This is Honorable.
Blackstone Audio Books presents
Rhetoric Poetics and Logic, Part 1, by Aristotle,
read by Frederick Davidson.
This unabridged recording of the reading of
Logic, Poetics and Rhetoric
was produced in 1992 by Blackstone Audio Books,
which holds the copy right there too.
Neither this recording nor any part thereof
may be reproduced or used for any purpose
without prior written authority
from Blackstone Audio Books.
We will be reading from three translations.
Logic is translated by G. R. G. Muir,
Poetics by Ingram Bywater,
and Rhetoric by W. Reese Roberts.
Logic, Poetics and Rhetoric by Aristotle.
Rhetoric by Aristotle.
This translation by W. Reese Roberts
and Ingram Bywater is reprinted
from the Oxford translation of Aristotle
by permission of the Jarrett trustees
and the Clarence and Press Oxford.
The numbers accompanying the text
in the outer margin
is referred to the Beka edition
of the Greek text of Aristotle.
Use of the page and line numbers
of this edition has become the customer
means of placing a passage in Aristotle.
Since the line numbers are referred to the Greek text,
they do not exactly correspond
to the lines of the English translation.
The numbers in the inner margins
of the present edition indicate chapters.
The selection from the notes
to the Roberts and Bywater edition
has been made by Professor Tom Sen,
who has also made the emandations
enclosed by brackets.
The translations from the Greek,
shown in the footnotes,
taken from Professor Lane Cooper's
Aristotle on the Art of Poetry
by the Clarence permission of the publishers,
the Cornell University Press.
Book one.
Rhetoric is the counterpart of dialectic.
Rhetoric and dialectic may be roughly English
as the art of public speaking
and the art of logical discussion.
Aristotle's philosophical definition of rhetoric
is given at the beginning of chapter two.
Both alike are concerned with such things
as come more or less
within the general can of all men
and belong to no definite sign.
Accordingly, all men make use more or less of both,
for to a certain extent all men attempt
to discuss statements and to maintain them,
to defend themselves and to attack others.
Ordinary people do this either at random
or through practice and through acquired habit.
Both ways being possible,
the subject can plainly be handled systematically,
but it's possible to inquire the reason
why some speakers succeed through practice
and others spontaneously.
And everyone will at once agree
that such an inquiry is the function of an art.
Here, and in later passages,
the term art stands for methodical treatment
of a subject.
Now, the framers of the current fetuses on rhetoric
have constructed but a small portion of that art.
The modes of persuasion
are the only true constituents of the art.
Everything else is merely accessory.
Aristotle here means by modes of persuasion
those attempts at the logical argument
on which he would himself like to see rhetoric rely.
In the next chapter,
he gives to the term the wide range
it had in current rhetorical usage
and concludes with a reference to the argumentative side.
A uniform rendering of the word is hardly possible,
but at the outset it is important to stress
Aristotle's fundamental view
that from the nature of its materials,
rhetoric is, in general, persuasive
rather than fully demonstrative.
When in later portions of the treatise
a single word rendering is given,
arguments will be preferred to proofs.
Everything else is merely accessory.
These writers, however, say nothing about entemines,
which are the substance of rhetorical persuasion,
but deal mainly with non-essentials.
Entemines are rhetorical arguments.
The arising of prejudice, pity, anger,
and similar emotions has nothing to do with the essential facts,
but is merely a personal appeal
to the man who is judging the case.
Consequently, if the rules for trials,
which are now laid down in some states,
especially in well-governed states,
were applied everywhere,
such people would have nothing to say.
All men, no doubt, think
that the law should prescribe such rules,
but some, as in the Court of Archaeophagus,
give practical effects to their thoughts
and forbid talk about non-essentials.
The Archaeophagus was the highest criminal court of Athens.
This is sound law and custom.
It is not right to pervert the judge
by moving him to anger or pity.
One might as well warp a carpenter's rule before using it.
Here, and in what follows,
the reader should understand judge in a broad sense,
including jury men and others who judge.
Again, a litigant has clearly nothing to do
but show that the alleged fact is so or is not so,
that it has or has not happened,
as to whether a thing is important or unimportant,
just or unjust.
The judge must surely refuse to take his instructions
from the litigant.
He must decide for himself all such points
as the lawgiver has not already defined for him.
Now, it is a great moment that well-drawn laws
should themselves define all the points they possibly can,
and leave as few as maybe to the decision of the judges,
and this for several reasons.
First, to find one man or a few men
who are sensible persons and capable of legislating
and administering justice
is easier than to find a large number.
Next, laws are made after long considerations,
whereas decisions in the courts are given at short notice,
which makes it hard for those who try the case
to satisfy the claims of justice and expediency.
The weightiest reason of all
is that the decision of the lawgiver
is not particular but prospective and general,
whereas members of the assembly and the jury
find it their duty to decide on definite cases
brought before them.
They will often have allowed themselves
to be so much influenced by feelings of friendship
or hatred or self-interest
that they lose any clear vision of the truth
and have their judgment obscured
by considerations of personal pleasure or pain.
In general, then, the judge should, we say,
be allowed to decide as few things as possible,
but questions as to whether something has happened
or has not happened will be or will not be,
is or is not.
Must of necessity be left to the judge
since the lawgiver cannot foresee them.
If so, it is evident that anyone who lays down rules
about other matters, such as what must be the contents
of the introduction or the narration
or any of the other divisions of a speech,
is theorizing about non-essentials
as if they belong to the art.
The only question with which these writers hear a deal
is how to put the judge into a given frame of mind
about the orator's proper modes of persuasion
and they have nothing to tell us.
That is, about how to gain skill in entamines.
Hence it comes that although the same systematic principles
apply to political as to forensic oratory
and although the former is a nobler business
and fitter for a citizen,
the matter which concerns the relations
of private individuals,
these authors say nothing about political oratory
but try, one door, to write treatises
on the way to plead in court.
The reason for this is that in political oratory
there is less inducement to talk about non-essentials.
Political oratory is less given to unscrupulous practices
than forensic because it treats a wider issue.
In a political debate,
the man who is forming a judgement
is making a decision about his own vital interests.
There is no need therefore to prove anything
except that the facts are what the supporter
of a measure maintains they are.
In forensic oratory, this is not enough.
To conciliate the listener is what pairs here.
It is other people's affairs that are to be decided
so that the judges intend on their own satisfaction
and listening with partiality,
surrender themselves to the disputants
instead of judging between them.
Hence, in many places, as we have said already,
irrelevant speaking is forbidden in the law courts.
In the public assembly,
those who have to form a judgement are themselves
well able to guard against that.
It is clear then that rhetorical study,
in its strict sense, is concerned with the modes of persuasion.
Persuasion is clearly a sort of demonstration
since we are most poorly persuaded
when we consider a thing to have been demonstrated.
The art of demonstration is an entomeme
and this is in general the most effective
of the modes of persuasion.
The entomeme is a sort of syllogism
and the consideration of syllogisms of all kinds,
without distinction, is the business of dialectic,
either of dialectic as a whole or of one of its branches.
It follows plainly therefore that he who is best able to see how
and from what elements a syllogism is produced
will also be best skilled in the entomeme
when he has further learned what its subject matter is
and in what respect it differs from the syllogism of strict logic.
The true and the approximately true are apprehended
by the same faculty.
It may also be noted that men have a sufficient natural instinct
for what is true and usually do arrive at the truth.
Hence the man who makes a good guess at truth
is likely to make a good guess at probabilities.
It has now been shown that the ordinary writers
on rhetoric treat of non-essentials.
It has also been shown why they have inclined more
towards the forensic branch of oratory.
Rhetoric is useful, one, because things that are true
and things that adjust have a natural tendency
to prevail over their opposite.
So that if the decisions of judges are not what they ought to be,
the defeat must be due to the speakers themselves
and they must be blamed accordingly.
Moreover, two, before some audiences,
not even the possession of the exactest knowledge
will make it easy for what we say to produce convictions.
For argument based on knowledge implies instruction
and there are people whom one cannot instruct.
Yeah, then we must use, as our modes of persuasion and argument,
notions possessed by everybody as we observe in the topics
when dealing with the way to handle a popular audience.
Further, three, we must be able to employ persuasions
just as strict reasoning can be employed
on opposite sides of a question,
not in order that we may in practice employ it in both ways,
for we must not make people believe what is wrong.
But in order that we may see clearly what the facts are,
but if another man argues unfairly,
we on our part may be able to confute him.
No other of the arts draws opposite conclusions.
Dialectic and rhetoric alone do this.
Both these arts draw opposite conclusions impartially.
Nevertheless, the underlying facts do not lend themselves equally well
to the contrary views.
No, things that are true and things that are better are,
by their nature, practically always easier to prove
and easier to believe in.
Again, four, it is absurd to hold that the man ought to be
ashamed of being unable to defend himself with his limbs
but not of being unable to defend himself with speech and reason.
By speech and reason, the translator here has done justice
to the twofold meaning of the Greek word logos.
When the use of rational speech is more distinctive
of a human being than the use of his limbs.
And it would be a jake it that one who uses such power
of speech unjustly might do great harm.
That is a charge which may be made in common
against all good things except virtue
and above all against the things that are most useful
as strength, health, wealth, and generalship.
A man can confer the greatest of benefits by a right use of these
and inflict the greatest of injuries by using them wrongly.
It is clear then that rhetoric is not bound up
with a single definite class of subjects
but is as universal as dialectic.
It is clear also that it is useful.
It is clear further that its function is not simply
to succeed in persuading but rather to discover
the means of coming as near such success
as the circumstances of each particular case allow.
In this it resembles all other arts.
For example, it is not the function of medicine
simply to make a man quite healthy
but to put him as far as may be on the road to health.
It is possible to give excellent treatment
given to those who can never enjoy sound health.
Furthermore, it is plain that it is the function
of one and the same art to discern the real
and the apparent means of persuasion
just as it is the function of dialectic
to discern the real and the apparent syllogism.
What makes a man a sophist is not his faculty
but his moral purpose.
In rhetoric, however, the term rhetorically
may describe either the speaker's knowledge of the art
or his moral purpose.
In dialectic, it is different.
A man is a sophist because he has a certain kind
of moral purpose.
A dialectician in respect not of his moral purpose
but of his faculty.
Let us now try to give some account
of the systematic principles of rhetoric itself
of the right method and means of succeeding
in the object we set before us.
We must make, as it were, a fresh start
and, before going further, define what rhetoric is.
Rhetorism may be defined as the faculty of observing
in any given case the available means of persuasion.
This is not a function of any other art.
Every other art can instruct or persuade
about its own particular subject matter.
For instance, medicine about what is healthy
and unhealthy, geometry about the properties of magnitudes,
arithmetic about numbers.
And the same is true of the other arts and sciences.
But rhetoric, we look upon as the power
of observing the means of persuasion
on almost any subject presented to us.
And that is why we say that in its technical character
it is not concerned with any special
or definite class of subjects.
Of the modes of persuasion, some belong strictly
to the art of rhetoric and some do not.
By the latter, I mean such things
as are not supplied by the speaker
but are there at the outset.
Witnesses, evidence given under torture,
written contracts and so on.
By the former, I mean such as we can ourselves
construct by means of the principles of rhetoric.
The one kind has merely to be used,
the other has to be invented.
Of the modes of persuasion furnished by the spoken word,
there are three kinds.
The first kind depends on the personal character
the second on putting the audience
into a certain frame of mind.
The third on the proof or apparent proof
provided by the words of the speech itself.
Persuasion is achieved by the speaker's personal character
when the speech is so spoken
as to make us think incredible.
We believe good men more fully
and more readily than others.
This is true generally whatever the question is
and absolutely true where exact certainty
is impossible and opinions are divided.
This kind of persuasion like the others
should be achieved by what the speaker says
not by what people think of this character
before he begins to speak.
It is not true as some writers assume
in their treatises on rhetoric
that the personal goodness revealed by the speaker
contributes nothing to his power of persuasion.
On the contrary,
his character may almost recall
the most effective means of persuasion he possesses.
Secondly, persuasion may come to the hearers
when the speech stirs their emotions.
Our judgments when we are peed and friendly
are not the same as when we are pained and hostile.
It is towards producing these effects
as we maintain that present day writers
on rhetoric direct the whole of their efforts.
This subject shall be treated in detail
when we come to speak of the emotion.
Thirdly, persuasion is affected through the speech itself
when we have proved a truth or an apparent truth
by means of the persuasive arguments suitable to the case in question.
There are then these three means of affecting persuasion.
The man who is to be in command of the must,
it is clear, be able, one, to reason logically,
two, to understand human character and goodness
in their various forms,
and three, to understand the emotions,
that is, to name them and describe them,
to know their causes and the way in which they are excited.
It does appear that rhetoric is an offshoot of dialectic
and also of ethical studies.
Ethical studies may fairly be called political,
and for this reason rhetoric masquerades as political science
and the professors of it as political experts.
Sometimes from want of education,
sometimes from ostentation,
sometimes owing to other human feelings.
As a matter of fact, it is a bunch of dialectic and similar to it,
as we said at the outset.
Neither rhetoric nor dialectic is the scientific study
of any one separate subject,
both of faculties for providing arguments.
This is perhaps the sufficient account of their scope
and of how they are related to each other.
With regard to the persuasion achieved by proof or apparent proof,
just as in dialectic there is induction on the one hand
and syllogism or apparent syllogism on the other,
so it is in rhetoric.
The example is an induction.
The enthameme is a syllogism,
and the apparent enthameme is an apparent syllogism.
I call the enthameme a rhetorical syllogism
and the example of rhetorical induction.
Everyone who affects persuasion through proof
does in fact use either enthamemes or examples.
There is no other way,
and since everyone who proves anything at all
is bound to use either syllogisms or inductions,
and this is clear to us from the analytics,
it must follow that enthamemes are syllogisms
and examples are induction.
The difference between example and enthamemes
made plain by the passages in the topics,
where induction and syllogism have already been discussed.
When we base the proof of a proposition
on a number of similar cases,
this is induction and dialectic example in rhetoric.
When it is shown that certain propositions being true
a further and quite distinct proposition
must also be true in consequence,
whether invariably or usually,
this is called syllogism and dialectic enthameme in rhetoric.
It is plain also that each of these types of oratory
has its advantages.
The types of oratory, I say,
for what has been said in the methodics
applies equally well here.
In some oratorical styles,
examples prevail in others enthamemes,
and in like manner,
some orators are better at the former
and some at the latter.
Speeches that rely on examples
are as persuasive as the other kind,
but those which rely on enthamemes
excite the louder applause.
The sources of examples and enthamemes
and their proper uses we will discuss later.
Our next step is to define the processes themselves more clearly.
A statement is persuasive and credible,
either because it is directly self-evident
or because it appears to be proved
from other statements than ourselves.
In either case, it is persuasive
because there is somebody whom it persuades,
but none of the arts theorize about individual cases.
Ledicin, for instance, does not theorize
about what will help to cure esocrates or callias,
but only about what will help to cure
any or all of a given class of patients.
This alone is its business.
Individual cases are so infinitely various
that no systematic knowledge of them is possible.
In the same way, the theory of rhetoric is concerned,
not with what seems probable
to a given individual like esocrates or hippias,
but with what seems probable to men of a given type.
And this is true of dialectic also.
Dialectic does not construct its syllogisms
out of any haphazard materials,
such as the fancies of crazy people,
but out of materials that call for discussions.
And rhetoric, too, draws upon the regular subject of debate.
The duty of rhetoric is to deal with such matters
as we deliberate on without arts or systems to guide us.
In the hearing of persons who cannot take in at a glance
a complicated argument or follow a long chain of reasoning.
The subjects of our deliberation
are such as seem to present us with alternative possibilities
about things that could not have been and cannot now
or in the future be other than they are.
Nobody who takes them to be of this nature
wastes his time in deliberation.
It is possible to form syllogisms
and draw conclusions from the results of previous syllogisms,
or, on the other hand, from premises which have not been thus proved,
but at the same time are so little accepted
that they call for proof.
Reasonings of the former kind will necessarily be hard to follow
or into their lengths,
but we assume an audience of untrained thinkers.
Those of the latter kind will fail to win assent
because they are based on premises that are not generally admitted or believed.
The entomeme and the example must, then, deal with what is in the main contingent,
the example being an induction,
and the entomeme a syllogism about such matters.
The entomeme must consist of few propositions,
fewer often than those which make up the normal syllogism.
But if any of these propositions is a familiar fact,
there is no need even to mention it.
The hearer adds it himself.
Thus, to show that Daliaeus has been victor in a contest
for which the prize is a crown,
it is enough to say that he has been victor in the Olympic Games.
Without adding, and in the Olympic Games, the prize is a crown,
a fact which everybody knows.
There are few facts of the neccesary type
that can form the basis of rhetorical syllogism.
One is material sources, or even premises.
Most of the things about which we make decisions,
and into which, therefore, we inquire,
present us with alternative possibilities.
For it is about our actions that we deliberate and inquire,
and all our actions have a contingent character.
Hardly any of them are determined by necessity.
Again, conclusions state what is merely usual or possible
must be drawn from premises that do the same,
and just as necessary conclusions
must be drawn from necessary premises.
This, too, is clear to us from the analytics.
It is evident, therefore, that the propositions
forming the basis of entomines,
though some of them may be necessary,
will most of them be only usually true.
Now, the materials of entomines are probability and signs,
which we can see must correspond respectively
with the propositions that are generally
and those that are necessarily true.
Now, probability is a thing that usually happens,
not, however, as some definitions would suggest,
anything whatever that usually happens,
but only if it belongs to the class of the contingent
or variable.
It bears the same relation to that in respect
of which it is probable,
as the universal bears the particular.
That is, bears the same relation to the conclusion
to be reached, to that which its general probability
is directed to the particular probable case
which has to be proved.
Of signs, one kind bears the same relation
to the statement it supports,
as the particular bears to the universal.
The other, the same as the universal, bears to the particular.
The infallible kind is a complete proof.
Technaleon, the fallible kind, has no specific name.
In infallible signs, I mean those on which
syllogism is proper and made it based,
and this shows us why this kind of sign
is called a complete proof.
When people think that what they have said
cannot be refuted, they then think that they're
bringing forward a complete proof,
meaning that the matter has now been
demonstrated and completed.
Peperasmonon, for the word peras,
has the same meaning of end or boundary,
as the word tecmar in the ancient times.
Now, the one kind of sign that which bears
the proposition it supports, the relation
of particular to universal, may be illustrated thus.
Suppose it were said, the fact that Socrates
was wise and just is a sign that the wise are just.
Here we certainly have a sign,
but even though the proposition be true,
the argument is reputable,
since it does not form a syllogism.
Suppose on the other hand it were said,
the fact that he has a fever is a sign that he is ill,
or the fact that he is giving milk is a sign
that he has lately born a child.
Here we have the infallible kind of sign,
the only kind that constitutes complete proof,
since it is the only kind that,
if the particular statement is true, is irretutable.
The other kind of sign, that which bears
to the proposition it supports,
the relation of universal to particular,
might be illustrated by saying,
the fact that he breathes past
is a sign that he has a fever.
This argument also is reputable,
even if the statement about the past breathing be true,
since a man may breathe hard without having a fever.
It has then been stated above
what is the nature of a probability
of a sign and of a complete proof.
And what are the differences between them?
In the analytics, a more explicit description
has been given of these points.
It is there shown why some of these reasonings
can be put into syllogisms and some cannot.
The example has already been described
as one kind of induction,
and the special nature of the subject matter
that distinguishes it from the other kind
has also been stated above.
Its relation to the proposition it supports
is not that of part to whole,
nor whole to part,
nor whole to whole,
but of part to part,
or like to like.
When statements are of the same order,
but one is more familiar than the other,
the former is an example.
The argument may, for instance, be that Dionysius,
in asking as he does for a bodyguard,
is scheming to make himself a despot.
Dionysius, the tyrant of Sylicuse.
For in the past, Pisces Stratus
kept asking for a bodyguard
in order to carry out such a scheme
and did make himself a despot as soon as he got it.
Pisces Stratus is the tyrant of Athens.
And so did Theraginus,
at Megara, the tyrant of Megara.
And in the same way, all other instances
known to the speakers are made into examples
in order to show what is not yet known
that Dionysius has the same purpose
in making the same request.
All these, being instances of the one general principle,
that a man who asks for a bodyguard
is scheming to make himself a despot.
We have now described the sources
of those means of persuasion
which are popularly supposed to be demonstrative.
There's an important distinction
between two sorts of enter means
that has been wholly overlooked by almost everybody.
One that also subsists
between the syllogisms treated of in dialectic.
One sort of enter mean really belongs to rhetoric
as one sort of syllogism really belongs to dialectic.
But the other sort really belongs to other arts and faculties,
whether to those we already exercise
or to those we have not yet acquired.
Missing this distinction, people fail to notice
that the more correctly they handle their particular subject,
the further they're getting away from pure rhetoric or dialectic.
This statement will be clearer if expressed more fully.
I mean that the proper subjects
of dialectical and rhetorical syllogisms
are the things of which we say
the regular or universal lines of argument are concerned.
That is to say those lines of argument
that apply equally to questions of right conduct,
natural science, politics,
and many other things that have nothing to do with one another.
Okay, for instance, the line of argument
concerned with the more or less.
On this line of argument,
it is equally easy to base a syllogism
or enter mean about any of what nevertheless
are essentially disconnected subjects.
Right conduct, natural science, or anything else whatever.
But there are also those special lines of argument
which are based on such propositions
that apply only to particular groups or classes of things.
Thus, there are propositions about natural science
on which it is impossible to base any inter mean
or syllogism about ethics,
and other propositions about ethics
on which nothing can be based about natural science.
The same principle applies throughout.
The general lines of argument have no special subject matter
and therefore will not increase our understanding
of any particular class of things.
On the other hand, the better the selection one makes
of propositions suitable for special lines of argument,
the newer one comes unconsciously to setting up a science
that is distinct from dialectic and rhetoric.
One may succeed in stating the required principles,
but one's science will be no longer dialectic or rhetoric,
but the science to which the principles are discovered belongs.
Most enter means are in fact based upon these
particular or special lines of argument,
comparatively few on the common or general kind.
As in the topic, therefore, so in this work,
we must distinguish in dealing with enter means,
the special and the general lines of argument
on which they are to be founded.
By special lines of argument,
I mean the propositions peculiar to each several class of things,
by general those common to all classes alike.
We may begin with the special lines of argument,
both of all let us classify rhetoric into its varieties.
Having distinguished these, we may deal with them one by one
and try to discover the elements of which each is composed
and the propositions each must employ.
Rhetoric falls into three divisions determined
by the three classes of listeners to speeches,
for of the three elements in speech making,
speaker, subject and person address,
it is the last one, the hearer,
that determines the speech's end and object.
The hearer must be either a judge with a decision
to make about things past or future or an observer.
Theros, a mere onlooker present at the show
where he decides no grave political or legal issue
and plays no higher role than that of speech taster
or oratorical connoisseur.
Political has been preferred to deliberative
as being clear to the English reader,
the oratory of the parliamentary councillor is meant.
A member of the assembly decides about future events
or during and about past events,
while those who merely decide on the orative skill observers.
From this it follows that there are three divisions of oratory,
one political, two forensic,
and three the ceremonial oratory of display,
or deliberative, advisory, legal and epideic ticks.
The oratory respectively a parliamentary assemblies
of law courts and of ceremonial occasions
when there is an element of display, show, declamation,
and the result is a set speech or harangue.
Political speaking urges us either to do or not to do something.
One of these two courses is always taken by private councillors
as well as by men who address public assemblies.
Forensic speaking either attacks or defend somebody,
one or other of these two things
was always done by the parties in a case.
The ceremonial oratory of display either praises or censures somebody.
These three kinds of rhetoric
refer to three different kinds of time.
The political oratory is concerned with the future,
it is about things to be done hereafter
that he advises for or against.
The party in a case of law is concerned with the past,
one man accuses the other,
and the other defends himself
with reference to things already done.
The ceremonial oratory is, properly speaking,
concerned with the present,
since all men praise or blame in view of the state of things
existing at the time.
They often find it useful also to recall the past
and to make guesses of the future.
Rhetoric has three distinct ends in view,
one breach of its three kinds.
The political oratory aims at establishing the expediency
or the harmfulness of a proposed course of action.
If he urges its acceptance,
he does so on the ground that it will do good.
If he urges its rejection,
he does so on the ground that it will do harm.
And all other points, such as whether the proposal is just
or unjust, honorable or dishonorable,
he brings in as subsidiary
and relative to his main consideration.
Parties in a law case aim at establishing a justice
or injustice of some action,
and they too bring in all other points
as subsidiary and relative to this one.
Those who praise or attack a man
aim at proving him worthy of honor or the reverse,
and they too treat all other considerations
with reference to this one.
That the three kinds of rhetoric do aim, respectively,
at the three ends we have mentioned,
is shown by the fact that speakers will sometimes not try
to establish anything else.
Thus, the litigant will sometimes not deny
that a thing has happened or that he has done harm,
but that he is guilty of injustice he will never admit.
Otherwise, there would be no need of a trial.
So too, political orators often make any concession
short of admitting that they are recommending their heroes
to take an inexpedient course
or not to take an expedient one.
The question whether it is not unjust for a city
to enslave its innocent neighbors
often does not trouble them at all.
In like manner, those who praise or censure a man
do not consider whether his acts have been expedient or not,
but often make it a ground of actual praise,
but he has neglected his own interest to do what was honorable.
Thus, they praise Achilles,
because he championed his foreign friend Patroclus,
though he knew that this meant death,
and that otherwise he need not die.
Yet, while to die thus was the noble a thing to him to do,
the expedient thing was to live on.
It is evident from what has been said
that it is these three subjects, more than any others,
about which the aorta must be able to have propositions
at his command.
Now, the propositions of rhetoric are complete proofs,
probabilities, and signs.
Every kind of syllogism is composed of propositions,
and the enthrony is a particular kind of syllogism
composed of their foresaid propositions.
That is, of complete proofs, probabilities, and signs
relating to the three subjects of the expedient,
the just, and the noble.
Since only eight possible actions are not impossible,
one can ever have been done in the past or the present,
and since things which have not occurred or will not occur
also cannot have been done or be going to be done,
it is necessary for the political, the forensic,
and the ceremonial speaker alike
to be able to have at their command propositions
about the possible and the impossible,
and about whether a thing has or has not occurred
will or will not occur.
Further, all men, in giving praise or blame,
in urging us to accept or reject proposals for action,
in accusing others or defending themselves,
attempt not only to prove the points mentioned,
but also to show that the good or the harm,
the honour or disgrace, the justice or injustice
is great or small, either absolutely or relatively,
and therefore it is plain that we must also have at our command
propositions about greatness or smallness
and the greater or the lesser,
propositions both universal and particular.
Thus, we must be able to say which is the greater or lesser good,
the greater or lesser act of justice or injustice,
and so on.
Such, then, are the subjects regarding which we are inevitably bound
to master the propositions relevant to them.
We must now discuss each particular class of these subjects in turn,
namely those dealt with in political, in ceremonial,
and lastly in legal oratory.
First, then, we must ascertain what are the kinds of things,
good or bad, about which the political orator offers counsel,
for he does not deal with all things,
but only with such as may or may not take place.
Concerning things that exist or will exist inevitably,
or which cannot possibly exist or take place,
no counsel can be given.
Nor, again, can counsel be given about the whole class of things
which may or may not take place.
For this class includes some good things that occur naturally
and some that occur by accident,
and about these is useless to offer counsel.
Clearly, counsel can only be given on matters
about which people deliberate,
matters namely that ultimately depend on ourselves
and which we have it in our power to set going.
But we turn a thing over in our mind
until we have reached the point of seeing whether we can do it or not.
Now, to enumerate and classify accurately the usual subjects of public business
and further to frame, as far as possible,
true definitions of them is a task
which we must not attempt on the present occasion,
for it does not belong to the art of rhetoric,
but to a more instructive art and a more real branch of knowledge
through political science.
And as it is, rhetoric has been given
upon our wider subject matter than strictly belongs to it.
The truth is, as indeed we have said already,
that rhetoric is a combination of the science of logic
and of the ethical branch of politics.
That is, the ethical theory.
And it is partly like dialectic, partly like statistical reasoning.
But the more we try to make either dialectic or rhetoric not
what they really are, practical faculties, but sciences,
the more we shall inadvertently be destroying their true nature,
for we shall be repashioning them and shall be parting into the region
of sciences dealing with definite subjects,
rather than simply with words and forms of reasoning.
Even here, however, we will mention those points
which it is of practical importance to distinguish
their fuller treatment falling naturally to political science.
The main matters on which all men deliberate
and on which political speakers make speeches
are some five in number, ways and means, war and peace,
national defence, imports and exports, and legislation.
As the way is the means, then, the intending speaker will need
to know the number and extent of the country's sources of revenue
so that if any is being overlooked, it may be added,
and if any is defective, it may be increased.
Further, he should know all the expenditure of the country
in order that if any part of it is superfluous,
it may be abolished, or if any is too large, it may be reduced.
For men become richer not only by increasing their existing wealth,
but also by reducing their expenditure.
A comprehensive view of these questions cannot be gained solely
from experience and home affairs.
In order to advise on such matters, a man must be keenly interested
in the methods worked out in other lands.
As to peace and war, he must know the extent of the military strength
of his country, both actual and potential,
and also the nature of that actual and potential strength.
And further, what wars his country has waged,
and how it has waged them.
He must know these facts not only about his own country,
but also about neighbouring countries,
and also about countries with which war is likely,
in order that peace may be maintained with those stronger than his own,
and that his own may have power to make war or not against those at a weaker.
He should know, too, whether the military power of another country
is like or unlike that of his own.
For this is a matter that may affect their relative strength.
With the same ending view, he must, besides,
have studied the wars of other countries as well as those of his own,
and the way they ended.
Similar causes are likely to have similar results.
With regard to national defence,
you ought to know all about the methods of defence in actual use,
such as the strength and character of the defensive force
and the position of the forts.
This last means that he must be well acquainted with the lie of the country
in order that the garrison may be increased if it is too small
or removed if it is not wanted,
and that the strategic points may be guarded with special care.
With regard to the foods that lie,
he must know what outlie will meet the needs of his country,
what kinds of food are produced at home, and what import it,
and what articles must be exported or imported.
This last he must know in order that agreements and commercial treaties
may be made with the country's concern.
There are indeed two sorts of states to which he must see
that his countrymen give no cause for offence,
states stronger than his own,
and states with which it is advantageous to trade.
But while he must, for security's sake, be able to take all this into account,
he must, before all things, understand the subject of legislation,
for it is on a country's laws that its whole welfare depends.
He must therefore know how many different forms of constitution there are,
under what conditions each of these will prosper,
and by what internal developments or external attacks each of them
tends to be destroyed.
When I speak of destruction through internal developments,
I refer to the fact that all constitutions, except the best one of all,
are destroyed both by not being pushed far enough
and by being pushed too far.
Thus, democracy loses its figure and finally passes into oligarchy,
not only when it is not pushed far enough,
but also when it is pushed a great deal too far.
Aristotle deals more poorly with the causes by which constitutions are destroyed
or changed into one another in book five of his politics.
Just as the aquiline and the snub nose not only turn into normal noses
by not being aquiline or snub enough,
but also by being too violently aquiline or snub,
arrive at a condition in which they no longer look like noses at all.
It is useful in framing laws not only to study the past history of one's own country
in order to understand which constitution is desirable for it now,
but also to have a knowledge of the constitutions of other nations
and so to learn for what kinds of nations the various kinds of constitution are suited.
From this we can see that books of travel are useful aids to legislation,
since from these we may learn the laws and customs of different races.
The political speaker will also find the researches of historians useful,
but all this is the business of political science and not of rhetoric.
These then are the most important kinds of information which the political speaker must possess.
Let us now go back and state the premises from which you will have to argue
in favor of adopting or rejecting measures regarding these and other matters.
It may be said that every individual man and all men in common
aim at a certain end which determines what they choose and what they avoid.
This end, to sum it up briefly, is happiness of its constituents.
Let us then, by way of illustration only,
ascertain what is in general the nature of happiness
and what are the elements of its constituent parts.
For all advice to do things or not to do them is concerned with happiness
and with the things that make for or against it.
Whatever creates or increases happiness or some part of happiness,
we ought to do. Whatever destroys or hampers happiness
or give rise to its opposite, we ought not to do.
For a more philosophic discussion of happiness, see Book 1 of the Nicomachean Ethics.
We may define happiness as possibility combined with virtue
or as independence of life or as the secure enjoyment of the maximum of pleasure
or as a good condition of property and body
together with the power of guarding one's property and body and making use of them.
But happiness is one or more of these things pretty well everybody agrees.
From this definition of happiness it follows that its constituent parts are
good birth, plenty of friends, good friends, wealth, good children,
plenty of children, a happy old age,
also such bodily excellence is its health, beauty, strength, large stature,
athletic powers together with fame, honor, good luck and virtue.
A man cannot fail to be completely independent if he possesses these internal
and these external goods. For besides these, there are no others to have.
Goods of the soul and of the body are internal. Good birth, friends, money
and honor are external. Further, we think that he should possess resources
and luck in order to make his life really secure.
As we have already ascertained what happiness in general is,
so now let us try to ascertain what each of these parts of it is.
Now good birth in a race or a state means that its members are indigenous
or ancient, a matter of great pride especially for the Athenians.
That its earliest leaders were distinguished men and that from them
have sprung many who were distinguished for qualities that we admire.
The good birth of an individual which may come either from the male or the female side
implies that both parents are free citizens and that, as in the case of the state,
the founders of the line have been notable for virtue or wealth or something else
which is highly prized and that many distinguished persons belong to the family,
men and women, young and old. The phrase is possession of good children
and of many children bear a quite clear meaning.
Applied to a community, they mean that its young men are numerous and of good quality.
Good in regard to bodily excellences such as stature, beauty, strength, athletic powers
and also in regard to the excellences of the soul which are a young man of temperance and courage.
Applied to an individual, they mean that his own children are numerous
and have the good qualities we have described.
Both male and female are here included.
The excellences of the latter are in body, beauty and stature.
In so, self-command and an industry that is not sordid.
Communities as well as individuals lack none of these perfections in their women as well as in their men.
Well, as among the latter demonians, the state of women is bad, almost half of human life is spoiled.
The constituents of wealth are plenty of coined money and territory,
the ownership of numerous large and beautiful states, also the ownership of numerous and beautiful implements, livestock and slaves.
All these kinds of property are our own, are secure, gentlemanly and useful.
The useful kinds are those that are productive, the gentlemanly kinds are those that provide enjoyment.
By productive, I mean those from which we get our income, by enjoyable, those from which we get nothing worth mentioning except the use of them.
The criterion of security is the ownership of property in such places and under such conditions that the use of it is in our power
and it is our own if it is in our own power to dispose of it or keep it.
By disposing of it, I mean giving it away or selling it.
Wealth as a whole consists in using things rather than in owning them.
It is really the activity that is the use of property that constitutes wealth.
Fame means being respected by everybody or having some quality that is desired by all men or by most or by the good or by the wise.
Honor is the token of a man's being famous for doing good.
It is chiefly and most properly paid to those who have already done good but also to the man who can do good in future.
Doing good refers either to the preservation of life and the means of life or to wealth or to some other of the good things which is hard to get either always or at that particular place or time.
For many gain honor for things which seem small but the place and the occasion account for it.
The constituents of honor are sacrifices, commemoration in verse or prose, privileges, grants of land, front seats at civic celebrations,
state burial or splendid tombs and sepulchres, statues, public maintenance, pensions.
Among foreigners, obeisances and giving place and such presences as among various bodies of men regarded as marks of honor.
For a present is not only the bestial of a piece of property but also a token of honor which explains why honor loving as well as money loving persons desire it.
The present brings to both what they want, it is a piece of property which is what the lovers of money desire and it brings honor which is what the lovers of honor desire.
The excellence of the body is health, that is a condition which allows us while keeping free from disease to have the use of our bodies.
For many people are healthy as they are told Herodocus was.
Herodocus is a physician, his strange health regime is described in Plato's Republic.
And these no one can congratulate on their health but they have to abstain from everything or nearly everything that men do.
Beauty varies at the time of life.
In a young man beauty is the possession of a body to endure the exertion of running and of contest of strength which means that he is pleasant to look at
and therefore all around athletes are the most beautiful being naturally adapted both for contest of strength and for speed also.
For a man in his prime beauty is fitness for the exertion of warfare together with a pleasant but at the same time formidable appearance.
For an old man it is to be strong enough for such exertion as is necessary and to be free from all those deformities of old age which cause pain to others.
Strength is the power of moving someone else at will. To do this you must either pull, push, lift, pin or grip him.
Thus you must be strong in all of those ways or at least in some.
Excellence in size is to surpass ordinary people in height, thickness and breadth by just as much as will not make one's movements slower in consequence.
Athletic excellence of the body consists in size, strength and swiftness.
Swiftness implying strength.
He who can fling forward his legs in a certain way and move them fast and fast is good at running.
He who can grip and hold down is good at wrestling.
He who can drive an adversary from his ground with the right blow is a good boxer.
He who can do both the last is a good pancreatias.
While he who can do all is an all-round athlete.
Happiness in old age is the coming of old age slowly and painlessly.
For a man has not this happiness if he grows old either quickly or tardily but painfully.
It arises both from the excellences of the body and from good luck.
If a man is not free from disease or if he is not strong he will not be free from suffering nor can he continue to live a long and painless life unless he has good luck.
There is indeed a capacity for long life that is quite independent of health or strength.
For many people live long who lack the excellences of the body but for our present purpose there is no use in going into the details of this.
The term possession of many friends and possession of good friends need no explanation.
For we define a friend as one who will always try for your sake to do what he takes to be good for you.
The man towards whom many feel thus has many friends.
If he is a worthy man he has good friends.
Good luck means the acquisition or possession of all or most or the most important of those good things which are due to luck.
Some of the things that are due to luck may also be due to artificial contrivance.
But many are independent of art as for example those which are due to nature.
Though to be sure things due to luck may actually be contrary to nature.
Thus health may be due to artificial contrivance but beauty and stature are due to nature.
All such good things excite NVR as a class the outcome of good luck.
Luck is also the cause of good things that happen contrary to reasonable expectations as when for instance all your brothers argue that you are handsome yourself
or when you find a treasure that everybody else has overlooked
or when a missile hits the next man and misses you
or when you are the only man not to go to a place you have gone to regularly while the others go there for the first time and are killed.
All such things are reckoned pieces of good luck.
As to virtue it is most closely connected with the subject of eulogy and therefore we will wait to define it until we come to discuss that subject.
It is now playing what our aims future or actual should be in urging and what in deprecating a proposal.
The latter being the opposite of the former.
Now the political or deliberative orator's aim is utility.
Deliberation seeks to determine not ends but the means to ends.
That is what it is most useful to do.
Further utility is a good thing.
We ought therefore to assure ourselves of the main facts about goodness and utility in general.
We may define a good thing as that which ought to be chosen for its own sake or as that for the sake of which we choose something else
or as that which is sought after by all things or by all things that have sensational reasons
or which will be sought after by any things that acquire reasons
or is that which must be prescribed for a given individual by reason generally
or is prescribed for him by his individual reason, this being his individual good
or is that whose presence brings anything into a satisfactory and self-sufficing condition
or as self-sufficiency or is what produces, maintains or entails characteristics of this kind
while preventing and destroying their opposites.
One thing may entail another in either of two ways, one simultaneously to subsequently.
Thus learning entails knowledge subsequently, health entails life simultaneously.
Things are productive of other things in three senses.
First as being healthy produces health, secondly as food produces health
and thirdly as exercise does, that is it does so usually.
All this being settled, we now see that both the acquisition of good things and the removal of bad things must be good.
The latter entails freedoms and the evil things simultaneously while the former entails possession of the good things subsequently.
The acquisition of a greater in place of a lesser good or of a lesser in place of a greater evil is also good
for in proportion as the greater exceeds the lesser, there is acquisition of good or removal of evil.
Other readings to this translation are one,
for the difference between the greater and the lesser constitutes acquisition of good in the one case
and removal of evil in the other and two, for the acquisition and the removal of the difference between the greater
and the lesser amount to the acquisition of good and the removal of evil respectively.
The virtues too must be something good, for it is by possessing these that we are in a good condition
and they tend to produce good works and good actions.
They must be separately named and described elsewhere.
Pleasure, again, must be a good thing since it is the nature of all animals to aim at it.
Consequently, both pleasant and beautiful things must be good things since the former are productive of pleasure while of the beautiful things
some are pleasant and some desirable in and for themselves.
The following is a more detailed list of things that must be good.
Happiness as being desirable in itself and sufficient by itself and as being that for whose sake we choose many other things.
Also justice, courage, temperance, magnanimity, magnificence and all such qualities as being excellences of the self.
Magnanimity that is loftiness of mind and greatness of spirit.
Further, health, beauty and the like as being bodily excellences and productive of many other good things.
For instance, health is productive both of pleasure and of life and therefore it sought the greatest of goods
since these two things which it causes, pleasure and life, are two of the things most highly prized by ordinary people.
Wealth, again, for it is the excellence of possession and also productive of many other good things.
Friends and friendship, for a friend is desirable in himself and also productive of many other good things.
So too, honor and reputation as being pleasant and productive of many other good things
and usually accompanied by the presence of the good things that cause them to be disturbed.
The faculty of speech and actions since all such qualities are productive of what is good.
Further, good parts, strong memories, receptiveness, quickness of intuition and the like for all such faculties are productive of what is good.
Similarly, all the sciences and arts and life since even if no other good were the result of life, it is desirable in itself.
And justice has the cause of good to the community.
The above are pretty well all the things admittedly good.
In dealing with things as goodness is disputed, we may argue in the following ways.
That is good, of which the contrary is bad.
That is good, the contrary of which is the advantage of our enemies.
For example, if it is the particular advantage of our enemies that we should be cowards,
we should be able to make sure that our academic courage is of particular value to our countrymen.
And generally, the contrary of that which our enemies desire or of that at which they rejoice is evidently valuable.
Hence, the passage beginning surely would triumph exalt.
That is to say, if you learned of the Greek scrolls amongst themselves, Iliad.
And throughout are by Dr. A. S. Way with occasional adaptations.
Aristotle, like other Greek writers, often indicates, as here, a whole passage by a few words taken from it.
This principle usually holds good, but not always, since it may well be that our interest is sometimes the same as that of our enemies.
Hence, it is said that evils draw men together. That is, when the same thing is hurtful to them both.
Further, that which is not in excess is good, and that which is greater than it should be is bad.
That also is good on which much labor or money has been spent.
The near fact of this makes it seem good, and such a good is assumed to be an end,
an end reached through a long chain of means, and any end is a good.
Hence, the line beginning.
And for Priam and Croy's town folk, should they leave behind them a boast?
Iliad again.
And oh, it were a shame to have carried so long and return empty-handed as erst we came.
And there is also the proverb about breaking the picture at the door.
That which most people seek after, and which is obviously an object of contention, is also good.
For, as has been shown, that is good, which is sought after by everybody, and most people is taken to the equivalent to everybody.
That which is praised is good, since no one praises what is not good.
So again, that which is praised by our enemies, or by the worthless.
For when even those who have a grievance think a thing good, it is at once felt that everyone must agree with them.
Our enemies cannot make the fact only because it is evident, just as those must be worthless whom their friends censure, and their enemies do not.
For this reason, the Corinthians conceived themselves to be insulted by Simonides when he wrote,
Against the Corinthians hath Iliam no complaint.
Against, that is good, which has been distinguished by the favor of a discerning or virtuous man or woman,
as Odysseus was distinguished by Athena, Helen, Vitecius, Paris by the goddesses, and Achilles by Homer.
And generally speaking, all things are good which men deliberately choose to do.
This will include the things already mentioned, and also whatever may be bad for their enemies or good for their friends.
And at the same time, practicable. Things are practicable in two senses.
One, it is possible to do them. Two, it is easy to do them. Things are done easily when they are done either without pain or quickly.
The difficulty of an act lies either in its painfulness or in the long time it takes.
Again, a thing is good if it is men wish, or perhaps a better translation, men deliberately choose a thing if it is.
And they wish to have either no evil at all, or at least a balance of good over evil.
This last will happen where the penalty is either imperceptible or slight.
Good, too, are things that are man's very own, possessed by no one else, exceptional,
for this increases the credit of having them, or the value put upon them.
So are things which befit the possessors, such as whatever is appropriate to their birth or capacity, and whatever they feel they ought to have but lack.
Such things may indeed be trifling, but nonetheless men deliberately make them the goal of their action.
And things easily affected for these are practicable in the sense of being easy.
Such things are those in which everyone, or most people, or one's equals, or one's inferiors, has succeeded.
Good, also, are the things by which we shall gratify our friends or annoy our enemies, and the things chosen by those whom we admire,
and the things for which we are fitted by nature or experience, since we think we shall succeed more easily in these.
And those in which no worthless man can succeed, for such things bring greater praise.
And those which we do in fact desire, for what we desire, is taken to be not only pleasant, but also better.
Further, a man of a given disposition makes chiefly for the corresponding things.
Lovers of victory make for victory, lovers of honor for honor, money-loving men for money, and so with the rest.
These then are the sources from which we must derive our means of persuasion about good and utility.
Since, however, it often happens that people agree that two things are both useful, but do not agree about which is the more so,
the next step will be to treat our relative goodness and relative utility.
A thing which surpasses another may be regarded as being that other thing plus something more,
and that other thing which is surpassed as being what is contained in the first thing.
Now to call a thing greater or more always applies a comparison of it with one that is smaller or less,
while great and small, much and little are terms used in comparison with normal magnitude.
The great is that which surpasses the normal, the small is that which is surpassed by the normal, and so with many and few.
Now we are applying the term good to what is desirable for its own sake and not for the sake of something else,
to that at which all things aim, to what they would choose if they could acquire understanding and practical wisdom,
and to that which tends to produce or preserve such goods or is always accompanied by them.
Moreover, that for the sake of which things are done is the end, an end being that for the sake of which all else is done,
and for each individual that thing is a good which fulfills these conditions in regard to himself.
It follows then that a greater number of goods is a greater good than one or than a smaller number,
if that one or that smaller number is included in the count, for then the larger number surpasses the smaller,
and the smaller quantity is surpassed as being contained in the larger.
Again, if the largest member of one class surpasses the largest member of another, then the one class surpasses the other,
and if one class surpasses another, then the largest member of the one surpasses the largest member of the other.
Thus, if the tallest man is taller than the tallest woman, then men in general are taller than women.
Conversely, if men in general are taller than women, then the tallest man is taller than the tallest woman.
For the superiority of class over class is proportionate to the superiority possessed by their largest specimen.
Again, where one good is always accompanied by another, but does not always accompany it, it is greater than the other,
for the use of the second thing is implied in the use of the first.
A thing may be accompanied by another in three ways, either simultaneously, subsequently, or potentially.
Life accompanies health simultaneously, but not health life.
Knowledge accompanies the act of learning subsequently.
Cheating accompanies sacrilege potentially, since the man who has committed sacrilege is always capable of cheating.
Again, when two things each surpass a third, that which does so by the greater amount is the greater of the two,
for it must surpass the greater as well as the less of the other two.
A thing productive of a greater good than another is productive of is itself a greater good than that other.
For the conception of productive of a greater had been implied in our argument.
That is, we have already said that what is productive of good is good.
It follows then from our way of looking at productivity and degree that what is productive of a greater good is a greater good.
Likewise, that which is produced by a greater good is itself a greater good.
Thus, if what is wholesome is more desirable and the greater good than what gives pleasure, health too must be a greater good than pleasure.
Again, a thing which is desirable in itself is a greater good than a thing which is not desirable in itself,
as for example bodily strength than what is wholesome, since the latter is not pursued for its own sake, whereas the former is.
And this was our definition of the good.
Again, if one of two things is an end and the other is not, the former is the greater good as being chosen for its own sake and not for the sake of something else,
as for example exercise is chosen for the sake of physical well-being.
And of two things, that which stands less in need of the other or of other things is the greater good, since it is more self-surprising.
That which stands less in need of others is that which needs either pure or easier things.
So, when one thing does not exist or cannot come into existence without a second, while the second can exist without the first, the second is the better.
That which does not need something else is more self-surprising than that which does and presents itself as a greater good for that reason.
Again, that which is a beginning of other things is a greater good than that which is not, and that which is a cause is a greater good than that which is not.
The reason being the same in each case, namely that without a cause and the beginning, nothing can exist or come into existence.
Again, whether a two sets of consequences arising from two different beginnings or causes, the consequences of the more important beginning or cause are themselves the more important.
And conversely, that beginning or cause is itself the more important which has the more important consequences.
Now, it is plain from all that has been said that one thing may be shown to be more important than another from two opposite points of view.
It may appear the more important one because it is a beginning and the other thing is not and also two because it is not a beginning and the other thing is.
On the ground that the end is more important and is not a beginning.
We might perhaps accept on the ground that it is the end, not the beginning, that matters.
So, Leodamas, when accusing Calistratus, said that the man who prompted the deed was more guilty than the doer since it would not have been done if he had not planned it.
Leodamas of Akana, a famous orator of the 4th century, Calistratus of Afidna, also a distinguished Athenian orator and politician,
his accusation by Leodamas here mentioned seems to have been directed against his conduct in the affairs of Oropus in 366 BC
in which he was associated with Chavria, an Athenian general, and with him was brought to trial.
On the other hand, when accusing Chavria, he said that the doer was worse than the prompter since there would have been no deed without someone to do it.
Men, said he, plot a thing only in order to carry it out.
Further, what is rare is a greater good than what is plentiful.
Thus, though it is a better thing than iron, though less useful, it is harder to get and therefore better worth getting.
Reversely, it may be argued that the plentiful is a better thing than the rare because we can make more use of it.
For what is often useful surpasses what is seldom useful.
When it's the saying, the best of things is water.
More generally, the hard thing is better than the easy because it is rarer.
And reversely, the easy thing is better than the hard, for it is as we wish it to be.
That is the greater good whose country is the greater evil and whose loss affects us more.
Positive goodness and badness are more important than the mere absence of goodness and badness.
For positive goodness and badness are ends, which the mere absence of them cannot be.
Further, in proportion as the functions of things are noble or base, the things themselves are good or bad.
Conversely, in proportion as the things themselves are good or bad, their functions also are good or bad.
For the nature of results corresponds with that of their causes and beginnings.
And conversely, the nature of causes and beginnings corresponds with that of their results.
Moreover, those things are greater goods, superior in which is more desirable or more honorable.
Thus, keenness of sight is more desirable than keenness of smell.
Sight generally being more desirable than smell generally.
And similarly, unusually great love of friends being more honorable than unusually great love of money.
Ordinary love of friends is more honorable than ordinary love of money.
Conversely, if one of two normal things is better or nobler than the other, an unusual degree of that thing is better or nobler than an unusual degree of the other.
Again, one thing is more honorable or better than another if it is more honorable or better to desire it.
The importance of the object of a given instinct corresponds to the importance of the instinct itself.
And for the same reason, if one thing is more honorable or better than another, it is more honorable and better to desire it.
Again, if one science is more honorable and valuable than another, the activity with which it deals is also more honorable and valuable as is the science.
So is the reality that is its object, each science being authoritative in its own sphere.
So also, the more valuable and honorable the object of a science, the more valuable and honorable the science itself is in consequence.
Again, that which would be judged, or which has been judged, a good thing, or a better thing than something else, by all or most people of understanding,
or by the majority of men, or by the ableist, must be so, either without qualification or in so far as they use their understanding to form their judgment.
This is indeed a general principle applicable to all other judgments also.
Not only the goodness of things, but their essence, magnitude and general nature are intact just what knowledge and understanding will declare them to be.
Here, the principle is applied to judgments of goodness, since one definition of good was what beings that acquire understanding will choose in any given case.
From which it clearly follows that that thing is better, which understanding declares to be so.
That again is a better thing which attaches to better men, either absolutely or in virtue of their being better, as knowledge is better than strength.
And that is a greater good which would be chosen by a better man, either absolutely or in virtue of his being better.
For instance, to suffer wrong rather than to do wrong, for that would be the choice of a juster man.
Again, the presenter of two things is a better, since all things pursue pleasure and things instinctively desire pleasurable sensation for its own sake.
And these are two of the characteristics by which the good and the end have been defined.
One pleasure is greater than another if it is more un-mixed with pain or more lasting.
Again, a nobler thing is better than the less noble, since the noble is either what is pleasant or what is desirable in itself.
And those things also are greater goods which men desire more honestly to bring about for themselves or for their friends.
Whereas those things which they least desire to bring about are greater evils.
And those things which are more lasting are better than those which are more pleating, and the more secure than the less.
The enjoyment of the lasting has the advantage of being longer, and that of the secure has the advantage of shooting our wishes, being there for us whenever we like.
Further, in accordance with the rule of coordinate terms and inflections of the same stem, what is true of one such related word is true of all.
But if the action qualified by the term brave is more noble and desirable than the action qualified by the term temperate,
then bravery is more desirable and temperate, and being brave than being temperate.
That, again, which is chosen by all, is a greater good than that which is not, and that chosen by the majority, and that chosen by the minority.
For that which all desire is good, as we have said.
And so, the more things desire, the better it is.
Further, that is the better thing which is considered so by competitors or enemies, or again, by authorized judges or those whom they select to represent them.
In the first two cases, the decision is virtually that of everyone, and the last two, that of authorities and experts.
And sometimes it may be argued that what all share is the better thing, since it is a dishonour not to share in it,
at other times, that what none or few share is better since it is rarer.
The more praiseworthy things are, the nobler, and therefore the better they are.
So, with the things that earn greater honours than others, honour is, as it were, a measure of value,
and the things whose absence involves comparatively heavy penalties, and the things that are better than others admitted or believed to be good.
Moreover, things look better merely by being divided into their parts, since they then seem to surpass a greater number of things than before.
And Thomas says that Meliagra was roused to battle by the thought of all horrors but light on a cloak whose city is tame of their pose,
when they slaughter the men, when the burg is wasted with ravening flame, when strangers are hailing young children to thrall them, their women to shame.
The same effect is produced by piling up facts in a climax after the manner of Episcamus, a Sicilian writer of comedies.
The reason is partly the same as in the case of division, for combination two makes the impression of great superiority,
and partly that the original thing appears to be the cause and origin of important results.
And since the thing is better when it is harder or rare than other things, its superiority may be due to seasons, ages, places, times, or one's natural powers.
When a man accomplishes something beyond his natural power, or beyond his years, or beyond the measure of people like him, or in a special way, or at a special place or time,
his deed will have a high degree of nobleness, goodness, and justice, or of their opposite.
Hence the epigram on the victor, the Olympic Games.
In time passed, bearing a yoke on my shoulders, a wood unshaven, I carried my loads of fish from Argus to Tagaea town, a fragment of Simonides.
So Ithikates used to extol himself by describing the lower state from which he had risen.
The son of a shoemaker, he became an honoured Athenian general, contemporary of Aristotle.
He has cited many times in the rhetoric, and must have been a colourful person.
Again, what is natural is better than what is acquired, since it is harder to come by.
Hence the words of Homer, I have learnt from none but myself.
And the best part of a good thing is particularly good, as when Pericles in his funeral oration said that the country's loss of its young men in battle was as if the spring were taken out of the year.
The funeral oration alluded to is not the one made famous by Thucydides, but the one on those fallen in the Samyan War, 440 BC.
So with those things which are of service when the need is pressing, for example in old age and times of sickness,
and of two things that which lead more directly to the end in view is the better.
So too is that which is better for people generally as well as for a particular individual.
Again, what can be got is better than what cannot, for it is good in a given case, and the other thing is not.
And what is the end of life is better than what is not, since those things are end in a greater degree which are nearer the end.
What aims at reality is better than what aims at appearance.
We may define what aims at appearance as what a man will not choose if nobody has to know of his having it.
This would seem to show that to receive benefits is more desirable than to confer them, since a man will choose the former even if nobody is to know of it.
But it is not the general view that he will choose the latter if nobody knows of it.
What a man wants to be is better than what a man wants to seem, for in aiming at that he is aiming more at reality.
Hence men say that justice is of small value, since it is more desirable to seem just than to be just, whereas with health it is not so.
That is better than other things which is more useful than they are for a number of different purposes.
For example, that which promotes life, good life, pleasure, and noble conduct.
For this reason, wealth and health are commonly thought to be of the highest value, as possessing all these advantages.
Again, that is better than other things which is accompanied both with less pain and with actual pleasure, because here there is more than one advantage.
And so here we have the good of feeling pleasure and also the good of not feeling pain.
And of two good things, that is the better whose addition to a third thing makes a better whole than the addition of the other to the same thing we'll make.
Again, those things which we are seen to possess are better than those which we are not seen to possess since the former have the air of reality.
Hence, wealth may be regarded as a greater good if its existence is known to others.
That which is dearly prized is better than what is not.
Another thing that some people have only one of, though others, have more like it.
Accordingly, blinding a one-eyed man inflicts worse injury than half blinding a man with two eyes, for the one-eyed man has been robbed of what he dearly prized.
The grounds on which we must base our argument, when we are speaking for or against a proposal, have now been set forth more or less completely.
The most important and effective qualification to success in persuading audiences and speaking well on public affairs is to understand all the forms of government and to discriminate their respective customs, institutions and interests.
For all men are persuaded by considerations of their interest and their interest lies in the maintenance of the established order.
Further, it rests with the supreme authority to give authoritative decisions, and this varies with each form of government.
There are as many different supreme authorities as there are different forms of government.
The forms of government are for democracy, oligarchy, aristocracy, monarchy.
The supreme right to judge and decide always rests, therefore, with either a part or a whole of one or other of these governing powers.
A democracy is a form of government under which the citizens distribute the offices of state among themselves by lot, whereas under oligarchy there is a property qualification, under aristocracy one of education, or perhaps discipline, with special reference to Sparta.
By education, I mean that education, which is laid down by the law, but is those who have been loyal to the national institutions that hold office under an aristocracy.
These are bound to be looked upon as the best men, and it is from this fact that this form of government has derived its name, the rule of the best.
Monarchy, as the word implies, is the constitution in which one man has authority over all.
There are two forms of monarchy, kingship, which is limited by prescribed conditions, and tyranny, or despotism, or autocracy, which is not limited by anything.
We must also measure the ends, which the various forms of government pursue, since people choose in practice such actions as will lead to the realization of their ends.
The end of democracy is freedom.
Of oligarchy, wealth, of aristocracy, the maintenance of education and national institutions, of tyranny is the protection of the tyrant.
It is clear, then, that we must distinguish those particular customs, institutions, and interests, which tend to realize the ideal of each constitution, since men choose their means with reference to their ends.
But rhetorical persuasion is effected not only by demonstrative but by ethical argument.
It helps the speaker to convince us, if we believe that he has certain qualities himself, namely goodness, or goodwill towards us, or both together.
Similarly, we should know the moral qualities characteristic of each form of government, for the special moral character of each is bound to provide us with our most effective means of persuasion in dealing with it.
We shall learn the qualities of governments in the same way as we learn the qualities of individuals, since they are revealed in their deliberate acts of choice.
And these are determined by the end that inspires them.
We have now considered the objects, immediate or distant, at which we are to aim when urging any proposal, and the grounds on which we are to base our arguments in favor of its utility.
We have also briefly considered the means and methods by which we shall gain a good knowledge of the moral qualities and institutions, peculiar to the various forms of government.
Only, however, to the extent demanded by the present occasion, a detailed account of the subject has been given in the politics.
We have now to consider virtue and vice, the noble and the base, or, here and elsewhere, goodness and badness, the fine and the mean, since these are the objects of praise and blame.
In doing so, we shall at the same time be finding out how to make our heroes take the required view of our own characters, our second method of persuasion.
The ways in which to make them trust the goodness of other people are also the ways in which to make them trust our own.
Praise, again, may be serious or frivolous, nor is it always of a human or divine being but often of inanimate things, or of the humblest of the lower animals.
Here, too, we must know on what grounds to argue and must therefore now discuss the subject, though by way of illustration only.
The noble is that which is both desirable for its own sake and also worthy of praise, or that which is both good and also pleasant because good.
If this is a true definition of the noble, it follows that virtue must be noble since it is both a good thing and also praiseworthy.
Virtue is, according to the usual view, a faculty of providing and preserving good things, or a faculty of conferring many great benefits and benefits of all kinds on all occasions.
The forms of virtue are justice, courage, temperance, magnificence, magnanimity, liberality, gentleness, prudence, wisdom.
If virtue is a faculty of beneficence, the highest kinds of it must be those which are most useful to others, and for this reason men honour most the just and courageous.
Since courage is useful to others in war, justice both in war and in peace.
Next comes liberality. Liberal people let their money go instead of fighting for it, whereas other people care more for money than for anything else.
Justice is the virtue through which everybody enjoys its own possessions in accordance with the law.
Its opposite is injustice through which men enjoy the possessions of others and the talents of the law.
Courage is the virtue that disposes men to do noble deeds in situations of danger in accordance with the law and in obedience to its commands.
Courage is the opposite. Temperance is the virtue that disposes us to obey the law where physical pleasures are concerned.
Incontinence is the opposite. Liberality disposes us to spend money for others good. Illiberality is the opposite.
Magnanimity is the virtue that disposes us to do good to others on a large scale. Its opposite is the meanness of spirit.
Magnificence is the virtue productive of greatness in matters involving the spending of money.
The opposites of these two are smallness of spirit and meanness respectively.
Prudence is that virtue of the understanding which enables men to come to wise decisions about the relation to happiness of the goods and evils that have been previously mentioned.
Yabab is a sufficient account for our present purpose of virtue and vice in general and of their various forms.
As the further aspects of the subject, it is not difficult to discern the facts. It is evident that things productive of virtue are noble as tending towards virtue
and also the effects of virtue, that is the signs of its presence and the acts to which it leads.
And since the signs of virtue and such acts as it is the mark of a virtuous man to do or have done to him are noble,
it follows that all deeds or signs of courage and everything done courageously must be noble things.
And so with what is just and actions done justly. Not however actions justly done to us. Here justice is unlike the other virtues.
Justly does not always mean nobly. When a man is punished it is more shameful that this should be justly than unjustly done to him.
The same is true of the other virtues. Again, those actions are noble for which the reward is simply honour or honour more than money.
So are those in which a man aimed at something desirable for someone else's sake.
Actions good, absolutely, such as those in man doubt his country without thinking of himself.
Actions good in their own nature. Actions that are not good simply for the individual since individual interests are selfish.
Noble also are those actions whose advantage may be enjoyed after death as opposed to those whose advantage is enjoyed during one's lifetime.
For the latter are more likely to be for one's own sake only.
Also, all actions done to the sake of others since these less than other actions are done for one's own sake.
And all successes which benefit others and not oneself. And services done to one's benefactors for this is just.
And good deeds generally since they are not directed to one's own profit.
And the opposites of those things of which men feel ashamed, for men are ashamed of saying, doing, or intending to do shameful things.
So when Al-Qaeda said, something I think would say to be, only shame restrained me.
Sappho wrote, if for things good and noble thou art yearning, if to speak baseness were thy tongue not burning,
no load of shame would unwind Ilyd's way what thou would honor wishes thou would say.
Those things also are noble for which men strive anxiously without feeling fear.
So they feel thus about the good things which lead to fair name.
Again, one quality or action is nobler than another if it is that of a naturally finer being.
Thus a man's will be nobler than a woman.
And those qualities are noble which give more pleasure to other people than to their possessors.
Hence the nobleness of justice and just action.
It is noble to avenge one's help on one's enemies and not to come to terms with them.
For Al-Qaeda is just and the just is noble.
And not to surrender is a sign of courage.
Victory too and honor belongs to the class of noble things.
And they are desirable even when they yield no proofs and they prove our superiority in good qualities.
Things that deserve to be remembered are noble and the more they deserve this the nobler they are.
So are the things that continue even after death.
Those which are always attended by honor, those which are exceptional,
and those which are possessed by one person alone.
These last are more readily remembered than others.
So again our possessions that bring no profit is there more pitting than others for a gentleman.
So are the distinctive qualities of a particular people and the symbols of what it especially admires.
Like long hair in sparta where this is a mark of a free man as it is not easy to perform any menial task when one's hair is long.
Again it is noble not to practice any sordid craft since it is the mark of a free man not to live at another's beck and call.
We are also to assume when we wish either to praise a man or blame him
that qualities closely allied to those which he actually has are identical with them.
For instance that the cautious man is cold, blooded and precious
and that the stupid man is an honest fellow or the thick-skinned man a good tempered one.
We can always idealize any given man by drawing on the virtues akin to his actual qualities.
Thus we may say that the passionate and excitable man is outspoken
or that the arrogant man is superb or impressive.
Those who run to extremes will be said to possess the corresponding good qualities.
Rashness will be called courage and extravagance, generosity.
That will be what most people think and at the same time this method enables an advocate to draw a misleading inference from the motive
arguing that if a man runs into danger needlessly much more will he do so in a noble cause.
And if a man is open-handed to anyone and everyone he will be so to his friends also
since it is the extreme form of goodness to be good to everybody.
We must also take into account the nature of our particular audience when making a speech of praise
for, as Socrates used to say, it is not difficult to praise the Athenian to a Athenian audience.
If the audience esteems a given quality we must say that our hero has that quality
no matter whether we are addressing civilians or Spartans or philosophers.
Everything in fact that is esteemed we are to represent is noble.
After all people regard the two things as much the same.
All actions are noble that are appropriate to the man who does them
if for instance they're worthy of his ancestors or of his own past career.
For it makes the happiness and is a noble thing that he should add to the honor he already has.
Even in appropriate actions the noble if they're better and nobler than the appropriate ones would be.
For instance if one who was just an average person when all went well becomes a hero in adversity
or if he becomes better and easier to get on with the higher he rises.
Compare the saying of Ipicratus, think what I was and what I am
and the epigram on the victory of the Olympic Games.
In time passed bearing a yoke on my shoulders of wood unshaven and the encomium of Simonides
a woman whose father, whose husband, whose brethren were princes all.
Once we praise the man for what he has actually done and fine actions are distinguished from others
by being intentionally good, deliberate intention based on moral choices meant in all these cases
we must try to prove that our hero's noble acts are intentional.
This is all the easier if we can make out that he has often acted so before
and therefore we must assert coincidences and accidents to have been intended.
Produce a number of good actions all of the same kind and people will think that they must have been intended
and that they proved the good qualities of the man who did them.
Praise is the expression in words of the eminence of a man's good qualities
and therefore we must display his actions as the product of such qualities.
Encomium refers to what he has actually done.
The mention of accessories such as good birth and education nearly helps to make our story credible.
Good fathers are likely to have good sons and good training is likely to produce good character.
Hence it is only when a man has already done something that we bestow encomiums upon him
yet the actual deed is evidence of the doer's character.
Even if a man has not actually done a given good thing we shall bestow praise on him
if we are sure that he is the sort of man who would do it.
To call anyone blessed is, it may be added, the same thing as to call him happy
but these are not the same thing as to bestow praise and encomium upon him.
The two latter are a part of calling happy just as goodness is a part of happiness.
To praise a man is in one effect akin to urging a course of action.
The suggestions which would be made in the latter case become encomiums when differently expressed.
When we know what action or character is required then in order to express these facts as suggestions for action
we have to change and reverse our form of words.
Thus a statement, a man should be proud not of what he owes to fortune but of what he owes to himself.
It put like this amounts to a suggestion. To make it into praise we must put it thus.
Since he is proud not of what he owes to fortune but of what he owes to himself
consequently whenever you want to praise anyone think what you would urge people to do
and when you want to urge the doing of anything think what you would praise a man to having done.
Since suggestion may or may not forbid an action
the praise into which we convert it must have one or other of two opposite forms of expression accordingly.
There are also many useful ways of heightening the effect of praise.
We must, for instance, point out that a man is the only one or the first or almost the only one
who has done something or that he has done it better than anyone else.
All these distinctions are honourable and we must further make much of the particular season
and occasion of an action arguing that we could hardly have looked for it just then.
If a man has often achieved the same success we must mention this. That is a strong point.
He himself and not luck will then be given a credit.
So too if it is on his own account that the observances have been devised and instituted
to encourage or honour such achievements as his own.
Thus we may praise Hippolycos because the first anchormium ever made was for him
or Harmonius or Aristogiton because their statues were the first to be put up in the marketplace.
Harmonius and Aristogiton were famous tyrannicides.
Their attempt to kill the sons of Pisces Characters in 514 BC only partly succeeded
and we may sense they're bad men for the opposite reasons.
Again, if you cannot find enough to serve a man himself you may pit him against others
which is what Isocrates used to do owing to his want of familiarity with forensic pleading.
Some manuscripts have what is perhaps the better reading owing to his familiarity.
The comparison should be with famous men that will strengthen your case.
Rhetorical efforts to magnify, extoe, amplify.
It is a noble thing to surpass men who are themselves great.
It is only natural that methods of heightening the effect should be attached particularly to speeches of praise.
They aim at proving superiority over others and any such superiority is a form of nobleness.
Hence, if you cannot compare your hero with famous men, you should at least compare him with other people generally
since any superiority is held to reveal excellence.
And in general, of the Lyons' argument which are common to all speeches, this tightening of effect is most suitable for declamations
where we take our hero's actions as admitted facts and our business is simply to invest these with dignity and nobility.
Examples are most suitable to deliberative speeches where we judge your future events by divination from past events.
And to me, the most suitable to forensic speeches, it is our doubts about past events
with most admitted arguments showing why a thing must have happened or proving that it did happen.
Above are the general lines on which all or nearly all speeches of praise or blame are constructed.
We have seen the sort of thing we must bear in mind in making such speeches
and the materials out of which end chromiums and censures are made.
No special treatment of censure and vital operation is needed.
Knowing the above facts, we know their contrary and it is out of these that speeches of censure are made.
We have next to treat of accusation and defense.
It is of two forms of forensic speech.
And to enumerate and describe the ingredients of the syllogism used therein.
There are three things we must ascertain.
First, the nature and number of the incentives to wrongdoing.
Second, the state of mind, wrongdoers.
Third, the kind of persons who are wronged and their conditions.
We will deal with these questions in order.
But before that, let us define the act of wrongdoing.
We may describe wrongdoing as injury-voluntarily inflicted contrary to law.
Law is either special or general.
By special law, I mean that written law which regulates the life of a particular community.
By general law, all those unwritten principles which are supposed to be acknowledged everywhere.
We do things voluntarily when we do them consciously and without constraint.
Not all voluntary acts are deliberate, but all deliberate acts are conscious.
That is to say, voluntary and therefore conscious.
And that is to say, conscious and therefore voluntary.
No one is ignorant of what he deliberately intends.
The causes of our deliberately intending, harmful and wicked acts contrary to the law are one, vice.
Two, lack of self-control.
For the wrongs of man doubt to others will correspond to the bad quality or qualities that he himself possesses.
But it is the mean man who will wrong others about money, the profligate in matters of physical pleasure,
the effeminate in matters of comfort and the coward where danger is concerned.
His terror makes him abandon those who are involved in the same danger.
The ambitious man in Greek, the honour-loving man, does wrong for the sake of honour.
The quick tempered from anger, the lover of victory for the sake of victory,
the embittered man for the sake of revenge, the stupid man because he has misguided notions of right and wrong.
The shameless man because he does not mind what people think of him.
And so with the rest, any wrong that anyone does to others corresponds to his particular faults of character.
However, this subject has already been teared up in part in our discussion of the virtues
and will be further explained later when we treat it the emotion.
We have now to consider the motives and states of mind of wrongdoers and to whom they do wrong.
Let us first decide what sort of things people are trying to get or avoid when they set about doing wrong to others.
For this plan that the prosecutor must consider, out of all the aims that can ever induce us to do wrong to our neighbours,
how many and which affect his adversary, while the dependent must consider how many and which do not affect him.
Now, every action of every person either is or is not due to that person himself.
Of those not due to himself, some are due to chance, the others to necessity.
Of these latter, again, some are due to compulsion, the others to nature.
Consequently, all actions that are not due to a man himself are due either to chance, or to nature, or to compulsion.
All actions that are due to a man himself and caused by himself are due either to habit or to rational or irrational craving.
Rational craving is a craving for good. That is, a wish. Nobody wishes for anything unless he thinks it's good.
Irrational craving is twofold. For example, anger and appetite.
In translating epistemia, desire has sometimes been used as well as appetite.
Thus, every action must be due to one or other of seven causes, chance, nature, compulsion, habit, reasoning, anger, or appetite.
It is superfluous, however, to distinguish actions according to the doer's ages, moral states, or the like.
It is, of course, true that, for instance, young men do have hot tempers and strong appetites.
Still, it is not so used that they act accordingly, but through anger or appetite.
Nor again is action due to wealth or poverty.
It is, of course, true that poor men, being short of money, do have an appetite for it.
And that rich men, being able to command needless pleasures, do have an appetite for such pleasures.
But here, again, their actions will be due not to wealth or poverty, but to appetite.
Similarly, with just men and unjust men and all others who are said to act in accordance with their moral qualities,
their actions will really be due to one of the causes mentioned, either reasoning or emotion.
Due, indeed, sometimes to good dispositions and good emotions and sometimes to bad.
But that good quality should be followed by good emotions and bad by bad.
It is nearly an accessory fact.
It is no doubt true that the temperate man, for instance, because he is temperate,
is always and at once attended by healthy opinions and appetites in regard to pleasant things,
and the intemperate man by unhealthy ones.
So, we must ignore such distinctions.
Still, we must consider what kinds of actions and the people usually go together.
For while there are no definite kinds of action associated with the fact that a man is fair or dark, poor or short,
it does make a difference if he is young or old, just or unjust.
And generally speaking, all those accessory qualities that cause distinctions of human character are important.
For example, the sense of wealth or poverty of being lucky or unlucky.
This shall be dealt to us later.
Let us now deal first with the rest of the subject before us.
The things that happen by chance are all those whose cause cannot be determined but have no purpose,
and that happen neither always nor usually nor in any fixed way.
The definition of chance shows just what they are.
Those things happen by nature which have a fixed and internal cause.
They take place uniformly, either always or usually.
There is no need to discuss in exact detail the things that happen contrary to nature,
nor to ask whether they happen in some sense naturally or from some other cause.
It would seem that chance is at least partly the cause of such a sense.
Those things happen to a compulsion which takes place contrary to the desire or reason of the doer, yet to his own agency.
Acts are done from habit which men do because they have often done them before.
Actions are due to reason when, in view of any of the goods already mentioned,
they appear useful either at end or as means to an end and are performed for that reason.
For that reason, since even licentious persons perform a certain number of useful actions,
but because they are pleasant and not because they are useful.
Passion and anger are due or acts of revenge. Revenge and punishment are different things.
Punishment is inflicted for the sake of the person punished. Revenge for that of the punisher to satisfy his feelings.
What anger is will be made clear when we come to discuss the emotion.
Habitat is the cause of all actions that appear pleasant. Habit, whether acquired by mere familiarity or by effort,
belongs to the class of pleasant things, for there are many actions not naturally pleasant which men perform with pleasure once they have become used to them.
To sum up then, all actions due to ourselves either are or seem to be either good or pleasant.
Moreover, as all actions due to ourselves are done voluntarily and actions not due to ourselves are done involuntarily,
it follows that all voluntary actions must either be or seem to be either good or pleasant.
For I reckon among goods escape from evils or apparent evils and the exchange of a greater evil for a less, since these things are in a sense positively desirable.
And likewise I count among pleasures escape from painful or apparently painful things and the exchange of a greater pain for a less.
We must ascertain and the number and nature of the things that are useful and pleasant.
The useful has been previously examined in connection with political archery. That is now a procedure to examine the pleasant.
Our various definitions must be regarded as adequate, even if they are not exact, provided they are clear.
We may lay it down that pleasure is a movement, a movement by which the soul as a whole is consciously brought into its normal state of being, and the pain is the opposite.
The relation here established between pleasure and the soul points to a Platonic background.
The second part of the definition may have originated in medical circles. It is closely paralleled in Plato, Timaeus.
If this is what pleasure is, it is clear that the pleasant is what tends to produce this condition, while that which tends to destroy it or cause the soul to be brought into the opposite state is painful.
We must therefore be pleasant as a rule to move towards the natural state of being, particularly when a natural process has achieved the complete recovery of that natural state.
Habits also are pleasant, for as soon as a thing has become habitual, it is virtually natural. Habit is a thing not unlike nature.
What happens often is akin to what happens always, natural events happening always, habitual events often.
Again, that is pleasant, which is not forced on us. For force is unnatural, and that is why what is compulsory is painful.
And it has been rightly said, all that is done on compulsion is bitterness unto the soul.
This is from a fragment of Uainas of Paras, a legit poet and sophist contemporary Socrates.
So all acts of concentration, strong effort and strain are necessarily painful.
They all involve compulsion and force, unless we are accustomed to them, in which case it is accustomed that makes them pleasant.
The opposites to these are pleasant, and hence these, freedom from toil, relaxation, amusement, rest and sleep, belong to the class of pleasant things,
for these are all free from any element of compulsion.
Everything too is pleasant, for which we have a desire within us, since desire is the craving for pleasure.
Of the desires, some are irrational, some associated with reason.
That is, they are accompanied or not accompanied by a rational principle.
By irrational, I mean those which do not arise from any opinion held by the mind, of this kind of those known as natural.
For instance, those originating in the body, such as the desire for nourishment, namely hunger and thirst,
and a separate kind of desire answering to each kind of nourishment, and the desire connected with taste and sex and sensations of touch in general.
And those of smell, hearing and vision, rational desires are those which we are induced to have, the many things we desire to see or get,
because we have been told of them and induced to believe them good.
Further, pleasure is the consciousness through the senses of a certain kind of emotion, but imagination is a feeble sort of sensation.
Imagination, mental picturing, fancy, impressions.
And they will always be in the mind of a man who remembers or expects something, an image or picture of what he remembers or expects.
If it is so, it is clear that memory and expectation also, being accompanied by sensation, may be accompanied by pleasure.
It follows that anything present is either present and perceived, past and remembered, or future and expected,
since we perceive present pleasures, remember past ones, and expect future ones.
Now, the things that are present to remember are not only those that were naturally perceived at present were present,
but also some things that were not, provided that their results have subsequently proved noble and good.
Hence the word, sweet tears when rescued to remember pain, a quotation from Euripides and Dramata,
and even his griefs are a joy long after to one that remembers all that he wrought and endured from the odyssey.
The reason of this is that it is present even to be merely free from evil,
the things that is present to expect are those that, when present, are felt to afford us either great delight or great but not painful benefit.
And in general, all the things that delight us when they are present also do so as a rule when we merely remember or expect them.
Then, even being angry is present, Homer said of Ross, but sweeter it is by far than the honeycomb dripping with sweetness from Iliad.
For no one grows angry with a person on whom there is no prospect of taking vengeance,
and we feel comparatively little anger, or none at all, with those who are much superior in power.
Some present feeling is associated with most of our appetite.
We are enjoying either the memory of a past pleasure or the expectation of a future one.
Just as persons down with fever during their attacks of thirst enjoy remembering the drinks they have had and looking forward to having more.
So also a lover enjoys talking or writing about his loved one or doing any little thing connected with him.
All these things recall him to memory and make him actually present to the eye of imagination.
Indeed, it is always the first sign of love that besides enjoying someone's presence, we remember him when he is gone and feel pain as well as pleasure because he is there no longer.
Similarly, there is an element of pleasure even in mourning and lamentation for the departed.
There is grief indeed at his loss, but pleasure in remembering him and as it was seeing him before us in his deeds and in his life.
We can well believe the poet when he says he's fake and in each man's heart he awakened the love of lament from the Iliad again.
Revenge too is pleasant.
It is pleasant to get anything that it is painful to fail to get and angry people suffer extreme pain when they fail to get their revenge.
But they enjoy the prospect of getting it.
Victory also is pleasant and not merely to bad losers but to everyone.
The winner sees himself in the light of a champion and everybody has a more or less keen appetite for being that.
The pleasantness of victory implies of course that combative sports and intellectual contests are pleasant since indeed it often happens that someone wins and also games like knuckle bones, ball, dice and craft.
And similarly with the serious sports, some of these become pleasant when one is accustomed to them while others are pleasant from the first like hunting with how and so indeed any kind of hunting.
But where does competition lose victory?
That is why forensic pleading and debating contests are pleasant to those who are accustomed to them and have the capacity for them.
Honor and good reputer are among the most pleasant things of all.
They make a man see himself in the character of a fine fellow, especially when he is credited with it by people whom he thinks good judges.
His neighbors are better judges than people at a distance. His associates and fellow countrymen better than strangers.
His contemporaries better than posterity. Sensible persons better than foolish ones.
A large number of people better than a small number. Those of the formal class in each case are the more likely to be good judges often.
Honor and credit bestowed by those whom you think much inferior to yourself, for example children or animals, you do not value.
Not for its own sake anyhow. If you do value it, it is for some other reason.
Friends belong to class of pleasant things. It is pleasant to love. If you love wine, you certainly find it delightful.
And it is pleasant to be loved, for this too makes the man see himself as the possessor of goodness.
A thing that every being that has a feeling for it desires to possess.
To be loved means to be valued for one's own personal qualities. To be admired is also pleasant, simply because of the honor implied.
Flattery and flatterer is a pleasant. The flatterer is a man who, you believe, admires and likes you.
To do the same thing often is pleasant since, as we saw, anything habitual is pleasant.
And to change is also pleasant. To change means an approach to nature, whereas a variable repetition of anything causes the excessive prolongation of a settled condition.
Therefore, says the poet, change is, in all things, sweet.
Euripity is quoted from Arestes.
That is why what comes to it only at long intervals is pleasant, whether it be a person or a thing, but it is a change from what we had before.
And besides, what comes only at long intervals has the value of rarity.
Learning things and wandering at things are also pleasant as a rule.
Wandering implies the desire of learning, so that the object of wonder is an object of desire.
While in learning, one is brought into one's natural conditions.
Conferring and receiving benefits belong to the class of pleasant things.
To receive a benefit is to get what one desires.
To confer a benefit implies both possession and superiority, both of which are things we try to attain.
It is because benefits and acts are pleasant that people find it pleasant to put their neighbors straight again and to supply what they lack.
Again, since learning and wandering are pleasant, it follows such things as acts of imitation must be pleasant,
for instance, painting, sculpture, poetry, and every product of skillful imitation.
This latter, even if the object imitated, is not itself pleasant.
For it is not the object itself which here gives delight, the spectator draws inferences.
That is a so-and-so, and thus learns something fresh.
Dramatic turns of fiction and hairbreaths escaped from perils are pleasant, because we feel all such things are wonderful.
And since what is natural is pleasant, and things akin to each other seem natural to each other,
therefore all kindred and similar things are usually pleasant to each other.
For instance, one man, horse, or young person is pleasant to another man, horse, or young person.
Hence the proverb, make, delight, mate, like, to like, beast, nose, beast, jastor, to jastor, and the rest of them.
But since everything like and akin to oneself is pleasant, and since every man is himself more like and akin to himself than anyone else is,
it follows that all of us must be more or less fond of ourselves.
For all this resemblance and kinship is present particularly in the relation of an individual to himself.
And because we are all fond of ourselves, it follows that what is our own is pleasant to all of us.
That's, for instance, our own deeds and words.
That is why we are usually fond of our flatterers, our lovers, and honour, also of our children, for our children are our own work.
It is also pleasant to complete what is detective, for the whole thing thereupon becomes our own work.
And since power over others is very pleasant, it is pleasant to be thought wise, for practical wisdom secures us power over others.
Scientific wisdom is also pleasant because it is the knowledge of many wonderful things.
Again, since most of us are ambitious, it must be pleasant to disparage our neighbours, as well as to have power over them.
It is pleasant for a man to spend his time over what he feels he can do best.
Just as the poet says, to that he bends himself to that each day a lot most time, wherein he is indeed the best part of himself.
Similarly, since amusement and every kind of relaxation and laughter too belong to the class of pleasant things,
it follows that ludicrous things are pleasant, whether men, words, or deeds.
We have discussed the ludicrous separately and the treatise on the art of poetry.
Not found in the Poetics as it exists today, Aristotle probably analysed the causes and conditions of laughter when treating of comedy in his lost second book.
So much for the subject of pleasant things, by considering their opposites we can easily see what things are unpleasant for.
We above are the motives that make men do wrong to others.
We are next to consider the states of mind in which they do it and the persons to whom they do it.
They must themselves suppose that the thing can be done and done by them.
Either that they can do it without being found out, or that if they are found out they can escape being punished,
or that if they are punished a disadvantage will be less than the gains themselves or those they care for.
The general subject of apparent possibility and impossibility will be handled later on,
since it is relevant not only to forensic but to all kinds of speaking.
But it may have been said that people think that they can themselves most easily do wrong to others
without being punished for it if they possess eloquent or practical ability or much legal experience,
or a large body of friends or a great deal of money.
Their confidence is greatest if they personally possess the advantages mentioned,
but even without them they are satisfied if they have friends or supporters or partners who do possess them.
They can thus both commit their crimes and escape being found out and punished for committing them.
They are also said, they think, if they are on good terms with their victims or with the judges who try them.
Their victims will in that case not be on their guard against being wronged
and will make some arrangement with them instead of prosecuting.
While their judges will favour them because they like them,
either letting them up altogether or imposing like sentences.
They are not likely to be found out if their appearance contradicts the charges that might be brought against them.
For instance, a weakling is unlikely to be charged with violent assault or a poor and ugly man with adultery.
Public and open injuries are the easiest to do because nobody could at all suppose them possible and therefore no precautions are taken.
The same is true of crimes so great and terrible that no man living could be suspected of them.
Here too no precautions are taken.
For all men guard against ordinary offences just as they guard against ordinary diseases,
but no one takes precautions against a disease that nobody has ever had.
You feel safe too if you are either no enemies or a great many.
If you have none, you expect not to be watched and therefore not to be detective.
If you have a great many, you will be watched and therefore people will think you can never risk an attempt on them
and you can defend your innocence by pointing out that you could never have taken such a risk.
You may also trust to hide your crime by the way you do it or the place you do it in
or by some convenient means of disposal.
You may feel that even if you are found out, you can save off a trial or have it postponed or corrupt your judges
or that even if you are sentenced, you can avoid paying damages or cannot be postponed doing so for a long time
or that you are so badly off that you will have nothing to lose.
You may feel that the game to be got by wrongdoing is great or certain or immediate and that the penalty is small or uncertain or distant.
It may be that the advantage to be gained is greater than any possible retribution
as in the case of despotic power according to the popular view.
You may consider your crimes as bringing you solid profit while their punishment is nothing more than being called bad names
or the opposite argument may appeal to you, your crimes may bring you some credit.
Thus you may incidentally be avenging your father or mother like Zeno.
That is evictions of injustice.
Whereas the punishment may amount to a fine or banishment or something of that sort.
People may be led on to wrong others by either of these motives or feelings,
but no man by both, they will affect people of quite opposite characters.
You may be encouraged by having often escaped detection or punishment already or by having often cried and failed.
For in crime, as in war, there are many who will always refuse to give up the struggle.
You may get your pleasure on the spot and the pain later or the gain on the spot and the loss later.
That is what appeals to weak wills person and weakness of will may be shown with regard to all the objects of desire.
It may on the contrary appeal to you, as it does appeal to self-controlled and sensible people,
that the pain and loss are immediate while the pleasure and profit come later and last longer.
You may be able to make it appear that your crime was due to chance or to necessity or to natural causes or to habit.
In fact, you put it generally as if you had failed to write rather than actually done wrong.
You may be able to trust other people to judge you equitably.
You may be stimulated by being in want, which may mean that you want necessaries as poor people do or that you want luxuries as rich people do.
You may be encouraged by having a particularly good reputation because that will save you from being suspected
or by having a particularly bad one because nothing you are likely to do will make it worse.
The above, then, are the various states of mind in which a man sets about doing wrong to others.
The kind of people to whom he does wrong and the ways in which he does it must be considered next.
The people to whom he does it are those who have what he wants himself, whether this means necessities or luxuries and materials for enjoyment.
His victims may be far off or near at hand. If they are near, he gets his profit quickly.
If they are far off, vengeance is slow, as those things who plunder the Carthage Union.
They may be those who are trustful instead of being cautious and watchful, since all such people are easy to elude.
Or those who are too easygoing to have enough energy to prosecute an ascender.
Or sensitive people who are not apt to show frightful questions of money.
Or those who have been wronged already by many people and yet have not prosecuted.
Such men must surely be the proverbial Mesian prey, that is to say, an easy prey.
Or those who have either never or often been wronged before. In neither case will they take precautions.
If they have never been wronged, they think they never will, and if they have often been wronged, they feel that surely it cannot happen again.
Or those whose character has been attacked in the past or is exposed to attack in the future.
They will be too much frightened of the judges to make up their minds to prosecute, nor can they win their case if they do.
This is true of those who are hated or unpopular.
Another likely class of victim is those who their injurer can pretend have, themselves, also their ancestors or friends,
treated badly or intended to treat badly, the man himself or his ancestors or those he cares for.
As the proverb says, wickedness needs but a pretext. The man may wrong his enemies because that is present.
He may equally wrong his friends because that is easy.
Then there are those who have no friends and those who lack eloquent and practical capacity.
These will either not attempt to prosecute us or they will come to terms or failing that they will lose their case.
There are those who it does not pay to waste time in waiting for trial or damages, such as foreigners and small farmers.
They will settle for a trifle and always be ready to leave off.
Also, those who have themselves wronged others, either often or in the same way as they are now being wronged themselves.
For it is felt that next to know wrong is done to people when it is the same wrong as they have often themselves done to others.
If, for instance, you assault a man who has been accustomed to behave with violence to others,
so too will those who have done wrong to others or have meant to or mean to or are likely to do so.
Though something fine and pleasant in wronging such persons, it seems as though almost no wrong were done.
Also, those by doing wrong to whom we shall be gratifying our friends, or those we admire or love for our masters,
or in general, people by reference to whom we mold our lives.
Also, those whom we may wrong and yet be sure of equitable treatment.
Also, those against whom we have had any grievance or any previous differences with them, as Calippus had when he behaved as he did to Dion.
Dion, a friend of Plato, freed Sicily of the tyranny of the older Dionysius,
and with Plato's assistance attempted to set up an ideal state.
In 354 BC, he was murdered by his former friend and associate Calippus.
Here, too, it seems as if almost no wrong were being done.
All those who are on the point of being wronged by others, if we fail to wrong them ourselves,
since here we feel we have no time left for thinking the matter over.
So, Aynethidemus is said to have sent a Cotibus prize to Gellon,
who had just reduced the town to slavery because Gellon had got there first and forced all his own attempts.
Aynethidemus was a tyrant of Leontini.
Cotibus is a Sicilian game. The prize was a gift of eggs, cakes, and sweetmeats.
And Gellon was a tyrant of Syracuse.
Also those by wronging whom we shall be able to do many righteous acts,
for we feel that we can then easily cure the harm done.
But Jason of Thessalion said that it is a dukey to do some unjust acts in order to be able to do many just ones.
Jason of Thelae was the ruler of Thessalion in the 4th century.
Among the kinds of wrong done to others are those that are done universally, or at least commonly,
one expects to be forgiven for doing these.
Also, those that can easily be kept dark, as were things that can rapidly be consumed like eatables are concerned,
or things that can easily be changed in shape, color, or combinations,
or things that can easily be stowed away almost anywhere,
portable objects that you can stow away in small corners, or things so like others,
of which you have plenty already that nobody can tell the difference.
There are also wrongs of a kind that shame prevents the victim speaking about,
such as the outrageous down to the women in his household, or to himself, or to his sons.
Also, those for which you would be taught very litigious to prostitute anyone,
tripling wrongs, or wrongs for which people are usually excused.
The above is a fairly complete count of the circumstances under which men do wrong to others,
of the sort of wrongs they do, of the sort of personings to whom they do them, and of their reasons for doing it.
It will now be well to make a complete classification of just and unjust actions.
We may begin by observing that they have been defined relatively to two kinds of law,
and also relatively to two classes of personings.
By the two kinds of law, I mean particular law and universal law.
The particular law is that which each community lays down and applies to its own members.
This is partly written and partly unwritten.
Universal law is the law of nature, for there rarely is, as everyone to some extent,
divines a natural justice and injustice that is binding on all men,
even on those who have no association or covenant with each other.
It is this that Sophocles' Antigone, clearly means when she says that the burial of Polyneses
was a just act in spite of the prohibitions.
She means that it was just by nature.
Not of today or yesterday it is, but lives eternal.
None can date its birth.
And so, Ampedocles, when he bids us kill no living creature,
says that doing this is not just for some people, while unjust for others.
Nay, but an all-embracing law through the realms of the sky,
unbroken its stretches, and over the earth's immensity.
A fragment of Ampedocles, a physical philosopher of the 5th century.
And as Al-Qudamah says in his Messinaic orations,
according to the scholars, the words of Al-Qudamah, the 5th century Sophocles and Orator,
were, God has left all men free, and nature has made no man a slave.
The actions that we ought to do or not to do have also been divided into two classes
as affecting either the whole community or some one of its members.
From this point of view, we can perform just or unjust acts in either of two ways,
towards one definite person or towards the community.
A man who is guilty of adultery or assault is doing wrong to some definite person.
A man who avoids service in the army is doing wrong to the community.
Thus, the whole class of unjust actions may be divided into two classes,
those affecting the community and those affecting one or more other person.
We will next, before going further, remind ourselves of what being wronged means.
Since it has already been settled, but doing a wrong must be intentional.
Being wronged must consist in having an injury done to you by someone who impends to do it.
In order to be wronged, a man must, one, suffer actual harm.
Two, suffer it against his will.
The various possible forms of harm are clearly explained by a previous separate discussion of goods and evils.
We have also seen that a voluntary action is one where the doer knows what he is doing.
We now see that every accusation must be of an action affecting either the community or some individual.
The doer of the action must either understand and intend the action, or not understand and intend it.
In the former case, he must be acting either from deliberate choice or from passion.
Anger will be discussed when we speak of the passions, the motives for crime and the state of mind of criminal have already been discussed.
Now, it often happens that a man will admit a fact, but will not admit the prosecutor's label for the act nor the fact which that label implies.
He will admit that he took a thing, but not that he stole it, that he struck someone first, but not that he committed outrage,
that he had intercourse with a woman, but not that he committed adultery,
that he is guilty of theft, but not that he is guilty of sacrilege, the object stolen not being consecrated,
that he has encroached, but not that he has encroached on state land, that he has been in communication with the enemy, but not that he has been guilty of treason.
Here, therefore, we must be able to distinguish what is theft, outrage or adultery, from what is not, if we are to be able to make the justice of our case clear,
no matter whether our aim is to establish a man's guilt or to establish his innocence.
Wherever such charges are brought against a man, the question is whether he is or is not guilty of a criminal offense.
It is deliberate purpose that constitutes wickedness and criminal guilt, and such names as outrage or theft imply deliberate purpose as well as a mere action.
A blow does not always amount to outrage, but only if it is struck with some such purpose as to insult the man's truck or gratify the striker himself.
Nor does taking a thing without the owner's knowledge always amount to theft, but only if it is taken with the intention of keeping it and injuring the owner.
And as with these charges, so with all the others.
We saw that there are two kinds of right and wrong conduct towards others, one provided for by written ordinances, the other by unrighteousness.
We have now discussed the kind about which the laws have something to say.
The other kind has itself two varieties.
First, there is the conduct of springs from exceptional goodness or badness, and is visited accordingly with censure and loss of honor, or with praise and increase of honor and decoration.
For instance, gratitude too are a vital of our benefactors, readiness to help our friends and the like.
The second kind makes up for the defects of a community's written code of law.
This is what we call equity.
People regarded as just, it is in fact a source of justice which goes beyond the written law.
Its existence partly is and partly is not intended by legislators, not intended where they have noticed no defect in the law, intended where they find themselves unable to define things exactly, and are obliged to legislate as if that held good always which in fact only holds good usually.
Or where it is not easy to compete only to the endless possible cases presented, such as the kinds and sizes of weapons that may be used to inflict wounds, a lifetime would be too short to make out to compete most of these.
If, then, a precise statement is impossible, and yet legislation is necessary, the law must be expressed in wide terms.
And so, if a man has no more than a finger ring on his hand when he lifts it to strike, or actually strikes another man, he is guilty of a criminal act according to the written words of the law.
But he is innocent really, and it is equity that declares him to be so.
From this definition of equity, it is playing what sort of actions and what sort of persons are equitable or the reverse.
Equity must be applied to forgivable actions, and it must make a distinguish between criminal acts on the one hand, and errors of judgement or misfortunes on the other.
A misfortune is an act not due to moral badness, but has unexpected results.
An error of judgement is an act, also not due to moral badness, but has results that might have been expected.
A criminal act has results that might have been expected, but is due to moral badness, for that is the source of all actions inspired by our appetite.
Equity did not be merciful to the weakness of human nature, to think less about the laws than about the man who framed them, and less about what he said than about what he meant.
Not to consider the actions of the accused so much as his intentions, nor this or that detail so much as the whole story.
To ask not what a man is now, but what he has always or usually been.
It would just remember benefits rather than injuries and benefits received rather than benefits conferred.
To be patient when we are wronged, to settle a dispute by negotiation and not by force.
To prefer arbitration to litigation, for an arbitrator goes by the equity of a case, a charge by the strict law, and arbitration was invented with the express purpose of securing full power for equity.
The above may be taken as a sufficient account of the nature of equity.
The worst of two acts of wrong done to others is that which is prompted by the worst disposition, hence the most trifling acts may be the worst ones,
as when Calistratus charged Melanopus with having cheated the temple builders of three consecrated half oboes.
Melanopus was a political rival to Calistratus. The exact nature of the offense he alluded to is unknown.
The converse is true of just acts. This is because the greater is here potentially contained in the less.
There is no crime that a man who has stolen three consecrated half oboes would shrink from committing.
Sometimes, however, the worst act is reckoned not in this way, but by the greater harm that it does.
Or it may be because no punishment for it is severe enough to be adequate, or the harm done may be incurable, a difficult and even hopeless crime to defend,
or due punishment then being difficult or impossible.
Or the sufferer may not be able to get his injurer legally punished, a fact that makes the harm incurable, since legal punishment and chastisement are the proper cure.
Or again, the man who has suffered wrong may have inflicted some fearful punishment on himself.
Then the doer of the wrong ought injustice to receive a still more fearful punishment.
Thus, Sophocles, when pleading for retribution to oak-chemon who had cut his own throat because of the outrage done to him,
said he would not fix the penalty less than the victim had fixed for himself.
Sophocles is not the tragedian, but the statesman at Orator advanced in years at the end of the Peloponnesian War.
The case mentioned here is unknown.
Again, a man's crime is worse if he has been the first man, or the only man, or almost the only man to commit it.
Or if it is by no means the first time he has gone seriously wrong in the same way.
The crime has led to the sinking out and invention of measures to prevent and punish similar crimes.
Thus, in Argos, a penalty is inflicted on a man on whose account a law is passed, and also on those on whose account the prison was built.
Or if a crime is specially brutal or specially deliberate, or if the report of it awakes more terror than pity.
There are also such rhetorically effective ways of putting it as the following.
That the accused has disregarded and broken not one, but many solemn obligations like oaths, promises, pledges, or rights of intermarriage between states.
Here, the crime is worse because it consists of many crimes, and that the crime is committed in the very place where criminals are punished.
As, for example, perjurers do.
It is argued that a man who will commit a crime in a law court will commit it anywhere.
Further, the worst deed is that which involves the doer in special shame.
That whereby a man wrongs his benefactors, he does more than one wrong by not merely doing them harm, but failing to do them good.
That which breaks the unwritten laws of justice, the better sort of man will be just without being forced to be so.
And the written laws depend on force, while the unwritten ones do not.
It may, however, be argued otherwise that the crime is worse, which breaks the written laws for the man who commits crimes for which terrible penalties are provided,
will not hesitate over crimes for which no penalty is provided at all.
So much then for the comparative badness of criminal action.
There are also the so-called non-technical means of persuasion.
And we must now take a cursory view of these, since they are especially characteristic of forensic oratory.
There are five in number, Laws, Witnesses, Contracts, Tortures, Odes.
First then, let us take laws and see how they are to be used in persuasion and dissuasion, in accusation and defense.
If the written law tells against our case, clearly we must appeal to the universal law and insist on its greater equity and justice.
Here, and in what follows, we must be taken in a general sense.
More literally, tells against his case, clearly the litigant must, he must argue, etc., so it's you elsewhere.
We must argue that the juror's oath, I will give my verdict according to my honest opinion,
means that one will not simply follow the letter of the written law.
We must urge that the principles of equity are permanent and changeless, and that the universal law does not change either.
For it is the law of nature, whereas written laws often do change.
This is the bearing of the lines in Sophoclese's Antigone, where Antigone pleads that in bearing her brother,
she had broken Creon's law, but not the unwritten law.
Not of today or yesterday they are, but live eternal, none can date their birth.
Not I would fear the wrath of any man and brave God's vengeance for defying these.
We shall argue that justice indeed is true and profitable, but the charm justice is not,
and that consequently the written law is not because it does not fulfill the true purpose of the law.
Or that justice is like silver and must be assayed by the judges if the genuine is to be distinguished from the content.
Or that the better a man is, the more he will follow and abide by the unwritten law in preference to the written.
Or perhaps that the law in question contradicts some other highly esteemed law, or even in contradicts itself.
Thus it may be that one law will enact that all contracts must be held binding, while another forbids us ever to make illegal contracts.
Or if a law is ambiguous, we shall turn it about and consider which construction best fits the interests of justice or utility,
and then follow that way of looking at it.
Or if, though the law still exists, the situation in which it was passed exists no longer.
We must do our best to prove this and to combat the law thereby.
If however the written law supports our case, we must urge that the oath to give my verdict according to my honest opinion
is not meant to make the judges give a verdict to this contrary to the law, but to save them from the guilt of perjury if they misunderstand what the law really means.
Or that no one chooses what is absolutely good, but everyone what is good for himself.
Our written laws, which were made for us, may not reach the abstract ideal of perfection, but they probably suit us better than if they did.
Or that not to use the laws is as bad as to have no laws at all.
Or that, as in the other arts, it does not pay to try to be cleverer than the doctor.
The left harm comes from the doctor's mistakes and from the growing habit of disobeying authority.
Or that trying to be cleverer than the laws is just what is forbidden by those codes of law that are accounted best.
So far as the laws are concerned, the above discussion is probably sufficient.
As the witnesses, they are of two kinds, the ancient and the recent.
And these latter, again, either do or do not share in the risks of the trial.
By ancient witnesses, I mean the poets and all other notable persons whose judgments are known to all.
Lastly, Athenians appeal to Homer as a witness about Salamis.
Claiming against Megala their ancient rights to the possession of Salamis, the Iliad has often in antiquity been called an Athenian interpolation.
And the men of Tenedos not long ago appealed to Periander of Corinth in their dispute with the people of Cigale.
Claim that the tyrant of Corinth in the 7th century BC, the incident referred to, is unknown.
And Cleophon supported his accusation of Cretias by quoting the elegiac verse of Solon,
maintaining that discipline had long been slack in the family of Cretias, or Solon would never have written.
Cleophon and Kilitas, leaders of opposite parties at the end of the Peloponnesian War.
Pray thee, bid the red-haired Cretias do what his father commands him.
These witnesses are concerned with past events.
As the future events which will also appeal to soothsayers, thus the Mr. Cress quoted the oracle about the wooden war as a reason for engaging the enemy's fleet.
Further proverbs are, as has been said, one form of evidence.
A general statement apparently, or possibly, proverbs are evidence in the sense indicated, that is, evidence of the future.
Thus, if you are urging somebody not to make a friend of an old man, and you will appeal to the proverb, never show an old man kindness.
Or, if you are urging that he who was made away with fathers should also make away with their sons, quote,
fool who slayeth the father and leaveeth his sons to avenge him.
Recent witnesses are well-known people who have expressed their opinions about some disputed matter.
Such opinions will be useful support for subsequent disputes on the same point.
Thus, Ubulus, a popular Athenian statesman of the 4th century, of the case mentioned here, nothing is known,
used in the law courts against Cares, the reply Plato had made to Archibius,
it has become the regular custom in this country to admit that one is a scoundrel.
This Plato may have been the philosopher or the comic poet, contemporary of Aristophanes.
There are also those witnesses who share the risk of punishment if their evidence is pronounced false.
These are valid witnesses to the fact that an action was or was not done, that something is or is not the case.
They are not valid witnesses to the quality of an action, to its being just or unjust, useful or harmful.
On such questions of quality, the opinion of detached persons is highly trustworthy.
Most trustworthy of all are the ancient witnesses and say cannot be corrupted.
In dealing with the evidence of witnesses, the following are useful arguments.
If you have no witnesses on your side, you will argue that the judges must decide from what is probable,
that this is meant by giving a verdict in accordance with one's honest opinion.
The probabilities cannot be bribed to mislead the court and that probabilities are never convicted of perjury.
If you have witnesses and the other man has not, you will argue that probabilities cannot be put on their trial
and that we could do without the evidence of witnesses altogether if we need to know more than balance the pleas advanced on either side.
The evidence of witnesses may refer either to ourselves or to our opponents
and either to questions of fact or to questions of personal character.
So, clearly, we need never be able to last for useful evidence.
For if we have no evidence of facts supporting our own case or telling against that of our opponent,
at least we can always find evidence to prove our own worth or our opponent's worthlessness.
Other arguments about a witness, that he is a friend or an enemy or a neutral
or has a good, bad or indifferent reputation and any other such distinction,
we must construct above the same general lines as we use for the regular rhetorical proofs.
Enfinemes.
Concerning contracts, arguments can be so far employed as to increase or diminish their importance and their credibility.
We shall try to increase both if they tell in our favor and to diminish both if they tell in favor of our opponent.
Now, for confirming or upsetting the credibility of contracts, the procedure is just the same as for dealing with witnesses.
For the credit to be attached to contracts depends upon the character of those who have signed them or have to cut to the bottom.
The contract being once admitted genuine, we must insist on its importance if it supports our case.
We may argue that contract is a law though of a special and limited kind and that while contracts do not of course make the law binding,
the law does make any lawful contract binding and that the law itself as a whole is a sort of contract,
so that anyone who disregards or repudiates any contract is repudiating the law itself.
Further, most business relations, those namely the voluntary, are regulated by contracts and if these lose their binding force, human intercourse ceases to exist.
We need not go very deep to discover the other appropriate arguments of this kind, if however the contract tells against us and for our opponent.
In the first place, those arguments are suitable which we can use to fight a law that tells against us.
We do not regard ourselves as bound to observe a bad law which it was a mistake ever to pass and it is ridiculous to suppose that we are bound to observe a bad and mistaken contract.
Again, we may argue that the duty of the judge of the empire is to decide what is just and therefore he must ask where justice lies and not what this or that document means
and that it is impossible to pervert justice by fraud or by force since it is founded on nature but a party to a contract may be the victim of either fraud or force.
Moreover, we must see if the contract contravenes either universal law or any written law of our own or another country and also if it contradicts any other previous or subsequent contract.
Arguing that the subsequent is the binding contract or else that the previous one was right and the subsequent one fraudulent, whichever way suits us.
Further, we must consider the question of utility, noting whether the contract is against the interest of the judges or not and so on. These arguments are as obvious as the others.
Examination by torture is one form of evidence to which great weight is often attached because it is in a sense compulsory.
Here again, it is not hard to point out the available grounds for magnifying its value if it happens to tell in our favor and arguing that it is the only form of evidence that is infallible
or, on the other hand, for refuting it if it tells against us and for our opponent when we may say what is true of torture of every kind,
a like that people under its compulsion internalize quite as often as they tell the truth, sometimes persistently refusing to tell the truth, sometimes recklessly making a false charge in order to be let off sooner.
We ought to be able to quote cases familiar to the judges in which this sort of thing has actually happened.
We must say that evidence under torture is not, fast-forwardly, the fact being that many men, whether thick-witted, tough-skinned, or stout-of-heart, endure their ordeal nobly,
while cowards and timid men are full of boldness till they see the ordeal of these others so that no trust can be placed in evidence under torture.
In regard to oaths, the fourfold division can be made.
A man may either both offer and accept an oath, or neither, or one without the other.
That is, he may offer an oath but not accept one, or accept an oath but not offer one.
There is also the situation that arises when an oath has already been sworn either by himself or by his opponent.
That is, both demand an oath from his adversary, call upon him to swear to the truth of his statements, and take an oath himself.
There is also the situation that arises when an oath has already been sworn either by himself or by his opponent.
If you refuse to offer an oath, you may argue that men do not hesitate to perjure themselves, and that if your opponent does swear, you lose your money.
Whereas if he does not, you think the judges will decide against him, and that the risk of an unfavorable verdict is preferable, since you trust the judges and do not trust him.
If you refuse to accept an oath, you may argue that an oath is always paid for.
That you would, of course, have taken it if you had been a rascal, since if you are a rascal, you would better make something by it, and you would in that case have to swear in order to succeed.
Thus, your refusal, you argue, must be due to high principle, not to fear a perjury.
And you may aptly quote the saying of Xenophanes, it is not fair that he who fears not God should challenge him who does.
It is as if a strongman were to challenge a weakling to strike, or be struck by, him.
If you agree to accept an oath, you may argue that you trust yourself but not your opponent, and that to invert the remark of Xenophanes, the fair thing is to the impious man to offer the oath and to the pious man to accept it,
and that it would be monstrous if you yourself were unwilling to accept an oath in a case where you demand that the judges should do so before giving their verdict.
If you wish to offer an oath, you may argue that piety disposes you to commit the issue to God, and that your opponent ought not to want other judges and himself, since you leave the decision with him,
and that it is outrageous for your opponent to refuse to swear about this question when they insist that others should do so.
Now that we see how we are to argue in each case separately, we see also how we are to argue when they occur in pairs, namely when you are willing to accept the oath but not to offer it, to offer it but not to accept it,
both to accept and to offer it, or to do neither.
These are of course combinations of the cases already mentioned, until your arguments also must be combinations of the arguments already mentioned.
If you have already sworn an oath that contradicts your present one, you must argue that it is not perjury, since perjury is a crime and a crime must be a voluntary action,
whereas actions due to the force or fraud of others are involuntary.
You must further reason from this that perjury depends on the intention and not on the spoken word,
but if it is your opponent who has already sworn an oath that contradicts his present one, you must say that if he does not abide by his oath, he is the enemy of society,
and that this is the reason why men take an oath before administering the laws.
My opponents insist that you, the judges, must abide by the oath you have sworn, and yet they are not abiding by their own oaths,
and there are other arguments which may be used to magnify the importance of the oath.
So much, then, for the non-technical modes of persuasion.
Book 2
We have now considered the materials to be used in supporting or opposing a political measure in pronouncing eulogies or censures,
and for prosecution and defence in the law court.
We have considered the received opinions on which we may best base our arguments, so as to convince our hearers,
those opinions with which our entamines deal, and out of which they are built in each of the three kinds of oratory,
according to what may be called the special needs of each.
But since rhetoric exists to affect the giving of decisions, the hearers decide between one political speaker and another,
and a legal verdict is the decision.
The orator must not only try to make the argument of his speech demonstrative and worthy of belief,
he must also make his own character look right and put his hearers, who are to decide, into the right frame of mind.
Particularly in political oratory, but also in lawsuits, it adds much to an orator's influence that his own character should look right
and that he should be thought to understand the right feeling towards his hearers.
And also that his hearers themselves should be in just the right frame of mind,
that the orator's own character should look right is particularly important in political speaking,
that the audience should be in the right frame of mind in lawsuits.
When people are feeling friendly and tackable, they think one sort of thing.
When they are feeling angry or hostile, they think either something totally different or the same thing with a different intensity.
When they feel friendly to the man who comes before them for judgment, they regard him as having done a little wrong, if any.
When they feel hostile, they take the opposite view.
Again, if they're eager for and have good hopes of a thing that will be pleasant if it happens, they think that it certainly will happen and be good for them,
whereas if they're indifferent or annoyed, they do not think so.
There are three things that inspire confidence in the orator's own character.
The three, namely, that induce us to believe a thing apart from any proof of it.
Good sense, good moral character, and good will.
False statements and bad advice are due to one or more of the following three causes.
Men either form a false opinion through one to good sense, or they form a true opinion,
but because of their moral badness, do not say what they rarely think.
Or, finally, they are both sensible and upright, but not well-disposed to their heroes,
and may fail in consequence to recommend what they know to be the best course.
These are the only possible cases.
It follows that anyone who is thought to have all three of these good qualities will inspire trust in his audience.
The way to make ourselves thought to be sensible and morally good must be gathered from the analysis of goodness already given.
The way to establish your own goodness is the same as the way to establish that of others.
Good will and friendliness of disposition will form part of our discussion of the emotions to which we must now turn.
The emotions are all those feelings that so change manners to affect their judgments,
and that are also attended by pain or pleasure, such as anger, pity, fear, and the like, with their opposites.
We must arrange what we have to say about each of them under three heads.
Take, for instance, the emotion of anger.
Here we must discover, one, what the state of mind of angry people is,
two, who the people are with whom they usually get angry,
and, three, on what grounds they get angry with them.
It is not enough to know one or even two of these points.
Unless we know all three, we shall be unable to arouse anger in anyone.
The same is true of the other emotions.
Though just as earlier in this work we drew up a list of useful propositions to the auditor,
let us now proceed in the same way to analyze the subject before us.
Anger may be defined as an impulse, accompanied by a pain,
through a conspicuous revenge for a conspicuous slight directed without justification towards what concerns one's self or towards what concerns one's friend.
If this is a proper definition of anger, it must always be felt towards some particular individual,
for example, Chaon, and not man in general.
It must be felt because the other has done or intended to do something to him or one of his friends.
It must always be attended by a certain pleasure, that which arises from the expectation of revenge.
But since nobody aims at what he thinks he cannot attain,
then the angry man is aiming at what he can attain, and the belief that you will attain your aim is present.
Hence it has been well said about Roth.
Sweeter it is by far than the honeycomb dripping with sweetness and sped through the hearts of men, quoted from the Iliad.
It is also attended by a certain pleasure because the thoughts dwell upon the act of vengeance,
and the images then called up cause pleasure, like the images called up in dreams.
Now, slighting is the actively entertained opinion of something is obviously of no importance.
We think bad things as well as good ones have serious importance,
and we think the same of anything that tends to produce such things,
while those which have little or no such tendency were considered unimportant.
There are three kinds of slighting, contempt, spite and insolence.
One, contempt is one kind of slighting, you feel contempt for what you consider unimportant,
and it is just such things that you slight.
Two, spite is another kind, or spite seems to show contempt.
It is a forcing and other man's wishes not to get something yourself but to prevent his getting it.
The slight arises just from the fact that you do not aim at something for yourself.
Clearly you do not think that he can do you harm, for then you would be afraid of him instead of slighting him,
nor yet that he can do you any good worth mentioning, for then you would be anxious to make friends with him.
Three, insolence is also a form of slighting, since it consists in doing and saying things that cause shame to the victim,
not in order that anything may happen to yourself or because anything has happened to yourself, but simply for the pleasure involved.
Retaliation is not insolence but vengeance.
The cause of the pleasure of us enjoyed by the insolent man is that he thinks himself greatly superior to others when ill treating them.
That is why yous and rich men are insolent. They think themselves superior when they show insolence.
One sort of insolence is to rob people of the honor due to them.
You certainly slight them thus, for it is the unimportant for good or evil that has no honor paid to it.
So Achilles says in anger, he has taken my prize for himself and has done me dishonor and, like an alien, honored by none,
quoted from the Iliad, meaning that this is why he is angry.
A man expects to be specially respected by his inferior in birth, in capacity, in goodness, and generally in anything in which he is much their superior.
As where money is concerned, a wealthy man looks for respect from a poor man.
Where speaking is concerned, the man with a term for oratory looks for respect from one who cannot speak.
The ruler demands the respect of the rule, and the man who thinks he ought to be a ruler demands the respect of the man who thinks he ought to be a ruler.
Hence it has been said, great is the wrath of kings, whose father is yousore mighty, and yea, but his ranker abideth long afterward also, quoted from the Iliad.
Their great resentment being due to their great superiority.
Then again, a man looks for respect from those who he thinks are in good treatment, and these are the people whom he has treated or is treating well,
or means or has meant to treat well, either himself or through his friends or through others that is a quest.
It will be planned by now, from what it has been said, one, in what frame of mind, two, with what person he is, and three, on what grounds people grow angry.
One, the frame of mind, is that in which any pain is being felt. In that condition, the man is always aiming at something.
Whether then, another man opposes him either directly in any way, as by preventing him from drinking when he is thirsty, or indirectly, the act appears to him just the same.
Whether someone works against him or fails to work with him, or otherwise flexes him while he is in this mood, he is equally angry in all these cases.
Hence, people who are afflicted by sickness or poverty or love or thirst, or any other unsatisfied desires, are prone to anger and easily roused,
especially against those who slight their presence and stress.
Thus, a sick man is angered by disregard of his illness, a poor man by disregard of his poverty, a man waging war by disregard of the war he is waging,
a lover by disregard of his love, and so is throughout any other sort of slight being enough if special slights are wanting.
Each man is predisposed by the emotion now controlling him to his own particular anger.
Further, we are angered if we happen to be expecting a contrary result, for a quite unexpected evil is especially painful, just as the quite unexpected fulfillment of our wishes is especially pleasant.
Once it is playing, what seasons, times, conditions and periods of life tend to stir a man easily to anger, and where and when this will happen,
and it is playing that the more we are under these conditions, the more easily we are stirred.
These, then, are the planes of mind in which men are easily stirred to anger.
The persons with whom we get angry are those who laugh, mock or gelatice, for such conduct is insolent.
Also, those who inflict injuries upon us are the marks of insolence.
These injuries must be such as they are neither retaliatory nor profitable to the doers.
For only then will every self to be due to insolence.
Also, those who speak ill of us and show contempt for us, in connection with the things we ourselves most care about.
Thus, those who are eager to inflame as philosophers get angry with those who show contempt for their philosophy.
Those who pride themselves upon their appearance get angry with those who show contempt for their appearance, and so on in other cases.
We feel, particularly angry on this account, if we suspect that we are, in fact, or that people think we are, lacking completely or to an effective extent in the qualities in question.
But when we are convinced that we excel in the qualities for which we adhere to that, we can ignore the during.
Again, we are angrier with our friends than with other people, since we feel that our friends ought to treat us well and not badly.
We are angry with those who have usually treated us with honor or a guard if a change comes and they behave to us otherwise.
For we think that they feel contempt for us, or they would still be behaving as they did before.
And with those who do not return our kindness or fail to return them adequately, and with those who oppose us so they are imperious.
For all such persons seem to feel contempt for us, those who oppose us seem to think us inferior to themselves, and those who do not return our kindnesses seem to think that those kindnesses were conferred by inferiors.
And we feel, particularly angry with men of no account at all, if they slight us.
For, by our hypothesis, the anger caused by the slight is felt towards people who are not justified in slighting us, and our inferiors are not thus justified.
Again, we feel angry with friends if they do not speak well of us or treat us well, and still more if they do the contrary.
Or if they do not perceive our needs, which is why Texas is angry with Meliagra in Antiphon's play.
A fragment of the Meliagra of Antiphon, a tragedian of the 4th century BC.
For this want of perception shows that they are slighting us, we do not fail to perceive the needs of those for whom we care.
Again, we are angry with those who rejoice with our misfortunes or simply keep cheerful in the midst of our misfortunes, since this shows that they either hate us or are slighting us.
Also, with those who are indifferent to the pain they give us, this is why we get angry with bringers of bad news.
And with those who listen to stories about us that keep on looking at our weaknesses.
This seems like either slighting us or hating us.
For those who love us, share in all our distresses, and it must distress anyone to keep on looking at his own weaknesses.
Further, with those who slight us before five classes of people, namely, one, our rivals, two, those whom we admire, three, those whom we wish to admire,
four, those for whom we feel reverence, five, those who feel reverence for us.
If anyone slights us before such persons, we feel particularly angry.
Again, we feel angry with those who slight us in connection with what we are as honorable men bound to champion our parents, children, wives, or subjects.
And with those who do not return a paper, since such a slight is unjustifiable.
Also, with those who reply with humorous levity when we are speaking seriously, for such behavior indicates contempt.
And with those who treat it less well and they treat everybody else, it is another mark of contempt that they should think we do not deserve what everyone else deserves.
Forgetfulness, too, causes anger, as when our own names are forgotten, trifling as this may be.
Since forgetfulness is felt to be another sign that we are being slighted, it is due to negligence, and to neglect us is to slight us.
The persons with whom we feel anger, the frame of mind in which we feel it, and the reasons why we feel it, have now all been set forth.
Clearly, the orator will have to speak so as to bring his heroes into a frame of mind that will dispose them to anger,
and to represent his adversaries as open to such charges and possess of such qualities as do make people angry.
Since growing calm is the opposite of growing angry and calmness, the opposite of anger, we might ascertain in what frames of mind men are calm towards whom they feel calm, and by what means they are made so.
For calm, read gentleness, mildness, placability, patience.
Growing calm may be defined as a settling down or quieting of anger.
Now, we get angry with those who slight us, and since slighting is a voluntary act, it is a plan that we feel calm towards those who do nothing of the kind, or who do or seem to do it involuntarily,
also towards those who intended to do the opposite of what they did do, also towards those who treat themselves as they have treated us, since no one can be supposed to slight himself,
also towards those who admit their fault and are sorry, since we accept their grief at what they have done as a satisfaction and cease to be angry.
The punishment of servants shows this, those who contradict us and deny their offense, we punish all the more, but we seem to be incensed against those who agree that they deserve their punishment.
The reason is that it is shameless to deny what is obvious, and those who are ashamed with towards us slight us and show contempt for us.
Anyhow, we do not feel shame before those of whom we are thoroughly contemptuous.
Also, we feel calm towards those who humble themselves before us and do not gain sayeth.
We feel that they thus admit themselves are inferior, and inferior feels fear and nobody can slight anyone so long as we feel afraid of him.
That, our anger ceases towards those who humble themselves before us, is shown even by dogs who do not bite people when they sit down.
We also feel calm towards those who are serious when we are serious, because then we feel that we are treated seriously and not contemptuously.
Also towards those who have done us more kindnesses than we have done them.
Also towards those who pray to us and beg for mercy, since they humble themselves by doing so.
Also towards those who do not insult or mock at or slight anyone at all, or not any worthy person, or anyone like ourselves.
In general, the things that make us calm may be inferred by seeing what the opposites are of those that make us angry.
We are not angry with people we feel or respect, as long as we feel or respect them.
You cannot be afraid of a person that also at the same time angry with him.
Again, we feel no anger, or comparatively little, with those who have done what they did through anger.
We do not feel that they have done it from a wish to slight us, but no one slights people when angry with them, since slighting is painless and anger is painful.
Nor do we grow angry with those who reverence us.
As for the frame of mind that makes people calm, it is blended the opposite of that which makes them angry,
as when they are amusing themselves or laughing or feasting, when they are feeling prosperous or successful or satisfied,
when, in fine, they are enjoying freedom from pain or inoffensive pleasure or justifiable hope.
Also, when time is part, and their anger is no longer fresh, for time puts an end to anger,
and vengeance, previously taken on one person, puts an end to even greater anger felt against another person.
Hence, philocrates, being asked by someone at a time when the public was angry with him,
why don't you defend yourself did right to reply, the time is not yet.
Philocrates was a contemporary political figure.
Why? When is the time? When I see someone else culminated.
For men become calm when they have spent their anger on somebody else.
This happened in the case of Oedipalus, though the people were more irritated against him than against Callisthenes.
They acquitted him because they had condemned Callisthenes to death the day before.
Again, men become calm if they had convicted the offender.
Or, if he has already suffered worse things than they and their anger, would have themselves inflicted upon them.
For they feel as if they were already avenged, or if they feel that they themselves are in the wrong and are suffering justly.
For anger is not excited by what is just, since men no longer think them that they are suffering without justification.
And anger, as we have seen, means this.
Hence we ought always to inflict the preliminary punishment in words, if that is done even slaves are less aggrieved by the actual punishment.
We also feel calm if we think that the offender will not see that he has punished on our account and because of the way he has treated us.
For anger has to do with individuals. This is plain from the definition.
Hence, the poet is Werwardton. Say that it was Odysseus, Sacka of cities.
Implying that Odysseus would not have considered himself avenged unless the Cyclops perceived both by whom and for what he had been blinded.
Consequently, we do not get angry with anyone who cannot be aware of our anger.
And in particular, we cease to be angry with people once they are dead.
For we feel that the worst has been done to them and that they will neither feel pain or anything else that we in our anger aim at making them feel.
And therefore the poet is well made apollo, say, in order to put a stop to the anger of Achilles against the dead Hector.
For behold, in his fury, he doeth despite to the senseless clay from the Odyssey.
It is now plain that when you wish to calm others, you must draw upon these lines of argument.
You must put your heroes into the corresponding frame of mind and represent those with whom they are angry as formidable or worthy of reverence,
or as benefactors, or as involuntary agents, or as much distressed at what they have done.
Let us now turn to friendship and enmity and ask towards whom these feelings are entertained and why.
In this chapter and elsewhere, it is difficult to translate feline and its related words by any single English equivalent to be a friend, to like, to love, may have to be used in turn.
We may describe friendly feelings towards anyone as wishing for him what to believe to be good things, not their own sake but for his,
and being inclined, so far as you can, to bring these things about.
A friend is one who feels us and excites these feelings in return, those who think they feel us towards each other think themselves friends.
This, being assumed, it follows that your friend is the sort of man who shares your pleasure in what is good and your pain in what is unpleasant for your sake and for no other reason.
This pleasure and pain of his will be the token of his good wishes for you, since we all feel glad at getting what we wish for and pained at getting what we do not.
Those then are friends to whom the same things are good and evil, and those who are, moreover, friendly or unfriendly to the same people.
For in that case, they must have the same wishes, and thus, by wishing for each other what they wish for themselves, they show themselves to each other's friends.
Again, we feel friendly to those who are treated as well, either ourselves or those we care for, whether on a large scale, or regularly, or at some particular crisis.
Provided it was for our own sake, and also to those who we think wish to treat us well, and also to our friends, friends, and to those who like or are liked by those whom we like ourselves,
and also to those who are enemies to those whose enemies we are and dislike or are disliked by those whom we dislike.
For all such persons, think the things good which we think good, so that they wish what is good for us, and this, as we saw, is what friends must do,
and also to those who are willing to treat us well, where money or our personal safety is concerned, and therefore we value those who are liberal, brave, or just.
But just we consider to be those who do not live on others, which means those who work for their living, especially farmers and others who work with their own hands.
We also like temperate men because they are not unjust to others, and to the same reason, those who mind their own business, and also those whose friends we wish to be, if it is planned, they wish to be our friends.
Such are the morally good, and those well thought of by everyone, by the best men, or by those whom we admire or who admire us, and also those with whom it is pleasant to live and spend our days.
Such are the good tempered, and those who are not too ready to show us our mistakes, and those who are not tantankerous or wholesome.
Such people are always wanting to fight us, and those who fight us, we feel, wish for the opposite of what we wish for ourselves, and those who have the task to make and take a joke.
Here, both parties have the same object in view, that is, both wish to pass the time pleasantly, when they can stand being made fun of, as well as do it pretty well themselves.
And we also feel friendly towards those who praise such good qualities as we possess, and especially if they praise the good qualities that we are not too sure we do possess, and towards those who are keenly in their person, their dress, and all their way of life,
and towards those who do not reproach us with what we have done amiss to them, or they have done to help us, for both actions show a tendency to criticise us,
and towards those who do not nurse grudges or store up grievances, but are always ready to make friends again, for we take it that they will behave to us just as we find them behaving to everyone else,
and towards those who are not evil speakers, and who are aware of neither their neighbours' bad points nor our own, but of our good ones only, as a good man always will be,
and towards those who do not try to torture us when we are angry or in earnest, which would mean being ready to fight us,
and towards those who have some serious feeling towards us, such as admiration for us, a belief in our goodness, or pleasure in our company,
especially if they feel like there's about qualities in us, for which we especially wish to be admired, esteemed, or liked,
and towards those who are like ourselves in character and occupation, provided they do not get in our way or gain their living from the same source as we do,
for then it will be a case of potter against potter, potter to potter and builder to builder begrudge their reward, because it from a hessiod works and dies,
and those who desire the same things as we desire, if it is possible for us both to share them together, otherwise the same trouble arises here too,
and towards those with whom we are in such terms that, while we respect their opinions, we need not blush before them for doing what is conventionally wrong,
as well as towards those before whom we should be ashamed to do anything really wrong.
Again, our rivals and those whom we should like to end this, though without their feelings, either we like these people or at least we wish them to like us,
and we feel friendly towards those whom we help to secure good for themselves, provided we're not likely to suffer heavily by it ourselves,
and those who feel as friendly to us when we are not with them as when we are, which is why all men feel friendly towards those who are faithful to their dead friends,
and speaking generally, towards those who are really fond of their friends and do not desert them in trouble,
of all good men we feel most friendly to those who show their goodness as friends,
also towards those who are honest with us, including those who will tell us of their own weak points.
It has just been said that with our friends we are not ashamed of what is conventionally wrong, and if we do have this feeling, we do not love them.
If, therefore, we do not have it, it looks as if we did love them.
We also like those with whom we do not feel frightened or uncomfortable, nobody can like a man of whom he feels frightened.
Friendship has various forms, comradeship, intimacy, kinship, and so on.
Things that cause friendship are doing kindnesses, doing them on earth, and not proclaiming the fact when they are done, which shows that they were done for our sake and not for some other reason.
enmity and hatred should clearly be studied by reference to their opposite. enmity may be produced by anger or spite or calamity.
Now, whereas anger arises from offenses against oneself, enmity may arise even without that.
We may hate people merely because of what we take to be their character.
Anger is always concerned with individuals, of callous or socrates, whereas hatred is directed also against classes.
We all hate enmity from any informer.
Moreover, anger can be cured by time, but hatred cannot.
The one aims at giving pain to its object, the other at doing them harm.
The angry man wants his victims to feel, the hater does not mind whether they feel or not.
All painful things are felt, but the greatest evils in justice and solace are the least felt, since their presence causes no pain.
And anger is accompanied by pain, hatred is not.
The angry man feels pain, but the hater does not.
Much may happen to make the angry man pity those who offend him, but the hater, under no circumstances wishes to pity a man whom he has once hated.
For the one would have the offenders suffer for what they have done, the other would have them cease to exist.
It is planned from all that we can prove of people to be friends or enemies.
If they are not, we can make them out to be so.
If they claim to be so, we can refuse their claim.
And if it is disputed whether an action is due to anger or to hatred, we can attribute it to whichever of these we prefer.
To turn next to fear, what follows will show the things and persons of which and the states of mind in which we feel afraid.
Fear may be defined as a pain or disturbance due to a mental picture of some destructive or painful evil in the future.
Of destructive or painful evils only, for there are some evils, for example wickedness or stupidity, the prospect of which does not frighten us.
I mean only such as amount to great pain or losses.
And even these only if they appear knock the moat, but so nearer to the imminent.
We do not fear things that are very long way off.
For instance, we all know we shall die, but we're not troubled thereby because death is not close at hand.
From this definition it will follow that fear is caused by whatever we feel has great power of destroying us or of harming us in ways that tend to cause us great pain.
Hence, the very indications of such things are terrible, making us feel that the terrible thing itself is close at hand.
The approach of what is terrible is just what we mean by danger.
Such indications are the enmity and anger of people who have power to do something to us, for it is plain that they have the will to do it, and so they are on the point of doing it.
Also injustice and possession of power, for it is the unjust man's will to do ideal that makes him unjust.
Also outrage virtue and possession of power, for it is plain that when outraged it always has the will to retaliate, and now it has the power to do so.
Also fear felt by those who have the power to do something to us, since such persons are sure to be ready to do it.
And since most men tend to be bad, slaves to greed and cowards in danger, it is as a rule a terrible thing to get another man's mercy,
and therefore if we have done anything horrible, those in the secret terrify us with the thought that they may betray or desert us.
And those who can do us wrong are terrible to us when we are liable to be wronged.
For as a rule, men do wrong to others whenever they have the power to do it, and those who have been wronged or believed themselves to be wronged are terrible.
For they are always looking out for their opportunity.
Also those who have done people wrong, if they possess power, since they stand in fear of retaliation, we have always said that wickedness, possessing power, is terrible.
Again, a rival for a thing causes fear when we cannot both have it at once.
We are always at war with such men.
We also fear those who are to be feared by stronger people than ourselves.
If they can hurt those stronger people, still more can they hurt us.
And for the same reason we fear those whom those stronger people are actually afraid of.
Also those who have destroyed people stronger than we are.
Also those who are attacking people weaker than we are.
Either they are already formidable or they will be so when their thus grown stronger.
Of those we have wronged, and of our enemies or rivals, it is not the passion of an outspoken whom we have to fear, but the quiet, dissembling, unscrupulous.
Since we never know when they are upon us, we can never be sure they are at a safe distance.
All terrible things are more terrible if they give us no chance of retrieving a blunder,
either no chance at all or only one that depends on our enemies and not ourselves.
Those things also work which we cannot or cannot easily help.
Speaking generally, anything causes us to feel fear that when it happens to or threatens others, causes us to feel pity.
The above are roughly the chief things that are terrible and the feared.
Let us now describe the conditions under which we ourselves feel fear.
If fear is associated with the expectation that something destructive will happen to us,
plainly nobody will be afraid who believes nothing can happen to him.
We shall not fear things that we believe cannot happen to us, nor people who we believe cannot inflict them upon us.
Nor shall we be afraid at times when we think ourselves safe from them.
It follows therefore that fear is felt by those who believe something to be likely to happen to them,
at the hands of particular persons, in a particular form, and at a particular time.
People do not believe this when they are, or think they are, in the midst of great prosperity
and are in consequence insolent, contemptuous, and reckless.
The kind of character produced by wealth, physical strength, abundance of friends, power.
Nor yet when they feel they have experienced every kind of horror already and have gone callous about the future,
like men who are being flawed and are already nearly dead.
If they are to feel the anguish of uncertainty, there must be some faint expectation of escape.
This appears from the fact that fear sets the thinking what can be done, which of course nobody does when things are hopeless.
Consequently, when it is advisable that the audience should be frightened,
the orator must make them feel that they really are in danger of something,
pointing out that it has happened to others who were stronger than they are,
and is happening or has happened to people like themselves,
with the hands of unexpected people in an unexpected form and at an unexpected time.
Having now seen the nature of fear and of the things that cause it and the various states of mind in which it is felt,
we can also see what confidence is about what things we feel it and under what conditions.
It is the opposite of fear, and what causes it is the opposite of what causes fear.
It is therefore the expectation associated with a mental picture of the nearness of what keeps us safe
and the absence or remoteness of what is terrible.
It may be due either to the near presence of what inspires confidence,
or to the absence of what causes alarm.
We feel it if we can take steps, many or important or both, to cure or prevent trouble.
If we have neither wronged others nor been wronged by them,
if we have either no rivals at all or no strong ones,
if our rivals who are strong are our friends or have treated as well or been treated well by us,
or if those whose interest is the same as ours are the more numerous party or the stronger or both.
As for our own state of mind, we feel confidence if we believe we have often succeeded
and never suffered reverses or have often met danger and escaped it safely.
For there are two reasons why human beings face danger calmly.
They may have no experience of it, or they may have means to deal with it.
Thus, when in danger at sea, people may feel confident about what will happen,
either because they have no experience of bad weather or because their experience gives them the means of dealing with it.
We also feel confident whenever there is nothing to terrify other people like ourselves
or people weaker than ourselves or people than whom we believe ourselves to be stronger.
And we believe this if we have conquered them or conquered others who are as strong as they are or stronger.
Also, if we believe ourselves superior to our rivals in the number and importance of the advantages that make man formidable,
wealth, physical strength, strong bodies of supporters, extensive territory and the possession of all,
or the most important appliances of war,
also if we have wronged no one or not many or not those of whom we are afraid,
and generally if our relations with the gods and satisfactories will be shown especially by signs and oracles.
The fact is that anger makes us confident, that anger is excited by our knowledge that we are not the wrongers but the wronged,
and that the divine power is always supposed to be on the side of the wronged.
Also, when at the outset of an enterprise we believe that we cannot and shall not fail or that we shall succeed completely,
so much for the causes of fear and confidence.
We now turn to shame and shamelessness.
What follows will explain the things that cause these feelings and the persons before whom and the states of mind under which they are felt.
Shame may be defined as pain or disturbance in regard to bad things, whether present, past or future,
which seem likely to involve us in discredit and shamelessness as contempt or indifference in regard to these same bad things.
If this definition be granted it follows that we feel shame at such bad things as we think are disgraceful to ourselves or to those we care for.
These evils are, in the first place, those due to moral badness, such are throwing away one's shield or taking to flight for these bad things are due to cowardice,
also withholding a deposit or otherwise wronging people about money, for these acts are due to injustice,
also having karma intercourse with forbidden person at wrong times or in wrong places, for these things are due to licentiousness,
also making profit in petty or disgraceful ways or out of helpless persons, for example the poor or the dead,
whence the pub up he would pick a corpse's pocket,
for all this is due to low greed and meanness, also in money matters giving less help than you might or none at all
or of accepting health from those worse off than yourself, so also borrowing when it will seem like begging,
begging when it will seem like asking the return of a favor, asking such a return when it will seem like begging,
praising a man in order that it may seem like begging and going on begging in spite of failure, all such actions are tokens of meanness,
also praising people to their face and praising extravagantly a man's good points and glowsing over his weaknesses
and showing extravagance sympathy with his grief when you are in his presence and all that sort of thing,
all this shows the disposition of a flasher, also refusing to endure hardships that are endured by people who are older,
more delicately brought up of higher rank or generally less capable of endurance than ourselves, for all this shows determinacy,
also accepting benefits, especially accepting them often from another man and then abusing him for conferring them, all this shows a mean,
ignoble disposition, also talking incessantly about yourself, making loud professions and appropriating the merits of others,
for this is due to boastfulness, the same is true of the actions due to any of the other forms of badness of moral character,
of the tokens of such badness that they are all disgraceful and shameless.
Another sort of bad thing that would truly feel shame is lacking a share in the honorable things shared by everyone else or by all or nearly all who are like ourselves,
by those like ourselves, I mean those of our own race or country or age or family and generally those who are on our own level,
once we are on a level with others it is a disgrace to be, say, less well educated than they are and so with other advantages
or more so in each case, if it is seen to be our own fault, wherever we are ourselves to blame for our present, past or future circumstances,
it follows at once that this is to a greater extent due to our moral badness.
We are moreover ashamed of having done to us, having had done or being about to have done to us, act that involve us in dishonor and reproach,
as when we surrender our persons or lend ourselves to vile deeds, for example when we submit to outrage and acts of yielding to the lust of others are shameful,
whether willing or unwilling, yielding to force being an instance of unwillingness, since unresisting submission to them is due to our manliness or cowardice.
These things and others like them are what cause the feeling of shame.
Now, since shame is a mental picture of disgrace in which we shrink from the disgrace itself and not from its consequences
and we only care what opinion is held of us because of the people who form that opinion, it follows that the people before whom we feel shame
are those whose opinion of us matters to us. Such persons are those who admire us, those whom we admire, those by whom we wish to be admired,
those with whom we are competing and those whose opinion of us we respect.
We admire those and wish those to admire us, who possess any good thing that is highly esteemed,
or from whom we are very anxious to get something that they are able to give us, as a lover feels.
We compete with our equals. We respect, as true, the views of sensible people such as our elders and those who are being well educated,
and we feel more shame about a thing if it is done openly before all men's eyes.
Hence the proverb, shame dwells in the eyes, for this reason we feel most shame before those who always do with us
and those who notice what we do, since in both cases, eyes are upon us.
We also feel it before those not open to the same invitation as ourselves, for it is plain that their opinions about it are the opposite of ours.
Also, before those who are hard on anyone whose conduct they think wrong, for what a man about himself, he has said not to resent when his neighbors do it,
so that of course he does resent their doing what he does not do himself.
And before those who are likely to tell everybody about you, not telling others is as good as not believing you wrong.
People are likely to tell others about you if you have wronged them, since they are on the lookout to harm you,
or if they speak evil of everybody, for those who attack the innocent will be still more ready to attack the guilty.
And before those whose main occupation is with their neighbors' tailings, people like satirists and writers of comedy,
these are really a kind of evils because and tell tales.
And before those who have never yet known us come to grief, since their attitude to us has amounted to admiration so far,
that is why we feel ashamed to refuse those of paper who ask one for the first time.
We have not as yet lost credit with them, such as those who are just beginning to wish to be our friends,
for they have seen our best side only.
Hence the appropriateness of Euripides' reply to the Syracuse.
The Scholiath tells us that Euripides was sent to negotiate peace with the Syracuse,
and finding them unwilling said, you ought men of Syracuse to respect our expressions of esteem,
if only because we are new petitioners.
And that also are those among our old acquaintances who know nothing to our discredit.
And we are ashamed not merely of the actual shameful conduct mentioned, but also of the evidence of it.
Not merely, for example, of actual sexual intercourse, but also of its evidences,
and not merely of disgraceful acts, but also of disgraceful talk.
Similarly, we feel shame not merely in presence of the persons mentioned,
but also of those who will tell them what we have done, such as their servants or friends.
And generally we feel no shame before those upon whose opinions we quite look down as untruthworthy.
No one feels shame before small children or animals.
Nor are we ashamed of the same things before intimate as before strangers,
but before the former of what seemed genuine false, before the latter of what seemed conventional ones.
The conditions under which we shall feel shame are these.
First, having people related to us like those before whom, as has been said, we feel shame.
These are, as was stated, persons whom we admire, or who admire us, or by whom we wish to be admired,
or from whom we desire some service that we shall not obtain if we forfeit their good opinion.
These persons may be actually looking on, as Kidias represented them in his speech on land assignments in Samos.
When he told the Athenians to imagine the Greeks to be standing all around them,
actually seeing the way they voted are not merely going to care about it afterwards.
Of Kidias, nothing is known. The speech referred to must have dealt with the spoliation of Samos
after the reconquest of the island by the Athenians in 440 BC.
Or again, they may be near at hand, or may be likely to find out about what we do.
That is why in this fortune we do not wish to be seen by those who once wished themselves like us.
For such a feeling implies admiration, and then feel shame when they have acts or exploits to their credit on which they are bringing dishonour.
Whether these are their own, or those of their ancestors, or those of other persons with whom they have some close connection,
generally we feel shame before those for whose own misconduct we should also feel it.
Those already mentioned, those who take it as their marvels, those whose teachers or advisors we have been,
or other people it may be like ourselves whose rivals we are.
For there are many things of shame before such people makes us do or leave undone,
and we feel more shame when we are likely to be continually seen by and go about under the eyes of those who know of our disgrace.
Hence, when Antiphon the poet was to be cudgled to death by order of Dionysius,
and saw those who had perished with him covering their faces as they went through the gates, he said,
Why do you cover your faces? Is it less some of these spectators should see you tomorrow?
Antiphon the tragedian was flogged to death by Dionysius the tyrant of Syracuse.
So much for shame. To understand shamelessness, we need only consider the converse cases,
and plainly we shall have all we need.
To take kindness next, the definition of it will show us towards whom it is felt, why, and in what frames of mind.
Kindness, under the influence of which a man is said to be kind, may be defined as helpfulness towards someone in need,
not in return for anything, nor for the advantage of the helper himself, but for that of a person helped.
Kindness is great if shown to one who is in great need, or who needs what is important and hard to get,
or who needs it at an important and difficult crisis.
Or if the helper is the only, the first, or the chief person to give the help.
Natural cravings constitute such needs, and in particular cravings accompanied by pain for what is not being attained.
The appetites are cravings of this kind, sexual desire, for instance, and those which arise during bodily injuries and endangers.
For appetite is active both in danger and in pain, hence those who stand by us in poverty or in banishment,
even if they do not help us much, are yet really kind to us because our need is great, and the occasion pressing.
For instance, the man who gave the mat in the lyceum.
The helpfulness must therefore meet preferably just this kind of need, and failing just this kind, some other kind as great or greater.
We now see to whom, why, and under what conditions kindness is shown, and these facts must form the basis of our arguments.
We must show that the person's help are or have been in such pain and need as has been described, and that their helpers gave or are giving the kind of help described in the kind of need described.
We can also see how to eliminate the idea of kindness and make our opponents appear unkind.
We may maintain that they are being or have been helpful simply to grow their own interest.
This, as has been stated, is not kindness, or that their action was accidental or was forced upon them, or that they were not doing a favor but merely returning one, whether they know this or not.
In either case, the action is a mere return and is therefore not a kindness, even if the doer does not know how the case stands.
In considering this subject, we must look at all the categories.
An act, maybe an act of kindness, because one, it is a particular thing.
Two, it has a particular magnitude, or three, quality, or four. He is done at a particular time, or five, place.
As evidence of the want of kindness, we may point out that a smaller service had been refused to the man in need, or that the same service, or an equal or greater one, has been given to his enemies.
These facts show that the service in question was not done for the sake of the person helped, or we may point out that the thing desired was worthless and that the helper knew it.
No one will admit that he is in need of what is worthless.
So much for kindness and unkindness.
Let us now consider pity, asking ourselves what things excite to pity, and for what persons, and in what states of our mind, pity is felt.
Pity may be defined as a feeling of pain caused by the sight of some evil, destructive or painful, which purples one who does not deserve it, and which we might expect to befall ourselves or some friend of ours, and moreover, to befall us soon.
In order to feel pity, we must obviously be capable of supposing that some evil may happen to us or some friend of ours, and moreover, some such evil, as is stated in our definition, or is more or less of that kind.
It is therefore not felt by those completely ruined who suppose that no further evil can befall them, since the worst has befallen them already, nor by those who imagine themselves immensely fortunate.
Their feeling is rather presumptuous insolence, for when they think they possess all the good things of life, it is clear that the impossibility of evil befalling them will be included, this being one of the good things in question.
Those who think evil may befall them are such as have already had it before them and have safely escaped from it. Elderly men are into their good sense and their experience.
Weak men, especially men inclined to cowardice, and also educated people, since these can take wrong views. Also, those who have parents living or children or wives, for these are our own, and the evils mentioned above may easily befall them.
And those who are neither moved by any courageous emotions such as anger or competence, these emotions take no account of the future, nor by a disposition to presumptuous insolence.
Insolent men too take no account of the possibility that something evil will happen to them, nor yet by great fear. Panic-stricken people do not feel pity because they are taken up with what is happening to themselves.
Only those feel pity who are between these two extremes. In order to feel pity, we must also believe in the goodness of at least some people. If you think nobody good, you will believe that everybody deserves evil fortune.
And generally, we feel pity whenever we are in the condition of remembering that similar misfortunes have happened to us or ours, or expecting them to happen in future.
So much for the mental conditions under which we feel pity. What we pity is stated clearly in the definition. All unpleasant and painful things excite pity if they tend to destroy and annihilate, and all such evils are due to chance if they are serious.
The painful and destructive evils are deaths in its various forms, bodily injuries and afflictions, old age, diseases, lack of food.
The evil due to chance are friendlessness, scarcity of friends, it is a pitiful thing to be torn away from friends and companions, deformity, weakness, mutilation.
Evil coming from a source from which good ought to have come, and the frequent repetition of such misfortunes. Also, the coming of good when the worst has happened.
For example, the arrival of the great king's gift for Diopites after his death. This refers to the king of Persia at that time, Artic Xerxes III, and Diopites was the commander of the Athenian troops in the Chester Neze against Philip of Macedonia in 342-41.
Also, that either no good should have befallen a man at all, or that he should not be able to enjoy it when it has. The grounds then on which we feel pity are these, or like these.
The people we pity are those whom we know, if only they are not very closely related to us. In that case, we feel about them as if we were in danger ourselves.
For this reason, Amarsus did not weep, they say, at the sight of his son being led to death, but did weep when he saw his friend begging.
The latter side was pitiful, the former terrible, and the terrible is different from the pitiful. It tends to cast out pity and often helps to produce the opposite of all pity.
Again, we feel pity when the danger is near ourselves. Also, we pity those who are like us in age, character, disposition, social standing, or birth.
For in all these cases, it appears more likely that the same misfortune may befall us also. Here, too, we have to remember the general principle that what we fear for ourselves excites our pity when it happens to others.
Further, since it is when the sufferings of others are close to us that they excite our pity, we cannot remember what disasters happened a hundred centuries ago, nor look forward to what will happen a hundred centuries hereafter,
and therefore feel little pity, if any, for such things.
It follows that those who heighten the effect of their words with suitable gestures, tones, dress, and dramatic action, generally, are especially successful and excite in pity.
They thus put the disasters before our eyes and make them seem close to us, just coming or just past.
Anything that has just happened or is going to happen soon is particularly piteous.
So, too, therefore, are the tokens and the actions of sufferers, the garments and the like of those who have already suffered, the words and the like of those actually suffering, of those, for instance, who are on the point of death.
Most piteous of all is it when, in such times of trial, the victims are persons of a noble character.
Whenever they are so, our pity is especially excited because their innocence, as well as the setting of their misfortunes before our eyes, makes their misfortunes seem close to ourselves.
Most directly opposed to pity is the feeling called indignation.
Pain at unmerited good fortune is, in one sense, opposite to pain at unmerited bad fortune, and is due to the same moral qualities.
Both feelings are associated with good moral character.
It is our duty both to feel sympathy and pity for unmerited distress and to feel indignation at unmerited prosperity.
For whatever is undeserved is unjust, and that is why we ascribe indignation even to the gods.
It might indeed be thought that envy is similarly opposed to pity on the grounds that envy is closely akin to indignation or even the same thing.
But it is not the same.
It is true that it also is a disturbing pain excited by the prosperity of others, but it is excited not by the prosperity of the undeserving, but by that of people who are like us or equal with us.
The two feelings have this in common, that they must be due not to someone toward thing being likely to befall ourselves, but only to what is happening to our neighbour.
The feeling ceases to be envy in one case and indignation in the other and becomes fear if the pain and disturbance are due to the prospect of something bad for ourselves as a result of the other man's good fortune.
The feelings of pity and indignation will obviously be attended by the converse feelings of satisfaction.
If you are pained by the unmerited distress of others, you will be pleased, or at least not pained, by their merited distress.
Thus, no good man can be pained by the punishment of parasites or murderers.
These are things we are bound to rejoice at as we must of the prosperity of the deserving.
Both these things are just, and both give pleasure to any honest man, since he cannot help expecting that what has happened to a man like him will happen to him too.
All these feelings are associated with the same type of moral character, and their contraries are associated with the contrary type.
The man who is delighted by others' misfortunes is identical with the man who envies others' prosperity, for anyone who is pained by the occurrence or existence of a given thing must be pleased by that thing's non-existence or destruction.
We can now see that all these feelings tend to prevent pity, though they differ among themselves for the reasons given, so that all are equally useful for neutralising an appeal to pity.
We will first consider indignation, reserving the other emotions for subsequent discussion, and ask with whom, on what grounds, and in what states of mind, we may be indignant.
These questions are really answered by what has been said already. Indignation is pain caused by the sight of undeserved good fortune.
It is then plain to begin with that there are some forms of good, the sight of which cannot cause it. Thus, a man may be just, or brave, or acquire moral goodness, but we shall not be indignant with him for that reason, any more than we shall pity him for the cultural reason.
Indignation is roused by the sight of wealth, power, and the like, by all those things, roughly speaking, which are deserved by good men and by those who possess the goods of nature, noble birth, beauty, and so on.
Again, what is long established seems akin to what exists by nature, and therefore we feel more indignation at those possessing a given good if they have, as a matter of fact, only just got it and the prosperity it brings with it.
The newly rich give more offense than those whose wealth is of longstanding and inherited. The same is true of those who have office or power, plenty of friends, a fine family, etc.
We feel the same when these advantages of theirs secure them others. But here again, the newly rich give us more offense by obtaining office through their riches than to those whose wealth is of longstanding and so in all other cases.
The reason is that what the latter have is felt to be really their own, but what the others have is not. What appears to have been always what it is, is regarded as real, and so the possessions of the newly rich do not seem to be really their own.
Further, it is not any and every man that deserves any given kind of good. There is a certain correspondence and appropriateness in such things, but it is appropriate for brave men, not for just men, to have fine weapons, and for men of family, not for parvenues, to make distinguished marriages.
Indignation may therefore probably be felt when anyone gets what is not appropriate for him, for he may be a good man enough. It may also be felt when anyone sets himself up against his superior, especially against his superior in some particular respect.
Wins the lines, only from battle he shank with Ayaz Telemon's son. Zeus had been angered with him had he fought with a mightier one, quoted from the Iliad. The second line is not found in the existing manuscripts of the Iliad.
But also, even apart from that, when the Imperial, in any sense, contends with his superior, a musician, for instance, with a just man, Fajatis is a finer thing than music.
In others been said to make clear the grounds on which, and the persons against whom, indignation is felt, there those mentioned and others like them.
As for the people who feel it, we feel it if we do ourselves deserve the greatest possible goods, and moreover have them, for it is an injustice that those who are not our equal should have been held to deserve as much as we have.
Or, secondly, we feel it if we are really good and honest people. Our judgment is then sound and we loathe any kind of injustice.
Also, if we are ambitious and eager to gain particular ends, especially if we are ambitious for what others are getting without deserving to get it.
And generally, if we think that we ourselves deserve a thing and that others do not, we are disposed to be indignant with those others so far as that thing is concerned.
Hence, servile, worthless, unambitious persons are not inclined to indignation, since there is nothing they can believe themselves to deserve.
From all this it is plain what sort of men those are, at whose misfortunes, distresses or failures, we ought to feel pleased or at least not pained by considering the facts described we see at once what their contraries are.
If therefore our speech puts the judges in such a frame of mind, as that indicated, and shows that those who claim pity on certain definite grounds do not deserve to secure pity, but do deserve not to secure it, it will be impossible for the judges to feel pity.
To take envy next, we can see on what grounds, against what persons, and in what states of mind, we feel it. Envy is pain at the sight of such good fortune as consists of the good things already mentioned.
We feel it towards our equals, not with the idea of getting something for ourselves, but because the other people have it. We shall feel it if we have, or think we have, equals.
And by equals, I mean equals in birth, relationship, age, disposition, distinction or wealth.
We feel envy also if we fall but a little short of having everything, which is why people in high place and prosperity feel it. They think everyone else is taking what belongs to themselves.
Also, if we are exceptionally distinguished for some particular thing, and especially of that thing, is wisdom or good fortune.
Ambitious men are more envious than those who are not. So are those who profess wisdom. They are ambitious to be thought wise.
Indeed, generally, those who aim at a reputation for anything are envious on this particular point, and small minded men are envious for everything seems great to them.
The good things which excite envy have already been mentioned. The deeds or possessions which arise the love of reputation and honor and the desire for fame and the various gifts of fortune are almost all subject to envy,
and particularly if we desire the thing ourselves or think we are entitled to it, or if having it puts us a little above others, or not having it a little below them.
It is clear also what kind of people we envy. That is included in what has been said already. We envy those who are near us in time, place, age or reputation.
Hence the line, I, kin, can even be jealous of their kin.
A fragment of a play by Euclid.
Also, our fellow competitors, who are indeed the people just mentioned, we do not compete with men who lived a hundred centuries ago, or those not yet born, or the dead, or those who dwell near the pillars of Hercules.
That is, those who dwell at the farthest limits of the Western world.
Or those whom, in our opinion, or that of others, we take to be far below us or far above us.
So too we compete with those who follow the same ends of ourselves. We compete with our rivals in sport or in love, and generally with those who are after the same things.
And it is therefore these whom we are bound to envy beyond all others. Hence the saying, Potter against Potter.
We also envy those whose possession of, or success in, a thing, is a reproach to us. These are our neighbors and equals.
For it is clear that it is our own fault we have missed the good thing in question. This annoys us and excites envy in us.
We also envy those who have what we ought to have or have got what we did have once.
Hence, old men envy younger men, and those who have spent much envy those who have spent little on the same thing.
And then who have not got a thing or not got it yet envy those who have got it quickly.
We can also see what things and what persons give pleasure to envious people, and in what states of mind they feel it.
The states of mind in which they feel pain are those under which they will feel pleasure, and the contrary things.
If, therefore, we ourselves, with whom the decision rests, are put into an envious state of mind,
and those whom our pity, or the award of something desirable, is claimed are such as have been described,
it is obvious that they will win no pity from us.
We will next consider emulation, showing in what follows its causes and objects, and the state of mind in which it is felt.
Emulation is pain caused by seeing the presence in persons whose nature is like our own of good things that are highly valued
and are possible for ourselves to acquire.
But it is felt not because others have these goods, but because we have not got them ourselves.
It is, therefore, a good feeling felt by good persons, whereas envy is a bad feeling felt by bad persons.
Emulation makes us take steps to secure the good things in question, and envy makes us take steps to stop our neighbour having them.
Emulation, as, therefore, tend to be felt by persons who believe themselves to deserve certain good things that they have not got,
it being understood that no one aspires to things which appear impossible.
It is accordingly felt by the young and by persons of lofty disposition, also by those who possess such good things as are deserved by men held in honour.
These are wealth, abundance of friends, public office, and the like.
On the assumption that they ought to be good men, they are emulated to gain such goods because they ought, in their belief, to belong to men whose state of mind is good.
Also, by those who more others think deserving.
We also feel it about anything for which our ancestors, relatives, personal friends, race, or country are specially honoured,
looking upon that thing as really our own, and therefore feeling that we deserve to have it.
Further, since all good things that are highly honoured are objects of emulation,
moral goodness in its various forms must be such an object, and also those good things that are useful and serviceable to others.
For men honour those who are morally good, and also those who do them service.
So, with those good things, our possession of which can give enjoyment to our neighbours, wealth and beauty rather than health.
We can see too what persons are the objects of the feeling.
They are those who have these and similar things, those already mentioned, as courage, wisdom, public office.
Holders of public office, generals, orators, and all who possess such powers, can do many people a good turn.
Public orators being public speakers, advocates, politicians, and statesmen.
Also those who many people wish to be like, those who have many acquaintances or friends,
those who many admire, or whom we ourselves admire, and those who have been praised and eulogised by poets or prose writers.
Persons of the country sought an object of contempt, for the feeling and notion of contempt are opposite to those of emulation.
Those who are such as to emulate or be emulated by others, are inevitably disposed to be contentious of all such persons as are subject to those bad things,
which are contrary to the good things that are the objects of emulation, despising them for just that reason.
Hence, we often despise the fortunate when luck comes to them without their having those good things which are held in honour.
This completes our discussion of the means by which the several emotions may be produced or dissipated,
and upon which depend the persuasive arguments connected with the emotions.
Let us now consider the various types of human character in relation to the emotions and moral qualities,
showing how they correspond to our various ages and fortunes.
By emotions, I mean anger, desire, and the like. These we have discussed already.
By moral qualities, I mean virtues and vices. These also have been discussed already,
as well as the various things that various types of men tend to will and to do.
By ages, I mean use, the prime of life, and old age.
By fortune, I mean birth, wealth, power, and their opposites.
In fact, good fortune and ill fortune.
To begin with, the useful type of character.
Young men have strong passions and tend to gratify them indiscriminately.
Of the bodily desires, it is the sexual by which they are most swayed,
and in which they show absence of self-control.
They are changeable and fickle in their desires, which are violent while they last but quickly over.
Their impasses are keen but not deep rooted, and are like sick people's attacks of hunger and thirst.
They are hot-tempered and quick-tempered, and apt to give way to their anger.
Bad temper often gets the better of them, for owing to their love of armor,
they cannot bear being slighted, and are indignant if they imagine themselves unfairly treated.
While they love armor, they love victories or more.
For youth is ego, for superiority of others, and victory is one form of this.
They love both more than they love money, which indeed they love very little,
not having yet learned what it means to be without it.
This is the point of Pentecost's remark about Amphiarios.
The remark is unknown. Pentecost of Mitolini was one of the seven sages.
Amphiarios may be one of the seven against thieves.
They look at the good side rather than the bad, not having yet witnessed many instances of wickedness.
They trust others readily because they have not yet often been cheated.
They are sanguine. Nature warms their blood as though with excessive wine,
and besides that, they have as yet met with few disappointments.
Their lives are mainly spent not in memory, but in expectation.
For expectation refers to the future, memory to the past,
and youth has a long future before it and a short past behind it.
On the first day of one's life, one has nothing at all to remember and can only look forward.
They're easily cheated owing to the sanguine disposition just mentioned.
Their hot tempers and hopeful dispositions make them more courageous and older men are.
The hot temper prevents fear, and the hopeful disposition creates confidence.
We cannot feel fear so long as we are feeling angry, and any expectation of good makes us confident.
They are shy, accepting the rules of society in which they have been chained,
and not yet believing in any other standard of honor.
They have exalted notions because they have not yet been humbled by life or learnt its necessary limitations.
Moreover, their hopeful disposition makes them think themselves equal to great things,
and that means having exalted notions.
They would always rather do noble deeds than useful ones.
Their lives are regulated more by moral feeling than by reasoning.
And whereas reasoning leads us to choose what is useful, moral goodness leads us to choose what is noble.
They are fonder of their friendliness, intimates and companions than older men are,
because they like spending their days in the company of others,
and have not yet come to value either their friends or anything else by their usefulness to themselves.
All their mistakes are in the direction of doing things excessively and vehemently.
They disobey key-lons precept by overdoing everything.
Key-lons of lack of diamonds, another of the seven surges.
Precept is to do nothing in excess, don't overdo anything.
They love too much and hate too much, and the same with everything else.
They think they know everything and are always quite sure about it.
This, in fact, is why they overdo everything.
If they do wrong to others, it is because they mean to insult them, not to do them actual harm.
They are ready to pity others because they think everyone an honest man, or anyhow better than he is.
They judge their neighbor by their own harmless natures, and so cannot think he deserves to be treated in that way.
They are fond of fun, and therefore witty, wit being well-bred insolence.
Such, then, is the character of the young, the character of elderly men, men who are past their prime.
Maybe said to be formed for the most part of the elements of the contrary of all these.
They have lived many years, they have often been taken in, and often made mistakes.
And life on the whole is a bad business.
The result is that they are sure about nothing and underdo everything.
They think that they never know, and because of their hesitation they always add a possibly or perhaps putting everything this way and nothing positively.
They are cynical.
That is, they tend to put the worst construction on everything.
Further, their experience makes them distrustful, and therefore suspicious of evil.
Consequently, they neither love warmly nor hate bitterly, but following the hint of bias they love as though they will someday hate and hate as though they will someday love.
Bias of priene, the last of the seven sages.
They are small-minded because they have been humbled by life, their desires are set upon nothing more exalted or unusual than what will help them to keep alive.
They are not generous because money is one of the things they must have, and at the same time their experience has taught them how hard it is to get and how easy to lose.
They are cowardly and always anticipating danger.
Unlike that of the young who are warm-blooded, their temperament is chilling.
Old age has paved the way for cowardice.
Fear is, in fact, a form of chill.
They love life, and all the more when their last day has come because the object of old desire is something we have not got, and also because we desire most strongly that which we need most urgently.
They are too fond of themselves.
This is one form that small-mindedness takes.
Because of this, they guide their life too much by considerations of what is useful and too little by what is noble.
For the useful is what is good for oneself, from the noble what is good absolutely.
They are not shy, but shameless rather.
Caring less for what is noble and for what is useful, they feel contempt for what people may think of them.
They lack confidence in the future, partly through experience, so most things go wrong, or anyhow turn out worse than one expects, and partly because of their cowardice.
They live by memory rather than by hope, for what is left to them of life is but little as compared with the long past, and hope is of the future, memory of the past.
This, again, is the cause of their locusticity, their continually talking of the past, because they enjoy remembering it.
Their fits of anger are sudden, but feeble.
Their sensual passions are either altogether gone or have lost their vigor.
Consequently, they do not feel their passions much, and their actions are inspired less by what they do feel and by the love of gain.
Hence, many of this time of life are often supposed to have a self-controlled character.
The fact is that their passions have flackened, and they are slaves to the love of gain.
They guide their lives by reasoning more than by moral feeling, reasoning being directed to utility and moral feeling to moral goodness.
If they're wrong others, they mean to injure them, not to insult them.
Old men may feel pity, as well as young men, but not for the same reason.
Young men feel it out of kindness, old men out of weakness.
Imagining that anything that befalls anyone else might easily happen to them, which as we saw, is a thought that excites pity.
Hence, they are quarrelous and not disposed to jesting or laughter, the love of laughter being the very opposite of quarrellessness.
Such are the characters of young men and elderly men.
People always think well of speeches adapted to and reflecting their own character, and we can now see how to compose our speeches so as to adapt both them and ourselves to our audiences.
As for men in their prime, clearly we shall find that they have a character between that of the young and that of the old, free from the extremes of either.
They have neither that excessive confidence which amounts to rashness, nor too much timidity, but the right amount of each.
They neither trust everybody nor distrust everybody but judge people correctly.
Their lives will be guided not by the sole consideration, neither of what is noble or of what is useful, but by both, neither by parsimony nor by prodigality, but by what is fit and proper.
So too, in regard to anger and desire, they will be brave as well as temperate and temperate as well as brave.
These virtues are divided between the young and the old.
The young are brave, but in temperate, the old temperate, but cowardly.
But generally, all the valuable qualities that youth and age divide between them are united in the prime of life, while all their excesses or defects are replaced by moderation and fitness.
The body is in its prime from 30 to 5 and 30. The mind, about 49.
So much for the types of character that distinguish youth, old age, and the prime of life.
We will now turn to those gifts of fortune by which human character is affected.
First let us consider good birth.
Its effect on character is to make those who have it more ambitious.
It is the way of all men who have something to start with to add to the pile, and good birth implies ancestral distinction.
The well-born man will look down even on those who are as good as his own ancestors, because any far-off distinction is greater than the same thing close to us and better to boast about.
Being well-born, which means coming of a fine stock, must be distinguished from nobility, which means being true to the family nature, a quality not usually found in the well-born, most of whom are poor creatures.
In the generations of men, as in the fruits of the earth, there is a varying yield.
Now and then, where the stock is good, exceptional men are produced for a while and then decadent sets in.
And then, after an interval of unproductiveness, the families begin again to produce them.
A clever stock will degenerate towards the insane type of character, like the descendants of Alcibiades or of the elder Dionysius,
a steady stock towards the fatuous and torpid type, like the descendants of Chimon, Pericles, and Socrates.
The type of character produced by wealth lies on the surface for all to see.
Wealthy men are insolent and arrogant. Their possession of wealth affects their understanding.
They feel as if they had every good thing that exists.
Wealth becomes a sort of standard of value for everything else, and therefore they imagine there is nothing it cannot buy.
They are luxurious and ostentatious. Luxurious because of the luxury in which they live and the prosperity which they display.
Ostentatious and vulgar because, like other people, their minds are regularly occupied with the objects, their love and admiration,
and also because they think that other people's idea of happiness is the same as their own.
It is indeed quite natural that they should be affected thus, for if you have money, there are always plenty of people who come begging from you.
Hence the saying of Simonides about wise men and rich men in answer to Hierro's wife, who asked him whether it was better to grow rich or wise.
Simonides was a poet of choral lyrics, and Hierro was the town of Syracuse, at whose court Simonides spent the last years of his life.
Why? Which, he said pricey, the wise men spending their days at the rich men's doors.
Rich men also consider themselves worthy to hold public office, so they consider they already have the things that give a claim to office.
In a word, the type of character produced by wealth is that of a prosperous fool.
There is indeed one difference between the type of the newly enriched and those who have long been rich.
The newly enriched have all the bad qualities mentioned in an exaggerated and worse form, to be newly enriched means, so to speak, no education in riches.
The wrongs they do others are not meant to injure their victims, but spring from insolence or self-indulgence.
For example, those would end in assault or an adultery.
As to power, here too it may fairly be said that the type of character it produces is mostly obvious enough.
Some elements in this type it shares with the wealthy type, others are better.
Those in power are more ambitious and more manly in character than the wealthy because they aspire to do the great deeds that their power permits them to do.
Responsibility makes them more serious.
They have to keep paying attention to the duties their position involves.
They are dignified rather than arrogant for the respect in which they are held inspires them with dignity and therefore with moderation.
Dignity being a mild and becoming form of arrogance.
If they wrong others, they wrong them not on a small but on a great scale.
Good fortune in certain of its branches produces the types of character belonging to the conditions just described, since these conditions are in fact more or less the kinds of good fortune that are regarded as most important.
It may be added that good fortune leads us to gain all we can in the way of family happiness and bodily advantages.
It does indeed make men more supercilious and more reckless, but there is one excellent quality that goes with it, piety and respect for the divine power in which they believe because of events which are really the result of chance.
The account of the types of character that correspond to differences of age or fortune may end here.
For to arrive at the opposite types to those described, namely those of the poor, the unfortunate and the powerless, we have only to ask what the opposite qualities are.
The use of persuasive speech is to lead to decisions.
When we know a thing and have decided about it, there is no further use in speaking about it.
This is so even if one is addressing a single person and urging him to do or not to do something, as when we scold the man for his conduct or try to change his views, the single person is as much or judged as if he were one of many.
We may say without qualification that anyone is your judge whom you have to persuade, nor does it matter whether we are arguing against an actual opponent or against a mere proposition.
In the latter case, we still have to use speech and overthrow the opposing arguments, and we attack these as we should attack an actual opponent.
Our principle holds good of ceremonial speeches also.
The onlookers for whom such a speech is put together are treated as the judges of it.
Broadly speaking, however, the only sort of person who can strictly be called a judge is the man who decides to issue in some matter of public controversy, that is, in lawsuits and in political debates, in both of which there are issues to be decided.
In the section on political oratory, an account has already been given of the types of character that mark the different constitution.
The manner and means of investing speeches of moral character may now be regarded as fully set forth.
Each of the main divisions of oratory has, we have seen, its own distinct purpose.
With regard to each division, we have noted the accepted views and propositions upon which we may base our arguments.
For political, for ceremonial and for forensic speaking, we have further determined completely by what means speeches may be invested with the required moral character.
We are now to proceed to discuss the arguments common to all oratory.
All orators, besides their special lines of argument, are bound to use, for instance, the topic of the possible and impossible, and to try to show that a thing has happened or will happen in future.
Again, the topic of size is common to all oratory.
All of us have to argue that things are bigger or smaller than they seem, whether we are making political speeches, speeches of eulogy or attack, or prosecuting or defending in the law courts.
Having analyzed these subjects, we will try to say what we count about the general principles of arguing by entomine and example, by the addition of which we may hope to complete the project with which we set out.
Of the above mentioned general lines of argument, that concerned with amplification is, as has been already said, most appropriate to ceremonial speeches.
That concerned with the past to forensic speeches, whether a required decision is always about the past.
That concerned with possibility in the future to political speeches.
Let us first speak of the possible and impossible. It may plausibly be argued that if it is possible for one of a pair of countries to be or happen, then it is possible for the other.
For example, if a man can be cured, he can also fall ill, but any two countries are equally possible in so far as they are countries.
That if of two similar things, one is possible, so is the other.
That if the harder of two things is possible, so is the easier.
That if a thing can come into existence in a good and beautiful form, then it can come into existence generally.
Thus, a house can exist more easily than a beautiful house.
That if the beginning of a thing can occur, so can the end.
For nothing impossible occurs or begins to occur.
Thus, the commensurability of the diagonal of a square with its side neither occurs nor can begin to occur.
That if the end is possible, so is the beginning.
For all things that occur, house are beginning.
But if that which is posterior in essence or in order of generation can come into being, so can that which is prior.
Thus, if a man can come into being, so can a boy, since the boy comes first in order of generation.
And if a boy can, so can a man, for the man also is first.
This in essence.
That those things are possible of which the love or desire is natural, for no one as a rule loves or desires impossibility.
That things which are the object of any kind of science or art are possible and exist or come into existence.
That anything is possible, the first step in whose production depends on men or things which we can compare or persuade to produce it by our greatest strengths, our control of them, or our friendship with them.
That where the parts are possible, the whole is possible.
And where the whole is possible, the parts are usually possible.
For if the slit in front, the toe piece and the upper lever can be made, then shoes can be made.
And if shoes, then also the front slit and toe piece.
But if a whole genus is a thing that can occur, so can the species.
And if a species can occur, so can the genus.
Thus, if a sailing vessel can be made, so also can a trireme.
And if a trireme, then a sailing vessel also.
That if one of two things whose existence depends on each other is possible, so is the other.
For instance, if double, then half.
If half, then double.
That if a thing can be produced without art or preparation, it can be produced still more certainly by the careful application of art to it.
Hence, Agathon has said,
To some things we by art must need detain others by destiny or luck we gain.
That if anything is possible to inferior, weaker and stupider people, it is more so for their opposite.
Thus, Isocrates said that it would be a strange thing if he could not discover a thing that Utenus had found out.
As for impossibility, we can clearly get what we want by taking the countries of the argument state of the past.
Questions of past fact may be looked at in the following ways.
First, that if the less likely of two things has occurred, the more likely must have occurred also.
But if one thing that usually follows another has happened, then that other thing has happened.
That, for instance, if a man has forgotten a thing, he has also once learnt it.
That if a man had the power and the wish to do a thing, he has done it.
For everyone does do whatever he intends to do whenever he can do it, there being nothing to stop him.
That, further, he has done the thing in question either if he intended it and nothing external prevented him,
or if he had the power to do it and was angry at the time, or if he had the power to do it and his heart was set upon it.
For people of the rule do what they long to do if they can.
Bad people, so lack of self-control, good people because their hearts are set upon good things.
Again, that if a thing was going to happen, it has happened.
If a man was going to do something, he has done it, for it is likely that the intention was carried out.
That if one thing has happened which naturally happened before another, or with a view to it, the other has happened.
For instance, if it has enlightened, it has also thundered.
And if an action has been attempted, it has been done.
That if one thing has happened which naturally happens after another, or with a view to which that other happens,
then that other, that which happened first or happened with a view to this thing, has also happened.
Thus, if it has thundered, it has also enlightened.
And if an action has been done, it has been attempted.
Of all these sequences, some are inevitable and some merely usual.
The arguments for the norm occurrence of anything can obviously be found by considering the opposites of those that have been mentioned.
High questions of future facts should be argued as clear from the same considerations.
That a thing will be done if there is both the power and the wish to do it, or if along with the power to do it there is a craving for the results,
or anger, or calculation prompting it.
That the thing will be done in these cases if the man is actually setting about it, or even if he means to do it later.
For usually what we mean to do happens rather than what we do not mean to do.
That a thing will happen if another thing which naturally happens before it has already happened.
Thus, if it is clouding over, it is likely to rain.
That if the means to an end have occurred, then the end is likely to occur.
Thus, if there is a foundation, there will be a house.
For arguments about the greatness and smallness of things, the greater and the lesser, and generally great things and small,
what we have already said will show the line to take.
In discussing deliberative oratory, we have spoken about the relative greatness of various goods, and about the greater and lesser in general.
Since, therefore, in each type of oratory the object under discussion is some kind of good, whether it is utility, no-bonus, or justice,
it is clear that every orator must obtain the materials of amplification through these channels.
To go further than this and try to establish abstract laws of greatness and superiority is to argue without an object.
In practical life, particular facts count more than generalizations.
Enough has now been said about these questions of possibility and the reverse of past or future fact, and of the relative greatness or smallness of things.
The special forms of oratorical argument having now been discussed, we have next to treat of those which are common to all kinds of oratory.
These are of two main kinds, example and enthamine, for the maxim is part of an enthamine.
That is not, as some think, a third main kind.
We will first treat of argument by example, for it has the nature of induction, which is the foundation of reasoning.
This form of argument has two varieties, one consisting in the mention of actual past facts, the other in the invention of facts by the speaker.
Of the latter, again, there are two varieties, the illustrative parallel and the fable.
For example, the fables of Esau, all those from Libya.
As an instance of the mention of actual facts, take the following.
The speaker may argue thus, we must prepare for war against the king of Persia and not let him subdue Egypt.
For Darius of old did not cross the Aegean until he had seized Egypt, but once he had seized it he did cross.
And the seize again did not attack us until he had seized Egypt, but once he had seized it he did cross.
If therefore the present king seizes Egypt he also will cross and therefore we must not let him.
The illustrative parallel is the sort of argument Socrates used.
For example, public officials ought not to be selected by lot.
That is like using the lot to select athletes instead of choosing those who are fit for the contest,
or using the lot to select a steered man from among a ship's crew, as if we ought to take the man on whom the lot falls and not the man who knows most about it.
Instances of the table are that of Stessichorus, about Philaris, and that of Esau in the sense of the popular leader.
When the people of Chimera had made Philaris military dictator and were going to give him a bodyguard, Stessichorus wound up a long talk by telling them the fable of the horse, who had a field all to himself.
Presently there came a stag and began to spoil his pasturage.
The horse, wishing to avenge himself on the stag, asked the man if he could help him to do so.
The man said, yes, if you will let me bridle you and get onto your back with javelins in my hand.
The horse agreed and the man mounted, but instead of getting his revenge on the stag, the horse found himself the slave of the man.
You too, said Stessichorus, take care, lest, in your desire for revenge on your enemies, you meet the same fate as the horse.
By making Philaris military dictator, you have already let yourself be bridled.
If you let him get onto your back by giving him a bodyguard, from that moment you will be his slaves.
Esau, defending before the assembly at Samos, the popular leader who was being tried to his life,
told his story.
A fox in crossing a river was swept into a hole in the rocks and not being able to get out suffered miseries for a long time through the swarms of fleas that fastened on her.
A hedgehog while roaming around noticed the fox and, feeling sorry for her, asked if he might remove the fleas.
But the fox declined the offer and when the hedgehog asked why, she replied,
These fleas are by this time full of me and not sucking much blood.
If you take them away, others will come with fresh appetites and drink up all the blood I have left.
So, men of Samos, said Esau, my client will do you no further harm.
He is wealthy already, but if you put him to death, others will come along who are not rich and their petulations will empty your treasury completely.
Fables are suitable for addresses to popular assemblies and they have one advantage.
They are comparatively easy to invent, whereas it is hard to find parallels among actual past events.
You will in fact frame them just as you frame illustrated parallels.
All you require is the power of thinking out your analogy, a power developed by intellectual training.
But while it is easier to supply parallels by inventing tables, it is more valuable for the political speaker to supply them by quoting what has actually happened.
Since in most respects the future will be like what the past has seen.
Where we are unable to argue by end to mean, we must try to demonstrate our point by this method of example and to condense our heroes thereby.
If we can argue by end to mean, we should use our example as subsequent supplementary evidence.
We should not precede the end to means.
That will give the argument an inductive error which only rarely suits the conditions of speech making.
If they follow the end to means, they have the effect of witnesses giving evidence and this always tells.
For the same reason, if you put your examples first, you must give a large number of them.
If you put them last, a single one is sufficient.
Even a single witness will serve if he is a good one.
It has now been stated how many varieties of argument by example are and how and when they are to be employed.
We now turn to the use of maxims in order to see upon what subjects and occasions and for what kind of speaker they will appropriately form part of a speech.
This will appear most clearly when we have defined a maxim.
It is a statement not about a particular fact such as the character of Ithacrakis but of a general kind.
Nor is it about any and every subject.
For example, straight is the contrary of curved is not a maxim.
But only about questions of practical conduct.
Courses of conduct will be chosen or avoided.
Now, an enthameme is a syllogism dealing with such practical subjects.
It is therefore roughly true that the premises or conclusions of enthamemes, considered apart from the rest of the argument,
are not maxims.
For example, never should any man whose wits are sound have his sons taught more wisdom than their fellows.
Here we have a maxim at the reason or explanation of the whole thing is an enthameme.
Thus, it makes them idle and therewith they earn ill will and jealousy throughout the city.
Again, there is no man in all things prosperous and there is no man among us all is free, are maxims.
But the latter taking with what follows it is an enthameme for all are slaves of money or of chance.
These are quoted from Euripides.
From this definition of a maxim, it follows that there are four kinds of maxims.
In the first place, the maxim may or may not have a supplement.
Proof is needed whether statement is paradoxical or disputable.
No supplement is wanted whether statement contains nothing paradoxical,
either because the view expert is already a known truce.
For example, chiefest of blessings is health for a man as it seemeth to me.
This being the general opinion or because as soon as the view is stated, it is clear that it grants.
For example, no love is true save that which loves forever.
Of the maxims that do have a supplement attached, some are part of an enthameme.
For example, never should any man whose wits are sound, etc.
Others have the essential character of enthamemes but are not stated as parts of enthamemes.
These latter are reckoned the best.
There are those in which the reason for the view expert is simply implied.
For example, a mortal man, nurse not immortal rough.
To say it is not right to nurse immortal rough is a maxim.
The added words a mortal man give the reason.
Similarly, with the word mortal preachers ought to cherish mortal not immortal thoughts.
What has been said has shown us how many kinds of maxim there are
and to what subjects of various kinds are appropriate.
It must not be given without supplement if they express disputed or paradoxical views.
We must, in that case, either put the supplement first and make a maxim of a conclusion.
For example, you might say, for my part, since both unpopularity and idleness are undesirable,
I hope that it is better not to be educated.
Or, you may say this first and then add the previous clause.
Where a statement, without being paradoxical, is not obviously true,
the reasons would be added as concisely as possible.
In such cases, both laconic and enigmatic sayings are suitable.
Thus one might say what Stetychorus said to the Locrians,
insolence is better avoided, let the Cicalos chirp on the ground.
The Cicalos would have to chirp on the ground if an enemy cut down the trees.
The use of maxims is appropriate only to elderly men in handling subjects in which the speaker is experienced.
For a young man to use them is, like telling stories, unbecoming.
To use them in handling things in which one has no experience is silly and ill-bred,
a fact sufficiently proved by the special fondness of country fellows for striking out maxims and their readiness to air them.
To declare a thing to be universally true when it is not is most appropriate when working out feelings of horror and indignation in our heroes,
especially by where preface or after the tax have been proved.
Even hacking it in commonplace maxims are to be used if they suit one's purpose.
Just because they are commonplace, everyone seems to agree with them and therefore they are taken for truth.
Thus, anyone who is calling on his men to risk an engagement without obtaining favorable omens may quote,
one omen of all is best that we fight for our Fatherland, quoted from the Iliad.
Or if he is calling on them to attack a stronger force, the war god showeth no favor, the Iliad.
Or if he is urging people to destroy the innocent children of their enemies, who slayeth the father and leaveeth his sons to avenge him.
Some proverbs are also maxims, for example the proverb, an attic neighbor.
From an attic neighbor is a restless neighbor.
You are not to avoid uttering maxims that contradict such sayings as have become public property.
I mean such sayings as know thyself and nothing in excess.
If doing so will raise your hero's opinion of your character or convey an effective strong emotion.
For example, an angry speaker might well say, if you do not choose that we ought to know ourselves,
anyhow if this man had known himself he would never have thought himself fit for an army command.
It will raise people's opinion of our character to say, for instance,
we ought not to follow the saying that did this treat our friends as future enemies, much better to treat our enemies as future friends.
The moral purpose should be implied partly by the very wording of our maxim.
Failing this we should add our reason.
For example, having said we should treat our friends not as the saying advises, but as if they were going to be our friends always,
we should add for the other behavior is that of a traitor.
Or we might put it, I disapprove of that saying a true friend will treat his friend as if he were going to be his friend forever.
And again, nor do I approve of the saying nothing in excess.
We are bound to hate bad men excessively.
One great advantage of maxims to a speaker is due to the want of intelligence in his heroes
who love to hear and succeed in expressing as a universal truth the opinions which they hold themselves about particular cases.
I will explain what I mean by this, indicating at the same time how we are to hunt down the maxims required.
The maxim, as has been already said, is a general statement and people love to hear stated in general terms what they already believe in some particular connections.
For example, if a man happens to have bad neighbors or bad children, he will agree with anyone who tells him nothing is more annoying than having neighbors or nothing is more foolish than to be the parent of children.
The artist has therefore to guess the subject on which his heroes really hold views already and what those views are.
And then let's express, as general truth, these same views on these same subjects.
This is one advantage of using maxims. There is another which is more important. It invests the speech with moral character.
There is moral character in every speech in which the moral purpose is conspicuous and maxims always produces the faith because the utterance of them amounts to a general declaration of moral principles.
So that if a maxim is a sound, they display the speaker as a man of sound, moral character.
So much for the maxim, its nature, varieties, proper use and advantages.
We now come to the end to means and we'll begin the subject with some general consideration of the proper way of looking for them and then proceed to what is a distinct question.
The lines of argument give the embodied in them. It has already been pointed out that the end to mean is a syllogism and in what sense it is so.
We have also noticed the difference between it and the syllogism of dialectic.
Thus we must not carry its reasoning too far back or the length of our argument will cause obscurity.
Nor must we put in all the steps that lead to our conclusion or we shall waste words in saying what is manifest.
It is this simplicity that makes the uneducated more effective than the educated when addressing popular audiences, makes them, as the poets tell us, charm the crowd's ears more finely.
Educated men lay down broad general principles.
Uneducated men argue from common knowledge and draw obvious conclusions.
We must not therefore start from any and every accepted opinion, but only from those we have defined, those accepted by our judges or by those whose authority they recognize.
And there must, moreover, be no doubt in the minds of most, if not all, of our judges, that the opinions put forward really are of this sort.
We should also place our arguments upon probabilities as well as upon certainties.
The first thing we have to remember is this.
With our argument concerns public affairs or some other subject, we must know some, if not all, of the facts about the subject on which we are to speak and argue.
Otherwise we can have no materials out of which to construct arguments.
I mean, for instance, how could we advise the opinions whether they should go to war or not, if we did not know their strengths, whether it was naval or military or both, and how great it is, what their revenue is amount to, who their friends and enemies are, what wars to they have waged and with what success, and so on.
Or how could we eulogize them if we knew nothing about the sea-fighted Salamis, or the Battle of Narraton, or what they did for the Heracleidae, or any other facts like that?
These are some of the historical and mythical merits, claimed by the Athenians mentioned in all praises of their city and their ancestors.
All eulogies based upon the noble deeds, real or imaginary, that stand to the credit of those eulogized, on the same principle, invectives are based on facts of the opposite kind.
The orator looks to see what base deed, real or imaginary, stand to the credit of those years attacking, such as treachery to the cause of Hellenic freedom, or the enslavement of their gallant allies against the barbarians, aegina, protea, etc.
Or any other misdeeds of this kind that are recorded against them.
So, too, in a court of law, whether we are prosecuting or defending, we must pay attention to the existing facts of the case.
It makes no difference whether the subject is the lack of Daimonians or the Athenians, a man, or a god. We must do the same thing.
Suppose it to be Achilles whom we are to advise, to praise or blame, to accuse or defend. Here, too, we must take the facts, real or imaginary.
These must be our material, whether we are to praise or blame him for the noble or base deeds he has done, to accuse or defend him for his just or unjust treatment of others, or to advise him about what is or is not to his interest.
The same thing applies to any subject, whatever. Thus, in handling the question whether justice is or is not a good, we must start with the real facts about justice and goodness.
We see, then, that this is the only way in which anyone ever proves anything, whether his arguments are strictly cogent or not.
Not all facts conform his basis, but only those that bear on the matter in hand, nor plainly can proof be affected otherwise by means of the speech.
Consequently, as appears in the topics, we must first of all have by us a selection of arguments about questions that may arise and are suitable for us to handle.
And then, we must try to think out arguments of the same type for special needs as they emerge, not vaguely and indefinitely, but by keeping our eyes on the actual facts of the subject we have to speak on, and gathering in as many of them as we can that bear closely upon it.
For the more actual facts we have at our command, the more easily we prove our case, and the more closely they bear on the subject, the more they will seem to belong to that speech only instead of being common places.
By common places, I mean, for example, eulogy of Achilles because he is a human being, or a demigod, or because he joined the expedition against Troy.
These things are true of many others, so that this kind of eulogy applies no better to Achilles than to Diomedes.
The special facts here needed are those that are true of Achilles alone, such facts as that he slew Hector, the bravest of the Trojans, and Kiknos, the invulnerable, who prevented all the Greeks from landing, and again that he was the youngest man who joined the expedition and was not bound by oath to join it, and so on.
Here, then, we have our first principle of selection of entomines, that which refers to the lines of arguments selected. We will now consider the various elementary classes of entomines.
By an elementary class of entomines, I mean the same thing as a line of argument.
We will begin, as we must begin, by observing that there are two kinds of entomines. One kind proves some affirmative or negative proposition, the other kind disproves one.
The difference between the two kinds is the same as that between syllogistic proof and disproof in dialectic.
The demonstrative entomine is formed by the conjunction of compatible propositions, the refutative by the conjunction of incompatible propositions.
We may now be said to have in our hands the lines of argument for the various special subjects that it is useful or necessary to handle, having selected the propositions suitable in various places.
We have, in fact, already ascertained the lines of argument applicable to entomines about good and evil, the noble and the base, justice and injustice, and also to those about types of character, emotions and moral qualities.
Let us now lay hold of certain facts about the whole subject, considered from a different and more general point of view.
In the course of our discussion, we will take note of the distinction between lines of proof and lines of disproof, and also of those lines of argument, you would in what seems to be entomines, but are not, since they do not represent valid syllogisms.
Having made all this clear, we will proceed to classify objections and refutations, showing how they can be brought to bear upon entomines.
One. One line of positive proof is based upon in consideration of the opposite of the thinking question. Observe whether that opposite has the opposite quality. If it has not, you refute the original proposition. If it has, you establish it.
For example, temperance is beneficial, for licentiousness is helpful. Or, as in the Missanian speech, if war is the cause of our present troubles, peace is what we need to put things right again. Or, for if not even evil doers should anger us if they meant not what they did, then can we own no gratitude to such as work constrained to do the good they did us?
Or, since in this world liars may win belief, be sure of the opposite likewise, that this world hears many a true word and believes it not. A fragment of Euripity is from Piestis.
Two. Another line of proof is taught by considering some modification of the key word and arguing that what can or cannot be said of the one, can or cannot be said of the other. For example, just does not always mean beneficial, or justly would always mean beneficial it, whereas it is not desirable to be justly put to death.
Three. Another line of proof is based upon correlative ideas. If it is true that one man gave noble or just treatment to another, you argue that the other must have received noble or just treatment, or that where it is right to command obedience, it must have been right to obey the command.
Thus, the Omidon, the tax farmer, instead of the taxes, if it is no disgrace to you to sell them, it is no disgrace for us to buy them. That is the right of collecting them.
Further, if well or justly is true of the person to whom a thing is done, you argue that it is true of the doer, but it is possible to draw a false conclusion here. It may be just that A should be treated in a certain way, and yet not just that he should be so treated by B.
Hence, you must ask yourself two distinct questions. One, is it right that A should be thus treated? Two, is it right that B should thus treat him?
And apply your results properly according as your answers are yes or no. Sometimes, in such a case, the two answers differ. You may quite easily have a position like that in the alchemyon of theodectase.
And was there none to loathe thy mother's crime, to which question alchemyon in reply says, why, there are two things to examine here. That is to say, was there nobody who thought the slaying a just act?
But Tragedian and Orator was a personal friend of Aristotle. And when Alteciboia asks what he means, he rejoins, they judge her fit to die, not me to slay her.
Again, there is the law suit about Demosthenes and the man who killed Meccanor. As they were judged to have killed him justly, it was thought that he was killed justly.
And in the case of the man who was killed at Teed, the judges were requested to decide whether it was unjust that he should be killed, since if it was not, it was argued that it could not have been unjust to kill him.
Four. Another line of proof is the affortiori, that it may be argued that even if the gods are not omniscient, certainly human beings are not. The principle here is that if a quality does not in fact exist where it is more likely to exist, it clearly does not exist where it is less likely.
Again, the argument that the man who strikes his father also strikes his neighbors follows from the principle that if the less likely thing is true, the more likely thing is true also, for a man is less likely to strike his father than to strike his neighbors.
The argument then may run thus, or it may be urged that if a thing is not true where it is more likely, it is not true where it is less likely, or that if it is true where it is less likely, it is true where it is more likely, according as we have to show that a thing is or is not true.
The reasoning in the text shows confusion and the text is uncertain, we might rather have expected the following connection of thought. The argument then may run thus, that if the less likely is true, the more likely is true, or as before, that if the more likely is not true, the less likely is not true, according as we have to show, etc.
This argument might also be used in a case of parody, as in the lines,
Thou hast pity for thy sire, who has lost his sons, hast none for oineus, whose brave son is dead.
And again, if these years did no wrong, neither did Paris, or if the sons of Tindareus did no wrong, neither did Paris, or if Hector did well to slay the trochlas, Paris did well to slay Achilles.
From a speech of the rhetorician Polycrates.
And if other followers of an art are not bad men, neither are philosophers.
And if generals are not bad men, because it often happens that they are condemned to death, neither are sophists.
And there are marks that, if each individual among you ought to think of his own city's reputation, you ought all to think of the reputation of Greece as a whole.
Five.
Another line of argument is based on considerations of time.
Thus, Ithicrates, in the case against Calmodius, said,
If before doing the deed I had bargained that, if I did it, I should have a statue, you would have given me one.
Will you not give me one now that I have done the deed?
You must not make promises when you are expecting a thing to be done for you, and refuse to fulfill them when the thing has been done.
Ithicrates, the general, was granted a statue for his defeat of the Lacked Imonians in 392 BC.
He claimed his statue only after his retirement in 371 BC.
Calmodius, a political opponent, opposed the honor.
And again, to induce the Thebans to let Philip pass through their territory into Attica,
it was argued that if he had insisted on this before he helped them against the Foccheans, they would have promised to do it.
In 339 BC, Philip of Macedonia sent an embassy to the Thebans, requesting passage through their territory into Attica.
An Athenian counter-embersy persuaded the Thebans to refuse the request.
The words are quoted, the words of the Macedonian ambassadors, not of Philip.
It is monstrous, therefore, that just because he threw away his advantage there and trusted their honor, they should not let him pass through now.
Six. Another line is to apply to the other speaker what he has said against yourself.
It is an excellent term to give to a debate, as may be seen in the Tuca of Sophocles.
It was employed by Iphicrates, and he replied to Aristopon,
Would you, he asked, take a bribe to betray the fleet?
No, said Aristopon, and Iphicrates replied,
Very good, if you who are Aristopon would not betray the fleet, would I, who am Iphicrates?
Aristopon, a celebrated orator of the century, prosecuted Iphicrates in 355 BC for a failure in a recent war.
Only it must be recognized beforehand that the other man is more likely than you are to commit the crime in question.
Otherwise, you will make yourself ridiculous.
If it is Aristides who is prosecuting, you cannot say that sort of thing to him.
The purpose is to discredit the prosecutor, who as a rule would have it appear that his character is better than that of the defendant,
a pretension which it is desirable to upset.
But the use of such an argument is in all cases ridiculous, if you are attacking others for what you do or would do yourself,
or are urging others to do what you neither do nor would do yourself.
Seven, another line of proof is secured by defining your terms.
Thus, what is the supernatural?
Surely it is either a god or the work of a god.
Well, anyone who believes that the work of a god exists cannot help also believing that gods exist.
Or take the argument of Iphicrates.
Goodness is true nobility, neither harmonious nor Aristogaitan had any nobility before they did a noble deed.
You also argued that he himself was more akin to harmonious and Aristogaitan than his opponent was.
At any rate, my deeds are more akin to those of harmonious and Aristogaitan than yours are.
Another example taken from Iphicrates' speech against harmonious who claimed descent from harmonious to tyrannicide.
The argument seems to have been personal merit, not family relationship conveys true nobility.
On account of my merit, I am closer to the tyrannicides than you, their descendant.
Another example may be found in the Alexander from some rhetorical essay on Alexander vis Paris, possibly by Iphicrates.
Everyone will agree that by incontinent people we mean those who are not satisfied with the enjoyment of one love.
A further example is to be found in the reason given by Socrates for not going to the court of Archelaus.
He said that one is insulted by being unable to require benefits as well as by being unable to require injuries.
All the persons mentioned define their term and get at its essential meaning and then use the result when reasoning on the points at issue.
Eight.
Another line of argument is found upon the various senses of words. Such a word is rightly as has been explained in the topics.
Nine.
Another line is based upon logical divisions.
Thus, all men do wrong from one of three motives, A, B or C.
In my case, A and B are out of the question and even the accusers do not allege C.
Ten.
Another line is based upon induction. Thus, in the case of the woman of Piper Etos, it might be argued that women everywhere can settle correctly the facts about their children.
Another example of this occurred at Athens in the case between the orator Mantias and his son when the boy's mother revealed the true fact.
And yet another of thieves in the case between Esmenias and Stilbon, when Dodonis proved that it was in Esmenias who was the father of her son, Thetaliskus, and he was in consequence always regarded as being so.
A further instance of induction may be taken from the law of Pliodectex, the Tragedian, Rector and friend of Aristotle.
If we do not hand over our horses to the care of men who have mishandled other people's horses, nor ships to those who erect other people's ships, and if this is true of everything else alike, then men who have failed to secure other people's safety are not to employ to secure our own.
Another instance is the argument of Alchidamus, the Socrates and the orator. Everyone honours the wise. Thus, the Parians have honoured Archilochus, in spite of his bitter tongue, Chians, Homer, though he was not their countryman, the Mithilinaeans, Sappho, though she was a woman.
The Lachodimonians actually made Chilon a member of their senate, though they are the least literary of men. The Italian Greeks honoured Pythagoras.
The inhabitants of Lantzacus gave public burial to Anaxagoras, though he was an alien, and honoured him even to this day.
It may be argued that peoples for whom philosophers legislate are always prosperous. On the ground that the Athenians became prosperous under Solon's laws and the Lachodimonians under those of Lycurgus.
While it feeds, no sooner did the leading men become philosophers than the country began to prosper.
Another line of argument is founded upon some decision already pronounced, whether on the same subject or on one like it or contrary to it. Such a proof is most effective if everyone has always decided thus.
But if not everyone, then at any rate most people, or if all or most, wise or good men have thus decided, or the actual judges of the present question, or those whose authority they accept, or anyone whose decision they cannot gain say because he has complete control over them, or those whom it is not seemingly to gain say as the gods or one's father or one's teacher.
Thus Autoclay said when attacking Myxedemides that it was a strange thing that the dread goddesses could, without loss of dignity, submit to the judgement of the Areapagos, and yet Myxedemides could not.
Autoclay as an Athenian political figure and versatile orator, contemporary of Aristotle. Of the case and Myxedemides, nothing is known.
The reference is that the Erenites as seen in Iscalus's play The Humanides, where they submit to the judgement of Areapagos.
Or as Sappho said, death is an evil thing, the gods have so judged it, or they would die.
Or again, as Aristipus said in reply to Plato when he spoke somewhat too dogmatically of Aristipus thought.
Well anyhow, our friend, meaning Socrates, never spoke like that.
Aristipus of Cyrene, duple of Socrates, founder of the Cyrenex school of philosophy, and of such a rival of Plato.
And Haggis Cipus, having previously consulted Zeus as Olympia, asked Apollo at Delphi whether his opinion was the same as his father's, implying that it would be shameful for him to contradict his father.
Thus too, Isocrates argued that Helen must have been a good woman, because Caesar decided that she was.
And Paris a good man because the goddesses chose him before all others, and Evagoras also, says Isocrates, was good.
Since when Conon met with his misfortune, he betook himself to Evagoras without trying anyone else on the way.
Twelve. Another line of argument consists in taking separately the parts of a subject, such as that given in the topics.
What sort of motion is the soul, for it must be this or that.
The Socrates of Pseudectes provides an example.
What temple has he profaned? What gods, recognized by the state, had he not honored?
Thirteen. Since it happens that any given thing usually has both good and bad consequences, another line of argument consists in using those consequences as a reason for urging that a thing should or should not be done.
For prosecuting or defending anyone for eulogy or censure.
For example, education leads both to unpopularity, which is bad, and to wisdom, which is good.
Hence, you either argue it is therefore not well to be educated since it is not well to be unpopular, or you answer no, it is well to be educated since it is well to be wise.
The art of rhetoric of Calypus is made up of this line of argument, with the addition of those of possibility and the others of that kind already described.
Calypus is quoted again. Nothing is known of him or his work, he may be of an early tuple of isocrities.
Fourteen. Another line of argument is used when we have to urge or disguise a course of action that may be done in either of two opposite ways, and have to apply the method just mentioned to both.
The difference between this one and the last is that whereas in the last any two things are contracted, yes, the things contracted are opposite.
For instance, the priestess enjoyed upon her son not to take the public speaking.
Four, she said, if you say what is right, men will hate you. If you say what is wrong, the gods will hate you.
The reply might be, on the contrary, you ought to take the public speaking, for if you say what is right, the gods will love you.
If you say what is wrong, men will love you.
This amounts to the proverbial buying the marsh with the sort.
It is just this situation, Viz, when each of two opposites has both a good and a bad consequence, opposite respectively to each other, but has been termed devarication.
Fifteen. Another line of argument is this. The things people approve of openly are not those which they approve of secretly.
Openly, their chief praise is given to justice and nobleness, but in their hearts they prefer their own advantage.
Try in place of this to establish the point of view which your opponent has not adopted.
This is the most effective of the forms of argument that contradict common opinions.
Sixteen. Another line is that of rational correspondence.
For example, if Ikrates, when they were trying to compel his son, a youth under the prescribed age to perform one of the state duties because he was tall, said,
if you can't tall boys' men, you will next be voting short men boys.
And Teodetes, in his law, said, you make citizens of such mercenaries as Strabax and Caledemus as a reward of their merits.
Will you not make exiles of such citizens as those who have done irreparable harm among the mercenaries?
The mercenaries were a problem for the Greeks, it is, from the beginning of the fourth century.
Caledemus, their celebrated leader in the middle of the century, served Athens and was rewarded by being made a citizen.
Strabax is less well known, but also was made a Athenian citizen.
Seventeen. Another line is the argument that if two results of the same, their antecedents are also the same.
For instance, it was the saying of Xenophonus, that to assert that the gods had birth is as in tears as to say that they'd die.
The consequence of both statements is that there is a time when the gods do not exist.
This line of proof assumes generally that the result of any given thing is always the same.
For example, you are going to decide not about Isocratus, but about the value of the whole profession of philosophy.
The manuscripts read Socrates, but the passage has been identified in the Antidosis speech of Isocratus.
Or, to give earth and water means slavery, or to share in the common peace means obeying orders.
We ought to make either such assumptions or their opposite as suits our best.
Eighteen. Another line of argument is based on the fact that men do not always make the same choice on a later, as on an earlier occasion, but reverse their previous choice.
For example, the following entomene.
When we were exiles, we fought in order to return.
Now we have returned, it would be strange to choose exile in order not to have to fight.
From the speech of Lysias.
On one occasion, that is, they chose to be true to their homes at the cost of fighting, and on the other to avoid fighting at the cost of deserting their homes.
Nineteen. Another line of argument is the assertion that some possible motive for an event or state of things is the real one.
For example, the gift was given in order to cause pain by its withdrawal.
This notion underlies the lines, God gives to many great prosperity, not of good will towards them, but to make the ruin of them more conspicuous.
Or take the passage from the Meliagos of Antiphon to slay no boar, but to be witnesses of Meliagos prowess unto Greece.
Or the argument in Ajax of Theodectes, that Diomedes chose out Odysseus not to do in honour, but in order that his companion might be a lesser man than himself.
Such a motive for doing so is quite possible.
Twenty. Another line of argument is common to forensic and deliberative oratory, namely to consider inducements and deterrents.
And the motives people have for doing or avoiding the actions in question.
These are the conditions which make us bound to act if they are for us, and to refrain from action if they are against us.
That is, we are bound to act if the action is possible, easy and useful to ourselves or our friends, or hurtful to our enemies.
This is true even if the action entails loss, provided the loss is outweighed by the solid advantage.
A speaker will urge action by pointing to such conditions and discourage it by pointing to the opposite.
These same arguments also form the material for activisation or defence, the deterrence being pointed out by the defence and the inducements by the prosecution.
As for the defence, this topic forms the whole art of rhetoric, both of Pamphilus and of Calippus.
Twenty-one. Another line of argument refers to things which are supposed to happen and yet seem incredible.
We may argue that people could not have believed them if they had not been true or nearly true, even that they are the more likely to be true because they are incredible.
For the things which men believe are either facts or probabilities.
If, therefore, a thing that is believed is improbable and even incredible, it must be true, since it is certainly not believed because it is as all-probable or credible.
An example is what Androclas of the Demi-Petrus said in his well-known Arrangement of the Law.
The audience tried to shut him down when he observed that the law required a law to set them right.
Why? He went on, fish need salt, improbable and incredible as this might seem for creatures reared in salt water.
And olive cakes need oil, incredible as it is that what produces oil should need it.
Twenty-two. Another line of argument is to refute our opponent's case by noting any contrasts or contradictions of dates, acts or words that it anywhere displays and this in any of the three following connections.
One, referring to our opponent's conduct, for example, he says he has devoted to you, yet he conspired with the thirty.
Two, referring to our own conduct, for example, he says I am litigious and yet he cannot prove that I have been engaged in a single lawsuit.
Three, referring to both of us together, for example, he has never even lent anyone a penny, but I have ransomed quite a number of you.
Twenty-three. Another line that is useful for men and causes that have been really or seemingly slanted is to show why the facts are not as supposed, pointing out that there is a reason for the false impression given.
Thus, a woman who had palmed off her son on another woman was thought to be the lad's mistress because she embraced him, but when her action was explained the charge was shown to be groundless.
Another example is from the Ajax of Theodectes, where Odysseus tells Ajax the reason why, though he is rarely braver than Ajax, he has not thought so.
Twenty-four. Another line of argument is to show that if the cause is present, the effect is present, and if absent, absent.
For by proving the cause, you at once prove the effect, and conversely, nothing can exist without its cause.
Thus, Thrasybulus accused Leodemus of having had his name recorded as a criminal on the slab in the Acropolis, and of erasing the record in the time of the Thirty-Tons.
To which Leodemus replied, impossible, for the Thirty would have trusted me all the more if my quarrel with the commons had been inscribed on the slab.
Thrasybulus freed Athens in 403 BC from the rule of the Thirty-Tons. Leodemus is probably the famous orator.
Twenty-five. Another line is to consider whether the accused person can take or could have taken a better course than that which he is recommending or taking, or has taken.
That is better suited to affect the evil purpose with which he is charged.
If he has not taken this better course, it is clear that he has not guilty, since no one deliberately and consciously chooses what is bad.
This argument is, however, fallacious, for it often becomes clear after the event how the action could have been done better, though before the event this was far from clear.
Twenty-six. Another line is, when a contemplated action is inconsistent with any past action, to examine them both together.
Thus, when the people of Eilea asked Xenophanes if they should or should not sacrifice to Lucothea and mourn for her, he advised them not to mourn for her if they thought her a goddess, and not to sacrifice to her if they thought her a mortal woman.
Twenty-seven. Another line is to make previous mistakes with grounds of accusation or defence.
Thus, in the Madeaire of Carkinus, the accused is alleged that Madeaire slain her children.
Carkinus was a tragedian, a contemporary baritotle.
At all events, they say, they are not to be seen, Madeaire having made the mistake of sending her children away.
In defence, she argues that it is not her children but Jason, whom she would have slain, for it would have been a mistake on her part not to do this if she had done the other.
This special line of argument for entomene forms the whole of the art of rhetoric in use before Theodorus.
That is to say, a Theodorus of Byzantium, outstanding teacher of rhetoric of the 5th century.
Another line is to draw meanings from names.
Sophocles, for instance, says, O steel in heart as thou art steel in name.
This line of argument is common in places of the gods.
Thus, too, Conon, called Thracibulus, rash in council.
Conon was the victor of Cnetus, and Thracibulus was the liberator of Athens in 403 BC.
And Herodicus said of Thracimacris, you are always bold in battle.
Herodicus was the physician. Thracimacris and Polus, Sophists and Rhetoricians, introduced by Plato in the Republic One and in the Gorgias.
Of Polus, you are always a cult and of the legislator Draco, that his laws were those not of a human being but of a dragon, so savage were they.
Draco was the almost mythical Athenian lawgiver of the 7th century.
And in Euripides, Hecuba says of Aphrodite, her name and Polis, Aphrosunus, rightly begin alike from the Proades of Euripides.
And Kyrimon writes Pentheus, a name foreshadowing grief, Penthos, to come.
A fragment of Kyrimon, a tragedian of the 4th century.
The Rescutative Entomene has a greater reputation than the demonstrative, because within a small space it works out two opposing arguments, and arguments put side by side appear out to the audience.
But of all syllogisms, whether reputative or demonstrative, those are most applauded of which we foresee the conclusions from the beginning, so long as they are not obvious at first sight.
For part of the pleasure we feel is their own intelligent anticipation, or those which we follow well enough to see the point of them as soon as the last word has been uttered.
Besides genuine syllogisms, there may be syllogisms that look genuine but are not.
And since an entomeme is merely a syllogism of a particular kind, it follows that besides genuine entomemes, there may be those that look genuine but are not.
One, among the lines of argument that form the spurious entomeme, the first is that which arises from the particular words employed.
A, one variety of this is when, as in dialectic, without having gone through any reasoning process, we make a final statement, as if it were the conclusion of such a process.
Therefore so-and-so is not true.
Therefore also so-and-so must be true.
So too in dialectic, compact and antithetical ushrens passes for an entomeme, such language being the top of province of entomeme, so that it is seemingly the form of wording here that causes the illusion mentioned.
In order to produce the effect of genuine reasoning by our form of wording, it is useful to summarize the results of a number of previous reasonings, as some he saved, others he avenged, the Greeks he freed.
Quoted from Isocrates from Evagoras.
Each of these statements has been previously proved from other facts, but the mere co-location of them gives the impression of establishing some fresh conclusion.
B, another variety is based on the use of similar words for different things.
For example, the argument that the mouse must be a noble creature, since it gives its name to the most august of all religious rites.
For such, the mysteries are a pun on the similarity of the Greek words miss and misterion.
Or one may introduce into a eulogy of the dog, the dog-star, or pan, because Tinder said,
Oh thou blessed one, thou whom they of Olympus call a hound of manifold shape, that follows the mother of heaven.
Or we may argue that because there is much disgrace in there not being a dog about, there is honour in being a dog.
There is a dog philosopher, a cynic.
Or that Hermes is ready other than any other god to go shares, since we never say shares all round except of him.
This is alluding to a proverb.
Or that speech is a very excellent thing, since good men are not said to be worth money, but to be worthy of esteem.
The same Greek word logos is here used for speech and esteem, hence what follows.
The phrase worthy of esteem, also having the meaning of worth speech.
Two, another line is to assert of the whole what is true of the path, or of the path what is true of the whole.
A whole and its path is supposed to be identical, though often they are not.
They will have therefore to adopt whichever of these two lines better suits your purpose.
That is how Euthydemus argues.
He was a sophist known for his captious arguments.
See Plato's dialogue, Euthydemus, the argument of Euthydemus was some kind of policy.
For example, with anyone knows that there is a trireme in the pyreth, since he knows the separate details that make up this statement.
There is also the argument that one who knows the letters knows the whole word, since the word is the same thing as the letters which compose it.
Or that if a double portion of a certain thing is harmful to health, then a single portion must not be called wholesome, since it is absurd that two good things should make one bad thing.
Put that as the Euthydemus' reputative, put as follows demonstrative.
The one good thing cannot be made up of two bad things.
The whole line of argument is palatious.
Again, there is polycraticism saying that placebo has put down 30 pounds, where the speaker adds them up one by one.
Or the argument in the arrest is a fair death test, where the argument is from part to whole.
He's right that she who slays her lord should die.
It is right too that the son should avenge his father. Very good. These two things are what arrest is done.
Still, perhaps the two things once they're put together do not form a right act.
The fallacy might also be said to be due to omission, since the speaker fails to say by whose hand a husband slayer should die.
Three. Another line is the use of indignant language, whether to support your own case or to overthrow your opponents.
We do this when we paint a highly colored picture of the situation without having proved the facts of it.
If the defendant does so, he produces an impression of his innocence.
And if the prosecutor goes into a passion, he produces an impression of the defendant's guilt.
Here, there is no genuine entomia. The hearer infers guilt or innocence, but no proof is given, and the inference is fallacious accordingly.
Four. Another line is to use a sign or single instance as certain evidence, which again yields no valid proof.
But it might be said that lovers are useful to their countries, since the love of harmonious and Aleister Gaeton calls the downfall of the talent Hipparchus.
Or again, that Dionysius is a thief since he is a vicious man. There is of course no valid proof here, not every vicious man is a thief, though every thief is a vicious man.
Five. Another line represents the accidental as essential.
An instance is what Polycrata says of the mice, that they came to the rescue because they gnawed through the bow strings from Polycrata's esophistic entomium on mice.
Or it might be maintained that an invitation to dinner is a great honour, for it was because he was not invited that Achilles was angered with the Greeks at Tenedos.
As a fact, what angered him was the insult involved. It is a mere accident that this was the particular form that the insult took.
Six. Another is the argument from Consequence. In the Alexander, for instance, it is argued that Paris might have had a lofty disposition since he despised society and lived by himself on Mount Ida.
Because lofty people do this kind of thing, therefore Paris too, we are to suppose, had a lofty soul.
Or if a man dresses fashionably and roams around at night, he is a rake, since that is the way rakes behave.
Another similar argument points out that beggars sing and dance in temples, and that exiles can live wherever they please.
And that such privileges are the disposal of those we account happy, and therefore everyone might be regarded as happy if only he has those privileges.
What matters, however, is the circumstances under which the privileges are enjoyed. Hence this line, too, falls under the head of fallacies by omission.
Seven. Another line consists in representing as pauses, things which are not pauses, on the ground that they happen the long ways or before the event in question.
They assume that because B happens after A, it happens because of A. Politicians are especially fond of taking this line.
But De Mardes said that the policy of democracy is the cause of all mischief, for after it, the war occurred.
De Mardes, the orator, arranged the peace between Philip of Macedonia and Athens after the Athenian defeated Chironia, and thereafter was the representative of the Macedonian party in Athens and an adversary of Demosthenes, the great orator.
Eight. Another line consists in leaving out any mention of time and circumstances.
For example, the argument that Paris was justified in taking Helens since her father left her free to choose. Here, the freedom was, presumably, not perpetual.
It could only refer to her first choice beyond which her father's authority could not go.
Or again, one might say that the strike of free man is an act of want and outrage, but it is not so in every case, only when it is unprovoked.
Nine. Again, Asperius, syllogism may, as in heuristical discussions, be based on the confusion of the Absolute with that which is not Absolute but particular.
As in dialectic, for instance, it may be argued that what is not is on the ground that what is not is what is not.
Or that the unknown can be known, on the ground that it can be known to be unknown.
So, also in rhetoric, Asperius' enthamine may be based on the confusion of some particular probability with Absolute probability.
Now, no particular probability is universally probable, as Agathon says.
One might, perchance, say this was probable that things improbable oft will happen to men.
For what is improbable does happen, and therefore it is probable that improbable things will happen.
Granted, this one might argue that what is improbable is probable, but this is not true absolutely.
As, in heuristic, the imposter comes from not adding any clause specifying relationship or reference or manner.
So, here it arises because the probability in question is not general but specific.
It is a this line of argument that Corax's art of rhetoric is composed.
Corax was one of the earliest Sicilian teachers of rhetoric.
If the accused is not open to the charge, for instance, of a weakling, he tried for violent assault.
The defense is that he was not likely to do such a thing.
But if he is open to the charge, that is, if he is a strong man, the defense is still that he was not likely to do such a thing since he could be sure that people would think he was likely to do it.
And so, with any other charge, the accused must be either open or not open to it.
There is in either case an appearance of probable innocence, but whereas in the latter case the probability is genuine, in the former it can only be asserted in a special sense mentioned.
This sort of argument illustrates what it meant by making the worse arguments in the better.
Hence, people were right in objecting to the training Protagoras undertook to give them.
He was the famous Sophist, the Plato-style of Protagoras.
It was a thought. The probability to handle was not genuine but spurious and has a place in no art except rhetoric and heuristic.
This remark entailed no approval on the part of Aristotle.
Entremins, genuine and apparent, have now been described. The next subject is their reputation.
An argument may be reputed either by counter-syllagism or by bringing in objection.
It is clear that counter-syllagism can be built up from the same lines of arguments as the original syllogisms.
For the materials of syllogisms are the ordinary opinions of men and such opinions often contradict each other.
Objections, as appears in the topics, may be raised in four ways.
Either by directly attacking your opponent's own statement or by putting forward another statement like it,
or by putting forward a statement contrary to it, or by quoting previous decisions.
One, by attacking your opponent's own statement, I mean for instance this.
If his entremins should assert that love is always good, the objection can be brought in two ways.
Either by making the general statement that all want is an evil, or by making the particular one that there would be no talk of conian love
if there were not evil loves as well as good ones.
Conian love means the incestuous love of Viblis for her brother, Kaunus.
Two, an objection from a contrary statement is raised when, for instance,
the opponent's entremim having concluded that a good man does good to all his friends, you object,
that proves nothing, for a bad man does not do evil to all his friends.
Three, an example of an objection from a like statement is the entremim having shown that ill-used men always hate their ill-users.
To reply, that proves nothing, for well-used men do not always love those who use them well.
Four, the decisions mentioned are those proceeding from well-known men.
For instance, if the entremim employed has concluded that some allowance ought to be made for drunken offenders,
since they did not know what they were doing.
The objection will be, Pitekas then deserves no approval,
or he would not have prescribed specially severe penalties for offenses due to drunkenness.
Pitekas is one of the seven sages.
Entremims are based upon one or other four kinds of alleged fact.
One, probabilities, two, examples, three, insalable signs, four, ordinary signs.
Four, fallible signs.
One, entremims based on probabilities are those which argue from what is or is supposed to be usually true.
Two, entremims based upon example are those which proceed by induction from one or more similar cases,
arrive at a general proposition and then argue deductively to a particular inference.
Three, entremims based upon infallible signs are those which argue from the inevitable and invariable.
Four, entremims based upon ordinary signs are those which argue from some universal or particular proposition, true or false.
Now, one, as a probability is that which happens usually but not always.
Entremims founded upon probabilities can, it is clear, always be refuted by raising some objection.
The refutation is not always genuine, it may be spurious.
For it consists in showing not that your opponent's premise is not probable but only in showing that it is not inevitably true.
Hence, it is always in defense rather than an accusation that it is possible to gain an advantage by using this policy.
For the accuser uses probabilities to prove his case.
And to refute a conclusion as improbable is not the same thing as to refute it as not inevitable.
Any argument based upon what usually happens is always open to objection.
Otherwise, it would not be a probability but an invariable and necessary truth.
But the judges think if the refutation takes this form, either that the accuser's case is not probable or that they must not decide it,
which, as we said, is a false piece of reasoning.
Or they ought to decide by considering not merely what must be true but also what is likely to be true.
This is indeed the meaning of giving a verdict in accordance with one's honest opinion.
Therefore, it is not enough for the defendant to refute the accusation by proving that the charge is not bound to be true.
He must do so by showing that it is not likely to be true.
For this purpose, his objection must state what is more usually true than the statement attacked.
It may do so in either of two ways, either in respect of frequency or in respect of exactness.
It will be most convincing if it does so in both respects.
For if the thinking question both happens often as we represented and happens more as we represented,
the probability is particularly great.
Two, fallible signs and entomines based upon them can be refuted even if the facts are correct, as was said at the outset.
For we have shown in the analytics that no fallible sign can form part of a valid logical proof.
Three, entomines depending on examples may be refuted in the same way as probabilities.
If we have a negative instance, the argument is refuted insofar as it is proved not inevitable,
even though the positive examples are more similar and more frequent.
And if the positive examples are more numerous and more frequent, we must contend that the present case is dissimilar
or that its conditions are dissimilar or that it is different in some way or other.
Four, it will be impossible to refute infallible signs and entomines resting on them by showing it anyway
that they do not form a valid logical proof.
This too we see from the analytics.
All we can do is to show that the fact alleged does not exist.
If there is no doubt that it does and that it is an infallible sign, refutation now becomes impossible,
for this is equivalent to a demonstration which is clear in every respect.
Amplification and depreciation are not an element of entomine.
By an element of entomine, I mean the same thing as a line of entomomatic argument,
a general class embracing a large number of particular kinds of entomine.
Amplification and depreciation are one kind of entomine,
this the kind used to show that a thing is great or small,
just as there are other kinds used to show that a thing is good or bad, just or unjust,
and anything else of that sort.
All these things are the subject matter of syllogisms and entomines,
none of these is the line of argument of an entomine,
no more therefore amplification and depreciation.
Nor are refutative entomines a different species from constructive,
pretty clear, but refutation consists either in offering positive proof or in raising an objection.
In the first case, we prove the opposite of our adversary's statements,
thus if he shows that a thing has happened, we show that it has not.
If he shows that it has not happened, we show that it has.
This then could not be the distinction if there were one,
since the same means are employed by both parties,
entomines being adduced to show that the fact is or is not so and so.
An objection on the other hand is not an entomine at all,
but as was said in the topics, it consists in stating some accepted opinion,
from which it will be clear that our opponent has not reasoned correctly or has made a false assumption.
Three points must be studied in making a speech,
and as we have now completed the account of one example,
maxims, entomines, and in general the thought element,
the way to invent and refute arguments.
We have next to discuss two, style, and three, arrangement.
Book three.
In making a speech, one must study three points.
First, the means of producing persuasion.
Second, the style or language to be used.
Third, the proper arrangement of the various parts of the speech.
We have already specified the sources of persuasion.
We have shown that these are three in number,
what they are, and why there are only these three.
But we have shown that persuasion must in every case be affected,
either one, by working on the emotions of the judges themselves,
two, by giving them the right impression of the speaker's character,
or three, by proving the truth of the statements made.
Entomines also have been described on the sources from which they should be derived,
there being both special and general lines of argument for entomines.
Our next subject will be the style of expression,
but it is not enough to know what we ought to say.
We must also say it as we ought.
Much help is thus afforded towards producing the right impression of a speech.
The first question to receive attention was naturally the one that comes first naturally,
how persuasion can be produced from the facts themselves.
The second is how to set these facts out in language.
A third would be the proper method of delivery.
This is a thing that affects the success of a speech greatly.
But either two, the subject has been neglected.
Indeed, it was long before it found a way into the arts of tragic drama and epic recitation.
At first, poets acted their tragedies themselves.
It is plain that delivery has just as much to do with oratory as with poetry.
In connection with poetry, it has been studied by Glaucon of Teos, among others.
Probably the rap so mentioned in Plato's dialogue, Ion.
It is essentially a matter of the right management of the voice to express the various emotions,
of speaking loudly, softly, or between the two, of high, low, or intermediate pitch,
of the various rhythms that suit various subjects.
These are the three things, volume of sound, modulation of pitch, and rhythm,
but the speaker bears in mind.
It is those who do bear them in mind who usually win prizes in the dramatic contests.
And just as in drama, the actors now count for more than the poets.
So it is in the contests of public life owing to the defects of our political institutions.
No systematic treatise upon the rules of delivery has yet been composed.
Aristotle's pupil Theoprastas was the first to provide a theory of delivery.
Indeed, even the study of language made no progress till late in the day.
Besides, delivery is, very properly, not regarded as an elevated subject of inquiry.
This could be translated as, or, is thought to be vulgar when viewed from a losty standpoint on any noble view.
Still, the whole business of rhetoric being concerned with appearances,
we must pay attention to the subject of delivery, unworthy though it is, because we cannot be without it.
The right thing in speaking really is that we should be satisfied not to annoy our hearers without trying to delight them.
We ought in fairness to fight our case with no help beyond the bare facts.
Nothing therefore should matter except the proof of those facts.
Still, as has been already said, other things affect the result considerably owing to the defects of our hearers.
The arts of language cannot help having a small but real importance.
Whatever it is, we have to expand to others.
The way in which a thing is said does affect its intelligibility.
Not, however, so much importance as people think.
All such arts are fanciful and meant to charm the hearer.
Nobody uses fine language when teaching geometry.
When the principles of delivery have been worked out, they will produce the same effect as on the stage.
A rendering of this, in our favourites, when the principles of style have been worked out, they will produce the same effect as delivery.
But only very slight attempts to deal with them have been made, and by a few people, as by Thrasymachus, in his Appeal to Pity.
This was Thrasymachus of Chalcedon, sockets and teacher of rhetoric, sharply criticised by Plato.
Traumatic ability is a natural gift and can hardly be systematically taught.
The principles of good diction can be so taught.
And therefore we have men of ability in this direction, too, to win prizes in their turn, as well as those speakers who excel in delivery.
Speeches of the written or literary kind owe more of their effect to their diction than to their thought.
It is naturally the poets who first set the movement going.
The words represent things, and they had also the human voice at their disposal, which of all our organs can best represent other things.
Thus the arts of recitation and acting were formed, and others as well.
Now it was the thought poets seemed to win fame through their fine language when their thoughts were simple enough,
but the language of oratorical prose first took a poetic colour, for example that of Gorgias.
Gorgias was another leading teacher of rhetoric of the 5th century.
Even now, most uneducated people think that Proetical Language makes the finest discourses.
That is not true. The language of prose is distinct from that of poetry.
This is shown by the state of things today, when even the language of tragedy has altered its character.
Just as iambics were adopted instead of tectrometers, because they are the most prose-like of all meters.
So tragedy has given up all those words, not used in ordinary talk, which decorated the early drama and are still used by the writers of hexameter poems.
It is therefore ridiculous to imitate a poetical manner which the poets themselves have dropped,
and it is now plain that we have not to treat in detail the whole question of style,
but may confine ourselves to that part of it which concerns our present subject, rhetoric.
The other, the Proetical part of it, has been discussed in the treatise on the art of poetry.
We may then start from the observations there made, including the definition of style.
Style, to be good, must be clear, as is proved by the fact that speech which fails to convey a plain meaning will fail to do just what speech has to do.
It must also be appropriate avoiding both meanness and undue elevation.
Poetical language is certainly free from meanness, but it is not appropriate to prose.
Clearness is secured by using the words, nouns and verbs alike, that are current and ordinary.
Freedom from meanness and positive adornment too are secured by using the other words mentioned in the art of poetry.
Such variation from what is usual makes the language appear more stately.
People do not feel towards strangers as they do towards their own countrymen,
and the same thing is true of their feeling for language.
It is therefore well to give to everyday speech an unfamiliar air.
People like what strikes them when they are struck by what is out of the way.
Inverse, such effects are common, and there they are pitting.
The persons and things they are spoken of are comparatively remote from ordinary life.
In prose passages they are far less often pitting because the subject matter is less exhorted.
Even in poetry it is not quite appropriate that fine language should be used by a slave or a very young man or about very trivial subjects.
Even in poetry the style, to be appropriate, must sometimes be toned down, though at other times heightened.
We can now see that the writer must disguise his art and give the impression of speaking naturally and not artificially.
Naturalness is persuasive, artificiality is the contrary.
For our hearers are prejudiced and think we have some design against them, as if we were mixing their wines for them.
It is like the difference between the quality of Pherodorus' voice and the voices of all other actors.
Pherodorus was a celebrated actor of the time.
His really seems to be that of the character who is speaking, there as do not.
We can hide our purpose successfully by taking the single word of our composition from the speech of ordinary life.
This is done in poetry by Euripides, who is referred to show the way to his successors.
Language is composed of nouns and verbs.
Nouns are of the various kinds considered in the treatise on poetry.
Strange words, compound words and invented words must be used sparingly and on few occasions, on what occasions we shall state later.
The reason for this restriction has been already indicated.
They depart from what is suitable in the direction of excess.
In the language of prose, besides the regular and proper terms for things, metaphorical terms only can be used with advantage.
This would gather from the fact that these two classes of terms, the proper or regular and the metaphorical, these and no others are used by everybody in conversation.
We can now see that a good writer can produce a style that is distinguished without being obtrusive.
And at the same time, clear, thus satisfying our definition of good or rhetorical prose.
Words of ambiguous meaning are cheaply useful to enable a thoughtist to mislead his hearers.
Synonyms are useful to the poet, by which I mean words whose ordinary meaning is the same.
For example, poranespai, advancing, and by design, proceeding.
These two are ordinary words and have the same meaning.
In the art of poetry, as we have already said, will be found definitions of these kinds of words.
A classification of metaphors and mention of the fact that metaphor is of great value both in poetry and in prose.
Prose writers might overpay especially careful attention to metaphor because there are other sources of scantier than those of poets.
Metaphor, moreover, gives style, clearness, charm, and distinction as nothing else can.
And it is not a thing whose use can be taught by one man to another.
Metaphors, like epithets, must be fitting, which means that they must fairly correspond to the things signified.
Failing this, their inappropriateness will be conspicuous.
The want of harmony between two things is emphasized by their being placed side by side.
It is like having to ask ourselves what dress will suit an old man, certainly not the crimson cloak that suits a young man.
And if you wish to pair compliments, you must take your metaphor from something better in the same line, if to disparage from something worse.
To illustrate my meaning, since opposites are in the same class, you do what I have suggested is to say that a man who begs, prays, and a man who prays begs.
For praying and begging are both varieties of asking.
So, Ithikrata is called Kalyas, a mendicant priest, instead of a torchbearer.
And Kalyas replied that Ithikrata's must be uninitiated, or he would have called him not a mendicant priest, but a torchbearer.
Ithikrata is the Athenian general.
Kalyas, a very foolish Athenian aristocrat in whose family the office of torchbearer was hereditary.
The torchbearer led the procession from Athens to Elyusus on the fifth day of the Great Eurysynean.
Both are religious titles, but one is honorable and the other is not.
Again, somebody calls actors, hangers on of Dionysus, but they call themselves artists.
Each of these terms is a metaphor, the one intended to throw dirt at the actor, the other to dignify him.
And pirates now call themselves purveyors.
We can not call a crime a mistake, or a mistake a crime.
We can say that Ithikrata took a thing or deplundered his victim.
An expression like that of Euryphides' telephos, king of the awe on Mesia's coast he landed, is inappropriate.
The word king goes beyond the dignity of the subject, and so the art is not concealed.
A metaphor may be amiss because the very syllables of the words conveying it fail to indicate sweetness of vocal actions.
Thus Dionysius the brazen in his elegies calls poetry Calliope's speech.
Dionysius the brazen was a poet and rhetorician of the 5th century.
Poetry and screeching are both to be sure of vocal utterances, but the metaphor is bad because the sounds of screeching,
unlike those of poetry, are discordant in our meaning.
Further, in using metaphors to give names to nameless things, we must draw them not from remote, but from kindred and similar things,
so that the kinship is clearly perceived as soon as the words are said.
Thus, in the celebrated riddle, I marked how a man glued bronze with fire to another man's body.
The process is nameless, but both it and gluing are a kind of application,
and that is why the application of a cupping glass is here called a gluing.
Good riddles do, in general, provide us with satisfactory metaphors.
The metaphors imply riddles, and therefore a good riddle can furnish a good metaphor.
Further, the materials of metaphors must be beautiful,
and the beauty, like the ugliness of all words, may, as Lecimne says, lie in their sound or in their meaning.
Lecimne is for the teacher of rhetoric and a disarrambic poet.
Further, there is a third consideration, one that upsets the palatious argument of the sophist of Bryson,
that there is no such thing as Powell language, because in whatever word you put a given thing, your meaning is the same.
This is untrue. One term may describe a thing more truly than another, may be more like it, and set it more intimately before our eyes.
Besides, two different words will represent a thing in two different lights.
So on this graph also, one term must be held fairer or fouler than another.
For both of two terms will indicate what is fair or what is foul, but not simply their fairness or their foulness,
or if so, at any rate, not in an equal degree.
The materials of metaphor must be beautiful to the ear, to the understanding, to the eye, or some other physical sense.
It is better, for instance, to say, rosy-fingered mourn than crimson-fingered, or worse still, red-fingered mourn.
The epithets that we apply to may have a bad and ugly aspect, as an arrest date is called a mother slayer,
or a bet it was, when he is called his father's avenger.
Simonides, the lyric poet, when the victor in the Newell race offered him a small fee, refused to write him an ode,
because he said it was unpleasant to write ode to half asses.
But on receiving an adequate fee, he wrote, Hail to you, daughters of storm-footed steeds.
Though, of course, they were daughters of attitude too.
The same effect is attained by the use of diminishes, which make a bad thing less bad, and a good thing less good.
Take, for instance, the banter of Aristophanes in the Babylonians, where he uses gold-let for gold, cloak-let for cloak,
scoff-let for scoff, and plague-let.
But, alike in using epithets and diminishes, we must be wary and not observe the mean.
Bad-taken language may take any of four forms.
One, the misuse of compound words.
Lycopron, for instance, talks of the many visaged heaven above the giant crested earth,
and, again, the strait-pathed shore, and progress of the pauper-poic-flatterer,
an oath-breaking and over-oath-keeping.
Cidamus uses such expressions as the soul filling with rage and face becoming flame-flushed,
and he thought their enthusiasm would be issue-fraught, and issue-fraught he made persuasion of his words,
and sombra-hued is the floor of the sea.
Lycopron, Gorgias, Alcidamus, authoritative teachers of rhetoric in the fifth and fourth century.
The way all these words are compounded makes them, we feel, fit for verse only.
This, then, is one form in which bad-pace is shown.
Two.
Another is the employment of strange words.
For instance, Lycopron talks of the prodigious Xerxes and spiliative Scyron.
Alcidamus has a toy for poetry and the witlessness of nature, and says, wetted with the unmitigated temper of his spirit.
Three.
A third form is the use of long, unseasonable, or frequent epithets.
It is appropriate enough for a poet to talk of white milk, but in prose such epithets are sometimes lacking in appropriateness,
or when spread too thickly, plenty reveal the author turning his prose into poetry.
Of course, we must use some epithets, since they lift our style above the usual level, and give it an air of distinction.
But we must aim at the due mean, or the result will be worse than if we took no trouble at all.
We should get something actually bad, instead of something merely not good.
That is why the epithets of Alcidamus seem so tasteless.
He does not use them as a seasoning of the meat, but as the meat itself.
So numerous and swollen and aggressive, are they.
For instance, he does not say sweat, but the moist sweat.
Not to the Isthmian games, but to the world concourse of the Isthmian games.
Not lords, but the lords that are monarchs of states.
Not at a run, but his heart impelling him to speed of foot.
Not a school of the muses, but Nietzsche's school of the muses had he inherited.
And so frowning care of heart and achiever, not a popularity, but of universal popularity.
And dispenser of pleasure to his audience.
And he concealed it not with vows, but with vows of the forest trees.
And closed not his body, but his body's nakedness.
And his sole desire was counter-imitative.
This isn't one and the same time, a compound and an epithet, so that it seems a poet's effort.
And so extravagantly excessive his wickedness.
We thus see how the inappropriateness of such poetical language imports absurdity and tastelessness into speeches,
as well as the obscurity that comes from all this verbosity.
For when the senses play, you only obscure and spoil its clearness by piling up words.
The ordinary use of compound words is where there is no term for a thing and some compound can be easily formed like pastime,
con or tribine, but if this is much done, the poet's character disappears entirely.
We now see why the language of compounds is just a thing for writers of dithilams who love sonorous noises.
Strange words for writers of epic poetry, which is a proud and statey affair.
Unmetaphor for I Am Big First, the meter which has been already said is widely used today.
Four.
There remains the fourth region in which that case may be shown, metaphor.
Metaphor, like other things, may be inappropriate, some are said because they're ridiculous, they are indeed used by comics as well as tragic poets.
Others are too grand and theatrical and these, if they are far-fetched, may also be obscure.
For instance, Golger talks of events that are green and full of sap and says,
Power was the bead you sowed and evil harvest you wreaked.
That is too much like poetry.
Alchydamas, again, recalls philosophy, a fortress that threatens the power of law.
And they are, obviously, a goodly-looking glass of human life and talks about offering no such toy to poetry.
All these expressions fail, for the reasons given, to carry the hero with them.
The address of Golger asked of a swallow, when she had let her dropping fall on him as she flew overhead,
is in the best tragic manner.
He said,
May shame, or filomela.
Considering her as a bird, you could not call her act shameful.
Considering her as a girl, you could.
And so it was a good jibe to address her as what she was once and not as what she is.
The simile also is a metaphor.
The difference is but slight.
When the poet says of Achilles that he leapt on the foe as a lion, from the Iliad,
this is a simile.
When he says of him, the lion leapt, it is a metaphor.
Here, since both are courageous, he has transferred to Achilles the name of lion.
Similes are useful in prose as well as in verse, but not often, since they are of the nature of poetry.
They are to be employed just as metaphors are employed, since they are rarely the same thing except for the difference mentioned.
The following are examples of similes.
Androthion said of Idreas that he would like a terrier level up the chain that flies at you and bites you.
Idreas, too, was savage now that he was let out of his chain.
Androthion, an Athenian orator of the fourth century, was sent on an embassy to Mausolus, Prince of Caria.
Idreas was the brother and successor, 331 BC, of Mausolus.
Theodamus compared Achidamus to an Uxenus who could not do geometry.
A proportional simile, implying that Uxenus is an Achidamus who can do geometry.
In Plato's Republic, those who stripped the dead compared to pearls, which bite the stones, turn them, but do not touch the thrower.
And those with simile about the Athenian people were compared to a ship's captain who was strong, but as a guest.
Androthion about poet verses, which are likened to persons who lack duty but possess useful freshness.
When the freshness had faded the charm perishes and so were the verses when broken up into prose.
Pericles compared the Samyans to children who'd take their pap but go on crying.
And the ocean to home oak, because they were ruining one another by civil war, just as one oak causes another oak to fall.
Demosthenes said that the Athenian people were like seasick men on board ships.
By general consent, not the great orator, more probably the general of the Peloponnesian war.
Again, democrates compared the political orators to nurses who swallow the bit of food themselves and then smear the children's lips with the spipple.
Democrates were probably active in the Athenian political life of the 4th century.
Androthion compared the lean Capricodotus to frankincense because it was his consumption that gave one pleasure.
Antiphanes was most likely the cynic philosopher.
Capricodotus was one of the best speakers of the time.
All these ideas may be expressed either as similes or as metaphors.
Those which seed as metaphors will obviously do well also as similes.
And similes, with the explanation omitted, will appear as metaphors.
But the proportional metaphor must always apply reciprocally to either of its code in its terms.
For instance, if a drinking bowl is the shield of Dionysus, a shield may fittingly be called the Brinking Bowl of Ares.
Such then are the ingredients of which speech is composed.
The foundation of good style is correctness of language, which falls under five heads.
One birth the proper use of connecting words and the arrangement of them in a natural sequence for which some of them require.
For instance, the connective men, for example, egomen, requires the correlative de, for example, ho-de.
The answering word must be brought in before the first has been forgotten and not be widely separated from it.
Nor, except in a few cases where this is appropriate, is another connective to be introduced before the one required.
Consider the sentence, but I, as soon as you told me, for Cleon had come begging and praying, took them along and set out.
In this sentence, many connecting words are inserted in front of the one required to complete the sentence.
And if there's a long interval before to set out, the result is obscurity.
One merit, then, of good style lies in the right use of connecting words.
Two, the second lies in calling things by their own special names and not by vague general ones.
Three, the third is to avoid ambiguities, unless indeed you definitely desire to be ambiguous, as those do who have nothing to say but are pretending to mean something.
Such people are apt to put that sort of thing into verse.
Empedocles, for instance, by his long, certain locutions, imposes on its hearers.
Empedocles was the physical philosopher.
These are affected in the same way as most people are when they listen to diviners whose ambiguous utterances are received with nods of acquiescence.
Precise by crossing the hallows will ruin a mighty realm.
Diviners use these vague generalities about the matter in hand.
Because they are predictions of us, as a rule, less likely to be falsified.
We are more likely to be right in the game of odd and even if we simply guess even, or odd, than if we guess the actual number.
And the oracle-monger is more likely to be right if he simply says that the thing will happen, than if he says when it will happen, and therefore he refuses to add a definite date.
All these ambiguities have the same sort of effect, and are to be avoided unless we have some such object as that mentioned.
For, a fourth rule is to observe protagonist's classification of nouns into male, female, and inanimate.
For these distinctions also must be correctly given.
Upon her arrival, she said her say, and departed,
He deltus sarcai dialectisar ocheto.
Five.
A fifth rule is to express plurality, fewness, and unity by the correct wording.
For example, having come, they struck me,
Hoi del santes et uptonne.
It is a general rule that a written composition should be easy to read, and therefore easy to deliver.
This cannot be so, whether a many-connecting word or clauses, or where punctuation is hard, as in the writings of Heraclitus.
This was Heraclitus of Ephesus, pre-Socratic philosopher.
His obscurity is frequently mentioned and criticized in antiquity.
To punctuate Heraclitus is no easy task, because we often cannot tell whether a particular word belongs to what precedes or what follows it.
Thus, at the outset of his treatise, he says, though this truth is always, men understand it not,
where it is not clear with which of the two clauses were it always should be joined by the punctuation.
Further, the following fact leads to Solicism, this, that the sentence does not work out properly if you annex to two terms a third, which does not suit them both.
Thus, either sound or color will fail to work out properly with some verbs.
Percy will apply to both.
Psy will not.
Obscurity is also caused if, when you intend to insert a number of details, you do not first make your meaning clear.
For instance, if you say, I meant after telling him this, that and the other thing to set out rather than something of this kind,
I meant to set out after telling him, then this, that and the other thing occurred.
The following suggestions will help give your language impressiveness.
Here, the Greek word sometimes means inflated diction, bombast, pomp, grand eloquence, rather than dignity.
One, describe a thing instead of naming it.
Do not say circle, but that surface which extends equally from the middle every way.
To achieve conciseness, do the opposite.
Put the name instead of the description.
When mentioning anything ugly or unseemly, use its name if it is the description that is ugly and describe it if it is the name that is ugly.
Two, represent things with the help of metaphors and epithets being careful to avoid political attacks.
Three, use plural for singular, as in poetry, where one finds unto Havens Achaean.
There are only one Haven is meant, and here are my letters, many-leaved poems.
This is a question from Euripides, Iphigenia, and Taurus.
More literally, here are the tablet's poems with many doors.
Four, do not bracket two words under one article, but put one article with each.
For example, Tezgunikos Tezhameteras.
These are two ways of expressing our wife.
Reverse to secure conciseness, for example, Tezhameteras Gunikos.
Five, use plenty of connecting words.
Conversely, to secure conciseness, dispense with connectives, while still preserving connection.
For example, having gone and spoken, and having gone, I spoke, respectively.
Six, and the practice of antimarkers too is useful to describe a thing by mentioning attributes it does not possess, as it does in talking of two methods.
There is a little wind-swept knoll.
This is a fragment from the lengthy epos, said by it, of antimikers of colophon, contemporary of Plato.
Describing the expedition of the Seven Against Thieves, he mentions two methods.
A village of Biosha and a plain of thieves standing upon a low rocky hill of the same name, and continues the description for many lines.
A subject can be developed indefinitely along these lines.
You may apply this method of treatment by negation, either to good or to bad qualities, according to which your subject requires.
It is from this source that the poet draws expressions such as the stringless or lyalless melody, thus forming epithets out of negation.
This device is popular in proportional metaphors, as when the trumpet note is called a lyalless melody.
The Greek word for melody is appropriate to the lyalless, and not the trumpet.
Your language will be appropriate if it expresses emotion and character, and if it corresponds to its subject.
Correspondence to subject means that we must neither speak casually about weighty matters, nor solemnly about trivial ones.
Nor must we add all the mental epithets to commonplace nouns.
All the epithets will be comic, as in the words of Clare Fawn, who can use phrases as absurd as O Queenly fig tree.
Clare Fawn was an Athenian writer of tragedies.
To express emotion, you will employ the language of anger in speaking of outrage, the language of disgust and to speak reluctance to utter a word when speaking of impurity or foulness,
the language of exultation for a tale of glory and that of humiliation for a tale of pity, and so on in all other cases.
This aptness of language is one thing that makes people believe in the truth of your story.
Their minds draw the false conclusion that you are to be trusted from the fact that others behave as you do and things are as you describe them.
And therefore they take your story to be true whether it is so or not.
Besides, an emotional speaker always makes his audience deal with him even when there is nothing in his argument, which is why many speakers try to overwhelm their audience by mere noise.
Furthermore, this way of proving your story by displaying these signs of its genuineness expresses your personal character.
Each class of man, each type of disposition will have its own appropriate way of letting the truth appear.
Under class, I include differences of age, as boy, man or old man, of sex, as man or woman, of nationality, as Spartan or Cosselian.
But dispositions, I hear me, are not dispositions only which determine the character of a man's life, which is not every disposition that does this.
If then a speaker uses the very words which are in keeping with a particular disposition, he will reproduce the corresponding character.
For a rustic and an educated man will not hear the same thing, nor speak in the same way.
Again, some impression is made upon an audience by a device which speechwriters employ to nauseate excess when they say,
who does not know this, or it is known to everybody.
They hear it as a shame to be ignorant and agrees with the speaker so as to have a share of the knowledge that everybody else possesses.
All the variations of our rhetorical style are capable of being used in the season or out of season.
The best way to counteract any exaggeration is the well-worn device by which the speaker puts in some criticism of himself.
For then, people feel it must be alright for him to talk that, since he certainly knows what he is doing.
Further, it is better not to have everything always just corresponding to everything else.
Your hearers will see through you less easily thus.
I mean, for instance, if your words are harsh, you should not extend this harshness to your voice and your continent, and have everything else in keeping.
If you do, the artificial character of each detail becomes apparent.
Whereas, if you adopt one device and not another, you are using art all the same and yet nobody notices it.
To be sure, if mild sentiments are expressed in harsh terms and harsh sentiments in mild terms, you become comparatively unconvincing.
Compound words, fairly plentiful epithets and strange words, best suit an emotional speech.
We forgive an angry man for talking about a wrong as heaven-high or colossal,
and we excuse such language when the speaker has his hearers already in his hands and has stirred them deeply, either by praise or blame or anger or affection.
As is Socrates, for instance, does at the end of his panagyric, with his name and fame and in that they brooked.
Men do speak in this vein when they are deeply stirred, and so once the audience is in a like-stated feeling, approval, of course, follows.
This is why such language is fitting in perfectly, which is an inspired thing.
This language, then, should be used either under stress and emotion or ironically after the manner of Gorgias and of the passages in the Pythagoras.
The form of a prose composition should be neither mexico nor destitute of rhythm.
The mexico form destroys the hearers' trust by its artificial appearance, and at the same time it diverts his attention, making him watch for mexico recurrences,
just as children catch up the heralds' questions, whom did the freedman choose as his advocate with the answer, Cleon?
On the other hand, unrhythmical language is too unlimited. We do not want the limitations in meter, but some limitation we must have, or the effect will be vague and unsatisfactory.
Now, it is number that limits all things, and it is the numerical limitation of the form of a composition that constitutes rhythm, of which meters are definite sections.
Prose, then, is to be rhythmical, but not mexico, or it will become not prose, but first. It should not even have too precise a prose rhythm, and therefore it should only be rhythmical to a certain extent.
Of the various rhythms, the heroic has dignity, but lacks the tones of the spoken language.
The iambic is the very language of ordinary people, so in common talk iambic lines occur oftener than any others, but in the speech we need dignity and the power of taking the hearer out of his ordinary self.
The trochee is too much akin to wild dancing. We can see this in tetramite verse, which is one of the trochaic rhythms.
There remains the pian, which speakers began to use in the time of tracimacrus, though there had been no name to give it. Tracimacrus of calcidon, the sophist of rhetorician.
The pian is a third class of rhythm, closely akin to both the two already mentioned. It has in it the ratio of three to two, whereas the other two kinds have the ratio of one to one and two to one respectively.
Between the two last ratios comes the ratio of one and a half to one, which is that of the pian.
Now, the other two kinds of rhythm must be rejected in writing prose, partly for the reasons given, and partly because they are too magical.
And the pian must be adopted, since from this alone of the rhythms mentioned, no definite meter arises, and therefore it is the least obtrusive of them.
A third and the same form of pian is employed at the beginning as at the end of sentences, whereas the end should differ from the beginning.
The two opposite kinds of pian, one of which is suitable to the beginning of a sentence, where it is indeed actually used.
This is the kind that begins with a long syllable and ends with three short ones, as Dallogenes, Aite Luchian, Odellosporn, Oris Prachant Lichia,
Baccholistai Berstres, and Kruciaku, Ekete Pae Dios, Golden-haired archer son of Zeus.
The other pian begins conversely with three short syllables and ends with a long one, as Metadegan, Udata, Toc, Aeanon, Ae, Fanice, Volks.
After Earth and its water, a night shuddered the ocean from sight.
This line and the two which previously did are by some regarded as fragments of the piens of Simonides.
This kind of pian makes a real close.
The short syllable can give no effective finality, and therefore makes the rhythm appear truncated.
A sentence should break off with a long syllable.
The fact that it is over should be indicated not by the scribe or by period mark in the margin, but by the rhythm itself.
We have now seen that our language must be rhythmical and not decorative of a rhythm, and what rhythms and what particular shape make itself.
The language of prose must be either free-running with its parts united by nothing except the connecting words, like the Pellus in Diteran,
or compact and antithetical, like the Stoes of the Old Perch.
The free-running style is the ancient one, for example, herein is set forth the inquiry of Herodotus Thothurian.
Herodotl intends to indicate the first complete sentence, or more than that.
Our manuscripts of Herodotus read Herodotus the Helicon Nastian.
Everyone used this method formally, not many do so now.
By free-running style, I mean the kind that has no natural stopping places and comes to a stop only because there's no more to say of that subject.
This style is unsatisfying just because it goes on indefinitely.
One always likes to cite a stopping place in front of one.
It is only at the go that men in a race paint and collapse.
While they see the end of the course before them, they can keep going.
Such, then, is the free-running kind of style.
The compact is that which is in periods.
By a period, I mean a portion of speech that has in itself a beginning and an end, being at the same time not too big to be taken in at a glance.
Language of this kind is satisfying and easy to follow.
It is satisfying because it is just the reverse of indefinite.
And, moreover, a hearer always feels that he has grasped being something and has reached some definite conclusion,
whereas it is unsatisfactory to see nothing in front of you and get nowhere.
It is easy to follow because it can easily be remembered.
And that's because language, when in periodic form, can be numbered.
A number is the easiest of all things to remember.
Number, that is, is recognized as consisting of a countable number of parts or divisions.
That is why verse, which is measured, is always more easily remembered than prose, which is not.
The measures of verse can be numbered.
The period must further not be completed until a sense is complete.
It must not be capable of breaking off abruptly.
It may happen with the following iambic lines of properties.
Caledon, soil is this.
Of pelops is land.
The smiling plain spaces across the strait.
According to the Stoliath, the line is a fragment from the Meliagra of Euripides.
By wrong division of the words, the hearer may take the meaning to be the reverse of what it is.
That is, by coming to an abrupt stop at the end of the first line and making no pause in its nibble.
For instance, in the passage quoted, one might imagine that Caledon is in the Peloponnesus.
A period may be either divided into several members or simple.
The period of several members is a portion of speech.
One, completing itself.
Two, divided into parts.
And three, easily delivered at a single breath.
As a whole, that is, not by fresh breath being taken at the division.
A member is one of the two parts of such a period.
By a simple period, I mean that which has only one member.
The members and the whole period should be neither curt nor law.
A member which is too short often makes the listener stumble.
He is still expecting the rhythm to go on to the limit his mind has fixed for it.
And if, meanwhile, he is pulled back by the speaker's stopping,
a shock is bound to make him such a big stumble.
If, on the other hand, you've gone too long, you make him feel left behind,
just as people who, when walking, pass beyond the boundary before turning back, leave their companions behind.
So, too, if a period is too long, you've turned it into a speech,
or something like a disirambic prelude.
Result is much like the preludes for democratures of Kyos,
geared at melanopages for writing instead of antistrophic stanzas.
Democratures of Kyos, a musician of the late fifth century,
melanopages of Melos, a poet of disirambes of the late fifth century.
He that sets traps for another man's feet,
is like to fall into them first,
and long-winded preludes do harm to us all,
but the preluder catches it worst.
Which applies likewise to long-membered orators,
that is, long-winded framers of long-membered periods.
Periods whose members are all together too short and not periods at all,
and the result is to bring the hearer down with a crash.
The periodic style, which is divided into members, is of two kinds.
It is either simply divided as in,
I have often wondered at the conveners of national gatherings
and the pandas of athletic contests.
This and all the following illustrations are taken from the Panagyricus of Isocrates.
Or it is antithetical, where in each of the two members,
one of the pair of opposites is put along with one of another pair.
Or the same word is used to bracket two opposites,
as they aided both parties, not only those who stayed behind,
but those who accompanied them.
For the latter, they acquired new territory larger than that at home,
and to the former, they left territory at home that was large enough.
Here, the contrasted words are staying behind and accompanying,
enough and larger.
So, in the example, both to those who want to get property
and to those who desire to enjoy it,
where enjoyment is contrasted with getting.
Again, it often happens in such enterprises that the wise men pale and the fool succeed.
They were awarded the prize of valor immediately
and won the command of the sea not long afterwards.
To sail through the mainland and march through the sea
by bridging a helispont and cutting through Athos.
Nature gave them their country and law took it away again.
Some of them perished in misery, others were saved in disgrace.
Athenian citizens keep foreigners in their houses as servants,
while the city of Athens allows her allies by thousands to live as the foreigners slaves
and to possess in life or to bequeath at death.
There is also what someone said about Pytholaus and Lycophron in a law court.
Pytholaus and Lycophron, after murder of their brother-in-law,
rulers of Peri, were defeated by Philip of Macedonia,
353 to 352 BC,
and thereafter became leaders of mercenaries,
placed circumstances in the speaker of the quotation are unknown.
These men used to sell you when they were at home,
and now they have come to you here and bought you.
All these passages have the structure described above.
Such a form of speech is satisfying because the significance of contrasted ideas is easily felt,
especially when they are both put side by side,
and also because it has the effect of a logical argument.
It is by putting two opposing conclusions side by side,
that you prove one of them false.
Such, then, is the nature of antithesis.
Parasosis is making the two members of a period equal in length.
Paramoiosis is making the extreme words of both members like each other.
This was happened either at the beginning or at the end of each member.
If at the beginning, the resemblance must always be between whole words,
at the end, between final syllables,
or inflections of the same word, or the same word repeated.
Thus, at the beginning,
agroncra eleben argon par autu,
and doretoy tepe lonto para retoy represin.
From the Iliad,
yet might they by presence be one,
and by pleadings be two.
From the Iliad,
yet might they by presence be one,
and by pleadings be pacified.
At the end,
uk o esesan auton paideon titok anai,
al autu aition gegon anai.
With uk, the meaning will be,
they didn't imagine that he had born a child,
but that he was the cause of its having been born,
presumably a humorous remark in a paternity case.
And,
and pleistice de frontici,
kai an alachristice elpitin,
in the midst of plenty of cares and exiduous hopes.
An example of inflections of the same word is,
axios de statenai calcus,
uk axios on calcu,
if he were to have a copper statue,
when he is not worth a copper.
Of the same word, repeated,
sut auton kai zonat elegez,
cacus kai nun grafais cacus,
when he was alive, you spoke evil of him,
and now you write evil of him,
of one syllable.
Did an epithet dainon,
aides argon,
would it have been very shocking to you,
if you had seen a man idling?
It is possible for the same sentence
to have all these features together.
Antiphasis, palisthenes,
and homoial teluton.
The possible beginnings of periods
have been pretty fully enumerated in the Teodectea.
There seems to be the rhetorical system
of Aristotle's friend Teodectes.
There are also spurious antiphasis,
that of Epicharmus.
There one time, aides their guest did stay,
and they were my hosts on another day.
This is from Epicharmus,
a Sicilian writer of comedies.
We may now consider the above points settled,
and pass on to say something about the way
to devise lively and ticking sayings.
Their actual invention can only come
from natural talent or long practice,
but this treatise may indicate the way it is done.
We may deal with them
in many kinds of terms.
We will begin by remarking
that we all naturally find agreeable
to get hold of new ideas easily.
Words express ideas,
and therefore those words are the most agreeable
that enable us to get hold of new ideas.
Now, strange words simply puzzle us.
Ordinary words can say only what we know already.
It is from metaphor that we can best
get hold of something fresh.
When the poet calls old age a wizard's stalk,
he conveys a new idea, a new fact to us,
by means of the general notion of lost bloom,
which is common to both things.
The similes of the poet do the same,
and therefore if their good simile
is given effective brilliance,
the simile, as has been said before,
is a metaphor differing from it,
only in the way it is put.
And just because it is longer,
it is less attractive.
Besides, it does not say outright that this
is that, and therefore the hearer
is less interested in the idea.
We see then that both speech and reasoning
are lively and proportionate
as they make a season new idea promptly.
For this reason, people are not much taken
either by obvious arguments,
using the word obvious to mean
what is playing to everybody
and needs no investigation,
nor by those which puzzle us
and we haven't stated,
but only by those which convey their information
to us as soon as we hear them,
or which the mind only just fails
to keep up with.
These two kinds do convey to us
a sort of information,
but the obvious and the obscure kinds
convey nothing,
either at once or later on.
It is these qualities then that,
so far as the meaning of what is said
is concerned, make an argument acceptable.
So far as the style is concerned,
it is the antithetical form
that appeals to us,
for example, judging that the piece
was a war upon their own private interests,
whether as an antithesis
between war and peace.
It is also good to use metaphorical words,
but the metaphors must not be far-petched
or they will be difficult to grasp,
nor obvious as they will have no effect.
The words too ought to set the scene
before our eyes,
for events ought to be seen in progress
rather than in prospect.
So we must aim at these three points,
antithesis, metaphor,
and epistemology.
Of the four kinds of metaphor,
the most picking is the proportional kind,
thus Pericles, for instance,
said that the vanishing from the country
of the young men who had fallen in the war
was as if the spring were taken out of the year.
Leptinus, speaking of the Lachodimonians,
said that he would not have the Athenians
let Greece lose one of her two eyes.
Leptinus was probably the opponent
of the Moslemies.
The metaphor may belong to the time
of the Lachodimonian embassy,
two Athens after the Lachodimonian
defeat at Lutra in 371 BC.
When Cares was personally believed
to be examined upon his share
in the Olympiac War,
Cephisodotus was indignant,
saying that he wanted his examinations
to take place while he had his fingers
on the people's throat.
Cares, with his mercenaries,
took command in the Olympian War,
on the people's throat,
that is, while he was still in command
of his mercenaries,
and so could coerce the people.
The same speaker once urged the Athenians
to march to Euboea
with Miltiades' decree as their ration,
with haste, without provisioning
and deliberation,
as Miltiades had prescribed
at the time of the first person invasion.
Epichlates, indignant at the truth
made by the Athenians with Epidaurus
on his keyboard,
said that they had scripted themselves
of their traveling money
for the journey of war.
Epichlates was the Athenian general.
Paitolaus called the state galley
the people's big stick
and cestos, the corn bin of the Piraeus.
Pericles embed his countrymen,
remove Aegeanus,
that I saw of the Piraeus,
and Moira Kles,
of the Piraeus,
said he was no more a rascal
than was a certain respectable citizen
he named,
whose rascality was worth
over 30% per annum to him
instead of a mere 10, like his own.
There's also the iambic line
of Alexandrides
about the way his daughters put off marrying.
My daughter's marriage bonds are overdue.
Alexandrides was a writer of the middle comedy.
Polyuctus,
a contemporary anti-Mathedonian orator,
said of a paralytic man named Spusipus
that he could not keep quiet
though fortune had fastened him
in the pillory of disease.
Kephysodotus,
called warship's painted millstones.
Diogenes the dog,
this is Diogenes of Sinope,
founder of the cynic school of philosophy,
called Taberns,
the messrooms of Attica.
Icyon,
who may have been a contemporary orator,
said that the Athenians
had emptied their town into Sicily.
This is a graphic metaphor.
Till all hell ash shouted aloud,
maybe regarded as a metaphor
and a graphic one again.
Kephysodotus,
bad the Athenians take care
not to hold too many parades.
Isocrates used the same word
of those who parade
at the national festivals.
Another example occurs
in the funeral speech.
It's uncertain which funeral speech
and whether the manuscripts are correct
in having Salamis.
It is fitting that Greece
should cut off her hair
beside the tomb of those who fell at Salamis
since her freedom and their valor
are buried in the same grave.
Even if the speaker here
only said that it was right to weep
when valor was being buried in their grave,
it would have been a metaphor
and a graphic one.
But the coupling of their valor
and her freedom presents
a kind of antithesis as well.
The course of my words,
said Ithicrates,
lies straight through the middle
of Cares's deeds.
This is a proportional metaphor
and the phrase straight through the middle
makes its graphic.
The expression,
from another,
is a graphic metaphor.
Lycolion said,
defending Chabrias,
they did not respect even that
bronze statue of his
that intercedes for him yonder.
Of Lycolion, nothing is known
but what can be gathered from this passage,
that he was an orator
who defended Chabrias,
the general in his trial,
366 BC.
This was a metaphor for the moment,
so it would not always apply.
A vivid metaphor, however,
Chabrias is in danger
and his statue intercedes for him,
that lifeless yet living thing
which records his services
to his country.
Practicing in every way
littleness of mind
is metaphorical for practicing
equality implies increasing it.
So it is,
God kindled our reason
to be a lamp within our souls.
For both reason and light
reveal things.
So is, we are not putting an end
to our wars but only postponing them.
For both literal postponement
and the making of such a piece
as this apply to future action.
So is such a saying as
this treaty is a far noble of trophies
and those we set up on fields of battle.
They celebrate small gains
and single successes.
It celebrates our triumph
and the war as a whole
for both trophy and treaty
are signs of victory.
So is, a country that pays
a heavy reckoning in being condemned
by the judgement of mankind
for a reckoning is damaged
deservedly incurred.
It has already been mentioned
that libel in it is God
by using a proportional type of metaphor
and by being graphic
that is making your hearers see things.
We have still to explain
things and what must be done
to effect this.
By making them see things
I mean using expressions that represent
things as in a state of activity.
About to say that a good man is poor
square is certainly a metaphor.
Both the good man and the square
are perfect.
But the metaphor does not suggest
activity.
On the other hand in the expression
with his vigor in full bloom
there is a notion of activity
and so in but you must roam
and in there at upspring
the helens to their feet
where upspring gives us activity
as well as metaphor
for what it once suggests
swissness.
So with Homer's common practice
of giving metaphorical life to
lifeless things all such passages
are distinguished by the effect
of activity they convey.
Thus, downward and on to the valley
rebounded the boulder remorseless
and the bicker arrow flew
and flying on eagerly
and stuck in the earth still panting
to feed on the flesh of the heroes
and the point of the spear in its
fury drove pulled through
his breast bones.
In all these examples the things
have the effect of being active
because they are made into living beings
shameless behavior and fury
and so on are all forms of activity
and the poet has attached these
ideas to the things by means
of proportional metaphors
as the stone is to Sisyphus
so is the shameless man to his victim
in his famous similes
too he treats inanimate things
in the same way curving
and crested with white
host following host without ceasing
the ocean waves rolling to the shore
here he represents everything
as moving and living and activity
is movement.
Metaphors must be drawn
as has been said already
from things that are related
to the original thing and yet
not obviously so related
just as in philosophy also
an acute mind will perceive resemblances
even in things far apart.
Thus Alquitas
a Pythagorean philosopher and mathematician
a friend of Plato
said that an arbitrator
were the same
since the Indians
fly to both for refuge
or you might say that an anchor
and an overhead hook were the same
since both are in a way the same
only the one secure things from below
and the other from above
and to speak of states as levels
is to identify two widely different things
the equality of a physical surface
and the equality of political powers
liveliness is specially conveyed
by metaphor
and by the further power
of surprising the hearer
because the hearer expected
something different
his acquisition of a new idea
impresses him all the more
his mind seems to say
yes to be sure
I never thought of that
the liveliness of epichromatic remarks
is due to the meaning not being
just what the words say
but to themselves on the ground
well constructed riddles
are attractive for the same reason
a new idea is conveyed
and there is a metaphorical expression
so with the novelties of Pair Doris
indeed the thought is stumbling
and as Pair Doris puts it
does not fit in with the ideas
you already have
they are like the burlesque words
of one finds in the comic writers
the effect is produced even by jokes
depending upon changes of the letters
the word
plays upon words that meant
hear and eight lines lower down
this too is a surprise
you find this in verse
as well as in prose
the word which comes is not
what the hearer imagined
but onward he came
and he speak to a shot with his
chilblanes
probably some number
less texameter poems
where one imagines the word
would be sandballs
and jokes made by offering
the letters of a word
consist in meaning
not just what you say
but something that gives a twist
to the word used
for example the remark of Pair Doris
about Nikon the harpist
Thrat-I-Sou
Eustration's Lady
where he pretends to mean
Thrat-I-Sou
you harp player
and surprise is absolutely fine
he means something else
but the remark will fall flat
unless you are aware
that Nikon is a Thrat-I-Sou
or again
you lie out on Thrat-I-Sou
you wish or do you wish
to persecute him
perhaps a prominent person
in both these cases
the saying must fit the fact
this is also true
of such lively remarks
as the one to the effect
that to the opinions
of the king of the sea
was not the beginning
of their troubles
since they gained by it
or the opposite one
of Isocrates
that their empire
was the beginning
of their troubles
either way the speaker
says something unexpected
the soundness of which is
there upon recognized
there would be nothing clever
and saying empire is empire
is a word with a new meaning
so too would the former saying
which denies that Ache
in one sense was Ache
in another sense
in all these jokes
whether a word is used
in a second sense or metaphorically
the joke is good if it fits the fact
for instance
Anathetos
proper name
where you say that
what is so and so in one sense
is not so and so in another
sense it fits the fact
again take
thou must not be a stranger
stranger than thou should
do not the word
thou must not be etc
amount to saying
stranger must not always be strange
here again it's the use of one word
in different senses
of the same kind also
is a much praised verse
of Anaxandrides
death is most fit
that would make death fit for you
this amount to saying
it is a fit thing to die
when you are not fit to die
or it is a fit thing to die
when death is not fit for you
that is when death is not a fit return
for what you are doing
the type of language employed
is the same in all these examples
but the more briefly and antithetically
such saying can be expressed
the more taking they are
for antithesis impresses
and brevity more quickly
they should always have
either some personal application
or some merit of expression
if they are to be true without
being commonplace
two requirements not always
satisfied simultaneously
thus a man should die
having done no wrong
is true but dull
the right man should marry
the right woman
is also true
but dull
as in it is fitting to die
when you are not fit for death
the more a saying has these qualities
the livelier it appears
if for instance it's wording is metaphorical
metaphorical in the right way
antithetical and balanced
and at the same time
it gives an idea of activity
successful similes also
has has been said above
are in a sense metaphors
since they always involve two relations
like the proportional metaphor
thus a shield we say
is the drinking bowl of ares
and a bow is the cordless liar
these are probably
phrases of the alchemist
a tragedian
a contemporary of Aristophanes
who mentions him with contempt
this way of putting a metaphor
is not simple
as it would be if we call the bow
a liar or the shield
a drinking bowl
as they say that a flute player
is like a monkey
or that a short-sighted man's eyes
are like a lamp flame
with water dropping on it
since both eyes and flame
keep winking
as similarly it seems that
when it is a converted metaphor
which is possible to say
that a shield is like
the drinking bowl of ares
or that a ruin is like
a house in rags
and to say that Nicaratus
was similarly made by Tratimus
when he saw Nicaratus
Nicaratus probably
the son of a famous opinion general
of the Peloponnesian war
had risked a contest
with a professional lapsibist
and had been beaten
the theme of the contest
may have been the story of Philoketes
one of the heroes who sailed to Troy
and who was bitten by a snake
Nicaratus
who had been beaten by Pattis
in a recitation competition
it is in these respects
that poets fail worst when they fail
and succeed best when they succeed
that is when they give the resemblance Patt
as in those legs of his curl
just like parsley leaves
and just like Philemon
struggling with his punch bowl
these are all similes
and that similes are metaphors
has been stated often already
proverbs again
are metaphors from one species to another
suppose for instance a man
to start some undertaking in hope of gain
and then to lose by it later on
here we have once more
the man of Carpathus
and his hair
says he
for both alike went through the said experience
it is now been explained fairly completely
how liveliness is secured
and why it has the effect it has
successful hyperbole
are also metaphors
for instance a man with a black eye
you would have thought he was a basket
of mulberries
here the black eye is compared to a mulberry
because of its color
the exaggeration lying in the quantity
of mulberries suggested
the phrase like so and so
may introduce a hyperbole
under the form of a simile
just like Philemon
struggling with his punch bowl
is equivalent to
you would have thought he was Philemon
struggling with his punch bowl
with his parsley leaves
is equivalent to his legs are so curly
that you would have thought
they were not legs but parsley leaves
hyperbole is of a young man to use
they show vehemence of character
and this is why angry people use them
more than other people
not though he gave me as much as the dust
or the sands of the sea
but her the daughter of Atreus's son
I never will marry
may not though she were fair
than Aphrodite the golden
then Athenae
the attic orators are particularly fond
of this method of speech
consequently it does not suit
an elderly speaker
it should be observed
that each kind of rhetoric
has its own appropriate style
the style of written prose
is not that of spoken oratory
nor are those of political
and forensic speaking the same
more strictly the oratory of debate
of the actual struggles
in the assembly
the combative, controversial style
both written and spoken
have to be known
to know the latter
to know how to speak good Greek
to know the former means
that you are not obliged
as otherwise you are
to hold your tongue
when you wish to communicate
something to the general public
the written style is the more finished
the spoken better admits
the kind that reflects emotion
hence actors look out for plays
written in the latter style
and poets for actors
competent for acting such plays
yet poets whose plays
are meant to be read
are read and circulated
Kailemon for instance
who is as finished
as a professional speech writer
and Likimius among the Dithirambic poets
compared with those of others
the features of professional writers
sound thin in actual context
those of the orators on the other hand
are good to hear spoken
but look amateurish enough
when they pass into the hands of a reader
this is just because they are so well suited
for an actual tussle
and therefore contain many dramatic touches
which being robbed of all dramatic rendering
fail to do their own proper work
and consequently look silly
thus strings of unconnected words
and constant repetitions of words
are very properly condemned in written speeches
but not in spoken speeches
because use them freely
for they have a dramatic effect
in this repetition there must be a variety of tone
paving the way as it were to dramatic effect
for example
this is the villain among you
who deceived you
who cheated you
who meant to betray you completely
this is the sort of thing that Kailemon
the actor used to do in the old man's madness
of Anax Andrides
whenever he spoke the words
Radamampus and Palamedes
and also in the prologue to the saint
whenever he pronounced the pronoun I
if one does not deliver such things cleverly
it becomes a case of the man who swallowed a poker
so too
with strings of unconnected words
for example I came to him
I met him
I besought him
he acted
not delivered with the same quality and picture voice
as though they had only one idea in them
they have the further peculiarity
of suggesting that a number of separate statements
have been made in the time usually occupied by one
just as the use of conjunctions
makes many statements into a single one
so the omission of conjunctions
acts in the reverse way
and makes a single one into many
it does make everything more important
for example
I came to him
I talked to him
I entreated him
what a lot of fact
but here I think
he paid no attention to anything I said
this is the effect which Homer seeks
when he writes
Niraeus likewise from Timae
three well-fashioned ships did bring
Niraeus the son of Aglaya
and Charaupus bright-faced king
Niraeus the cumbliest man
of all that
trillions strand
if many things are said about a man
his name must be mentioned many times
and therefore people think that
if his name is mentioned many times
many things have been said about him
so that Homer by means of this illusion
has made a great deal of Niraeus
though he has mentioned him only
in this one passage
and has preserved his memory
though he nowhere says a word
about him afterwards
now the style of our trip
that's the public assemblies
seen in painting
the bigger the song
the more distant is the point of view
so that in the one and the other
high finishing detail is superfluous
and seems better away
a forensic style is more highly finished
still more so is the style of language
addressed to a single judge
with whom there's very little room
for rhetorical artifices
since he can take the whole thing
in better and judge what is
to the point in what is not
the struggle is less intense
this is why the same speakers
do not distinguish themselves
in all these branches at once
high finish is wanted least
where dramatic delivery is wanted most
and here the speaker must have a good voice
and above all a strong one
it is ceremonial oratory
that is most literary
but it is meant to be read
and next to it forensic oratory
to analyze style still further
and add that it must be agreeable
or magnificent is useless
why should it have these traits
any more than restraint, liberality
or any other moral excellence
obviously agreeableness will be produced
by the qualities already mentioned
if our definition of excellence
or style has been correct
for what are the reasons
should style be clear
and not mean but appropriate
if it is prolix it is not clear
nor yet if it is curt
plainly the middle ways you expect
again style will be made agreeable
by the elements mentioned
namely by a good blending of ordinary
and unusual words
by the rhythm and by the persuasiveness
that springs from appropriateness
this includes our discussion of style
both in its general aspects
and in its special applications
to the various branches of rhetoric
we have now to deal with arrangement
a speech has two parts
you must state your case
and you must prove it
or prove it
without having first stated it
since any proof must be approved
of something
and the only use of a preliminary statement
is the proof that follows it
of these two parts
the first part is called the statement of the case
the second part the argument
just as we distinguish
between enunciation and demonstration
the current division is absurd
for narration surely is part
of a forensic speech only
how in a political speech
is it a sense
or a reply to a forensic opponent
or an epilogue in closely reasoned speeches
again introduction
comparison of conflicting arguments
and recapitulation are only found
in political speeches
when there is a struggle between two policies
they may occur then
so may even accusation and defense
often enough
but they form no essential part
of a political speech
even forensic speeches
do not always need epilogue
not for instance a short speech
nor one in which the factories
remember the effect of an epilogue
being always a reduction
in the apparent length
it follows then
the only necessary part of a speech
are the statement and the argument
these are the essential features of a speech
and it cannot in any case
have been more than introduction, statement,
argument and epilogue
refutation of the opponent
is part of the argument
of the opponent's case of your own
for that process is a magnifying
of your own case
and therefore a part of the arguments
since one who does this proves something
the introduction does nothing like this
nor does the epilogue
it merely reminds us of what has been said already
if we make such distinctions
we shall end
like Doros and his followers
by distinguishing narration
proper from post-narration
and pre-narration
refutation
but we all turn it to bring in a new name
if it indicates the real species
with distinct specific qualities
otherwise the practice is pointless
and silly
like the way Likimnius invented names
in his art of rhetoric
secundation,
divergation,
ramification
the introduction is the beginning of a speech
corresponding to the prologue in poetry
and the pellet would include music
they're all beginnings paving the way
as it were
for what is to follow
the musical pellet would resemble
the introduction to speeches of display
as flute players play first some brilliant passage
they know well
and then flip it on to the opening notes
of the piece itself
so in speeches of display
the writer should proceed in the same way
he should begin with what best takes his fancy
and then strike up his theme and lead into it
which is indeed what is always done
take as an example
the Helen of his Socrates
there's nothing in common between the heuristics
and Helen
and here
even if you travel far from your subject
it is sticking rather that there should be the sameness
in the entire speech
the usual subject for the introduction
to speeches of display
is some piece of praise or censure
thus Gorgas writes in his Olympic speech
you deserve widespread admiration
men of Greece
praising thus
those who started the festival gatherings
his Socrates
on the other hand
censures them for awarding distinctions
to fine athletes
but giving no prize for intellectual ability
or one may begin with a piece of advice
thus
we ought to honor good men
and so I myself am praising Aristides
or we ought to honor those who are unpopular
but not bad men
men whose good qualities have never been noticed
like Alexander
son of Priam
here they are to get advice
or we may begin as speakers during the law court
that is to say with appeals to the audience
to excuse us
of our speeches about something paradoxical
difficult or hackneyed
like Choyrila
in the lines
but now when allotment of all has been made
from the epic poem
persists on the Persian war by Choyrila Samos
the apology is for a theme as hackneyed
as the Persian war had become
introductions to speeches have displayed
and may be compared to some piece of praise
or censure
of advice to do or not to do something
or appeals to the audience
and you must choose
between making these preliminary passages
connected or disconnected with the speech
itself
introductions to forensic speeches
must be observed
have the same value as the prolox of dramas
and the introductions to epic poems
the dithirambic prelude resembling the
introduction to a speech of display
as
for thee and thy gift
and thy battle spoils
in prologues
and in epic poetry
a foretaste of the theme is given
intended to inform the heroes
of it in advance
instead of keeping their minds in suspense
anything vague puzzles them
so give them a grasp of the beginning
and they can hold fast to it
and follow the argument
so we find
sing a goddess of song
of the wrath
from the Iliad
tell me a muse of the hero
from the Odyssey
lead me to tell a new tale
how there came great war prayers to Europe
out of the asian land
possibly from Corillus
the tragic poet too
let us know the pivot of their play
if not of the outset like Euripides
at least somewhere in the preface to a speech
like Sophocles
Polybos was my father
and so in comedy
this then is the most essential function
and distinctive property of the introduction
to show what the aim of the speech is
and therefore no introduction ought to be employed
whether subject is not long or intricate
the other kinds of introduction employed
are a medial in purpose
and may be used in any type of speech
whether the speaker, the hearer, the subject
or the speaker's opponent
those concerned with the speaker himself
or with his opponent
are directed to removing or exciting prejudice
but whereas the dependent will begin
by dealing with this sort of thing
the prosecutor will take quite another line
and deal with such matters
in the closing part of his speech
the reason for this is not power to seek
the defendant when he is going to bring himself
on the stage
must clear away any obstacles
but if you are to excite prejudice
you must do so at the close
so that the judges may more easily remember
what you have said
the appeal to the hearer
aims at securing his goodwill
or at arising his resentment
or sometimes at gaining his serious attention
to the case
or even at distracting it
for gaining it is not always an advantage
and speakers will often for that reason
try to make him laugh
you may use any means you choose
to make your hearer receptive
to the good impression of your character
which always helps to secure his attention
he will be ready to attend to anything
that touches himself
and to anything that is important
surprising or agreeable
and you should accordingly convey to him
the impression that what you have to say
is of this nature
if you wish to distract his attention
you should imply that the subject
does not affect him or is trivial
or disagreeable
but observe always has nothing to do
with the speech itself
but to listen to what is beside the point
where this tendency is absent
no introduction is wanted
beyond the summary statement of your subject
to put a sort of head on the main body
of your speech
moreover calls for attention
when required
may come equally well in any part of a speech
in fact the beginning of it
is just where there is least slackness
of interest
it is therefore ridiculous to put this kind
of thing at the beginning
of your subject
choose therefore any point in the speech
where such an appeal is needed
and then say
now I beg you to note this point
it concerns you quite as much as myself
or
I will tell you that
who is like you have never yet
heard for terror or for wonder
this is what
prodigal is called
slipping in a bit of the 50 drachma
show lecture for the audience
whenever they began to nod
they would explain a softest
contemporary of Socrates
on his 50 drachma show lecture
the plato craftius
it is plain that such introductions
are addressed
not to ideal hearers
but to hearers as we find them
the use of introductions
to excite prejudice
or to dispel misgivings is universal
my lord I will not say that equally
from the antigony by Socrates
or
why all this preface
from Euripides
Ipigenia in Taurus
introductions are popular with those
whose case is weak
or looks weak
it pays them to dwell on anything
rather than the actual fact of it
that is why Slav instead of answering
the questions put to them
make indirect replies with long preambles
the means of exciting in your hearers
goodwill and various other feelings
of the same kind
the poet finally says
may I find in pyection hearts
at my coming
goodwill and compassion
and these are the two things
we should aim at
in speeches of display
we must make the hearer feel
that the eulogy includes either himself
or his family
or his way of life
or something or other of that kind
but it is true as Socrates says
in the funeral speech
of the Athenians and Athens
but it is Sparta
the introductions of political archery
will be made out of the same materials
as those of the forensic kind
though the nature of political archery
makes them very rare
the subject is known already
and therefore the facts of the case
need no introduction
but you may have to say something
on account of yourself or your opponents
or those presents may be in kind
to treat the matter either more
or less seriously than you wish them to
or to make the matter under discussion
seem more or less important than before
for either of which purposes
you will want an introduction
you may also want one to add elegance
to your remarks
feeling that otherwise
they will have a casual air
like got a gas eulogy of the aleans
in which without any preliminary
sparring or fencing
he begins straight off with
happy city of Alice
in dealing with prejudice
and it is that whereby you can
dispel objectionable suppositions
about yourself
it makes no practical difference
whether such a supposition has been
put into words or not
so that this distinction may be ignored
another way is to meet any of the issues
directly to deny the alleged fact
or to say that you have done no harm
or none to him
or not as much as he says
or that you have done him
no injustice or not much
or that you have done nothing
disgraceful enough to matter
these are the sorts of questions
on which the dispute hinges
thus, if he crates
for applying to Nancy Crates
admitted that he had done the deed alleged
and that he had done Nancy Crates harm
but not that he had done him wrong
or you may admit the wrong
but balance it with other facts
and say that if the deed harmed him
at any rate it was honourable
or that if it gave him pain
at least it did him good
or something else like that
another way to allege that your action
was due to mistake or bad luck
or necessity
as Sophocles said he was not trembling
as his traducer maintained
in order to make people think
he was an old man
but because he could not help it
he would rather not be 80 years old
this is not Sophocles the Tragedian
but an Athenian sex and orator
of the time of the Peloponnesian war
he was one of the 30 tyrants
you may balance your motives
against your actual deed
saying for instance that you did not
mean to injure him
but to do so and so
that you did not do what you are
falsely charged with doing the damage
while accidental
I should indeed be a detestable person
if I had deliberately intended this result
another way is open
when your columniator
or any of his connections
is or has been subject to the same
grounds for suspicion
yet another
when others are subject to the same
grounds for suspicion
but are admitted to be in fact innocent
of the charge
for example you must I be a proper good
because I am well groomed
then so and so must be one too
another
if other people have been
columniated by the same man
or someone else
or without being columniated
have been suspected
and say it is monstrous
to trust a man's statements
when you cannot trust a man himself
another is when the question
has been already decided
so with euripides it is replied
to Higgy Einon
who in the action
from exchange of properties
accused him of impiety
and having written a line
encouraging perjury
my tongue has thorn
no oath is on my soul
the opponent himself was guilty
in bringing into the law court
cases whose decision belongs
to the Dionysiac Contest
if I have not already answered
for my words there
I am ready to do so
if you choose to prosecute me there
another method
is to denounce calamity
showing what an enormity it is
and in particular
that it raises false issues
and that it means
peace
the argument from evidential circumstances
is available for both parties
thus in the Tuca
Odysseus says that Tuca
is closely bound to Priam
since his mother Hacionae
was Priam's sister
Tuca replies that Telemon
his father was Priam's enemy
and that he himself did not
betray the spies to Priam
another method suitable
for the columniator
is to pray some trifling
in Christchurch
or after mentioning
a number of good qualities
to attack one bad one
that really bears on the questions
this is a method
of thoroughly skillful
and unscrupulous prosecutors
by mixing up the man's merits
is what is bad
they do their best
to make use of them to damage him
there is another method
open to both columniator
and apologist
but one might argue
that Diomedes chose Odysseus
as his companion
because he is supposed to Odysseus
to be the best man for the purpose
and you might reply to this
that it was on the contrary
because he was the only hero
so worthless that Diomedes
need not fear his rivalry
we may now pass from the subject
of columni to that of narration
narration in ceremonial oratory
is not continuous but intermittent
there must of course
be some survey of the actions
that form the subject matter
of the speech
the speech is a composition
containing two parts
one of these is not provided
by the orator's art
this the actions themselves
of which the orator is in no sense
author
the other part is provided by his art
namely the proof where proof is needed
that the actions were done
the description of their quality
and the reason why sometimes
it is not desirable to make
the whole narrative continuous
is that the case thus expanded
is hard to keep in mind
show therefore from one set
of facts that your hero is
for example brave
and from other sets of facts
that he is able just etc
a speech thus arranged
is comparatively simple
instead of being complicated
and elaborate
you will have to recall well known
narration of them
non for instance
if your object is the praise of Achilles
we all know the fact that his life
what you have to do
is to apply those facts
but if your object is the praise
of Pritius
you must narrate his deeds
which not many people know of
probably the Pritius
who was one of the 30 talents
and was a famous man in his day
nowadays it is said absurdly enough
that the narration should be rapid
or what the man said to the baker
who asked whether he was to make
the cake hard or soft
what can't you make it right
just so here
we are not to make long narrations
just as we are not to make long
introductions or long arguments
here again rightness does not
consist either in rapidity
or in conciseness
but in a happy mean
that is in saying just so much
as we will make the facts plain
or lead the hero to believe
or wrong to someone
or that the facts are really as important
as you wish them to be thought
or the opposite facts
to establish the opposite arguments
you may also narrate as you go
anything that does credit yourself
for example
I kept telling him to do his duty
and not abandon his children
or discredit your adversary
for example
but he answered me that
wherever he might find himself
there he would find other children
slipping anything else
that the judges will enjoy
the defendant will make less of a narration
he has to maintain that the thing
has not happened
or did no harm
or was not unjust or not so bad
as is alleged
he must therefore not waste time
about what is admitted fact
unless he bears on his own contention
for example that the thing was done
but was not wrong
further we must speak of events
or indignation
by being represented as present
the story told to Alkenos
is an example of a brief chronicle
when it is repeated
Penelope in 60 lines
another instance is the epic cycle
as treated by Phidelus
and the prologue to the Onius
the narration should depict character
to which end you must know
what makes it do so
one such thing is the indication
of moral purpose
the quality of purpose indicated
determines the quality of character depicted
and is itself determined
by the end pursued
but it is that mathematical discourses
depict no character
they have nothing to do with moral purpose
for they represent nobody
in pursuing any end
on the other hand
the Socratic dialogues do depict character
being concerned with moral question
this end will also be gained
by describing the manifestations
of character
for example, he kept walking along
as he talked
which shows the man's recklessness
and rough manners
do not let your words seem inspired
so much by intelligence
in the manner now current
as by moral purpose
for example, I willed this
I, it was my moral purpose
true, I gained nothing by it
still it is better but
for the other way shows good sense
but this shows good character
which is useful
and good character after what is noble
where any detail may appear incredible
then add cause of it
of this, Sophocles provides an example
in the Antigone
where Antigone says she had cared more
for her brother than for husband or children
since if the latter perished
they might be replaced
but since my father and mother
in their graves lie dead
no brother can be born to me
if you have no such cause
or wish to suggest
just say that you are aware
that no one will believe your words
but the fact remains that such is your nature
however hard the world may find it to believe
that a man deliberately does anything
except what pays him
again, you must make use
of the emotions
relate the familiar manifestations
of them
and those that distinguish yourself
and your opponent
for instance
he went away scowling at me
and I teal his eyes
hissing with fury
and shaking his fists
these details carry conviction
the audience takes the truth of what they know
is so much evidence for the truth of what they do not
plenty of such details may be found in Homer
thus did she say
but the old woman buried her face in her hand
a true touch
people beginning to cry
do put their hands over their eyes
bring yourself on the stage
from the first in the right character
people may regard you in that light
and the same with your adversary
but do not let them see what you are about
how easily such impressions may be conveyed
we can see from the way in which we get
some inking of things we know nothing of
by the mere look of the messenger
bringing news of them
have some narrative in many different parts
of your speech
and sometimes let there be none at the beginning of it
in political architecture
there is a little opening for narration
nobody can narrate what has not yet happened
there is narration at all
it will be a past event
the recollection of which is to help the hearers
to make better plans for the future
audible hopes you haven't
the hearer to believe that the thing has happened
or that the man has caused injury
or wronged someone
or that the facts are really as important
as you wish them to be thought
or the opposite facts
to establish the opposite arguments
you may also narrate as you go
anything that does credit yourself
for example
I kept telling him to do his duty
and not abandon his children
or discredit your adversary for example
but he answered me that
wherever he might find himself
there he would find other children
the answer Herodotus records
of the Egyptian mutineers
slipping anything else that the judges will enjoy
the defendant will make less of a narration
he has to maintain that the thing has not happened
or did no harm
or was not unjust
he must therefore not waste time
about what is admitted fact
unless he bears on his own contention
for example that the thing was done
but was not wrong
further we must speak of events as past and gone
except where they excite pity
or indignation
by being represented as present
the story told to Alcinus
is an example of a brief chronicle
when it is repeated to Penelope
in 60 lines
another instance is the epic cycle
as treated by Phyllis
and the prologue to the Onius
the narration should depict character
to which end you must know
what makes it do so
one such thing is the indication
of moral purpose
the quality of purpose indicated
determines the quality of character depicted
and is itself determined
by the end pursued
that it is that mathematical discourse
is depict no character
they have nothing to do with moral purpose
for they represent nobody
is pursuing any end
on the other hand
the Socratic dialogues do depict character
being concerned with moral question
this end will also be gained
by describing the manifestations
of various types of character
for example he kept walking along
as he talked
which shows the man's recklessness
and rough manners
do not let your words seem inspired
so much by intelligence
in the manner now current
for example I willed this
I it was my moral purpose
true I gained nothing by it
still it is better but
for the other way shows good sense
but this shows good character
good sense making us go after
what is useful
and good character after what is noble
where any detail may appear incredible
then add cause of it
of this Sophocles provides an example
in the Antigone
where Antigone says she had cared more
for her brother than for husband
or children
since if the latter perished
they might be replaced
but since my father and mother
in their graves lie dead
no brother can be born to me
if you have no such cause to suggest
just say that you are aware
that no one will believe your words
but the fact remains that such is your nature
however hard the world may find it
to believe that a man deliberately
does anything except what pays him
again you must make use of the emotions
relate the familiar manifestations
of them
and those that distinguish yourself
and your opponent
for instance
he went away scowling at me
so I skin it described
as his singing with fury
and shaking his fist
the details carry conviction
the audience takes the truth
of what they know
there is so much evidence
here that may be found in Homer
thus did she say
but the old woman bathed her face in her hand
a true touch
people beginning to cry do put their hands
over their eyes
bring yourself on the stage
from the first in the right character
that people may regard you in that light
and the same with your adversary
but do not let them see what you are about
how easily such impressions may be conveyed
we can see from the way in which
we get some inkling of things
by the mere look of the messenger
bringing news of them
have some narrative in many different parts
of your speech
and sometimes let there be none
at the beginning of it
in political architecture
there is a little opening for narration
nobody can narrate
what has not yet happened
if there is narration at all
it will be a past event
the recollection of which is to help the hearers
to make better plans for the future
audible hopes you have enjoyed this program
