I would like to offer you today a broader definition of human intelligence, one that
I think takes into account the whole person, both our deepest challenges as well as our
most profound strengths.
I believe our standard model of intelligence is systematically letting far too many kids
fall between the cracks in an educational system that has such limited notions of human potential.
Let me share with you two school evaluations that I think do a nice job illustrating this
point.
So this one is a middle school assessment about a quiet but friendly and hard working
young man who is enrolled in a small private academy.
Depending on the subject he works at a variety of different grade levels.
His teachers report he is a willing participant in every facet of school and becomes fervent,
even obsessive about activities of particular interest.
Showing superior grasp of academic concepts in his homework, class discussions and projects,
he occasionally suggests alternatives to teacher directed assignments so that he can demonstrate
his comprehension and skill.
As a result, his relationships with peers, older students with mutual interests and adults
continue to improve.
Okay, now I want to show you another school evaluation about an eight-year-old boy who
was referred to a neurologist.
According to this neurologist, information provided by mother and observations in the
office setting indicate that difficulties displayed have a multi-factorial basis, including
attention deficit hyperactive disorder, mild oppositional defiant disorder, generalized anxiety
disorder, and mild unevenness in skill development.
Now, I want to ask you all a question.
Raise your hand if you thought I was talking about two completely different children.
So I see some hands here.
I mean, would it surprise anyone in this room to know that this was actually the same kid,
Blaine, at different points in this kid's life, one when he was eight years old and one in
middle school?
Do you think, just looking at this report, by the way, these are the recommendations
of this kid.
We have a whole bunch of things, including counseling, medication, social interventions,
behavioral management.
Is there anything in this evaluation that would have allowed you to predict this kid?
I want you to think about that for a second.
In recent years, a number of very thoughtful educators, clinicians, psychologists, and parents
have identified the unique needs and learning styles of a particular classification of students
called the twice-exceptional student.
So I want to tell you today about these twice-exceptional students.
What you find is that twice-exceptional students simultaneously have exemplary strengths as
well as extraordinary challenges.
So you may see the child could have difficulty with written expression, high anxiety, could
become easily frustrated, difficulty with social interactions, uneven academic performance,
while also having a rich vocabulary, being resourceful, being curious, imaginative, creative,
having a special talent or interest, all in a single package.
Now, it's estimated there are about 300,000 of these kids in this country, but I think
that's a gross underestimate for a number of reasons.
For one, I don't think we fully realize that a lot of these challenges can be strengths
in the right context, but I also think we have a really narrow notion of strengths to
begin with.
So I think in order to really find out how many of these kids are falling through the
cracks and really get the best out of these students, I think we need to take into account
a 4C model.
So we need to take into account capacity, competence, commitment, and creativity.
Importantly, they're not all the same thing.
You often, you do sometimes see them all in the same package, but I think it's really
important to differentiate them from each other.
So first of all, what is the difference between capacity and competence?
Well, here's a chart of so-called one of our biggest metrics of potential, IQ, the IQ test.
Most of you have heard of the IQ test.
It's supposed to forecast your ability to achieve academically on actual competence tests
of standardized achievement.
And what you see here is, yeah, it's true, IQ does correlate with standardized achievement.
I'm not saying that IQ is a useless measure of potential in academics, but what you see
here is that about 50% of individuals are underperforming based on their predicted measure
of potential, and often unrecognized, 50% are overperforming based on their predicted
measure of human potential.
That often is not made nearly as much.
We need to leave much more room in our models in school for children to surprise us.
Something is clearly not complete here in our understanding of human intelligence.
But if we just stop there, there's obviously more to getting out of seeing possibility
in children than just their academic performance, their capacity, or even their competence.
We also have commitments.
You see kids in special education have so many commitments, so much values.
They have so many values and passions for special interest areas, for things that they're
from making the world a better place.
I think something is deeply followed with an education system where if a child comes
to you and says, look, I'd really like resources to end violence or end bullying or to develop
my musical talents, et cetera, et cetera, that we say, hold on, we have to measure your IQ
or measure your, look at your standardized test to see whether or not you score above
a certain threshold in order to make the world a better place.
I think something is deeply followed with a system where we don't just immediately say,
great, how can we help you get there?
And in addition to commitment, I also see creativity as extraordinarily important.
You find that creativity often comes in the most unexpected packages.
So you see these kids right here, these happy, engaged group of kids.
Well, these are kids on the autism spectrum.
Now, according to a lot of popular notions of autism, they're not capable of deep social
interactions and bonding.
But what do you find when you actually work with kids in the autism spectrum is that they
crave connection, they deeply crave connection.
And my colleague Matt Lerner has been designing these improv exercises that puts them in this
kind of situation where they can be funny with each other, where they can really bond
with each other in neat, fun ways, and finds that instead of the social awkwardness that
a lot of people, a lot of what may be referred to as neurotypical people would call social
awkwardness among people in the autism spectrum, actually it's completely reframed as social
creativity in this context.
And they are genuinely creative in this context.
I don't know about you, but I would much rather be called socially creative than socially
awkward and at least have that framing.
So I really do believe we need a new theory of human intelligence.
One that is more holistic and takes into account a child's passions, personal goals,
as well as their ability level.
Because the more that we engage and are motivated to achieve, the more that increases our actual
ability.
And the more the ability achieves, it then becomes an upward spiral where then our engagement
is greater as well.
And the most important, once it's connected to a personal passion or dream, then we can
start to realize a real possibility we have.
Now I'd be remiss if I didn't tell you that this is deeply personal for me.
When I was a child, I was diagnosed with a learning disability called central auditory
processing disorder.
It made it very difficult for me to process information in real time.
And I was held back in third grade as a result.
A lot of the kids and teachers thought they took my slowness as an indicator of being
stupid.
And I was kept in special education until ninth grade when a teacher took me aside and
she said, you know, I see you.
I see your frustration.
Why are you still here?
And she inspired me.
I realized I had no good answer to that question.
And she inspired me to see what I was possibly, what was I capable of?
My capability exceed my capacity that everyone was telling me.
And so I took myself out of special education and I signed up for lots of classes.
I joined the school orchestra, I joined the choir.
By my senior year, most of my friends were in gifted education and I wanted to be in
gifted education.
I went to the school psychologist and I said, you know, I would love to my senior year be
in gifted education.
And he said, well, you look gifted, you know.
That's good.
Good start.
I told him I'm getting straight A's, I'm getting straight A's in all my classes.
That sounds gifted as well.
But I had to see if you're actually gifted.
I need to look at your IQ score when you're age 11.
So he pulled out my test, my scored age 11, which turned out that my measured IQ at age
11, I've never revealed this in a talk, was borderline mentally, intellectually impaired.
And he said, and he took out a bell curve and he said, look, up here on the right, these
are the kids who are in your gifted class.
These are all your friends, basically, you know, to the left here, about in the center
is about average.
And he moved to the left of the bell curve and said, this is you.
I'm sorry, you don't qualify for gifted education.
I was so upset and shy at that moment.
And I just remember thinking to myself, gosh, at what point can my, is my achievement allowed
to trump my potential?
When I'm actually doing it, at what point can that trump what was measured as my potential?
I knew at that moment that I wanted to do something to change the system.
And I applied to Carnegie Mellon University and put in a personal statement.
And I said, look, I really want to change our metrics of human potential.
And I think far too many people are falling between the cracks in terms of our standard
models.
And they rejected me to Carnegie Mellon.
They said, sorry, your SAT scores are not high enough to redefine intelligence.
Again, again, I was rejected because they were looking at my SAT scores potential over
what I was trying to show them right in front of their face.
So I looked at the different departments at Carnegie Mellon to see which ones don't look
at SAT scores.
And I found the opera department.
I went in the following week, did not tell the opera department I was already rejected
by their university.
And I said, hi, I just love opera and I'd like to audition.
And I sang stars from Les Miserables, sang my heart out, and they accepted me on a partial
scholarship to Carnegie Mellon University for my singing ability.
Apparently, the departments don't talk to each other very much.
I was just rejected.
Once I got to Carnegie Mellon, I should say it's a lovely department, no disrespect,
but I endured a full semester of dance classes and ballet and acting classes.
I'm a terrible actor.
Singing classes, not a bad, not a terrible singer.
And I went in second semester freshman year to the psychology department at Carnegie Mellon,
my heart beating so fast, trying to pretend I hadn't been planning this my whole life.
And I walked into the department and the secretary was there eating a bologna sandwich.
And I said, hey, I just took a course in psychology.
I loved it.
Do you think maybe I could be a minor in psychology?
It's called foot in the door technique.
You start small and work up.
And she's like, whatever, no one's ever been this excited to be a minor in psychology
at Carnegie Mellon.
The thing that she's like, just sign this paper.
And I remember as I was skipping back in my tights because I'd just come from dance class that day,
I remember thinking to myself with this paper in my hand, my gosh, this is all it came down to in life,
was finding a way to sign the paper, to get to that space where there was high expectations for everyone,
where everyone just saw a different aspect of me.
And there was no question.
All she wanted to do was finish her bologna sandwich.
She didn't ask to say, well, I'm sorry, let me see, what are your SAT scores?
Or sit down and let me have you take an IQ test.
No, I was there.
I had figured a strategy through my commitment and creativity to get there.
And once I was there, it didn't matter anymore what my potential was.
So following semester, I went back to the same secretary.
I think somehow she was still eating the same bologna sandwich.
I don't know how that's possible.
But I said, look, I would like to be a major in psychology.
I took another course, and it was just even better than the first.
Who knew this department would have such a good psychology department?
And she said, fine, just sign these two pieces of paper and you can have whatever you want.
So I changed my major to psychology, and then working my way up,
I graduated Phi Beta Kappa, straight A's, Carnegie Mellon,
got accepted to Yale University for a PhD program.
Well, thank you.
Thank you.
And in 2009, I actually did graduate from Yale with a PhD,
and my dissertation was a new theory of human intelligence.
So now I've seen through personal experience as well as lots and lots of research,
just how many kids really are falling between the cracks.
I think that if we're ever going to get the best out of students,
we need to really understand this coexistence of ability and disability,
not treat them as opposites, not have gifted education here
and special education here and set up this false dichotomy in our school system
that we only have these two binary characters, these two binary categories.
I think in order to really see the true possibilities in all students,
we need to have a theory of intelligence that is holistic
and really takes into account and appreciates the whole person.
Thank you so much.
