Thank you.
So today we're here to talk about change and we've heard lots of examples of really good change.
And some examples of change that are less good.
Now of course what we want to do is when we see change happening is that we want to be able to control it.
And often we don't really know how to do that.
So I'd like to give you three examples of systems that are currently changing
where we would like to be able to control that change.
That is not what I expected it to be.
So whose talk is this?
Ah, there we are. Cool.
So this is my first example of change that is currently happening.
There are about 36 million people globally that are suffering from Alzheimer's disease.
And the World Health Organization predicts a tripling of this number until the year 2050.
The second example is the world's honey bee population.
It's decreasing by about 20% each year.
And the economic value of natural pollination is estimated to be $265 billion.
And that is not even to mention the ecological value of natural pollination.
The third example is the financial crisis that happened in 2008.
That cost us over the course of three years 2.6 trillion US dollars.
Now what do brains, bees and bankers have in common?
These are all complex systems.
And complex systems usually are very robust.
You know, your head can tolerate being hit by a football and it's fine.
A beehive can tolerate a harsh winter and it doesn't matter too much.
And the economy can tolerate booms and busts, that's part of it.
So what is it that makes complex systems that usually are very robust
fail so spectacularly when they do fail?
That's what I wanted to know.
So I got interested in complex systems when I did my PhD in physics.
And I was thinking of what to do next, what to do with my career.
And at that point I remembered a book that I had received many years before.
It was a book about complex systems.
And it talked about a place in Santa Fe in the United States
that studied complex systems.
Brains, bees, bankers.
And that seemed like an invitation to go there and understand how things work.
How does the world work?
So I decided to go to Santa Fe and do a postdoc in complex systems.
And a few years later I joined the faculty of the School of Mathematics in Bristol.
And I was approached by a colleague, a philosopher of science, James Ladyman.
And he asked me the question, so what is a complex system?
And I realized that in all these years of studying complex systems
I had not come across a satisfying answer to that question.
So James and I decided we would try to find an answer.
Now the first thing that we noticed about all these systems that I've just shown you
is that they consist of many elements that are interacting
and forming an emergent behavior.
So what do I mean by that?
Take the human brain.
The human brain consists of about 100 billion neurons.
Now that is many elements.
They're interacting and they're forming thoughts and feelings and language.
That is the emergent behavior.
A healthy human brain loses about 9,000 neurons each day.
And we don't even notice it.
So it's a very robust piece of matter that generates emergent behavior.
What about a beehive?
A healthy honey beehive consists of between 20 and 70,000 bees.
Now these bees are interacting, they're talking to each other,
they're foraging, they're building nest sites.
That is the emergent behavior of a beehive.
If I were to take out a few hundred of these workers of the beehive,
the beehive would simply continue to function,
because other bees are taking over the tasks of the bees that I just took out.
And in a healthy hive you can even take out the queen,
and the hive will simply breed a new queen.
So complex systems are consisting of these many elements
that very robustly give you an emergent behavior.
Now this begs the question, is that enough?
If I have something that consists of many elements
that forms an emergent behavior,
is that enough for it to be a complex system?
So let's look at a watch.
A mechanical watch, we've all seen it.
And there are many elements inside,
it's the cogs and wheels inside that are interacting,
and then are forming an emergent behavior,
which is a watch tells time.
While an individual element inside of the watch does not tell time.
But if I were to take out just a single wheel out of that watch,
the watch would immediately stop working.
So it is not as robust as the other systems we looked at.
So a watch is not a complex system.
Now the second thing we noticed about all of these systems
is that they all contain order,
as well as disorder inside of them at the same time.
And what do I mean by that?
If we take a honeybee hive,
now looking at an infrared image of a honeybee hive,
what we see is that at the core of the hive,
the temperature is at a constant 34 degrees Celsius.
And this temperature is only ever deviating by a max 2 degrees Celsius.
So it's an incredibly robust feature of a hive.
So this constant feature inside of the hive is what I call order.
What is disorder in a hive?
Well, we all know because we've looked at it
and it looks incredibly disordered when you look at a hive.
So at some level we have a disorder behaviour
and at another level we have a very ordered behaviour.
Now how do the bees manage to regulate the temperature to this precise degree?
In order to understand that we need to understand what bees do
in order to regulate the temperature.
What do they do?
A single bee senses the temperature around itself
and if it seems not warm enough it starts flapping its wings
and it starts moving about a bit.
And then it sees if that goes in the right direction
and if it's warm enough it will stop.
And all the other bees are doing the same thing.
But the thing is they don't do that in a very regular way.
They try something out and if it works they keep doing it.
If it doesn't work they do something else.
So we have a disorder behaviour at the bottom level of this complex system
and this disorder behaviour through interaction
leads to a very ordered state at this higher level.
So we have a disordered behaviour that through interaction
leads to an ordered state.
That is a hallmark of a complex system.
Now what does that mean for complex systems to fail?
If these are very robust systems what does it take
for a complex system to fail?
So if we think of the brain again
a human brain loses about 9000 neurons a day in a healthy state
but a human brain that suffers from Alzheimer's disease
loses about half of its neurons.
Now that is billions.
So somewhere in between it crosses the line
from being healthy to being unhealthy.
What about order and disorder?
What is order in the brain?
Order in the brain is neurons firing in a synchronous way.
When neurons do that that is basically a thought,
that is a feeling, synchronous firing of neurons.
But when there are too many neurons firing at the same time
there is too much order
then that can lead to an epileptic seizure
and that is an unhealthy state of the brain.
So somewhere there is a good balance between order and disorder
for a complex system to function well.
In order for us to know how many is many
and how much order and disorder is good
what we need is mathematical tools.
And there is a particular mathematical method
that I got very interested in.
And it's inside something that you probably all have in your pockets.
We heard about it before.
It's your mobile phone.
Your mobile phone is based on a mathematics of information.
Now the mathematics of information was invented in the 1940s.
So what was the situation in the 1940s?
There was Churchill sitting in London
needing to talk to Roosevelt in Washington.
And all that had to go was a very noisy phone line
that went from London through the Atlantic Ocean to Washington.
Now this very noisy phone line
made the American engineer Claude Shannon wonder about
how noisy can this phone line be
for these two people to still be able to communicate reliably.
And so Claude Shannon pretty much single-handedly invented
the mathematics of information and communication.
And in particular he invented a mathematical function
which he called the entropy function.
And this function is designed to measure disorder, noise in communication.
And all the algorithms inside of your phone
are all based on this function.
So they make sure that when you talk into your phone
your voice gets through fine at the other end.
So this function is perfectly designed to measure order and disorder.
Now the cool thing about this function is
that you can measure order and disorder in speech
or you can measure order and disorder in normal firing patterns
in animal movements, stock market prices.
This is what we can do, what we can take
to characterise complex systems.
So how does that work in practice?
A few years ago a colleague of mine, Paddy Royal and I
we looked at glassy materials.
A glassy material, a glass.
We all know that when you heat up a glass
it starts to become liquid.
You can bring it into shape and you cool it down again
and it will retain its shape.
The puzzling thing was for decades for scientists the following.
You take the liquid glass and the solid glass
and you bring them under the microscope
and you look at them and you will not be able to tell the difference.
They both look equally disordered.
But clearly there's a huge difference between them.
One you can take and drink wine out of,
and the other one you can't.
So Paddy and I designed a mathematical tool
based on the entropy function
that we then applied to videos of these two materials under the microscope.
And we were able to distinguish the solid form of the glass
from the liquid form by measuring the amount of order that it takes
for the liquid to become solid.
So there we actually could find an answer
to different behaviours of a complex system using information theory.
Now here's a very different example of a complex system
where mathematical tools helped.
We've probably all heard of the fatal incident
that happened again this year in Mecca
where several hundred people were trampled to death during the pilgrimage.
Now this is not the first time this happened
and so in 2007 the Saudi Arabian government
asked complex system scientists at the ETH in Zurich
to see if they could find a solution to this problem.
So what these scientists did was they took videos
of these very crowded areas
and they looked at the flow of people in these areas.
And what they noticed is that most of the time
the flow was pretty regular and people were going this way
and people were going this way.
But then about 20 minutes before the fatal accident
and that was at a particular region, the Jamarad bridge region.
20 minutes before the incident
the flow of people started to change very much
and what they observed was that turbulence started to arise
in the areas where later on people would be squashed.
So what they suggested to the government was
to put in flow shaping objects into these areas.
And that was implemented
and there hasn't been an accident in that area since.
Now this year's accident was in a different area
so clearly there's more to be done.
But there's something we have understood about complex systems
and many elements interacting
and the right balance between order and disorder.
So what can we take away from that?
If we wanted to be able to control change that is happening
in these complex systems around us at the moment
I think we need four things to think about.
The first one is we need to understand really well
what a complex system is to begin with.
And the second thing we need is mathematics.
The third thing we need is a specialist knowledge
of the system that we're looking at.
And then last but by no means least
I think we need to appreciate the power of disorder.
Thank you.
Thank you.
