Hi everyone, my name is Jane and today I want to talk to you about a profound mystery, namely
how ants find your picnic blanket.
When you think about it, it should actually be kind of amazing that they can do this.
After all, nobody told them that you were there or that you have food.
Now it's no secret that ants are among the most sophisticated species on the planet and
hands down the most successful and evolutionary terms, but not individually.
Individually ants are really unsophisticated.
Even a hundred ants are unsophisticated.
If you put a hundred ants on a flat surface, they'll pretty much just walk around in circles
until they die of exhaustion.
But if you put half a million ants together, they'll form themselves into a super organism
with a collective intelligence that far exceeds the intelligence of any individual ant.
And so even though each individual ant is basically blind and only very minimally intelligent,
together they're able to form an efficient path from their nest to your picnic blanket
in a manner of minutes.
Now this presents a major question in the study of the emergence of complex systems,
which is what I've studied here at Gallatin.
How could evolution have produced agents with such a stark contrast between their individual
simplicity and their collective complexity?
So the mystery that I'm going to talk to you about today is how simple agents interacting
via simple rules can and do self-organize into collective sophisticated behavior to
solve system-wide problems, like finding food or building a nest.
Problems that no single one of them could solve on their own and that they solve together
without any one of them having any idea that they're doing so.
So one of my favorite examples of this is how humans built the Internet kind of without
really realizing it and how Google realized it and then found a way to use it.
So in the early days of the Internet, users were doing two basic things.
They were creating web pages and they were linking to other web pages.
And they started doing this really on their own.
And the main criticism was that while there were a lot of good web pages out there with
a lot of good information, it was really hard to find anything if you didn't already know
where it was.
And so Google's major insight was that it could use the bottom-up linking behavior that
was already happening to rank web pages.
So when you searched for something on Google, whatever page on that topic had the most other
pages linking to it showed up as the top result.
So no one at Google decides what the top result is going to be any more than any individual
user gets to decide what the top result is going to be.
Yet collectively, all users do decide what the top result is going to be.
Now as the Internet has matured, Google's algorithm has started to take more things
into account, things like an individual user's GPS data or their past search histories.
And so what shows up as the top result for any individual becomes a more complex problem.
And Google also did more than just uncover these networks of connections.
It also started to really influence how those connections grew and changed.
So when a page shows up as the top results on Google, the more likely other pages are
to link to it.
And so this really interesting dynamic emerges between the bottom-up linking behavior and
the top-down ranking behavior.
So we see an interplay like this in the top-down and the bottom-up in the human brain too.
There are something like 10 trillion neurons in the average human brain, and somehow the
individual firing and not firing of all 10 trillion neurons from this emerges the collective
patterns of brain activity that are our thoughts and concepts and ideas.
And these patterns in turn influence the firing of individual neurons.
So as sensory information is processed from the bottom-up, higher-level brain areas look
at the distributed patterns of activity at the lower levels and try to match those patterns
to high-level concepts that have emerged from similar patterns in the past.
So high-level brain areas effectively feed these predictions or hypotheses back to the
lower levels and influence the firing of individual neurons, not at all unlike the top search
results on Google influencing the individual linking behavior at the bottom.
So one of the things I was really interested in looking at in my senior research project
is how do we do this with computers?
One of the main goals of artificial intelligence research is to give computers high-level concepts
that they can use effectively in image processing and recognition.
So what I did was to see if I could give a computer the high-level concept pigeon, because
pigeons are my favorite animals.
Now a recent wave in computer science research suggests that teaching or telling computers
what high-level concepts are might not be the best way to go about doing it.
What if instead we give them the tools to learn high-level concepts themselves?
Intuitively this makes more sense because we don't think about learning and intelligence
as just the having of facts and the following of rules.
We think about intelligence and learning largely as the ability to think abstractly,
to make analogies and problem-solve and reason about new situations.
Since the brain is an obvious example of a system that does this already, and since
those capabilities emerge from the simple behavior of relatively simple neurons, researchers
have started building programs that are literally called artificial neural networks.
They're networks of individual interconnected simple units that compute simple functions
on data.
So these programs use the distributed parallel processing of these simple units to find complex
features in data.
So instead of designing a feature detector algorithm and trying to teach the computer
when and how to use it, which takes a lot of time and isn't always an option, these
networks of individual units are effectively set loose on data to find the relevant features
themselves.
And in so doing, they really build and learn to use their own high-level concepts that
are related to and that involve these features.
And so like an ant finding your picnic blanket without knowing that you're there and that
you have food, and like your brain recognizing some percept without your neurons knowing
what you're looking at, artificial neural networks are able to recognize their own high-level
concepts in data without the individual units even knowing what they're looking for.
And so this is important because problems are going to arise that involve concepts that
we humans don't or can't know beforehand that might have solutions that could be totally
counterintuitive to our human brains.
So incorporating frameworks for emergent collective intelligence will help us build
better machine learning programs.
And these programs will be powerful not only in image processing and recognition, but in
things like medicine and robotics.
So I can imagine using a machine learning program to detect and perhaps even develop
treatments for unknown medical conditions.
And I can imagine building algorithms for autonomous robots to search disaster sites
for victims.
Understanding how collective intelligence emerges from simple agents in nature has led
to major advances in artificial intelligence research.
But what can it tell us about humans?
Could we start to think about economics and politics and cities and neighborhoods as collective
behavior that we all contribute to and engage in?
First social science study focuses on how top-down power dynamics influence our behavior.
They talk about how market prices influence our individual buying and selling habits,
how policies guide our behavior, how the job opportunities or the feel of a city or a neighborhood
make us want to move there.
But what about our role in that?
Can we start thinking about these phenomena as bottom-up?
So can we start thinking about how our individual buying and selling habits set market prices?
How our votes shape public policy?
How my moving to alphabet city contributes to the personality of that neighborhood?
These are phenomena that we engage in and contribute to every single day.
And in understanding how we help shape them, we're that much closer to understanding how
they, in turn, shape us.
Thank you.
