If we look at the consensus of the climate reports today, it has one conclusion, we are
in trouble. However, game-changing technology has true history taking us into new avenues
where better possibilities exist. Today, I'm going to talk about Christian, my father,
an inventor and an engineer, and the game-changing technology that he developed. True work, we
had established contact in Egypt because we were testing out a product. And during those
couple of years, we finally figured out that that wasn't working. And every time professors
come in and tell, this isn't working, you have this kind of embarrassing moment with
the chief researcher. And then we started talking about, so what's the best idea Egypt
has had, and how did you go about it? And professor receive, who was the chief researcher,
it looked as if we were talking about his child, he started digging into his office chair,
took up a report on clay, and said that this had been up on a national level where they
had decided to shovel into the ground 100 kilos per square meter, and trying to get
it as far down as they could, but it's really difficult getting clay into the ground when
you're doing it manually. But that had been their best case where they had really good
results. Unfortunately, that was too expensive, and so they closed the case. And the report
was now what he said, dead. They are not using it anymore. So feel free to look through
and do whatever. My father started flipping through the pages, and I've known him for
a couple of years, so I know when he has an idea. So we started digging into the problem.
And about five months later, we had filed a patent. We returned happily to Egypt, down
to professor receive, and told him that we found a way that you can mix water and clay,
just like the kids do in the kindergarten basically. And we called it liquid nano clay, mechanically
separated flakes with air bubbles. The idea was that we suspended the clay into water,
and we would just pour it onto the sand, and it would go in. We'll see if it looks at us
and goes, we've been doing this for 70 years. We've been trying to find a solution. Twenty
of those, I personally have been involved in trying to figure out with clay. And we
try that a lot. It doesn't work. What happens is you pour the mixture onto the sand, and
the clay just binds on the surface and creates a crust that chokes everything. Too bad my
father didn't know that at the time. So we took up a cylinder with sand, filled it up,
we make a batch with liquid nano clay, which was our patent, the idea, and we pour it on,
and the clay goes straight into the sand and binds perfectly. Now receives looks at this,
and he had a facial expression I've never seen before. He gets up, he leaves the office.
There's some mechanical work on one of the walls outside. After a while he comes back
again and the work has stopped. He sits down and goes, okay, let's do this. Later he confessed
that he was so angry that two hillbillies from Norway had found a solution that had
evaded them for so long, and at the same time he was so happy that there finally was hope,
because he immediately knew what this would mean. So we tested it. As you can see, there
is a slight difference. We got ridiculous results. We had an increase of 416 percent
what they could manage to get out of their soil when we applied liquid nano clay to the
ground and then fertilized it. That was an amazing improvement, but unfortunately that
was also our bane, because there was no researcher willing to sign off on this. They all thought
it was a joke. They met up, they saw what we were doing. Those who paid attention all
the time, they knew we hadn't cheated, and they asked, can I have it in my backyard,
in my field? And we say, sure, but would you like to sign the report? And he goes, uh-uh,
no way. And the reason was that he said, I would be laughed out of the society if I
do that. I will never work as a scientist again. I can see the results, but I cannot
explain it. So it took us almost six years to figure out why they were so angry about
this. Then Christian finally found out that there is a fungus that wouldn't grow in the
sand without the liquid nano clay. And that fungus is responsible for converting fertilizers
into nutrition for plants. And 80 percent of all plant life on earth need that fungus
to grow or to thrive. So that's by accident. We had found a way to make that fungus enjoy
living in the desert. And that was the magic. Now all the researchers went, oh, that's brilliant,
easy. We can do that. Anyway, so what's game changing about that? We can make, uh, grow
a little bit in the sand. Well, if you look on all the deserts that exist and imagine
them green, that's one third of the planet that is now considered fertile farmland. We
had the same yield as good American farm soil in pure desert. Even better, we were using
only one kilo of clay per square meter, and we watered it in. And on top of that, we only
used one third of the water. So we were saving water, we were getting ridiculous results,
and we could do it all over the sandy deserts. But to put it into a perspective that you
understand, the U.S., as we think of it, is using 16 percent of the land mass for farm soil. That
is the U.S. in true scale compared to the Sahara desert. The Sahara desert is bigger than the U.S.
And that's one desert. And we can use all of that as farmland. That brings us up to an almost
unlimited amount of farmland that is now possible to use. And where we have living, where we have
farmland, you can have civilization. You can have cities, you can have forest, you can do whatever
you want. And I'm not talking about theoretical science, I'm talking about practical proven
technology. We have planted over 10,000 trees and had several wheat fields. We have pepper fields,
we have had date trees that we treated, and all of them have improved and really thrived in pure
desert sand. However, water is always a problem. But that technology already exists today. The U.S.,
China, Iran, and Saudi, we're all using and many other countries are using desalination. That means
you take saltwater and turn it into freshwater by a rather energy cost method. Saudi, for example,
is using 25 percent of all the oil they're producing, and they're producing a lot, to go
straight into desalination to make water for the population. It's an amazing feat. Unfortunately,
it's also polluting a lot. So, instead, you could take, say, a region of the desert that's
nobody using anyway. We plant the forest, we can take some of that biomass and turn that into energy
by intensive cropping. And since we use very little water, we can make a lot of biomass grow,
and that can be turned into energy either by bio oil or biochip or any other emerging technology
that turns biomass into energy. Now, the reason this hasn't been so popular lately
is that they were taking away farmland from farmers. But now, that's not a problem. We need to do this
to actually grow in the desert. So, this is what we started with. And the heat, when you come out,
well, I was driving down with a car. I'm European, so I have air cooling in the car,
and then you go out of the car and you can feel being hit by the heat. It's warm,
and we had bulldozers leveling it, and it was leveled. We started planting, and I go, yeah.
So, we spent about seven hours where we were using liquid nano clay, just watering it on.
We had fertilizers, and we had seeds planted. And then I returned a year later.
And we had wheat fields. We had trees five meter high. And the funny thing is, you all try this.
You go on asphalt, which is warm when it's summer. It's hot. Your feet are burning,
and then you go on the lawn, and it goes, ah. And the same feeling was there. I went into
among the trees, and it was the feeling that, hey, I can have a picnic here. This would be
nice. It's in the shadows, and life isn't that bad.
So, and this is something we can do all over. Wherever you have sand and salt water, we can now,
we have the technology to produce water, food, and energy. That's the foundation of a society. And,
of course, a lot of jobs. And you can do this anywhere. There is a desert.
You can always transport the water. China, for example, is now building a channel from the coast,
all the way into Inner Mongolia. It's just a question of will. This is a little bit photoshopped picture.
But what is real is actually the sand dunes on both sides are the same. We only leveled it,
and planted a lot of water. So, you can do this anywhere. There is a desert. You can always transport
water. The trees are the same. We only leveled it, and planted a wheat field and trees. The
tree in the background is also... But the point is that we can, by today's technology, change the
future. I believe we're standing on the brink of a new age, an age of bio, where we'll have unlimited
amount of food, water, and power. And on a local level, we will produce a lot of work. On a global
level, we will be reducing the CO2, because this is a carbon negative process. You plant, you use
some of those plants for energy, for food, and whatever, and then you plant some more. And thus,
we can expand. Instead of saving, we can now expand, build more, and fix the environment at the same
time, and we'll have a lot of jobs and a lot of energy. I believe this is the age that is coming,
is the age of bio. And I'm hoping that we can build this future together. Thank you.
