Hi everyone. I want to talk to you about a new way of looking at the mind. What I call
the extended mind is the idea that the technology we use becomes part of our mind, extending
our minds and indeed ourselves into the world. We'll start with something that might be a
little bit more familiar, the extended body. We're used to the idea that we can extend
our bodies with technology. We know about prosthetic limbs. Here's the athlete, Oscar
Pistorius, running on his prosthetic legs. You don't need prosthetic limbs to extend
your body or prosthetic limbs. Blind people say that their canes serve as an extension
of their body. It feels exactly like a body from the inside or in a more mundane every
day experience. A car can feel like an extension of your body, a bike, or indeed a musical
instrument. We saw a great illustration of that just a few minutes ago with Duparu and
his didgeridoo burn as an extension of his body. Well, so it is with the body. So it
is for the extended mind, where technology gets incorporated into our human mind. Now,
you might think that to incorporate technology into your mind, you'd have to turn yourself
into a cyborg, something like that. A whole bunch of pipes and tubes inside your head
or at least need a whole bunch of fancy technology like this on your head. I actually think there's
a more ordinary kind of mind extension, which is happening to us right now, all the time,
as we move into the technological future. So take our friend, the iPhone. I've had one
of these now for maybe three or four years, and it's basically started taking over a whole
bunch of the functions of my brain. Things my brain used to do are now done by my iPhone.
There's a million examples. Take memory. How many people use their brain to remember
phone numbers anymore? Not me. My iPhone does all the work. It used to be the biological
memory used to carry the load. Now the iPhone is carrying the load for me, acting as my
memory. The iPhone serves to control planning functions that my brain used to do. Spatial
navigation, you know, offloaded from my brain into Google Maps. The iPhone even stores as
the repository of my desires. I've got a program on the iPhone that tells me my favorite dishes.
I have a local restaurant. Let me go there. I just look it up and say this, this, this, this.
This is the iPhone is controlling my desires for me. It even makes decisions for me. Here's
the executive decision maker. Am I going to go speak at that TED conference? Oh, definitely.
So, okay, you might say, okay, well, this is all a big metaphor, and yeah, it's a little
bit like a mind in some ways. But I think there's actually an interesting philosophical
thesis here that I want to defend. That in some sense, the iPhone is literally becoming
part of your mind. Your mind is extending from your brain into the world, so the iPhone
is actually part of it. I mean, the iPhone hasn't been implanted into your mind, but you
might think it's as if it were, here's an iPhone implanted into your mind. It's as if
it was implanted into your mind, although it's actually out there in the world. That's
the extended mind thesis. So the iPhone's memory is basically my memory. The iPhone's
planning or navigation is basically my planning and navigation as if it had happened inside
the brain. Now, for me as a philosopher, this is really interesting because one of the central
philosophical problems about the mind, maybe the central philosophical problem about the
mind is what we call the mind brain problem. How does the mind you're thinking and you're
feeling relate to your brain? This bunch of machine neurons you have inside your head.
Is it something more? Is it something less? If you ask most people, where is your mind,
they'll point and say, well, it's somewhere in there. This extended mind thesis, I think
it's sort of transformed our vision of the mind by saying, okay, well, the mind is not
just in the brain, it's partly in the world around us, in the environment that we interact
with. Now, I don't know. You might think this is kind of crazy or even totally mad.
When my collaborator, Andy Clark, and I first put this thesis forward back in the mid-1990s,
and we came across a bit of resistance then. A lot of people made objections. Now, back then,
we didn't have iPhones. Our central example was a notebook. People writing stuff down in
the notebook and using that as a memory. And indeed, you don't need high tech to get the idea
of the extended mind going. The very first time somebody counted on their fingers,
that was a kind of mind extension, a kind of addition that could have been taking place in
your head that's happening on your fingers. But technology really amplifies this extension
of our mind. And I think it's made the thesis ring true for more people as well, because we
experience this actually happening to us. But still, you might object in various ways. This
iPhone is just a tool. It's not really part of your mind. For it really to become part of your
mind, you'd have to implant it like this. To be on your mind, it's got to be on the inside of your
skull. Or maybe it can't be part of your mind. It's metal. Minds are biological. Are they
involved with soul or something? No, I think it's a tricky issue. But I think this kind of reaction
which you get involves a kind of brain chauvinism. It's like gender chauvinism or race chauvinism
or species chauvinism. What's so special about the brain? I mean, what's so special about the
inside of the brain compared to the outside? For a start, you know, it's like if you've got stuff
that's going on on the inside of the brain, the same stuff could in principle go on on the outside
of the brain. We want to say no difference in principle as long as it's driving the processes
inside the brain, the action, the consciousness in the same way that would happen. Otherwise,
there's no principle barrier about the skull. That would be skull chauvinism. Likewise,
metal versus biology. You know, if the metal does the same job the biology is doing,
then it also counts as part of the mind. Otherwise, it would be biology, DNA chauvinism.
So I think that's a principled object. That objection I think can be rejected. You might
think that somehow consciousness is at the very center of the mind. And I've got some
some sympathy with this. And the consciousness is this deeply internal
state. But I think there's what we're thinking, what we're feeling right in the present moment
is at the core of the mind. But there's always a whole lot to our minds which is outside our
consciousness. What we think are our innermost desires, our hopes, our fears, our personality
traits. A lot of this, most of this is not passing through your mind at any given moment.
At any given moment, it's just a tiny little snapshot. What makes you you is a whole bunch of
stuff which is outside your consciousness, available to effect it. So your memories are mostly
outside your consciousness. And the view here is it doesn't matter whether it's stored somewhere
deep in your brain or out there in the world. If it's out there accessible to you, driving
your state, then it counts as part of your mind. I mean, there is still a brain at the core of
all this. And I'm not saying the iPhone is itself a mind. You are still the mind, but your brain
and your consciousness at the core. But the mind is the iPhone is part of it. It's a kind of extension,
if you like. Oh, what was that? I'm sorry, my iPhone begs to differ. It thinks it's the mind and
I'm the extension. So this thesis, I think it's not just it's a new way of looking at the world,
which is kind of cool, a new way of looking at the mind. But I think it actually makes a difference
to some of our practices. I mean, in Alzheimer's disease, when people describe themselves as losing
their minds. And one thing we found happens, works really well in handling people with Alzheimer's
and slowing the decline is the use of mind extension technology. People use notes in the
environment, for example, to act as a kind of memory, external memory with labels everywhere.
This really serves to slow down the loss of mental function, keeping some aspect of their mind
out there in the world. There are issues about makes a difference to education.
There are debates about open book examinations and the use of calculators and exams. Well,
if you take the extended mind thesis, you ought to be testing the whole extended self. If a calculator
or a computer is going to be with you, coupled with you reliably available in the future, it is
part of your extended self and you ought to be testing the whole extended self. Here's a case of
extended perception. A blind person who starts using his iPhone as a vision tool. This is the
color identification program, color ID. You can download it. It basically reads out colors. You
point it to something. It reads it out. He said he used this to see a sunset for the first time.
He held it up and said, you know, red, orange, yellow, as your crimson. He was moved to tears.
Felt like he was seeing the sunset for the first time using this as an extended vision mechanism,
extended perception mechanism. That wearable computing becomes more and more ubiquitous in
our lives. This is just going, I think, to become more and more common. Here we've got glasses that
compute stuff for us through extended perception. There's also the socially extended mind. We all
know where other people get extensions of your mind. We all know long-term couples where one person
acts as another person's memory, you know, reminding them things at the right time or when they
finish each other's sentences or speak as, you know, a single individual in a conversation. In
effect, what's happening now is one person is becoming part of an extension of another person's
mind or vice versa. I'll be in my mind if, I'll be in your mind if you'll be in mine. I think
Bob Dylan said that. There's also social networking is really, is really amplifying this.
So when I was preparing this talk about a, about a month ago, I posted out on,
send a note out to Facebook. I've got to give a TED talk, 15-minute TED talk in Sydney next
month on the extended mind. Any ideas on how to approach it? And I got a whole lot of responses
and pretty useful responses from this social network which is kind of surrounding us becoming
part of our extended mind. There were more and there were more and there were more,
including, I mean, a whole bunch of useful suggestions. I stole a bunch of them, you know,
not least of them, this one. Exciting. Maybe you could work Facebook in. Or,
well, you could start by mentioning that your crowd sourced the whole talk. Well, thanks guys.
That was a, that was handy. Now, there are some downsides and dangers to this whole extended
mind thesis. I mean, one is that as our minds move into the world, we become more vulnerable
to their loss than when they were protected on the inside of the skull. This is already
something familiar from things like, you know, the tragic, the floods in Queensland or the other
bushfires in Victoria where we often talk about the greatest tragedy being that people lose their
memories. You know, their houses and their possessions and so on. Basically, you've become
part of them. The loss of them really feels like loss of oneself. And as more of one's mind gets
extended, the more there is vulnerability. I mean, just say somebody steals my iPhone.
You might think that's a pretty serious thought. That's a form of theft, you know,
and they should be punished for this. But if I'm right, that should actually be reconceived
as a really vicious form of assault. Like, you know, getting into my brain and, you know,
messing with my, messing with my neurons. And that really does kind of capture the
attitude I have to my iPhone. You might worry this is going to turn us into robots. Remember
the guy from Lost in Space? Dangerous, Will Robinson. But I think we have to remember we
still always have consciousness at the middle of this and judgment. And the extension of our mind
doesn't abnegate us from using our judgment with better and better technology, which becomes more
and more flexible. I think there's the hope that the interplay of judgment and technology
might move us forward in an interesting way. So I actually think then to conclude this extended
mind thesis offers us some hope of an optimistic worldview. People say, is Google making us stupid?
This is a debate which has been out there in the media. Well, if I'm right about the extended
mind thesis, there's a sense in which Google is actually making us smarter. Google is getting inside
our minds. I don't know about you, but I heard someone say recently, when I sit down at Google,
I feel like my IQ goes up 30 points. You know, it's like all that knowledge and they say, you
know, knowledge is power of a kind. So, you know, this leads to a kind of potential democratization
to have the powers of the mind as technology becomes cheaper and available to more and more
advanced. It's going to spread, you know, phones are already spreading. Google is spreading with
time. This becomes available to everyone. So in a way, I think what's going on here is a trend
which are in the very early stages of turning us into superheroes of the mind. Technology is
gradually giving us these super powers, turning us into cognitive super geniuses, if you like.
And this is going to go more and more this way in the future. The question is, will we use these
powers for good or for evil? That's the, I think that's the gift of the extended mind
and the challenge it presents as we move into our extended future. Thank you very much.
