Thank you. So what I'd like to do is give a talk about the principle of self-organization
and how it is a wonderful model for creating truly sustainable human systems. So I'm going
to be doing this in an ecological sort of framework and then moving into human systems
at the end of the talk. Now as we came into the 20th century, a lot of people doing research
in various disciplines, things like psychology, anthropology, sociology, biology, ecology,
cybernetics, were finding that our sort of traditional Western paradigm for doing research
through linear reductionism wasn't working for them. And by the middle of the 20th century,
a lot of these researchers from various disciplines came together and started sharing notes. And
what they realized was that the phenomena they were seeing in their respective disciplines
was basically the same. They were looking at feedback loops, emergent properties. And
so by the latter half of the 20th century, they started to bring together a unified body
of theory called complex system science. And within that was embedded the principle of
self-organization. Now what self-organization is, it's a process that when as a system grows,
if it's going to self-organize, it doesn't just get bigger, it gets more complex. And
that complexities derived from the parts within the system becoming ever more specialized
through time and tightly integrated together such that each part doing what it needs to
do to sustain itself creates conditions that sustain the whole. And as a result, these
self-organizing systems grow increasingly resilient, stable, and efficient. So that was
quite a bit right there. So I'm going to go through that one more time just to reinforce
it. So self-organization, a process that as a system grows, it not only gets bigger,
but more complex. The complexity derived from the parts becoming ever more specialized
and tightly integrated together with each part doing what it needs to do to sustain
itself creating conditions that sustain the whole. And as a result, these systems grow
resilient, stable, and efficient. Now our bodies are wonderful examples of self-organization.
We all started life as a single microscopic cell and now our bodies have over 30 trillion
cells. And during our developmental phase, that one cell didn't just multiply to 30 trillion,
the cells started to differentiate. So now we have 254 different kinds of cells in our
bodies, you know, skin cell, muscle cell, nerve cells, bone cells. But the specialization
in our cells goes even further. So some nerve cells just communicate with a sensory cell.
Other nerve cells just communicate with a muscle cell. Other neurons link sensory neurons
to motor neurons. So our cells are incredibly specialized, but luckily for us, they're tightly
integrated together so that each cell doing what it needs to do to sustain itself creates
conditions that sustain the whole. And as a result, our bodies are incredibly stable.
You go in the interior body environment, right at 98.6, blood sugar held very carefully,
pH very carefully controlled, and we're resilient. If we get sick or wounded, we heal. But I'd
like to really show how this process of self-organization works in ecosystems. I'm an ecologist,
that's where I naturally go. How it works through ecosystems through evolutionary time
to create systems that become ever more resilient and stable and efficient. Now in the natural
world, the bottom line currency is energy, and this is a rock hard currency, and it's also
finite. So natural selection is always pushing species to become more energy efficient, because
any organism or population that develops an adaptation or strategy that makes them more
energy efficient means they'll be able to support a larger population on the same finite
amount of energy. However, if organisms start moving towards energy inefficiency, natural
selection starts taking them out of the picture. And as you're going to see, this process of
pushing species towards energy efficiency is going to make species become more specialized
and tightly integrated with other members of their ecological community. Now for a while
now, ecologists have been saying we shouldn't be moving species from one part of the world
to another, because when we do that, we create these young ecological interactions, which
are usually very energy inefficient and often quite harmful for the species involved. So
let me just give you an example of this. In 1904, chestnut blight fungus was accidentally
introduced into North America. Now at that time, the American chestnut was the most common
forest tree east of the Mississippi River. In the heart of its range, places like Tennessee
and Kentucky, American chestnut grew to immense sizes. We have pre blight photographs of trees
up to 14 feet in diameter. So that's about the width of the stage I'm standing on. They
grew to almost 200 feet in height. They produced the most edible nut of any tree in North America,
and it only took that fungus about 30 years to almost completely eradicate the species.
Now that was obviously a really bad outcome for the American chestnut, but I'd like you
to contemplate the fungus. If you are a host specific parasite, the worst thing you could
do is annihilate your host. Because if you've done that, you have just annihilated yourself.
Now that was an incredibly energy inefficient thing for that fungus to do. It would have
been much better served if it didn't kill off its host tree. It would have lived longer.
It would have reproduced more. There would have been more of a resource out there for
its offspring to live on. So a really bad move. But if two species do not extinguish each
other, and these two species have not extinguished each other yet in North America, natural
section kicks into gear and starts forcing them to adjust their ecologies to be more
energy efficient. And that means that these relationships can co-evolve from something
like a predation, which is what the fungus was doing to its trees, was just killing them,
right up to a mutualism that's beneficial for both species involved and often obligatory
for their survivorship. So my favorite example of this involves the bull's horn acacia tree
and its resident as teka acacia ant. These are two species that live down in Central
America. Through their co-evolve time together, the bull's horn acacia has developed three
features to service its ants. The first is the thorns that used to ward off herbivores
have now become huge and pliable. And they no longer protect the tree, but the ants drill
into them, hollow them out, and that's where they raise their young. Secondly, on every
leaf stem are these open sap wells where the ants will go to drink, and that's where they
get their liquid as well as their carbohydrate energy resource. And then around the margins
of all the leaves are these little globules called belchian bodies, which the ants harvest
for their nutrition and they grow back. The ants have become so specialized, the acacia,
they can only survive on belchian bodies in acacia sap. If they are removed from their
tree, they will be dead in 24 hours time. But in return, they give their tree the most
advanced plant defense system of any tree in the world. They have a very venomous sting
that wards off all herbivores. Those trees never get munched on at all. But not only
that, if vines try to crawl up the trunk of an acacia, the ants will come down, they all
chop through those vines and kill them. If surrounding trees try to encroach in the acacia
space, the ants will go into those trees and defoliate them. Now, if you remove the acacia
ants from their host tree, it will be defoliated in about a month's time. So these two species
are in this very mutually beneficial interaction that's obligatory. But what's marvelous
about this example is we know from the mandibular structure of the ants that they're derived
from leaf cutter ants. So way back when, when the ancestral leaf cutter ant and the ancestral
acacia tree first came together in their young ecological interaction, it probably wasn't
a very pretty sight. Trees might have been being stripped with their leaves and killed,
which was not a very energy efficient thing to do. And somehow natural selection kicked
it in gear and started forcing these species to adjust their ecologies right up to this
present day mutualism. Now, another ecological interaction between species is competition.
And this is looked at differently in ecology than we often look at it. We often think of
competition being a good thing. But in the natural world, competition between two species
is a negative, negative interaction. It harms both parties because they're using energy
in their competitive struggles. If they can actually come up with strategies where they
can coexist without competing, they get an energy boost. So natural selection will push
them to do this through something that is called niche separation. And what a species
niche is, it's sort of its total ecological role. It's all of its adaptations, all of
its interactions, everything. Matter of fact, it would be way too complex to define the
niche of any one species. So ecologists break it down. We look at things like the foraging
niche, something that's a lot easier to get a handle on. So you might say, all right,
how does this organism go about getting its food? Well, in niche separation, one way that
species can separate their niches to not compete is what's called temporal separation, where
they're just active at different times, like owls at night and hawks during the day. They
can coexist without competing and get the energy boost by doing that. Another way to
do it is they can take their habitat where they live and break it up into micro-habitats,
subsets the habitat where they will forage. So our black cap chickadees do this by just
foraging insects off of branches, while at the same time, white breasted nut hatches have
specialized to just forage on the trunks of trees. And in this way, those two species
of birds can be foraging at the exact same time and not compete at all through their
specialization. Or a third way they can do this, Darwin's finches do this down the Galapagos
is they have developed resource partitioning. So you get these mixed flocks of finches that
are all foraging together in the large big fence just eats large seeds and the small
big fence just eats small seeds. And in this way, again, they can coexist without the energy
losses of competition. Now, so what is happening here is driven by energy efficiency, natural
selection is forcing species to become more specialized. And as you can see, the examples
I just gave are all showing the species have become more specialized, which means the size
of their niches shrink, which means through time ecosystems can support more and more
and more species, which boosts the repetition of function of critical roles. And that might
not sound like such a great thing. But that repetition of function is the key to the resiliency
of these systems. So I want to just picture a wildflower meadow around here, here in New
Hampshire somewhere, all the way through the bloom season from, you know, right in May,
all the way through November. And if you were to go out and catalog how many different insect
pollinators you could find out there, you'd find well over a thousand species through
that whole blooming season. All these different species of moths, butterflies, bees, flies,
beetles, ants, all pollinating at different times of the season, different time of the
day and night in different ways so they can all coexist. And all that repetition of function,
what it does is if any one of those species should go extinct, that pollination system
is just fine. There's so many others doing the exact same critical role. And so all of
the critical roles out in the natural world were to find very robust repetition of function.
We don't just have a handful of decomposing species, we've got thousands of them. We don't
just have a handful of photosynthetic plants. We've got hundreds and hundreds of them.
And again, that's what brings up the resiliency and stability because if any one species should
go extinct, the system is just fine. So what we see with self-organization is that it's
pushing systems to decentralize critical roles. Whenever we start moving towards concentration
of critical roles, we start moving away from resiliency and stability. So let me just give
you three examples of human systems where you can see this at play. So I want you to
picture Detroit, Detroit, Michigan. Back in 1980, the bulk of the jobs in that city were
with General Motors. And then through the next two decades, as General Motors started
faltering and started losing jobs, the result in Detroit was devastating. Detroit, within
20 years, lost over one half its human population, leaving tens of thousands of vacant buildings
that had to be destroyed and leaving their city bankrupt and their economy just in shambles
because there had been way too much concentration in the job market with just one corporate
entity. Another example, take the Central Valley of California right now. Due to use
of pesticides there for so many years, there are no longer any native pollinators. So the
bulk of the produce grown in this country, fruits, vegetables, nuts, are all pollinated
by one species, the honeybee. And I think as many of you know, the honeybee is not doing
that well. If something should happen that takes the honeybee out, that system collapses
overnight because now we're down to ultimate concentration with just one party. And of
course, another example would be the financial meltdown of 2008. Now, many people think the
reason for that meltdown was risky investments, but risky investments were the catalyst. The
underlying reason for that big failure was that so much of the banking assets in this
country were held in very few banks, something like 54 percent of all the banking assets
were held in just 10 banks. And those banks were big, and they're all involved in the
same sorts of investment schemes. And once Lehman Brothers bellied up, if the federal
government hadn't stepped in and short up the rest of the system, it would have gone
as a cascade through that system collapsing it. So I'm just pointing out here that there
are risks when we start to really concentrate. Now, I should mention, Western scientists
may be the last people or people that really ever came upon this notion of self-organization
because it was actually written about over 200 years before Western science came across
this principle in a wonderful book that was published in 1776 called The Wealth of Nations
by Adam Smith. And if you are familiar with Smith, then you'll know he's considered the
father of economic theory. Now, at that time, Smith was looking at these pre-industrial
merchant economies. And the thing that really intrigued him was that he had all these merchants
doing what they're doing out of their own self-interest, but without anyone orchestrating
it, they were creating a network of relationships that were mutually beneficial. So what he
was writing about, he was writing about self-organization, but he called it the invisible hand of the
economy. So here you have the butcher, and the blacksmith, and the baker, and the brewer,
all doing what they're doing to make money, but the blacksmith is making knives that get
sold to the butcher, who in turn is butchering meat that gets sold back to the blacksmith,
and then you have this robust, interactive, and integrated sort of network of relationships.
Now, if you look at those merchants, they were specialized and integrated together. But
if you look at our economy today, you're going to see we have moved in an entirely different
direction, towards very much towards concentration. Any sector we want to look at, whether it's
agriculture, energy, media, retail, financial, pharmaceutical, you're going to see that the
bulk of the capital is running through just a handful of very large corporate enterprises.
And I can assure you, these corporate enterprises are not specialists. You look at a Walmart,
they're generalists. Walmart sells everything. And they're not very interested in integrating
with others in their sector. They would just assume dominate their sector through competitive
exclusion or mergers or acquisitions. So self-organization becomes a really good scientific rational for
re-regionalizing and relocalizing economies. Now, I'm not suggesting we get rid of large
corporations or end global trade or anything like that, but I think we've moved way too
far in that direction. And I think we need to move back if we truly want to create resilient,
stable economies that will service us all much better. And not only that, if we do that,
if we move back towards re-localizing and re-regionalizing economies, then we get the
benefits of having that economic system be much more environmentally sound and much more
socially just. Now, I don't have the time to explain how self-organization is going
to do that, because I planned this talk to be just 15 minutes. So I'm going to stop and
I'll let you contemplate how self-organization does that. Well, thank you very much.
Thank you very much.
