Now three questions to start. What is the stuff of life? How do we make life? And how
do we know when we've made it? It's okay for me telling you I might make life. But how
do we know? Or how do we know when we discover new life? Now I'm a chemist and I try and
make molecules in my lab and take this rock here on the screen. This rock is actually
LAH 84001. This is a very famous rock, a rock found in Antarctica. And it was so famous
and so exciting that Bill Clinton got on TV and said we have found life in this rock.
Can you see it? I'm not sure I can. But I guess if you look at that kind of long wiggly
little thing that could be a fossilized worm or bacterium, we may call that life. Or can
we? It's quite clearly dead. But maybe it was living at some point in the past on Mars.
And this is a very interesting point that we are trying desperately to find our place
in the universe by doing experiments like looking for Higgs or looking for the radiation
at the background of the universe with the Planck telescope. And the question we have
really is why is it the planet Earth is alive as you can clearly see by this nice blue color?
This blue color means photosynthesis. This white color means water. But now look at Mars.
Mars looks quite clearly dead. Was Mars always dead? Or is Mars in fact alive right now that
we just can't see those microbes? Clearly Mars is not as alive as Earth. So we really
wish to ask how come Earth is alive? This seems a fairly interesting question. But we
really have no idea. So let's take these two videos here. Are these dead or alive? I'll
let you study them for a moment. The right hand side is a little bit more animated, but
I'll give you the answer. The right hand side is dead. This is a tube made in my lab. And
the right hand side is germination, quite clearly alive. But if you could see on the
right hand side this nice long structure, doesn't it remind you of the long structure
in the meteorite? Yeah, this structure was made in my lab using inorganic materials.
And so we can be fooled quite easily by things that are supposed to be dead or alive. So
in my quest to make life, I need to be able to have a test to kind of ensure that I can
convince my critics or the potential users that we've in fact made some kind of life.
But we can perhaps begin to think about an indistinguishability test. You want technology
or the best technology to be indistinguishable from nature? And this inspiration allowed
me to say, well, who cares if there's a thing called life or death if you can't tell the
difference? So we figured that maybe we could have a Turing test for life. So what I would
do is go to my laboratory and make my inorganic cell from scratch, no DNA, no proteins, nothing
to cheat, just dead stuff. And then I make my cell. And then I use an indistinguishability
test just like in the Turing test to find out if you're a conscious entity or a computer.
Sometimes when I'm teaching undergraduates, I want to do a Turing test because I'm not
sure there's anyone there. So how does this Turing test work? Well, you have an interrogator.
In this case, it's an alien interrogator. And they're interrogating either a human being
or a computer. And they have to tell the difference. In the case of a life for life, you would have
a cell that was living that was trying to interrogate between your homemade cell and
a real cell. And if your living cell could not tell the difference, then functionally
that is alive. And you've crossed the line. And the reason I wanted to kind of present
this as an idea to build on this is because making life is going to be full of controversy
of whether we've actually crossed that line from non-life into life. And I would argue
it doesn't matter because life is a very funny thing that we're trying to pin down.
So how did we get to life? And how am I going to make life in the lab so we can actually
pose this question? And I think this is an important step that we need to make. And the
problem with finding life is that although you may think I'm a little bit crazy if I
tell you I want to make life in the lab, we do have life on planet Earth. And really,
it's just a question of scale. Life took around about 400 million years to emerge on
planet Earth. That's quite a long time, but it's not a huge amount of time. The sea has
a pretty big volume. There's lots of molecules of water in the sea, say 10 to the 45 molecules.
That's quite a lot of molecules. That is almost as many molecules of water as there are kilograms
in the observable universe. So it's a very big number. And then if you take all the seconds
that elapsed in that 400 million years, the number of collisions that could have happened,
you get a whopping 10 to the 53 events. So that's a really nice playing field to roll
your dice to find life. We're going to find life. Keep looking. So perhaps the reason
why we think about life or the emergence of life is this issue of time scale. But I don't
have 400 million years, even with anti-aging. So how am I going to do it? How are we going
to find life in the lab? Well, we need to take our planet Earth and chop it up, maybe
take an ocean, maybe take Darwin's pond, maybe take a flask in a test tube, and then
go further, go smaller, make artificial cells, proto cells, and get those cells to behave
like living cells. So eventually we end up with a very primitive bacterium. So our idea
is nothing less than to put the elements required for life that aren't living, just the carbon,
the nitrogen, the oxygen, the minerals, in a machine, and take that machine all the way
through the scale, and out at the end, you want to get your living cell. And we can use
any elements we want, because my theory, or the theory that's emerging in my laboratory
is that the process is more important than the material. But let's talk about probability
before we get bogged down in chemistry. Now, I just want you to imagine that you've got
a load of dice, and you're going to roll them. And I don't know who's lucky and wins
the lotto, or is very good at blackjack or whatever. But think about how you would make
a protein. So a protein with 154 amino acids, 154 amino acids in a chain, with 20 to tubes
from, if you were going to randomly make that, it would require you to throw the dice of
whopping, I guess, 10 to the 200 times. Now, that is a very, very, very large number of
times. In fact, it's so large, you're never going to get there. So that means God must
have made everything that, in fact, the creationists are correct, right? Well, I may not agree
with that especially. Let's take an inorganic molecule, a molecule that I make in my lab
in just a few seconds. This has 154 metals and six positions. So now it's like a dice,
but 154 of them. So I'd have to roll 154 of these dice and get all the numbers that I've
written down to make my ring. But yeah, I can make my ring in the lab in about a second.
Actually, it's about 500 milliseconds. So in 500 milliseconds, I can roll one in 10 to
119. That's completely crazy, or is it? Well, of course, it's not about probability, it's
about using the laws of chemistry. And what we need to do in this quest to build life
is to really unpick those laws of chemistry. And what I want to say is that life exists
in this universe of chemistry. And so it's a very interconnected universe. All the possible
drugs are there. All the possible diseases are there in biochemistry. All the possible
materials are in this universe of chemistry. So how can we explore that universe? This
is the problem. It's not that we're fantastically improbable. That clearly is not the case. But
we need to find a way to explore that universe. Now the way I've started to do it in my lab
is to basically get as many flasks as we can and connect them together with pipes to start
to mix all the chemicals in different time and space. And you can see this happening
here. You can see all the pumps and all the wires. It all looks very complicated. I only
have four vessels here. Imagine if I want a trillion. I'm not going to rear a wire
thing very well in my lab. It will turn into a mess very quickly. I would suggest this
is a problem akin to the transistor. The first transistor, which was huge, when the first
transistor was kind of realized, people could conceptually design a computer. How could
you get from a huge transistor to the microprocessors of today? It was just a question of scale.
And so what we're trying to do is to somehow create a chemical internet by fusing together
3D-printed devices that can plug and play to take this complexity and just plug them
together. And that's what we're doing in my lab right now. It's a very good excuse to
use 3D printers. I guess on the way they're printing all sorts of things. But when I'm
there, they tend to be printing these reactors. So what we're trying to imagine is a 3D-printed
chemical engine that's plug and play. So we can do lots of things with this. But really,
my vision, I want to make life. All the other stuff will come, but I want to make life.
And I need to be able to engineer as many possible events in a small space and time because
I'm not going to live for 400 million years. So we're building a chemical engine. And the
chemical engine itself will print the architecture on the fly. The architecture will be defined
by the chemistry at the same time. And not only that, we will then do the chemistry in
the 3D-printed device. So the 3D printer will become the chemistry set. And we will do this
in vast arrays. And by printing in 3D, we can suddenly put lots of reactions together
in real time and in space. And this has many applications beyond getting life. But go back
to the Higgs. We wanted to get the Higgs, and the technologies flow out of that for
other things. We want to try and make life in the lab, and I'm hopeful the technology
will flow out for other things. So one idea is if we've made life or we've made an engine
where we can evolve molecules of life, then we'll be able to embed molecular networks
for drugs, for molecules and materials we want to make. We'll be able to screen them
and then scale them. So we'll have a kind of machine that will allow us to discover
and build other molecules. And so then this allows us to take chemistry, if you like,
into the information space where molecules can be represented by numerical blueprints.
And we're trying to build a chemical HTML in my lab at the moment by using the laws
of chemistry and informatics. And when we do this, we have to do this chemistry. We have
to build these networks. So we're building a generational network where we can have breeding,
cross-fertilization, that mimics what you get in nature. And it's basically taking a
load of chemicals and mixing them up in a blender, but doing it a billion, billion, billion
times. Although this slide looks complicated, it's nothing more than that. And the idea
is it will get evolving matter coming out. Well, we've made some inorganic cells in the
lab. They're minimal nanomolecules. They can undergo some aspects of replication. We call
them eye-chels. They react in their environment, and they have a metabolism. But they need
something more. And this is the thing I'm going to leave you. The life is not just about
chemistry. It's about a process that we call evolution in a strict sense, this process
of evolving molecules in the device. And the way this would work is rather than just copying
the molecule faithfully, making a perfect copy as we are here, we would make a polymer,
and that polymer could mutate. And you can see the analogy with DNA. So we need to build
mutatable molecules into our net chemistry network. So how will this work? How will we
build this in the lab? Because I've told you about having this chemical internet on one
hand is 3D printer over here. But is it just a load of fancy words? How are we going to
implement this? So the way we're attempting to do it in the lab, so if you take the right,
the left-hand side here, this is actually our huge scale reactor. You'll be able to
see a spark in the middle there. And this is where we're going to shovel in the elements
required. A bit like a really primordial reaction. So we can come from the smallest, simplest
molecules. We're not going to put in, we're not going to cheat by putting in synthetic
proteins. We're going to come from the minimum chemistry set. So that's our kind of flask
or our warm pond of Darwin. Then we have all these different pumps and flow systems, you
can see in the bottom there, where we have this small reactor filling up. And then on
the right-hand side, you saw these cells moving, these artificial cells that were flowing in
the microfluidic device. And I think by the combination of the big engine having the big
scale chemistry being scaled down, smaller and smaller, and then using evolution, we
will be able to discover a whole range of new molecules and cells with lifelike properties.
And when we start to get hung up on is it life or is it dead, we can just start to think
about our test for life. And then we can get ourselves out of this potential infinite
loop of discussion about have we made life and is it dead and is it a virus. And then
start to think about the implementation of the technologies that will result. And I think
that's a pretty important step that we need to try and take. So just imagine in a few
years when we built the reactor in my lab and we have this massive scale system where
we can do a trillion, trillion, trillion reactions every second. And not only can we do a trillion
reactions a second, but we can network them. And by networking them, we can access a much
bigger space. So what will come out of that space? So this is the question, what will
emerge? And I guess what will emerge will be an invulvable inorganic system. And what
we're calling it at the moment is rather fancifully inorganica, because this will be the first
life form that we find that is not based on DNA or proteins. Thank you very much.
