Science and mathematics are probably the best tools we have to try and understand the things
that we do know. But over the last three years, I've been on a journey to try and understand
how much science and mathematics can tell us about what we do not know. This is a subject
of a new book documenting that three-year journey. I think that actually we spend a lot
of time trying to know what's going to happen next, probably especially in government. You
would love to know what's going to happen next, the fact that we would like to know
what's going to happen with the climate or maybe with an asteroid that might hit us or
even the economy. And I would say that actually my subject of mathematics is probably one
of our best tools in trying to understand what might happen next. Mathematics is actually
about looking for patterns, looking at the data that's happened up to this point, understanding
that data to be able to make some predictions into the future. But how powerful is that
tool in actually getting the answers right? I guess the ultimate symbol of the kind of
unknowability of the future is the casino dice. If I throw this on the table, how can
I know what's going to happen next that I'm going to get in this case of five?
Well, I guess the hero in this story is Isaac Newton because he gave us the tools to be
able to give us some feeling that we might be able to know what's going to happen next.
The laws of motion, the calculus enables us to understand a sort of world in flux. So
post-Newton we really felt like we should be able to know what that dice is going to
do. It's just following some Newtonian dynamics as it falls from my hand onto the table, impacts
I should be able to find out what this dice is going to do next. In fact, this is a dice
that I picked up whilst I was in Vegas. I actually went to Vegas to the craps tables
to try and use my mathematical abilities to make a lot of money. Unfortunately, I lost
a lot of money, but they did let me keep the casino dice that we played with. And I guess
if Newton is my hero, then the nemesis in this story is this guy here, a French mathematician
Henri Poincaré, who at the turn of the 20th century understood that even if we have the
equations that describe the way the universe evolves, they may not be able to help us in
predicting what's going to happen next. And this was this discovery of something called
chaos theory. Chaos theory actually is a statement that even simple systems can have
very complex dynamics that are very hard to predict. Now my favourite example of chaos
in action is a very simple system indeed. It's a pendulum. A pendulum is so simple and
predictable that we use it to keep track of time. But this is a slightly different pendulum.
It's two metal pieces jointed together a little bit like a leg. The geometry is very simple.
The geometry of these two pieces of metal, very easy to describe mathematically. The
equations of motion which control the pendulum are also quite straightforward. But trying
to predict the behaviour of this pendulum, what it's going to do next, is almost impossible.
I think the fact that some of you laughing is an indication of the unpredictability of it.
Humour is related to the fact that you really don't know quite what's going to happen next.
But the real challenge of chaos theory is can I reproduce that result? If I start the pendulum
off at exactly the same point, then Newtonian physics says it will do exactly the same thing.
Now I have a little notch here which I try and do a repeat of that behaviour. So try
and remember what it just did and is it anything like the following? Well that's kind of a
lazy one. Whoa! Suddenly off it goes. Wow! I mean it certainly didn't do anything like
that last time. Even knowing when it's finished, when has it done its last little one. This
is my favourite desktop toy. I can play with this for absolutely hours. So if you'll indulge
me, let's just do it one more time because it is. Whoa! Look, it's off it goes straight
away. So there are three different attempts to repeat the behaviour but this is so sensitive
to very small changes and completely changes what it will do next. My other favourite desktop
toy that I have on my table is this one here. It's again a pendulum. This is a pendulum
that swings and I've got six magnets which the pendulum is attracted to. And actually
I use this to make all my decisions in life. So each of the magnets has an answer to a
question. So we've got definitely maybe yes, ask a friend, try again, no way. So I'm a
big Arsenal fan so let's ask it whether I should make a bet on Arsenal winning the champions
lead this season. So I'm going to let that one just swing off. I've got a little example
of what this pendulum is like. So here are three magnets. I set the pendulum off, it's
attracted to the magnets but try and predict which magnet the pendulum is going to end
up at. It's almost impossible. It looks like one of the top one and then suddenly right
at the last minute it falls on the bottom one here. My one is still going trying to
make up its mind whether I'm going to make that bet on the champions league. Let's see
is it going to make up its mind? Or it says maybe. Okay, well that's hope I suppose. But
this is a little bit like an asteroid flying around three planets. The planets are attracting
this little asteroid and trying to predict which planet is going to get wiped out. Poincaré
actually discovered the sensitivity of these systems when he was trying to understand whether
our solar system was stable. So here are three computer models of the behavior of this pendulum.
So I started the pendulum off in the top left hand corner but I just changed very slightly
the decimal place of one of the coordinates of where I'm starting it. Sixth decimal place.
And you can see it completely changed the behavior. At the beginning they followed fairly
similar paths. So the first one ended up at the blue magnet. So I've colored the magnets
yellow, blue and red. But very small change in the sixth decimal place and the second
experiment ended up at the red magnet. The third experiment I changed the sixth decimal
place again ended up at the yellow magnet. So although they started off quite similar
very quickly they diverge and have completely different behaviors. And it's this sensitivity
to very small changes which means it's very difficult to predict the future. This is a
computer graphic which helps you to try and work out what's going to happen next with
this pendulum. If you start the pendulum over a yellow region it means it's going to end
up at the yellow magnet. So you can see that there's this large yellow blob that's a region
over the yellow magnet. If I start the pendulum near a yellow magnet I'm pretty guaranteed
that it's going to end up at the yellow magnet. The other two magnets can't attract it. But
interestingly opposite that yellow blob there's another region of quite big yellow where it's
also predictable because it just swings backwards and forwards and ends up at the yellow magnet.
The other two can't pull it apart. So there are regions where we can know. And of course
mathematics has been very powerful as a tool to work out what's going to happen next. This
is why we've been able to land a spaceship the size of a washing machine on the side
of a comet. But I started that pendulum off in the top left hand corner. And this is an
area which geometrically we call a fractal. A fractal has infinite complexity. So as I
zoom in on it it never simplifies. It never becomes a single colour. So as I zoom in I
think I've got more and more data about my starting position. I zoom in the 50th decimal
place but even the 51st can change it from red yellow to blue. And this is why if I'm
in that region it's incredibly difficult to predict what's going to happen next. And I
think this is a message here. It's important to know when I can know when I'm in a predictable
region but maybe as important to know when I can't make predictions about what's going
to happen next to the system. This has a name of course. You may have heard of it. The
butterfly effect. Because these chaotic systems control so many things in the natural world.
The weather. Why can't we predict the weather beyond five days? Because it has incredible
sensitivity to small changes. So the butterfly flapping its wings in Brazil can cause a tornado
to suddenly hit London. And it's not just the weather. The economy might well have chaotic
systems in it. But also population dynamics. So here's a little question for you. There's
an animal which it's rumoured every four years it throws itself over a cliff in a mass suicide
pack. So I'm going to do a little survey. See which one you think. So hands up if you
think muskrats throw themselves over cliffs every four years. Any votes for muskrats in
the audience. There's one right at the back. Yeah. Right. Okay. Any. What about voles?
Who thinks voles actually throw themselves over cliffs every four years? Yes. Oh, few
more for the voles fans. Okay. Great. How many things lemmings throw themselves over
cliffs? The hands are going up. Oh, he put up his hand. I guess I better put my hand up.
Yes. We even have this expression behaving like a lemming because it's believed that
they just follow the behaviour of other animals. And indeed the story is that every four years
the lemming population dies out. And the theory was that they perform some sort of mass suicide
pack. They just follow each other. You may remember that little computer game. Did you
ever play that one? I used to love that one. You'd set your lemming off and all the others
would follow it over the cliff. Well, it seemed like this behaviour had been proved by Walt
Disney. I'm old enough to remember when Walt Disney used to make nature programs and they
went out to the Arctic and they discovered these lemmings behaving very strangely, herding
themselves to the side of the cliff. And you think, well, gosh, certain death if they go
over that cliff smashed into the water below. Do they turn back? No, they start throwing
themselves over the cliff in some sort of suicide pack. So this footage from Disney
seemed to prove this idea that the lemmings kill themselves in this suicide pack every
four years. There's one here who really doesn't want to go over. He's saying, no, no, no,
go, go, no, no, go guys. And over he goes as well. So it seemed like the theory about
the suicide pack had been proved. Four years ago, a few years ago, the cameraman who filmed
this sequence came clean. Those lemmings did not want to go over that cliff. In fact, the
film crew had set up a spinning plate on the side of the cliff and there was somebody in
the production team putting lemmings on the top of this spinning thing and they were being
flown over the side of the cliff. They didn't want to go over. So it seemed like we were
back to the drawing board. What was it? Every four years, the populations of lemmings really
plummet. So if it wasn't, the film crew can't be going every four years and putting lemmings
on this spinning plate and it wasn't a sort of mass suicide. What was killing the lemmings?
It turned out it was mathematics that was killing the lemmings. I think something that many
students would sign up for. It's incredibly deadly subjects. But actually there's a mathematical
formula at work which determines the number of lemmings from one season to the next. It's
actually a very simple formula. So here's, I've simplified it a little bit so we can
explore the dynamics of this formula. But basically, each generation, you get to the
next generation, you get a sort of multiplication factor that, in this case, the lemmings double
each season, but there's not enough food for all the lemmings to survive. And so this formula
tells you how many lemmings will not survive that season. So what you do is you take the
current generation, you multiply it by the previous generation, and in this case we're
going to divide by 10, and then that's the number of lemmings that won't survive that
season. So I want to actually explore the dynamics of this formula with you. And since
we're on a stage, we're going to actually try and act it out. So I need two volunteers.
We're going to start with two lemmings. So could I have two volunteers to come up and
help me demonstrate, embody the mathematics of this. This is all about getting involved
and taking part. So I need two volunteers. There's one there. Sir, if you could come down
and then I need another lemming as well. No, to get this going, we need a woman. I'm
sorry. Don't worry, it's purely theoretical. So I need, could I have a female volunteer?
Yes. Why don't you come up? Thank you very much. I'm going to start picking on people.
So yeah, go on. Up you come. Great. Okay, so this is our first generation of lemmings.
So we have two lemmings, and the formula says you double up, so there'll be four lemmings
in the second generation. So actually, come on down. That's right, you're in a TEDx talk
talk. Great. Excellent. So we've got two, but I now need two who are there going to
be the offspring of these. Don't worry, we're not going to do this other than in the mind.
So could I have two more volunteers who are going to be, it's a great excellent, annoyingly
right in the middle of the thing, but that's great. So one more volunteer, please. Else
I will start picking on people. Excellent. So here are our four lemmings who've grown
over the course of this generation, but they're not all going to survive. And the formula
says I take four, multiply it by two, that's eight, divide by 10, that's roughly one is
not going to survive. So three will survive, one will not. So how are we going to sort
out which of these lemmings is going to die? Oh, look, there are some chairs in the wings.
That's great. Why don't we use the chairs? And there's kind of like nice circle here.
Great. So that's one. So three are going to survive. So I need three chairs. You probably
know what I'm going to ask you to do next. Okay. So one is not going to survive. So we're
going to play musical lemmings and you've got to fight for these chairs. Okay. We need
a little bit of music to get you going. So when the music stops, you've got to fight
for a chair. The one that doesn't get a chair gets kicked over the cliff. Okay. So cue the
lemming music. Yeah, some lemming dancing kind of helps here. Although they don't come yet,
no hovering. Okay, no hovering there. So yeah, a little bit of clapping also. But which three
are going to survive? One will not survive. Oh, wow. That was quite a fight out there at the
front, I think. But I'm afraid he didn't survive. So this one gets kicked over the cliff. There
he goes. And we've got three survivors. So let's get our three survivors up. Okay. Thank
you. Oops. Yes, let's see. So three lemmings doubles up to six. So I need three more lemmings
for the next round. So could I have three more volunteers? Who thinks they can beat this
lady here to that chair? Okay. We got a volunteer here. I need two more. Oh, God, we've got
a dance in front of camera. I definitely yes. Good. Excellent. And one more. Great. You
could have played the music for us. Yeah. So one more. Would you like to come up? No,
but you are going to come up. Thank you very much. Excellent. So now we've got three lemmings
double up to six. So remember the formula, which tells us how many are going to survive
three times six, 18 divide by 10. That's roughly two are not going to survive for will. So
we need another chair in here. Let's see whether the wings. Yes, excellent. So we've got one
more chair. So we've got a square here. Okay. So who's going to survive? Who's going to
not? So let's cue the lemming music. I just two bites the dust this time. So which two
are going to bite the dust? Let's clap them along. Bit of lemming music, lemming dancing.
Excellent. You're hovering. I can see it. You are hovering. So let's see who two don't
survive. Oh, gosh, that sound gentlemanly. Look, you've just kept and this. Oh my gosh,
granddad's gone. Granddad's gone. Oh, dear. Oh, but you're still here. Grandmaster. Oh,
you kicked off granddad. Oh my gosh. So we got four survivors. So if you could get up,
now what happens next? Well, they double up, they've got four double up to eight. So I need
four more volunteers. If you want to play again, you can you want to get them back. So four
more volunteers, please. This is the last round, your last chance to play. Excellent.
There's one coming down there. Three more, please. Come on. This is all about getting
involved in bodying the four. Oh, great. Excellent. Yes, one there and bring your friend. Oh, no,
we got two late. Too late. The place has been taken. So now we've got eight. Four times eight
is 32 divided by 10. That's three. I'm not going to survive five will. So we're going
to make another space here. I've got one more chair in the wings here. So five survivors,
three are not going to survive. So let's cue the lemming music.
So three is the magic number this time. Three are not going to survive. Is our grandma going
to make it? Yes. Fantastic. There are three that went over your girl. Let's kick them
over the side of the cliff. Yeah, this one's really determined to make it through the whole
generation. So if you could get up there now, something interesting happens to the dynamics
now. So we've got a five survivors. But what happens on the next round, five doubles up
to 10. Five times 10 is 50 divided by 10. I have five that die and five that survive.
So now we get a stability with this formula. And although the population started small,
it eventually stabilizes. So let's give our surviving lemmings a big round of applause.
Thank you. And the dynamics of this formula are such that wherever you start, they will
always get a fixed generation. So that's not what the lemmings do. The lemmings disappear
every four years. So what's happening with the lemmings? Well, if I make the lemmings
a little more frisky, and we triple every generation, and we run the formula again,
we start with two, if we ran that game, we would go up to five on the first round, then
to eight, and then it would go five, eight, and it would ping pong between these two
values with this new formula. So now we get a periodic behavior. It doesn't stabilize.
If we make the lemmings even more frisky, so they're multiplying up by a factor of 3.5,
then we see the actual behavior that happens in the Arctic. We see four different values,
one of them which is very low. And that's what we're seeing when we see the population
of lemmings disappear every four years. So this is all very predictable and nice patterns.
But if I tweak it a little bit more and take the lemmings and make them incredibly frisky,
so they're multiplying by a factor of 4, then suddenly the patterns disappear and chaos ensues.
And this is the important thing with these dynamical systems. So know the areas where
you can make predictions, but also to know when actually you lose control. In this case,
if I put one extra lemming in, it completely changes the dynamic of the population from
one generation to the next, this kind of butterfly effect or lemming effect, I guess it would
be called. So what about my casino dice? I'll return to my casino dice. Can I know about this?
Well, actually, I talked to one of the people who understood that these population dynamics
are chaotic. It's Lord May, a colleague of mine in Oxford. He's actually a cross-party
member of the House of Lords. And he's actually one of the interviewees in my book, What We
Cannot Know. And I talked to him about the importance it took government of understanding
the role of chaotic dynamics in trying to make predictions or not about what's going to happen
next. And he said to me over lunch in the House of Lords, not only in research, but in the everyday
world of politics and economics, we would be better off if more people realized that simple
systems do not necessarily possess simple dynamic properties. And I asked him how he was getting
on sort of trying to persuade the members of parliament and the civil servants about the
mathematics of chaos theory. And well, certainly about the MPs, he says they're not interested
in mathematics, they're mostly interested in their egos here. But I returned to my casino
dice and I wondered, is the reason that I can't predict what's going to happen next with this
casino dice? Because it's chaotic. And I got a little bit of a surprise, because it depends
on where you're playing. So there's a piece of research done by some Polish mathematicians
that've analyzed how the dice falls. And it depends what table you're playing on. So sometimes
this dice can be much more predictable than you might think. And if you take one thing away from
this talk, it's the following. If you've got a very squishy table, then the pictures which control
the dynamics of how the dice will fall are actually not fractal in nature, but very clear cut.
So let's see, did I? Yes, this little picture here. So the top left hand corner is a picture of the
dynamics of the dice as it falls on a very squishy table. As the table becomes more rigid,
and it loses less energy, then it becomes chaotic, and the pictures are fractal in nature. I cannot
know what's going to happen next. But let's take this table here, because here's a very soft little
carpet. What you discover is that if you drop a dice, it's more than likely to land on the face
that is down on your hand if the table is actually squidgy and soft. So this is quite
squidgy and soft. So let's see whether I get a six in this case. I got a one. Oh dear. And that's
why I chose to do mathematics, because you really do know what's going to happen next. Thank you.
