Hello, and welcome to Meteorology, our survey of the wonders of the weather.
My name is Robert Fulvelle.
I am a professor of atmospheric and oceanic sciences at the University of California,
Los Angeles, better known as UCLA.
And I would like to introduce to you my theme for the course, Three Simple Words, Nature
Abhors Extremes.
Nature Abhors Extremes, this is my motto, the lens through which I view the physical
world around us.
I would like you to consider this statement, but don't accept it uncritically.
After all, it seems like a ridiculous statement.
Nature is replete with extremes.
It seems to revel in them, especially when it comes to the weather.
Here are a few of nature's extremes.
Rainfall.
There's a place in India that averages 450 inches of rain a year.
Thereof drought probably means when the rainfall accumulation is less than 300 inches.
But in contrast, in some parts of the Atacama Desert of Shile, it hasn't rained in centuries.
Winds.
Close to 200 mile per hour winds were clocked in 1979's Typhoon Tip.
A 231 mile per hour wind was recorded in April 1934 during a winter storm at Mount Washington,
New Hampshire.
Over 300 miles per hour was detected in a devastating Oklahoma City tornado in 1999.
Tornadoes strike the United States about 1500 times per year.
Temperatures.
The highest temperature ever recorded in the United States was 134 degrees Fahrenheit
in Death Valley in 1913.
This was a world record high temperature for nine years.
The lowest temperature in the United States, you guessed it, in the Alaskan interior about
minus 80 degrees Fahrenheit.
Large temperature swings can occur when fronts pass or when winds shift, particularly when
they start blowing down slope.
In 1943, the temperature in a town in the Black Hills area of South Dakota rose by 49
degrees Fahrenheit in two minutes.
But nothing matches the temperature and the temperature swings of air heated by lightning.
In lightning, the air temperature immediately adjacent to the lightning bolt increases to
about 50,000 degrees Fahrenheit, literally in a flash.
The air jumps away from the lightning bolt so fast it breaks the sound barrier, and that's
the thunder that we hear.
Lightning strikes the earth millions of times a day.
I can keep going, but why bother?
Nature has many more extremes, and the real question is, how can I have the temerity,
the audacity to even suggest that nature abhors these extremes that it is so full of?
And here's why.
Why in large, those extremes that I have mentioned were symptoms.
Symptoms of an underlying disease.
Disease, look at that word, dis-ease.
It means an uneasiness with, a frustration with, an impairment, an imbalance, a stress.
Nature hates stress.
Let me do a non-atmospheric example, earthquakes.
I'm not a geologist, but living in Los Angeles has given me some unfortunate empirical experience
with earthquakes.
As you know, the earth's crust is fractured like an eggshell, and the pieces are in motion.
Some pieces trying to climb over other pieces, others just trying to pass by like ships in
the night, and all of this motion is frustrated, frustrated by friction.
So the stress builds, and it builds, and it builds, and it increases to an intolerable
point, and then the fault breaks.
The ground lurches, landscapes, and lives are rearranged.
And when the dust settles, we need to ask ourselves a question we must consider whether
any good has come from it at all.
And the answer is, yes, somewhere there is less stress, for a while, but it'll just
happen again.
Now let's consider the earth-atmosphere-ocean system.
We're receiving a lot of energy from the sun in the form of radiation, but much of this
radiation, much of this energy, streams through the atmosphere with very little absorption.
You can't warm the air if it doesn't absorb the radiation.
Instead, the radiation warms the ground.
So the atmosphere is heated from below, like a pot of water on the stove.
There's an imbalance.
Cold air, warm ground.
Nature wants to distribute the heat, first it tries via process called conduction, molecule
to molecule to molecule, far too slow.
So the stress builds.
The air stays cold, the ground gets hotter, the stress builds, and builds, and builds,
and then a threshold is passed.
And suddenly there's motion, air rushing up and down at high velocity, up to 100 miles
per hour, and rushing around and around at high velocity, 100, 200, 300 miles per hour.
Storms are what happens when nature loses its patience.
The stress has built to intolerable levels, something had to be done.
We're talking about imbalance.
With lightning, the stroke occurs when an electric charge imbalance becomes too large.
Many other atmospheric phenomena are responding to temperature imbalances, variations with
height, which I've just mentioned, also variations between land and sea, and between equator and
pole.
This is the first of many times in this course I will say this very important concept, probably
the most important concept in the entire course.
Temperature differences make pressure differences, pressure differences drive winds.
Temperature differences make pressure differences, and pressure differences drive winds.
The purpose of winds are to reduce the temperature differences that made the pressure differences
to begin with.
The goal of winds is to blow themselves out.
But, and you knew there was a but coming, right?
Nature is frustrated.
It's frustrated by the lack of absorption of sunlight by air.
It's frustrated by the slowness of conduction.
It's frustrated by the spherical shape of the earth.
It's frustrated by earth's rotation.
That's a big one.
Each of these things helps create stress.
Each permits temperature differences to grow, and grow, and grow until nature has a tantrum.
And what good did it do?
Like the earthquake, it has brought temporary relief.
And as soon as it's over, it just starts all over again.
Here is my working roadmap for the course, through a few examples.
I'll introduce a lot of concepts that I'll explain through the course.
A lot of this may not make a lot of sense at first, and it may not be obvious why what
I'm saying is important.
But if you return to this lecture after finishing the course, you'll see that it all makes sense.
So the first example, I want to use this can of electronic duster.
This is the kind of compressed fluid or compressed substance that we use to safely blow out dust
from electronic equipment.
The can is at room temperature, like everything else in this room.
But it feels cold to the touch in the way that the tabletop or the glass or the cup
does not, because it's made of metal.
Metal is a good conductor of heat.
Heat conductivity and its role in the atmospheric heat transfer is, we'll talk about that in
lecture five.
Now products like this used to use chlorofluorocarbons, CFCs.
CFCs have been shown to worsen the ozone hole, which we'll discuss in lecture three.
Nowadays, this product contains a substance called hydrofluorocarbon.
It's ozone safe, but it's also a greenhouse gas.
We'll discuss the greenhouse effect in lecture four.
Now normally, hydrofluorocarbons are gases, but the contents of this can are at very high
pressure.
So inside, it's actually a fluid.
Now I'm going to start releasing this product and talk while I'm releasing it.
As I'm releasing it, the hydrofluorocarbon rapidly converts to vapor.
In fact, it's boiling.
In lecture two, we'll discuss the concept of pressure, and pressure in boiling we'll
discuss in lecture eight.
The pressure drop, as the fluid is coming out of the container, is allowing expansion.
This allows and creates cooling without heat transfer.
We'll first encounter adiabatic expansion cooling in lecture six.
Adiabatic is a Greek word.
There's lots of Greek and Latin terms in this course, but I'll explain what each of
them means.
Adiabatic is the Greek word that means impassable.
We'll see why that actually makes sense.
So as I release the contents, one of the things that I've noticed is the can gets very, very
cold.
Now, be careful.
It's actually possible that if you discharge it too long, your fingers could actually stick
to the can and cause frostbite.
But this is far, far colder than just adiabatic expansion cooling.
This is a diabetic process.
Diabatic is the opposite of adiabatic, and in this case, it means it involves significant
heat transfer.
In lecture eight, we'll see that an important source of heating and cooling occurs when substances
change phase, such as liquid to gas, as in this example.
The vaporizing hydrofluorocarbon took heat from the can and from the air, and that's
why the can is so cold.
Where did the heat go?
It's now hidden or latent in the molecular structure of the gas.
We call this latent heat.
Our phase changes and latent heat transfers will involve water substance.
Speaking of water, let's look at the can.
If you look closely at the can, you'll notice that it's actually wet.
It might actually have frost on it.
It is so cold.
Dew has formed.
The rumeir has been chilled to its dew point on contact with the can.
We'll talk about this in lecture eight.
With dew, latent heat was transferred from the condensing vapor to the rumeir, so my
can actually helped warm up this room a little bit, as if it needed it.
Latent heat from condensing vapor is storm fuel.
Storm fuel for isolated cumulus clouds, we'll discuss in lecture nine, to long, squaline
storms and tornado rotating supercell storms of lectures 18 and 19, to hurricanes, which
we'll discuss in lecture 21.
We got a lot out of this little can, didn't we?
Now, next, let's talk about water vapor and shear.
Water vapor and shear are important ingredients in the storm recipe.
Water vapor always helps.
Shear is sometimes good, sometimes not.
Shear is wind change over a distance, wind speed, wind direction, or both.
By wind, I'm talking about the horizontal wind, and the horizontal wind can have shear
in the vertical direction and the horizontal direction as well.
This particular example is horizontal wind shear.
What you're looking at is infrared satellite imagery from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, NOAA.
IR, or infrared, is part of the electromagnetic spectrum.
We'll see that in lecture four.
Specifically, it's a wavelength of infrared radiation that is absorbed by water vapor.
Of course, there are no colors like red and blue in the IR part of the spectrum.
So these have been added.
These are false colors.
What you're seeing is a series of hooks that grow in a chain.
These hooks are forming, owing to strong horizontal wind shear.
This is an example of a shear instability.
An instability is what makes the weather so interesting.
The reason?
Shear creates spin.
Spin is ubiquitous in nature.
The ultimate spin is the spin of our planet.
The rotation rate of the Earth is 1,000 miles per hour at the equator.
The spin of the Earth, the spin relative to the Earth, are both profound influences on
the winds, on clouds, thunderstorms, hurricanes, and beyond.
That was horizontal wind shear.
So now let's consider vertical wind shear.
Let's say you spill a heavy fluid on your kitchen table.
It spreads owing to its own weight.
The leading edge of the fluid is very clearly defined.
We've made a front.
Fronts are places where fluids of different density meet.
Fluids are ubiquitous in nature, molasses and air on your table, air and water at the
sea surface, oil and vinegar in your salad dressing.
Fluids with different densities do not want to mix.
We can make air more dense by cooling it.
We'll see the relationship between temperature, density, and pressure in lecture two.
Air and water represent a density difference of about a thousand times, but fluids will
resist mixing with density differences as small as one percent.
And we can make a density difference of one percent in air with a temperature difference
of just a few degrees.
So let's do an example with air, cold and warm air, cold air chilled by evaporation
of rainwater, maybe cold air chilled by passing over cold ground, something like this.
But in any case, the point is that the more dense cold air is burrowing beneath the less
dense warm air.
So look at the air flows.
Do you see the vertical shear?
Do you see the spin?
Now I'm a modeler.
I make simulations of the weather and phenomena such as this.
This is a simulation of cold air under running dense air.
This creates shear.
Shear creates spin.
Look what spin can do.
In this case, it's creating billows.
We call these Kelvin-Helmholtz billows, or KH billows.
I'll show you this picture again in lecture nine.
This is a photo taken by one of my former students.
These are Kelvin-Helmholtz billows made visible by condensed water, a testament to the power
of shear and spin.
One thing we'll see repeatedly, spin creates low pressure.
It's motion that begets new and different motion, motion that helps air rise, motion
that helps some storms intensify, others weaken, motion that can make hurricanes deadly, tornadoes
even deadlier.
So far, the shear we've seen is pretty benign.
But that's not always so.
My next example is the perfect storm.
The perfect storm was a storm that occurred in 1991, and it caused a lot of damage from
Florida to Maine and beyond, hundreds of millions of dollars of losses in Massachusetts alone,
29-foot waves, and massive coastal flooding.
You may know the perfect storm from the movie and the best-selling book of the same title.
The book was about fishermen who perished aboard a ship called the Andrea Gale on October
28, 1991, when their fishing boat was swamped by a gigantic wave.
The perfect storm is interesting to us because it was so unusual, in evolution and in motion.
Let's take a look at the track of the storm.
This is a topographic map of northeastern North America and the North Atlantic.
The red shading is terrain height above sea level.
The red dots show positions of the perfect storm at various times.
The storms position in intensity at 18-zero degrees, which is the same as the current
intensity at 18-Z on October 28, 1991, are marked.
In meteorology, we measure time by London time, the Greenwich Meridian, which runs through
the City of London.
18-Z means 1800 hours, or 6 p.m. in London.
It was five hours earlier in the Eastern U.S. 1 p.m. Eastern Standard Time.
Daylight savings time ended the day before, otherwise it would have been 2 p.m.
The storm's sea level pressure at this time is 1,006 millibars.
The millibar is a traditional unit in meteorology.
It was also 29.7 inches of mercury, which might be a more familiar unit to you.
Is that low pressure?
Not really.
We'll see it's actually pretty close to the worldwide average sea level pressure.
Millibars these days have been replaced by a new unit called the hectopascal.
The hectopascal was named after a great scientist.
But to me, it sounds like a disease, so I'll keep my millibars.
The plot also shows that the maximum wind speed at this time was 30 knots.
A knot is a nautical mile per hour.
Our common statute mile per hour is 15% higher, so it's 35 miles per hour.
It's also 56 kilometers per hour or 15 meters per second in other units.
The storm is heading east and south at this time.
Radio contact with the Andrea Gale was lost just a few hours later,
but there was a lot of life left in this storm.
24 hours later, the storm started turning to the west.
Stronger now, a large pressure drop to 986 millibars.
The winds are 50 knots, 58 miles per hour.
These are sustained winds in the United States that represents a one minute average.
Gusts could have been a lot higher.
On 12Z, October 30, noon in London, 7 am in Boston, storm pressure reached its minimum.
972 millibars, 34 millibars less than at the time of its birth.
Sustained winds are now 60 knots, about 70 miles per hour.
You're probably noticing a relationship between pressure and wind speed.
Sustained winds increasing as the central pressure drops.
Do the lowest pressures always produce the strongest winds?
Let's watch to see if that relationship changes over time.
These lows are called cyclones. Air flows around them in circles.
We'll see why in lectures 11 and 12.
This cyclone's westward track is very unusual.
We'll see in lecture 13 that the mid-latitude winds tend to blow from west towards east,
particularly in the middle to upper troposphere.
These are the winds that guide lows like this.
Those are topics of lectures 14 and 15.
You may be wondering what the troposphere is.
I'll tell you about that in lecture 3.
The storm weakened during its westward track.
Its central pressure rose to 996 millibars by 18Z, October 31st.
The winds weakened to 40 knots.
But the storm's unusual path has led it over the Gulf Stream,
and the warm water, the energy from the warm water,
has given the storm a new lease on life.
The Gulf Stream is part of Earth's grand ocean current system,
and we'll discuss that in lecture 20.
The storm then curved east and then north.
By 18Z on November 1st, it's a hurricane.
Central pressure, 980 millibars.
Sustained winds, 65 knots.
Here's proof that our relationship between central pressure
and maximum sustained winds is not perfect.
The storm's pressure has been lower in the past,
but the winds are strongest at this time.
Pressure is important, but pressure gradients largely determine wind speed.
A pressure gradient is a pressure difference
divided by the distance between the points.
More about that in lectures 11 and 12.
Our storm is just barely a Category 1 hurricane
on the five-category Saffir-Simpson scale.
This particular hurricane went unnamed, sort of,
because now it's named the unnamed hurricane.
We'll talk more about hurricanes in lecture 21,
including how hurricanes get their names.
The perfect storm didn't come out of nowhere.
Its direct ancestor was another hurricane named Grace,
which was moving across the Central Atlantic just the day before.
Let's take a look.
This is a representation of the surface temperature
in wind fields at 1Z October 28,
17 hours before the perfect storm formed
off the coast of Nova Scotia.
And here is Hurricane Grace.
It had just reached hurricane strength, Category 1,
65 knots, 75 miles per hour.
Grace was moving to the northwest,
as many hurricanes do at that location and time of year.
This is a consequence of the large-scale circulation.
We'll talk about that in lecture 13.
Grace is surrounded by isobars.
These are lines of equal sea-level pressure.
Grace's central pressure at this time was about 985 millibars.
It was strengthening as it continued moving over warm water.
The airflow around Grace is counterclockwise.
We'll see why in lecture 12.
The forces involved here are pressure gradient force,
which drives the wind, Coriolis force,
and the centripetal force,
and they combine to produce counterclockwise motion
around cyclones, parallel to isobars.
Actually, if you look carefully,
you'll see that the wind actually crosses the isobars
at a shallow angle, towards low and away from high.
That's due to the fourth force, friction,
and we'll talk about why friction turns the winds later.
Now, I'm highlighting a front.
The front is a meeting place between cold and warm air,
cold air born in the polar regions of the planet.
Air mass is called MP and CP,
maritime polar and continental polar,
and warm air born in the tropical regions,
MT for maritime tropical.
We'll talk about air masses in lecture 13.
We see cold, warm, and stationary fronts in lecture 14.
The name depends on which air mass is doing the pushing.
At this time, neither air mass is pushing very hard,
but that changes quickly.
Fifteen hours later,
we see the cold polar air is pushing more southward.
These are northerly winds.
In meteorology, we name a wind by where it has come from.
These winds blowing from north toward south are northerly winds,
and these winds have created a cold front.
To the east, warm air is gaining the upper hand.
These are southerly winds blowing from south towards north,
and a warm front has been born.
Something is happening along the front.
The spin is increasing.
It's becoming concentrated.
Spin makes low pressure.
Let's move ahead another nine hours.
The cold front and grace are on a collision course.
This is a contest,
a contest that the hurricane is going to lose.
Meanwhile, a new cyclone has appeared along the front
between the cold and the warm fronts.
This is the perfect storm.
It's now been born,
and the Andrea Gale has already been lost.
There are two cyclones on this figure.
Grace is a tropical cyclone,
born near the equator, nurtured by warm water,
happiest when the temperature gradients are small.
We'll see why in lecture 16,
and later, why tropical cyclones hate vertical wind shear.
In contrast, the perfect storm was born on a front.
It loves shear.
It feeds on it.
It's an extra tropical cyclone.
We'll see its life cycle in lecture 14.
Ahead 30 hours.
It's 7-Z on October 30.
The perfect storm is moving west.
Hurricane Grace is a memory.
The perfect storm is evolving,
a rather more complicated structure
than the textbook example we'll see in lecture 14.
It's always good to remember
textbook examples aren't often found outside of textbooks.
Let's jump ahead another day and a half.
22-Z, October 31.
The perfect storm has finished its move towards the west.
It's now sitting over the Gulf Stream,
soaking up that moisture and energy.
The front's still there,
but our storm's not on the front anymore.
In fact, it's not even an extra tropical cyclone anymore.
It's a tropical cyclone, a hurricane, just like Grace.
As for the front, new extra tropical cyclones
will form along it in other places at other times.
This is a cycle that will never end.
We are embarking on an inquisitive approach to the weather.
We'll ask and answer many questions.
The most important being how and why.
How the winds blow, why they blow the way they do,
how they're born, how storms form, and why they exist,
how they're born, move, and why they die.
Why the most important rain in a storm
may be that which actually never reaches the ground.
Some more questions.
Why is the sea breeze cool and the Santa Ana wind hot?
How do barometers work?
Why is it often bumpy as you fly over mountains
and cloudy as well?
How can it get so windy in the lee of mountains?
Why does dew form?
Why is the sky blue and the setting sun red?
In this course, I will show you how and tell you why.
I will show you how and tell you why.
Guided at all times by Einstein's famous dictum,
make things as simple as possible, but no simpler.
Some concepts will be easy.
Some will take time to marinate.
I employ repetition.
Be assured that if something's important, I'll repeat it.
If something's important, I'll repeat it.
See, I just did it.
But what I really mean is I'll be returning
to an important concept, a theme, an example, repeatedly
to remind you, to reinforce, and at every turn,
I'll try to appeal to your intuition and experience.
Many things turn out to be simple applications
of what we already know, what I call my kitchen examples.
However, the most interesting phenomena are probably those
that defy both our intuition and our experience.
An example, why is the sky blue at twilight?
I'll bet the answer surprises you.
We'll discuss that in lecture 22.
Here are a few questions to keep in mind along the way.
In the movie The Day After Tomorrow, there's a scene
in which bitterly cold air, originating many miles
above the ground, are drawn down by a powerful vortex,
flash freezing the city of New York.
In one scene, a flag is frozen in half-flutter.
Is that possible?
In the opening scene of the movie Twister, a grown man
is shown being sucked out of an underground shelter
by a tornado.
Is that plausible?
Airplanes fly to level where the air is bitterly cold.
It draws in this air to maintain the cabin pressure.
Do airplanes have to run their heaters continually
in order to compensate?
You're seated on the same airplane.
You're seated in an exit row.
You're afraid of falling asleep.
Your hand accidentally opening the emergency hatch,
precipitating a mid-air disaster in which everyone
and everything is sucked out of the airplane,
starting with you.
Are your fears reasonable?
Can you dig a well so deep that you can't draw water from it?
How is El Nino like water sloshing back and forth
in a bathtub?
My goal is to help you understand nature.
Whenever we understand something, however,
we peel away a little bit of the mystery.
The English poet John Keats complained
that by explaining how it worked,
Isaac Newton had unweaved the rainbow.
I could not disagree more.
Our appreciation for nature is enhanced
by understanding her design.
Please join me as we unweave the mysteries of the weather.
