Welcome back to Meteorology.
We're exploring the wonders of the weather.
In the last lecture, we realized that temperature
measures the microscopic activity of atoms and molecules
and pressures largely due to atmospheric mass
weighing down on us owing to gravity.
Density plays a subtle but important role in the atmosphere
because substances with different densities resist mixing.
For air, these three properties are related
through a simple equation called the ideal gas law.
Pressure decreases with height
because as you ascend, less mass remains to push down on you.
And density decreases with height as well
because air is compressible and it squeezes down on itself.
In this lecture, we'll see that the variation of temperature
with height is complex.
We'll learn what air is made of, now and in the distant past as well,
and we'll be introduced to the greenhouse effect
and its major players.
Some things to think about along the way.
We've all heard the saying,
warm air rises and cold air sinks.
Is that always true?
Could something that comprises only four out of every 10,000 molecules
in air really make a difference?
What good is the ozone layer
and how did a chemical used in common spray cans damage it?
But first, let's introduce ourselves to the standard atmosphere.
The standard atmosphere is created by averaging,
averaging from equator to pole, from winter to summer,
from day to night, from land to sea.
The standard atmosphere has four layers
distinguished by how temperature varies with height.
In the lowest layer, nearest the ground,
we call this the troposphere.
That's from the Greek, turning sphere,
turning, implying change, implying the weather.
It's our weather sphere.
The troposphere extends from sea level
up about 12 kilometers or 7.5 miles or so.
We remember that surface pressure is 1,000 millibars,
and the pressure at the top of the troposphere,
which we call the tropopause, is about 200 millibars.
With the surface pressure of 1,000
and a tropopause pressure of 200,
we remember that this represents 80%
of the Earth's atmospheric mass
because pressure is proportional to mass.
Further, notice temperature decreases quickly with height,
and I mean very quickly.
From 60 degrees Fahrenheit or 16 C,
at bottom on average, to minus 80 Fahrenheit,
minus 62 C at the top.
That's 140 Fahrenheit temperature drop
over a very short distance.
Why?
Because we'll see later that the atmosphere,
the troposphere, is heated from below.
Next up, stratosphere.
From the Latin, to spread horizontally.
You see words like stratus in there.
This is a layer of great stability,
which impedes vertical motions.
The top of the stratosphere is called the stratopause.
We find it at 50 kilometers
or 30 miles on average above sea level.
The pressure there is about a millibar.
So we see that the troposphere and stratosphere together
already account for 99.9% of the mass of the atmosphere.
In the stratosphere,
temperature increases with height instead of decreasing.
We'll see that some incoming solar radiation
is absorbed there, and further,
it's harmful ultraviolet radiation
being absorbed by oxygen and ozone.
The stratosphere, to us, is the ozone layer.
Next up is the mesosphere,
Greek for middle sphere.
It's distinguished by temperature
resuming its decrease with height.
The top of the mesosphere is the mesopause,
85 kilometers, 55 miles above sea level.
The pressure there is 0.01 millibars,
one-hundredth of a millibar.
And finally, the thermosphere
extends from 55 miles up
to where the atmosphere just fades away,
and it can live up to its name, too.
Temperatures there can be thousands of degrees,
and yet the thermosphere is also a strangely cold place.
The thermosphere helps illustrate the difference
between temperature and heat content.
There's virtually no mass in the thermosphere,
but it's a very deep layer.
Great depth with little mass means
it is a layer with very, very low density.
I'm sure you've heard the saying,
nature abhors a vacuum.
Making one, at least at sea level,
is actually pretty hard.
In fact, a good example of vacuum at sea level
is the classic incandescent light bulb.
There's a filament in here,
and electricity is pushed through the filament
in order to heat it up and make light.
But air is removed in order to prolong the life of the filament.
But even if the air is completely removed
and not replaced with anything else,
there's still some air remaining in the bulb.
There's still some density within this bulb,
and the air density in the bulb is still larger
than what we would find in the thermosphere.
Suppose you were unfortunate enough
to find yourself in the thermosphere.
You're back-facing the sun,
your belly facing the earth.
You'd have the absolutely unique sensation
of freezing and frying at the same time.
Your back, exposed to undiluted solar radiation,
would be very, very hot,
and you would find that very deadly.
But your chest is hidden from the sun.
Well, so what?
If you're in your backyard,
in your hammock, in your sea level,
your back facing the sun would certainly feel hotter
than your chest facing the ground,
but your chest would not freeze,
because air at sea level is dense enough
to carry heat energy around your body
from the sun into the shade.
But that's not true in the thermosphere.
Your chest would freeze.
Let's return to the troposphere.
Remember, the troposphere extends
seven and a half miles above mean sea level,
and we had that huge 140 Fahrenheit
temperature drop with height.
This is warm air beneath very cold air.
It's warm air underneath very, very cold air.
If warm air rises and cold air sinks,
why doesn't the troposphere turn over?
And here's a hint.
It's not because the stratosphere is stopping it.
It's not because the stratosphere is acting as a lid.
The saying, warm air rises and cold air sinks
is not always true.
What is true is less dense air rises
and more dense air sinks.
Less dense air rises and more dense air sinks.
That's one of the most important concepts in this course.
We have already seen that density decreases
exponentially with height,
because of air's compressibility squeezing down on itself.
The tropopause air is colder.
It is colder, but it's also less dense than surface air.
In fact, it's a quarter of the density of air at sea level.
This is another example where we see temperature,
but we need to think density.
So why is the troposphere heated from below?
And is there any way it could have been different?
To understand these questions,
we need to know more about how we receive energy from the sun.
And before that, we need to know a lot more about what air is.
So what is air?
The first thing we're going to do is we're going to divide air
into two categories, dry air and water vapor.
Dry air is very largely fixed in quantity
and well mixed through the atmosphere.
Water vapor, in contrast, is extremely variable
in horizontal space, in vertical depth, and in time.
So let's look at dry air first.
Dry air is 78% nitrogen in the form N2.
That's two nitrogen atoms.
Together they combine into a diatomic nitrogen molecule.
Nitrogen is removed from the atmosphere by bacteria and soil,
and it's returned when plants and animals decay.
A further 21% of the dry atmospheric mass is oxygen in the form O2.
Oxygen is removed by plants and animal decay
and also by the process of oxidation
in which oxygen combines with other elements.
And it's added back to the atmosphere through plant photosynthesis.
About 1% of the dry atmospheric mass is argon,
one of the non-reactive noble gases.
You can think of argon as just lying around doing nothing.
And in fact, argon comes from the Greek word for lazy.
Now, if you were keeping count,
that already adds up to 100% o-inter rounding.
And it would be very tempting to ignore the minor constituents.
But they're not really so minor.
We would ignore the other constituents
of the dry atmospheric mass at our peril.
And one of those minor gases is carbon dioxide, CO2.
I want you to think about this analogy.
Picture a basketball arena.
25,000 persons gather together to watch a basketball game.
And each individual in that stadium
representing a fraction of the Earth's dry atmospheric mass.
That means that just shy of 20,000 of the patrons
would represent nitrogen 78%.
And a little over 5,000 would represent oxygen's 21% share.
And about 250 of the patrons would be argon slackers,
probably up there in the cheap seats.
In this stadium of 25,000 persons,
carbon dioxide share would represent only 10 persons.
You could lose 10 people in a stadium this size
and never find them.
But these 10 individuals are the players.
And no players, no game.
Carbon dioxide represents 0.0387% of the dry atmospheric mass,
and you know it's rising.
That's only 387 molecules out of every million.
But carbon dioxide has an outsized importance as a greenhouse gas.
So it plays a major role in regulating the temperature of the Earth's surface.
Now I have to admit, my example is a little exaggerated.
CO2 isn't the only greenhouse gas,
and indeed it's not even the most important one.
That role goes to water vapor.
But what this does show,
what it shows is we cannot presume importance from quantity.
78% of the dry atmospheric mass is N2, nitrogen,
which has virtually no role in determining the radiative balance
of the Earth-atmosphere-ocean system.
But this planet would be a different place
without that 0.0387% of carbon dioxide.
This planet would be a lot different if it had a lot more.
CO2 concentrations are rising,
due in large part to fossil fuel burning.
In fact, CO2 concentrations in the atmosphere have increased 20% over my lifetime.
This plot is called the Keeling Curve,
named after Charles David Keeling,
the scientist who first started making measurements such as these.
The horizontal axis is time in years,
and the vertical axis, carbon dioxide concentration, imparts per million.
Note the sawtooth nature of this curve.
There's an annual cycle superimposed on a clearly distinct upward trend.
These data were collected at Mauna Loa, Hawaii, in the Northern Hemisphere.
Which time of year should the atmospheric CO2 concentration be smallest?
Well, let's think.
Biological activity of plants removes CO2 from the air,
so therefore atmospheric concentrations should be lowest
after periods of the highest plant activity.
So that means the summer and into the early autumn.
This demonstrates that nature provides an important sink for carbon dioxide.
But to show something more,
it shows that the sink is not large enough to compensate for our activity
for what we're doing to increase the CO2 in the atmosphere.
And it also shows, it also shows without natural sinks,
which include the ocean, atmospheric CO2 concentrations would already be higher.
Other minor constituents in the dry atmospheric mass include methane, CH4,
about two parts per million.
It's added to the atmosphere by six distinct sources.
First, swamps, rice paddies, landfills, and areas like that.
Second, methane is added by ruminants, like cattle and sheep.
Third, insects like termites.
And also biomass burning is fourth.
Methane is contributed by the ocean as well,
and the Earth's interior biovolcanic activity.
Methane is highly reactive, and it is removed by oxidizers.
But the importance of methane is this.
It's roughly 25 times more potent per unit weight than carbon dioxide as a greenhouse gas.
Methane is also increasing over time due to anthropogenic activity.
And you can see in this plot, it also has a seasonal cycle.
The next minor constituent is nitrous oxide, N2O, about 300 parts per billion with a B.
It's known as laughing gas, but it's no laughing matter.
It's about 300 times more potent a greenhouse gas by unit weight than carbon dioxide.
Nitrous oxide is produced in the soil by bacteria and destroyed by sunlight,
principally in the stratosphere.
There are anthropogenic sources of this gas, and concentrations have been rising.
Our next minor constituent is ozone, O3,
three oxygen atoms together to produce an ozone molecule.
Ozone represents about 40 parts per billion.
Near the surface, it is a dangerous pollutant which damages plants and contributes to smog,
and ozone literally eats rubber.
If you have windshield wipers on your car and you live in a polluted area,
you may notice that they don't seem to last too long, and ozone is part of the reason.
Ozone is created by lightning, and it contributes to the peculiar fresh odor
we sometimes detect in the vicinity of thunderstorms.
In fact, ozone comes from the Greek word to smell.
Up to now, our drier constituents have been pretty well mixed through the atmosphere,
but ozone is our first and most important major exception.
The vast majority of ozone is located in the stratosphere,
where local concentrations are 250 times larger than they are in the entire atmosphere as a whole.
In the stratosphere, ozone is produced after oxygen molecules absorb incoming solar radiation,
and it's destroyed on reaction with atomic oxygen.
Ozone itself also absorbs harmful radiation that would otherwise survive to reach the ground.
Let's look at the natural stratospheric ozone cycle.
It looks something like this.
Consider an oxygen molecule that's O2, two oxygen atoms, and it absorbs ultraviolet radiation.
And the act of absorbing the ultraviolet radiation causes the molecule to split apart
into its individual oxygen atoms.
But oxygen atoms don't last very long in the atmosphere.
Oxygen is far too reactive, and an oxygen atom will find a nearby O2 molecule to react with,
and that makes O3, which is ozone.
Next, ozone also absorbs ultraviolet, which splits it apart.
So notice in this process that ozone is both created and destroyed, but there's no net loss.
And also two ultraviolet absorption events have occurred, one with oxygen, one with ozone,
and that's harmful radiation that doesn't reach the ground.
Now, you've undoubtedly heard of the ozone hole,
which is an area of depleted stratospheric ozone residing over the South Pole.
It has a very strong annual cycle and is most pronounced in October, which is spring in the southern hemisphere.
The ozone hole is a natural phenomena, but it's one that has become much more severe in recent years.
The peculiar meteorology of the Antarctic atmosphere has made ozone loss far more pronounced there,
and in fact, this southern hemisphere problem has primarily a northern hemisphere cause,
because to a large degree, it came out of a spray can.
Now, the culprit in the excessive ozone hole expansion includes something called chlorofluorocarbons,
which I'll call CFCs.
CFCs are very rare in the atmosphere, amounting to only one to two parts per 10 billion.
But CFCs play a dual role as greenhouse molecules and also destroyers of stratospheric ozone.
CFCs have anthropogenic sources.
They were used as propellants in spray cans, but also coolants in refrigerators and in air conditioners,
as solvents and in fire extinguishers.
A CFC you've probably heard of is spreeon.
The problem is CFCs are chemically inert, which leads to them having very, very long lifetimes in the atmosphere.
This long lifetime allows CFCs released at the surface to spread globally and loft far upwards, reaching the stratosphere.
In particular, they can work their way to the southern hemisphere where they become trapped
in an intense vortex of winds that encircles Antarctica during its long and sunless winter season.
When sunlight returns to the region in the Antarctic spring, intense ultraviolet radiation from the sun
can break the CFC molecules apart, liberating the chlorine atoms.
Ultimately, and it's more complicated than this and we'll discuss it, but ultimately,
these chlorine atoms become involved in reactions that destroy ozone,
and also restore the free chlorine back to the atmosphere, leaving those chlorine atoms free to destroy even more ozone.
The basic chemistry of this looks like this.
First, free chlorine reacts with ozone, creating chlorine oxide, CLO, and molecular oxygen.
But then chlorine oxide encounters a free oxygen atom.
These oxygen atoms were just floating around, and when they encounter one, it gives up its oxygen to the oxygen atom.
So we see that the free chlorine is liberated and lives yet again to attack yet another ozone molecule.
This is Pac-Man in the stratosphere.
Now, eventually, the chlorine atom is removed from the atmosphere, but before it does so, it can destroy many, many thousands of ozone molecules.
Let's take a look at what the ozone hole looks like.
Here's how the ozone hole appeared on a single day, September 30, 2008, as seen by NASA's satellites.
We're looking down over the South Pole and we can see the continent of Antarctica.
The colored field we're looking at is total ozone in a vertical column, but we already know that virtually all of that is in the stratosphere,
so we're really seeing stratospheric ozone.
The blue colors in this image indicate very low concentrations,
and we see the ozone hole has engulfed all of Antarctica and is reaching out towards South America.
Next, let's look at how the ozone hole evolved within a single year, the last half of 2008.
Our loop has started in July, and we see the ozone hole, developed by August, the end of Southern Hemisphere winter,
and then it gets very big in September and very big in October, which is their spring.
By year end, it's gone, which is summer in the Southern Hemisphere.
And note also a clockwise circulation around Antarctica.
We'll come back to that, and some interesting geometric shapes come and go in the ozone hole as well at the edges.
The ozone hole was first detected in 1979 by scientists of the British Antarctic Survey.
They had been making measurements of stratospheric ozone from Antarctica since 1957.
This plot shows the Antarctic ozone concentration in October over the years.
The depth of the hole grew rapidly after 1979, and the hole has generally been growing larger in horizontal size as well,
reaching a record extent in 2006.
The next animation tracks the evolution of the ozone hole over the years.
This loop starts in 1979, and we're seeing October ozone concentrations every year during Antarctic spring.
And we see very clearly there's considerable inter-annual variability, there's great variation among the years,
but the trend, the trend towards larger and deeper ozone holes indicated by the preponderance of blue in the fields is clear.
Question. Why haven't CFCs destroyed stratospheric ozone over the entire planet?
Why is the destruction limited to one place, the South Pole, and one season, the Austral Spring?
And the short answer is, we got lucky.
The chlorine liberated from the CFCs doesn't stay free very long before getting incorporated into other stable forms,
including hydrogen chloride and chlorine nitrate.
And under normal circumstances, these compounds can hold on to the chlorine that they acquired from the decomposed chlorofluorocarbons.
But remember, you saw a prominent clockwise circulation in those animations.
You were seeing the South Polar Stratospheric Vortex, a huge ring of fast-moving air encircling the South Pole.
That air is extremely, bitterly, incredibly cold.
And in that cold vortex, clouds of ice and clouds of nitric acid can form, and they may look very pretty,
but research has demonstrated they're deadly, they're deadly to ozone.
They're deadly to ozone because these clouds can play host to chemical reactions that make hydrogen chloride
and chlorine nitrate, usually stable compounds, give up their chlorine to form diatomic chlorine gas Cl2.
And then, when sunlight returns in spring, ultraviolet radiation is able to break these Cl2 molecules up as well,
again liberating the chlorine atoms.
And it is these free chlorine atoms that are involved in the destruction of the ozone, leading to the Antarctic ozone hole.
Boy, this is pretty complicated.
And in fact, I hate to tell you, the chemistry is even more complicated than that,
because it involves other chemicals, notably bromine and nitrogen oxides from natural and man-made sources,
and these also contribute to ozone destruction.
So indeed, the 1995 Nobel Prize for Chemistry went to three scientists for explaining stratospheric ozone processes,
including the role of CFCs in their destruction.
And in 1987, the Montreal Protocol, an international treaty dedicated to phasing out the production of ozone-depleting substances
like CFCs, was initiated.
One of the most successful international treaties ever.
The good news is that new substances that don't deplete stratospheric ozone have been brought into widespread use.
But there's bad news too.
Some of those substitutes are themselves very powerful greenhouse gases,
making a little bit of their pollution go a very, very long way.
Now, let's turn to water vapor.
Water vapor is literally the fuel of thunderstorms and hurricanes.
Water vapor represents zero to four percent of the total atmospheric mass,
but is extremely variable in space and time.
Water vapor is concentrated near the Earth's surface in the lower troposphere,
and there's three reasons for that.
First, water has a surface source like soil, plants, and surface water like rivers, lakes, and obviously the ocean.
Second, an efficient mechanism for returning water to its surface origin exists,
I'm talking about precipitation.
And third, and most importantly, the ability of air to hold water vapor is a very strong function of temperature.
The ability of air to hold water vapor is a very strong function of temperature.
I will discuss an important caveat regarding that statement later.
But for now, let's know that warm air can hold much more water vapor than cold air.
At sea level, 90 Fahrenheit air can hold more than seven times more vapor than air freezing.
And, as we have already seen, the temperature decreases rapidly with height in the lower atmosphere.
And one reason is this is one reason why most of the water vapor is located near the ground.
And the reason is because higher up, it's too cold to permit much vapor to accumulate.
Let's talk a little bit about the early atmosphere.
Earth didn't always have the atmosphere we have today.
When the Earth was still cooling, it probably had an atmosphere of hydrogen and helium.
Those are the two most abundant constituents of the universe.
But Earth's mass is not great enough.
It's gravity not strong enough to retain those elements, and that early atmosphere was lost to space.
Subsequently, Earth developed an atmosphere that had significantly more CO2 than our present atmosphere.
And that atmosphere had plenty of water vapor, nitrogen, sulfur, and ammonia.
But the distinctive thing of that atmosphere, there was virtually no oxygen.
That atmosphere was produced by volcanic activity and crustal outgassing.
We should wonder, where did all that CO2 go?
Actually, all that CO2 is largely bound up in rocks, especially carbonates such as limestone.
And where did our oxygen come from?
In our atmosphere, the first free oxygen probably resulted from photo dissociation of water vapor by intense solar radiation.
Radiation came in and blasted H2O molecules apart, liberating the oxygen into the atmosphere.
But this is a very, very slow process.
So actually, significant oxygen concentrations had to await the evolution of photosynthesis,
which converts CO2 and water into sugar as well as oxygen.
Even then, oxygen concentration increases in the atmosphere were slow,
limited by oxygen's highly reactive nature.
So a large amount of the oxygen produced by plants and bacteria didn't get into the atmosphere,
or didn't stay there very long because they became bound up with iron in the soils.
Let's summarize what we've discussed today.
The atmosphere has four layers.
Most important for us, the troposphere, our weather sphere, and the stratosphere, which hosts the ozone layer.
In the troposphere, temperature decreases very, very quickly with height.
We saw a temperature drop of 140 Fahrenheit over a vertical distance of only 7 to 8 miles.
But the troposphere doesn't overturn.
The cold air at the tropopause is also much less dense than the air at sea level.
Less dense air rises, more dense air sinks.
That is the statement that is always true.
But what is air?
Air is mainly N2 and O2, nitrogen and oxygen, and a little bit of argon.
And the rest are just minor constituents that don't even add up to 1%.
But we saw those minor constituents are also very, very important.
One of those trace gases, CO2, is a greenhouse gas, and it's increasing in concentration time.
Other even rarer gases are even more potent at regulating Earth's surface temperature,
including methane and nitrous oxide, because they're also greenhouse gases as well.
And they represent the thermostat of the Earth's atmosphere-ocean system.
We saw that ozone protects us by absorbing harmful radiation that otherwise would have reached the surface.
And man-made chemicals like the now banned CFCs destroyed stratospheric ozone,
especially in the infamous ozone hole over the South Pole.
So what is this greenhouse effect I've been talking about anyway?
And what is radiation?
What's the difference between the radiation produced by the Sun and the radiation produced by our Earth?
We'll find out in our next lecture.
