Welcome back to Meteorology, our survey of the wonders of the weather.
Our lecture today concerns energy in the greenhouse effect, but first let me review
what we've seen in previous lectures. We've seen that pressure decreases quickly with height,
but the vertical variation of temperature is much more complex. The atmosphere has four layers,
only two of which are actually important to us. The troposphere or weather sphere occupies on
average the lowest 12 kilometers or seven and a half miles extending above sea level. Temperature
decreases with height very rapidly in this region, but it does not overturn because density also
decreases very rapidly. Tropospheric temperature decreases with height because it's heated from
below, despite the fact that the energy for the Earth-Atmosphere-Ocean system is coming down to
us from the Sun. The temperature decrease with height ceases in the stratosphere the next layer
up because oxygen and ozone are there intercepting some of the incoming solar radiation. In this
particular lecture, we'll see that all objects emit radiation, but the amount and type of radiation
depends very strongly on temperature. We'll see what solar radiation is made of and why the
radiation produced by the Earth is so very different. We'll discuss absorption and see some objects are
indiscriminate absorbers while others are very selective. We'll discuss the greenhouse effect.
Some questions to think about as we go through this lecture. What does color tell us about temperature
and when? Why can't we see at night? Why isn't the Earth's surface a frozen lump of ice? All those
questions involve radiation. In order to discuss radiation, we need to introduce ourselves to the
electromagnetic spectrum. The electromagnetic spectrum consists of radiation we can see,
visible light, the colors of the rainbow, radiation we can feel, the infrared, radiation we can
exploit, microwaves for cooking and communication, radio and TV and weather radar, and radiation we
can largely do without x-rays, gamma rays, and much of the ultraviolet. Radiation travels as waves
and waves are characterized by wavelength, the distance between crest to crest of a wave
or from trough to trough. In fact, the electromagnetic spectrum spans an enormous range
of wavelengths. Gamma and x-rays are about a billionth of a meter, a wavelength of a billionth
of a meter. Ultraviolet rays are about 10 millions of a meter. That means you can put four million
of them in an inch. Ultraviolet is also about a tenth of a micron, introducing a very useful
unit to use in radiation. A micron is a millionth of a meter. Visible light is the range from 0.4
to 0.7 microns or roughly two one hundredth thousands of an inch. The infrared part of the
spectrum we divide up into two sections, the near infrared about a micron and the far infrared
closer to 10 microns, about four ten thousands of an inch. Beyond that we have microwaves,
a thousand microns or 0.04 inches, TV and FM radio, wavelengths of about a meter or 40 inches,
and finally AM radio, which has a wavelength of about a hundred meters or the distance of a
football field. Our focus in this course is ultraviolet, visible and the near and far infrared.
For visible light, let me take you back to your childhood and remind you of the acronym ROYGBIV.
Those are the colors of visible light arranged from long wavelength to short, red, orange, yellow,
green, blue, indigo and violet. Next, I'd like to discuss four fundamental points
concerning radiation. I'll mention the four points and then we'll discuss them in turn.
First, all objects emit radiation. That means the sun, the air, the ground and your hair.
Second, the total amount of radiative energy emitted is a very very strong function of temperature.
Third, all objects radiate energy at all wavelengths of the electromagnetic spectrum.
Fourth, objects radiate much more energy at some wavelengths than others. So first,
the statement was all objects emit radiation. That's true for all objects with a temperature
greater than absolute zero. That narrows it down to everything. Remember, absolute zero is minus 459
Fahrenheit, minus 273 Celsius and zero on the Kelvin absolute temperature scale. For our purposes
here, suffice it to say that objects emit radiation because they have temperature. Second, radiative
energy emitted just very strongly depends on temperature. In fact, the energy is proportional
to the fourth power of temperature. We call this the Stefan-Boltzmann law. If we measure the temperature
in Kelvin, we see that if we take an object's temperature and we double it, the radiative
energy output increases by a factor of 16 because 16 is two raised to the fourth power.
So picture a warm summer day. The warm ground is maybe 80 degrees Fahrenheit. That's 300 Kelvin.
The temperature of the sun's outer surface is 6,000 Kelvin or near abouts. That's 20 times
hotter. That means the sun produces 160,000 times more radiation than the warm ground does.
Third point, all objects radiate energy at all wavelengths of the electromagnetic spectrum.
The sun, the air, the ground, your hair emit gamma and x-rays. Ultraviolet, visible light, infrared
microwaves and radio waves. But beach sand might be hot at noon, but it certainly doesn't give off
visible light, and we sure hope it's not producing much deadly gamma ray radiation either. So while
that statement is true, it's a little misleading, and that leads us to our fourth point. Objects
radiate much more energy at some wavelengths than others. The sun produces gamma rays and radio waves,
but most of its output is in the visible light between 0.4 and 0.7 microns and nearby wavelengths.
Beach sand radiates virtually all of its radiation in the far infrared. Emission of visible light,
microwaves, finite, but undetectably small. So we've seen that the amount of radiation
produced depends on temperature, but also the kind of radiation produced also depends on temperature.
So that leaves us to two more laws which basically illustrate this last point. Plonk's law tells us
how much of each kind of radiation an object produces. Veen's law shows us which radiation wavelength
is produced the most. So let's look at what is called a Plonk curve for an object of roughly
6,000 Kelvin, about the temperature of the sun's outer surface. The horizontal axis is wavelength
in microns from short to long. The vertical axis is a measure of the relative output of radiation
at that wavelength. It looks like a bell curve with a long tail extending to the right, and the total
radiate of energy is the area beneath this curve. Now I'm going to subdivide this curve into our
four principal types of radiation, ultraviolet, visible, near infrared, and far infrared. And as I
do that, we see the peak for the sun is in the visible portion of the spectrum, and in fact the
peak is near the colors green and yellow. Our sun is a yellowish star, and its color reflects its
temperature. Further, we see that almost half of the solar radiation is in the visible band from
0.4 to 0.7 microns. 44% of the sun's output is visible light. Another 37% in the near infrared,
11% along the underneath the long tail of far IR and beyond, and only 7% is ultraviolet and shorter.
But this means that more than half of the sun's energy is actually invisible to our eyes.
So now, let's look at the Planck curve for a cooler object, an object that is cooler by a whole
500 Kelvin. That's a lot colder, but it is still a very, very hot object. We see a couple of things.
First, the area beneath the curve is a lot smaller. This illustrates the Steffen-Boltzmann effect.
Second, there's less radiation at every wavelength, and it may be hard to see, but the peak of the
curve has been shifted to the right. It's still in the visible, but it's been nudged a little bit
towards the color red, which are the longer wavelengths of visible light. For progressively
colder objects, the peak shift to longer wavelengths is now very obvious. This is Wien's law, which
tells us the wavelength of maximum emission is inversely proportional to temperature. We still
have a curve that looks like a Planck curve, but the curve is a lot shallower because the
temperature is lower, so there's less energy being produced, and the curve's peak is shifting to
longer and longer wavelengths as the temperature gets lower. In fact, the smallest curve I've drawn
here is for a red dwarf. That's a star with a temperature of 3,500 Kelvin, but that's still
12 times hotter than the Earth's surface. Now, you may be wondering something. Why did I draw
the hottest objects curve red and the coldest objects curve blue? In fact, I used blue for the
curve for the red dwarf. That doesn't seem to make a lot of sense. The answer is, in the world of
color temperature, our intuition and our experience mislead us. In the world of color temperature,
blue is hot and red is cool. An important point here, though, is that the typical Earth's surface
produces negligible amounts of radiation at visible and ultraviolet wavelengths,
and that's why we can't see at night. So now, let's turn to emission and absorption,
which are two very important points, and we're leading up towards the greenhouse effect.
What I've drawn are the plump curves for the Sun and the Earth plotted on the same scale.
Now, the Sun is much hotter, so why do these curves have equal height? There are two reasons
for that. First, solar radiation is spread throughout space. The Sun may produce 160,000 times more
radiation than the Earth does, but its radiation is spread out far and wide. And the second and
very important point is, for thermal equilibrium, we need our radiation budget to be balanced.
We need in to equal out. So, over a long period of time, not so long as to incorporate climate
change, but long enough to smear out effects of seasons and days and sea breezes and things like
that, our radiation budget is balanced, and the energy that we receive from the Sun and the energy
that we lose to the cold of space are equal. Note a really, really important point about these two
curves. Now that I've justified them, there is virtually no overlap. This lack of overlap leads
to an interesting and powerful consequence, the greenhouse effect. I'm going to call solar radiation,
shortwave radiation, because it's basically occupies the shorter wavelengths of the electromagnetic
spectrum, and my synonym for Earth's radiation will be longwave radiation. The division between
the two is at about three microns, but if you look at the curves, you see there's relatively
little radiation there, so we don't need to be very precise with our demarcation.
So far, what we've seen is how much radiation there is at various wavelengths,
but this does not tell us what happens to the radiation, and that's the topic we turn to now.
What is the fate of radiation, whether it's shortwave from the Sun or longwave from the Earth?
Three things can happen to radiation. It can be reflected back to its origin. It can be scattered
in all directions, or it can be absorbed. It can be absorbed by the ground, by air, by particles
in the air, such as cloud droplets and soot. The only way radiation can change the temperature
of an object is through absorption, so let me do an example of reflection and absorption.
I have here a heart-shaped object. Well, hearts aren't really shaped like this,
and it's red, and to a large degree hearts are red as well. I can actually argue that this
heart-shaped object is anything but red. Radiation of many wavelengths is encountering the ball.
In the visible wavelengths, all colors of the light are falling on this ball,
and they are all absorbed, except for red, which is reflected back to our eyes. We would not be
seeing this object as red if red were not reflected back to us, so the old saying is,
you are what you eat, and if that's true, this object is not red. A black object
absorbs all colors of visible light. A white object reflects all colors equally.
Now let's talk about absorption. Absorption is a very complex subject.
Objects, by which I mean atoms and molecules, absorb wavelengths for which they have a particular
affinity. Objects that absorb everything that have an affinity for everything are called black
bodies. Black bodies don't actually have to be colored black, but that helps. The ultimate
example of a black body is blacktop asphalt. That is a pig that eats anything. Generally,
the earth's surface, dirt, is very nearly a black body, and we treat it as such.
In contrast, in very important contrast, atmospheric gases tend to be very selective
absorbers. They're finicky eaters. Nitrogen, 78% of the earth's dry atmospheric mass,
absorbs almost nothing. Ozone O3 absorbs a lot of ultraviolet, some foreign for red,
and a wee bit more. The flip side of absorption is emission. Objects that absorb must also emit.
Remember, all objects emit radiation. Absorption depends on affinity.
Emission is determined by temperature. Absorption depends on affinity. Emission
depends on temperature. Let's consider ozone as an example. Ozone emits in the far infrared owing
to its relatively cool temperature, but it absorbs ultraviolet coming in from the sun.
So the recipe here is a simple one. UV in, far infrared, out.
What I'm showing you now is a very, very hideous diagram. It is a diagram of atmospheric absorption.
The horizontal axis is again wavelength and microns. The vertical axis is now the fraction
of radiation that is absorbed by the atmosphere. If the line is very high up on the curve,
then that represents very large absorption affinity. So the vertical axis is absorption
affinity, and we see a very, very complex figure, and this reflects the internal dynamics of atoms
and molecules. Now, when I show this plot in my class, I have a fantasy about this.
Remember the movie Dead Poets Society, where Mr. Keating tells his students to rip out a page out
of their textbook. I keep on wanting to tell my students to take this figure, the atmospheric
absorption, and rip it out of their textbooks, and I don't do that. I don't do that because
it would ruin the resale value of their textbooks. But this is a very important curve,
and so we're going to actually look at this curve step by step, but we're going to keep in mind
Einstein's famous admonition to make things as simple as possible, but no simpler.
So let's build this picture step by step. The first part, we're going to look at the shortest
wavelengths of sunlight, the ultraviolet. Radiation wavelengths less than 0.4 microns.
The simplified absorption for this portion of the spectrum shows that absorption is generally
very high. We've pegged up there close to 100%. That absorption is accomplished by oxygen and ozone
in the stratosphere. That's why the stratosphere exists and why it is relatively warm. The ozone
hole would let some of these wavelengths pass down to the ground. But notice the absorption curve
dips downward before we reach the far end of the ultraviolet. The very longest wavelengths
of ultraviolet do reach the ground. They survive to reach the ground everywhere. They reach us.
I call this portion of the curve sunburn alley because these are the radiation wavelengths of
ultraviolet that burn our skin. Now, this is not an official term, so don't go telling people about
sunburn alley. Let's move on to the next part of the electromagnetic spectrum, visible light.
In this portion, we see there is very little absorption of visible light because the absorption
curve is very far down at the bottom, very little absorption affinity. If you look closely,
there actually is a little bit and it's in the longer wavelengths of visible light, the colors
orange and red. We'll see later on in this course if this absorption actually means anything.
But let's finish the shortwave radiation going down. What's largely left is mainly near infrared,
in some far infrared as well. And we see we're back to significant absorption. This is absorbed
primarily by water vapor. Next, let's compare what's being absorbed by the atmosphere and what the sun
is producing. So now I have the curve superimposed on top of each other. And you see that the sun's
emission and the atmosphere's absorption curves resemble each other, except they're flipped.
There's a very important implication to this. The atmosphere absorbs best what the sun makes
the least of. The atmosphere absorbs best what the sun makes the least of. Half of the sun's
radiation is almost totally ignored. Much of that can pass right through air as if it weren't even
there and it reaches the ground, which will absorb anything and that warms the earth. We're halfway
done. Now we're dealing with radiation emitted by the cool earth as a result of absorbing all that
nice visible light. These are longer wavelengths, the far infrared, and I've drawn the bell curve
of the earth's plunk curve. This is another bell curve and it's actually starting to look pretty
normal. Let's divide earth's upward radiation into three sections as well, but remember it's
all far infrared. In the first section, we see that the absorption is almost 100%. The curve is
way up there at the top of the plot. This radiation is being absorbed by water vapor and carbon
dioxide. This is outgoing radiation being absorbed and re-emitted, some of that being sent back down.
This is part of the greenhouse effect. In the middle section of the curve,
emission is large, but absorption is relatively small. We call this the atmospheric window.
Between 7 and 11 microns, much of the radiation emitted at these wavelengths
manages to escape to space and isn't recycled into the greenhouse effect. Actually, this picture was
a little too simple. Absorption in the 7 to 11 micron band actually looks more like this.
There's a smudge, as it were, on the atmospheric window where ozone does some absorption. I call
this the ozone tonsil because to me, it looks like one. You may have to stand on your head to see why.
And again, that's my term, it's not a real term, but it illustrates why ozone is a greenhouse gas.
Finally, for our last section, the very longest wavelengths of the far infrared,
there's less emission, but also lots of absorption. And again, it's water vapor and carbon dioxide.
So now, let's put it all together. Our absorption spectrum, absorption of incoming solar radiation,
limited but important. Much of that radiation survives to be absorbed by the ground.
That radiation is then re-radiated upwards at longer wavelengths, owing to the cooler
temperatures of the earth. A lot of that radiation, though, is absorbed on the way out,
especially by water vapor and carbon dioxide. Our primary greenhouse gases are very selective
absorbers, and that is the greenhouse effect. If we remove these gases from our atmosphere,
the earth's atmosphere and the earth would be a much colder place.
Let's look at the atmosphere greenhouse effect in a slightly different way. I'm working towards a
question, why doesn't the greenhouse effect run away to catastrophe? And I'm working towards an
analogy, greenhouse gases acting as a blanket for the earth's surface. Some people really hate the
blanket analogy, but they're joyless people and they're not here anyway, so let's press on.
Picture sunlight streaming through the atmosphere, visible, ultraviolet, near-infrared, largely
ignored by the finicky atmosphere, but absorbed by the ground, and it warms it up. The ground is
a black body. It'll eat anything. The earth also radiates at longer wavelengths, reflecting its
cooler temperature. This is not the greenhouse effect, at least not yet. Some of the outgoing
radiation escapes to space, but some is absorbed by greenhouse gases. Those same selective absorbers
that wouldn't touch the short wavelength radiation raining down sure like the long wavelength stuff
going up. The greenhouse gases themselves radiate in all directions, including down,
down towards the ground, where it is absorbed by our old black body friend the ground. It'll eat
anything, and as a result, it warms up more. If you absorb, you must emit, so the ground emits
radiation again. Some of this escapes to space. Some is absorbed by our greenhouse gases yet again.
What is absorbed again must be re-emitted, and some of that is sent towards the ground,
which warms up even more. So why doesn't this process run away? Did you notice? Each step,
I said some of, some part of, some fraction of, each step actually involves less energy. We're
moving towards an equilibrium where n equals out, but the temperature of that equilibrium
is a lot higher than if none of this extra greenhouse action had taken place.
So let me do my Blanken analogy. You're in bed, it's cold, you're losing heat to the cold room,
you're losing far infrared. You're also absorbing far infrared from the room, but you're not very
happy with the balance you've struck. n equals out, but you're colder than you would want to be.
So you toss on a blanket, and the blanket absorbs part of your outbound radiation,
and some of that radiation, which is absorbed by the blanket, is re-emitted back to you,
increasing your temperature. So now you feel better, you feel warmer. Since the amount of
radiation you emit depends on your temperature, depends on the fourth power of your temperature,
you're actually radiating away more energy than ever. But you're also gaining more as well,
because you're gaining energy not only from the room, but also from the blanket you put on.
You have reached a new equilibrium temperature, your radiation budget is still balanced,
n equals out, but you're at a higher temperature. Note your temperature didn't run away,
and you didn't melt. The presence of greenhouse gases have made the earth much warmer than it
otherwise would have been. Earth's average surface temperature, average equator to pole,
winter to summer, land to sea, is about 60 degrees Fahrenheit. Without the greenhouse effect,
that average temperature would be 60 Fahrenheit lower, the average would be zero. The earth's
surface would likely be frozen everywhere, including the tropics. The reason the earth is not a big
snowball in space is because of greenhouse gases, carbon dioxide, ozone, methane, nitrous oxide,
and especially water vapor, the most important greenhouse gas of all.
Greenhouse gases are our thermostat, and hence our concern about their quantities
and the future of the earth. So, let me summarize. The electromagnetic spectrum
encompasses a gigantic variety of waves and wavelengths. It's not limited to ultraviolet,
visible, and infrared near and far, but those are the portions that we're interested in.
Objects emit radiation based on their temperature. The cooler the object, the longer the wavelengths
of radiation that are produced. Objects absorb radiation based on their affinity. Some objects
absorb everything, we call them black bodies. Others are very finicky and selective absorbers.
Most air constituents do not absorb much of the short wavelength radiation the sun produces,
a significant and important exception, ozone, which absorbs ultraviolet radiation in the stratosphere,
and also molecular oxygen participates in that as well. The cooler earth produces longer wavelengths,
preferred by finicky gases like water vapor, carbon dioxide, and other minor constituents.
This differential absorption represents the greenhouse effect. The very same gases that
largely ignored short wavelength radiation on the way down absorb at least some of earth's
longwave radiation welling up upwards. Since objects that also absorb must also emit and emit
in all directions, some of that intercepted energy is returned to the surface. This makes the earth's
surface warmer than it would have been without the greenhouse effect. In fact, it makes the earth
habitable. If the greenhouse effect is not something that's coming in the future, it's here
so we can be also. Let me do a quick look ahead to the next lecture. We've seen that earth receives
radiation from the sun, but it is not spread equally across the planet. Variations of solar
radiation with time will make the seasons. Variations with latitude will drive the atmospheric
circulation. Nature strives modally to smooth out these differences. There are two other ways
that nature has for moving heat energy around, conduction and convection. Only one of them
works very well. We'll find out which one next time.
