Music
Welcome back to meteorology.
In the last lecture, we examined the sea breeze and land breeze circulations.
These are local circulations driven by temperature differences.
The low thermal inertia land heats up quickly during the day,
despite actually absorbing less solar radiation than its neighbor, the sea.
The heated air gets thicker and deeper, creating a horizontal pressure difference
directed from land to sea above the ground.
Air above the ground starts flowing seaward, the first link,
in a circulation loop that ultimately ushers cool sea air inland along the surface.
At night, the sea breeze switches to a land breeze as the land cools quickly,
and again, that's low thermal inertia.
So both the daytime sea breeze and the night breeze are cool winds.
But we saw that the land breeze can be hot if forced to flow downslope.
That was the ultimate land breeze, the Santa Ana.
The Santa Ana's are hot owing to downslope motion, which causes compression.
The winds could actually start out quite cool, but they warm up quickly.
And the winds can speed up, too, as they're channeled through passes and canyons.
But neither of those things, neither of those things tells us why the Santa Ana winds are so dry.
This lecture is our first look at atmospheric moisture.
Some questions to think about during this lecture.
When are we susceptible to getting static electric shocks when we shuffle around in stocking feet?
And why?
Shouldn't ice appear on airplane wings? Shouldn't ice just bounce off?
And why are clouds the likely result of forcing air to ascend?
Let's get started.
I've already made this important statement.
The ability of air to hold water vapors is a very strong function of temperature.
That means that warm air can hold much more water vapor than cold air.
That's one reason why water vapor is not well mixed to the atmosphere.
The vapor is located pretty close to the ground because the air father locked is too cold to hold it.
Eventually, I will be qualifying this statement, but it's a great place to start our exploration of humidity.
A sample of air will have two moisture properties, vapor capacity, VC,
which tells us how much water vapor air can hold at a maximum, and that's primarily a function of temperature,
and vapor supply, BS, which tells us how much water vapor actually exists in the sample.
We can express these two properties as mixing ratios.
A mixing ratio is a mass of water vapor divided by a mass of dry air excluding the vapor.
It's like a recipe.
For example, in my backyard, I have a hummingbird feeder,
and in it I put a mixing ratio of one part sugar to four parts water.
For convenience, since water vapor content is so small, we express the vapor mass in grams and the dry air mass in kilograms.
So suppose a sample of air had 10 grams of water vapor per every one kilogram of dry air.
Its vapor supply would be 10 grams per kilogram.
It's just understood by us that the grams refers to water vapor and the kilograms to dry air.
Is 10 grams per kilogram of vapor supply? Is that a lot? A little?
Well, actually it depends on what the sample's vapor capacity is.
Relative humidity, or RH, is the ratio of vapor supply and capacity expressed as a percentage.
Let's take our sample of air with a vapor supply of 10 grams per kilogram.
If the vapor capacity of that air is also 10 grams per kilogram, the relative humidity is 100% and we're at saturation.
That air can hold no more water vapor.
If the vapor capacity of that air were 20 grams per kilogram, the relative humidity would only be 50%,
and that air would not feel especially damp.
If the vapor capacity were 30 grams per kilogram, as it might be on a warm summer day,
the relative humidity is now only 33%, and that might feel uncomfortably dry to you.
Next, we should appreciate that vapor supply is a measure of absolute humidity, the actual vapor content of the air.
The same absolute humidity of 10 grams per kilogram might feel damp or arid to you depending on the air's vapor capacity,
and that's primarily a function of temperature.
The bottom line that we'll be seeing again and again is this.
You have a good feel for relative humidity, but you're a very poor judge of vapor supply.
Here are some numbers, some vapor capacity values for air at sea level.
The numbers themselves aren't important, the pattern is.
I'm going to start at minus 20 degrees C, and I'm going to increase by intervals of 10 C or 18 F.
Minus 20 C is minus 4 Fahrenheit, and that air can hold 3 quarters of a gram per kilogram.
But at minus 10 C or 14 Fahrenheit, that air can hold 2 grams per kilogram at a max.
I've gone from 3 quarters of a gram per kilogram to 2 grams per kilogram of more than doubled.
At zero C or 32 F, that air can hold 4 grams per kilogram we've doubled again.
At 10 C or 50 F, 8 grams per kilogram.
20 C or 68 F at 15 grams per kilogram, a little less than double.
At 30 C, 86 F, we're at 28 grams per kilogram, and 40 Celsius air.
40 Celsius, 104 Fahrenheit, that air can hold 50 grams per kilogram at a maximum,
an increase of 66 times over the air at minus 4 Fahrenheit.
These values demonstrate that vapor capacity is a very strong function of temperature.
It's an exponential function.
For each increase of 10 C or 18 F, vapor capacity approximately doubles.
Increase the temperature a little, its vapor holding capacity increases a lot.
And vapor capacity is also influenced by pressure to some degree,
but we're effectively ignoring that for now.
Vapor capacity is also called saturation mixing ratio,
since it represents the mixing ratio or vapor supply that would be present in air if it were saturated.
At saturation, air is holding all the water vapor it can.
Our vapor capacity numbers clearly show that it doesn't take much water vapor to saturate cold air.
And if extra water vapor is present, it has to condense, forming liquid or ice depending on conditions.
It's easy to make clouds or fogs out of cold air.
But that also means it's very hard to get much precipitation out of very cold air.
It may be saturated, the relative humidity may be 100%,
but the vapor supply values are so small that precipitation has to be small.
It's like getting blood out of a turnip.
In contrast, hot air is thirsty air.
The vapor capacity of hot air is enormous, and it's very hard to saturate.
Picture a thimble versus a swimming pool.
That's a little bit of an extreme example.
But we don't find hot saturated air very often unless we're in a sauna.
By the way, mixing ratio tells us what fraction of air water vapor represents.
Recall dry air is 78% nitrogen, 21% oxygen, 1% argon, and so on.
A vapor supply of 10 grams per kilogram means air is 10 parts water vapor for every 1,000 parts dry air,
so the water vapor content is actually just a little bit under 1%.
Let's do a non-intuitive example.
Let's compare a foggy winter day in Minnesota, relative humidity 100%,
with a hot, very dry, early summer day in Death Valley.
Chances are there's more water vapor in the Death Valley air than in that Minnesota fog.
In Minnesota, our temperature might be minus 10 C or 14 Fahrenheit.
The vapor capacity, 2 grams per kilogram.
And I said we're saturated, so the vapor supply is 2 grams per kilogram.
Also, we have a fog.
In Death Valley, suppose the temperature is 40 C or 104 Fahrenheit,
so that's probably a little before lunchtime.
The vapor capacity of that air, 50 grams per kilogram.
And if the relative humidity is 5%, 5% and that's oppressively dry,
this means the vapor supply is 2 and a half grams per kilogram.
More moisture in Death Valley than in Minnesota.
Again, you're a poor judge of absolute humidity.
In the last lecture, we discussed the hot, dry Santa Ana winds of Southern California.
These were the hot, dry winds that blow out of the desert when the desert is cold.
They became hot because they traveled downslope and experienced compression warming.
We called this the dry adiabatic process,
involving temperature change due to volume contraction rather than heat exchange.
A sample of descending dry air will heat up at a rapid rate,
10 C per kilometer, or almost 30 Fahrenheit per mile.
Moisture, by which I mean air with some vapor supply, also compresses dry adiabatically,
as long as the air is cloud-free.
In fact, a better term for the dry adiabatic process would be sub-saturated adiabatic,
but I'm going to stay with the time-honored term.
As the moist air moves downslope, its vapor supply may not change,
but its vapor capacity increases dramatically due to the compression warming
and the exponential relationship between vapor capacity and temperature.
Let's do an example.
Santa Ana winds originating over Nevada might have a temperature of 50 Fahrenheit,
so that's a vapor capacity of 8 grams per kilogram.
And let's say the relative humidity is 100 percent, that's an exaggeration,
but that would mean the vapor supply is 8 grams per kilogram as well.
Now, let's move that air downslope two miles into Los Angeles.
The air's temperature increases by 60 Fahrenheit, becoming 110 Fahrenheit.
Its new vapor capacity is more than 50 grams per kilogram,
but the vapor supply is still only 8 grams per kilogram,
so instead of being saturated as we started out, the relative humidity is now under 16 percent.
We had a drop of relative humidity from a very moist 100 percent to bone dry 16 percent
just by moving the air downslope.
So Santa Ana winds can start off cool and moist in the high elevation Great Basin,
but they have very low humidities by the time they reach sea level.
In fact, relative humidities down to 5 percent are not uncommon when the winds are howling.
And this dry air is thirsty and it steals moisture from wherever it finds it, like vegetation,
which is one reason why low relative humidities are so conducive to fire.
Let's do another example.
If you live in a cold climate, you undoubtedly know that indoor relative humidities
can become uncomfortably low in the winter.
Let's go back to our foggy winter day in Minnesota.
The temperature was 14 Fahrenheit.
Relative humidity 100 percent.
Vapor supply and capacity 2 grams per kilogram.
So let's bring this air indoors and heat it up to a reasonable room temperature,
68F, 20C, but without changing its vapor supply.
So its vapor supply is still 2 grams per kilogram,
but the heated air's new vapor capacity is 15 grams per kilogram,
so our new relative humidity is 2 divided by 15 or 13 percent, shockingly low, literally.
When the relative humidity gets down to values below 20 percent,
static electric shocks become a common problem.
If you shuffle your feet on a carpet and then touch a piece of metal,
an electric shock can be created.
Friction has caused an electric charge to be created on your body.
And under higher humidity conditions, this charge cannot build up.
That's because objects become coated with a very thin layer of surface water,
even when the relative humidity is way below 100 percent.
Water isn't just a good conductor of heat.
It conducts electricity very well,
and as a result, the charge cannot hold and it cannot build up.
But when the air is relatively dry, the water coat is absent,
and the charge can build up to be discharged
when you touch another good conductor, like metal.
So the solution to your little indoor problem is to humidify the air,
adding water vapor to increase the relative humidity.
Nature has a big outdoor problem with static electricity buildup
because air is a lousy conductor of electricity.
Nature's discharges of static electricity tend to be dramatic and deadly
in the form of lightning.
We'll examine how and why lightning forms later in the course.
We defined adiabatic as temperature change due to volume and pressure changes.
No heat exchange was involved.
If I heat air in a furnace, that's an example of a diabetic process.
Temperature change by heat exchange.
So diabetic is the opposite of adiabatic.
But, you know, the source of the temperature change doesn't matter.
If you increase the temperature a little, the relative humidity decreases a lot.
So my examples so far have shown
that even if water content of air doesn't change,
relative humidity will change with temperature,
and did you notice it's an inverse relationship?
All our examples so far have involved warming the air by heat exchange or compression,
so it's time to do the reverse.
Suppose the vapor supply does not change during the day.
What time of day should the relative humidity be highest?
Well, it'll be highest when the temperature is lowest,
and on a typical day, that'll be around sunrise,
and the ground has been cooling all night.
Thus, we can increase relative humidity by lowering the air temperature.
And with enough cooling, we can potentially raise the relative humidity all the way to 100%.
And as we've seen, a great way to change temperature is to change its elevation.
Lifting air causes it to expand.
That was adiabatic expansion cooling.
So as long as the air has a little bit of moisture,
even just a smidge in the moisture,
we can lift that air to saturation if we can have the means to lift it.
So, let's make a cloud.
Let's do our Santa Ana example in reverse.
Suppose air starts at a foot of a two-mile-tall mountain on a hot and relatively dry day.
Let's say the temperature is 110 Fahrenheit, 43 C.
The vapor capacity of that air is more than 50 grams per kilogram,
and let's say the vapor supply is only 8 grams,
so the relative humidity is under 16%.
Now we force that air to ascend, to ascend to a mountain top two miles tall.
It cools 60 Fahrenheit on the way up, all the way down to 50 Fahrenheit or 10 C.
Its vapor capacity has decreased from a formally enormous value
down to a humble 8 grams per kilogram.
That's the same as the vapor supply, so our relative humidity is now 100%.
We started very hot and relatively very dry,
and with just a little bit of lifting and two miles is not that much,
we brought this air to saturation through expansion cooling.
Any further lifting would cool the air more,
causing the vapor capacity to become smaller than its vapor supply.
Now with the vapor excess in that air,
that air parcel that started off brutally dry has now become a cloud.
A cloud has been born.
Take a look outside. There may be a deep cloud right above your head.
The air at that cloud's apex lightly originated near your feet,
so when you look at a cloud you should be thinking, air has risen there.
So why does vapor capacity increase with temperature?
Why does warm air hold more water vapor than cold air?
Actually, it doesn't have anything directly to do with the temperature of nitrogen and oxygen or argon,
and everything to do with the temperature of the water molecules themselves
and the pressure they exert.
Let's investigate this.
The three phases of any substance are vapor solid and liquid.
For simplicity, let's just consider vapor and liquid at temperatures above freezing.
One thing we need to remember is water substance is always moving between these two phases,
always going back and forth.
Vapor molecules are becoming liquid, they're condensing,
liquid drops are becoming vapor, they're evaporating,
and the microscopic activity of a water molecule is a function of its temperature
and increases quickly with its temperature as well,
and water molecules are always in collision.
The lower the temperature is, the less likely two vapor molecules can avoid bonding upon collision
so the drops that they form are more likely to be long-lived.
The higher the temperature, on the other hand,
the more likely that a water molecule could escape from its liquid prison and become vapor,
so there will be very few surviving drops.
Let's examine this more closely, but first in the context of pressure rather than temperature.
Consider water vapor molecules in the vicinity of a plain surface of liquid water like a lake or a pond.
These vapor molecules are exerting a pressure, force per unit area, on the liquid water surface,
and we call this vapor pressure.
It's a small part of the total atmospheric pressure exerted on the liquid
because vapor represents only a very small part of the air's mass.
But if we increased the number of vapor molecules in the air,
if we increased its amount, we would increase the vapor pressure.
The vapor pressure is a function of the water vapor mass.
Now let's turn to temperature.
Temperature is measuring the microscopic energy of vibration of translation of water molecules in the air and in the liquid,
and the vapor molecules in motion may chance to collide with the liquid water surface,
and if and when they do, there's always a chance they'll become incorporated into the liquid water prison they will have condensed.
Meanwhile, water molecules in the liquid water prison seek to escape
to break the surly bonds with their neighbors and return to the atmosphere as vapor,
and if and when they succeed, they will have evaporated.
When the rates of condensation and evaporation are the same, the vapor-liquid system is an equilibrium.
There's vapor becoming liquid, there's liquid becoming vapor,
but there is no net gain or loss of either form of water.
This equilibrium is called saturation.
At saturation, there's just enough vapor molecules around to replace the water that escapes from the liquid.
This vapor mass exerts a pressure, and the pressure is called the saturation vapor pressure.
It is simply the vapor pressure exerted at the condition of saturation.
What happens if there are too few vapor molecules around to replace those that manage to escape from the liquid water prison?
This situation is sub-saturation.
The liquid water surface is losing more vapor molecules than it's gaining, so it is evaporating.
There is a net transfer of water mass from liquid to vapor.
The shortage of vapor mass also means that the vapor pressure is smaller than it needs to be.
This means that the actual vapor pressure is less than the saturation vapor pressure.
Actual vapor pressure represents supply.
Saturation vapor pressure represents demand, need, or capacity.
And indeed, for our purposes, actual vapor pressure is the vapor supply, and saturation vapor pressure is the vapor capacity.
Vapor supply and vapor capacity are moisture concepts expressed as mass or quantity,
rather than the consequence of mass, which is pressure.
So how does temperature fit in?
As the temperature gets higher, more vapor molecules would be needed to be present in order to balance the escapees.
That balances saturation, and the saturation vapor pressure and vapor capacity increase with temperature.
Since the microscopic energy increases quickly with temperature,
so does saturation vapor pressure and vapor capacity.
They're exponential functions.
The relevant temperature here is not the temperature of the nitrogen and the temperature of the oxygen per se,
but because of collisions in heat conduction amongst the constituents of air,
it's likely that the water molecules have the same temperature as their neighboring constituents.
So in a nutshell, the ability of air to hold water vapor is really the ability of vapor to avoid condensing.
It's the ability of water vapor to succeed in evaporating.
Now, we're not just measuring the temperature of water vapor alone,
so we will persist in our convenient untruth about air holding vapor.
How does the condensation process start?
It turns out the vapor molecules require a surface to condense on.
Large existing liquid water surfaces, like the lake we've been considering, definitely work, but you don't find those everywhere.
Other useful surfaces are bridges, picnic tables, your skin, blades of grass, and your glasses if you got them.
But what about in the middle of the air?
What kind of surfaces exist there?
Well, you'd be surprised.
There's grit suspended in the air, grit like sand particles, dust, soot, salt crystals, even what we call clean air.
And all of these surfaces in midair can serve to support cloud droplet formation when the conditions are ripe and we call them condensation nuclei.
Look inside each cloud droplet.
There's at least one piece of dust, salt, soot, or whatever.
And raindrops are made of many cloud droplets and so contain many pieces of grit.
I'm sorry to be the person to have to tell you that pure rainwater isn't pure.
Some water, some surfaces make very good hosts for condensing water molecules, and we call them hygroscopic nuclei.
Hygro is a combining form, meaning water, scopic to seed to seek.
These are water seeking nuclei.
Particles formed by sulfuric and nitric acid pollutants, soot particles, and other things like that help make haze in polluted cities because they attract water that might not otherwise condense.
They're hygroscopic nuclei.
But the best condensation nuclei, the most hygroscopic nuclei of all, is salt.
Have you ever noticed that it's often hazy along the seashore, even when the air is not polluted?
We'll talk about the optical phenomenon of haze later, when it's blue and it's white and white, in a future lecture.
But you're likely seeing small condensation particles.
Salt is a great condensation nucleus.
Indeed, water vapor will start condensing on salt particles at relative humidities as low as 75%.
That's what is making salt clump in your salt shaker.
Do you ever go to a restaurant and look in their salt shakers?
A trick they use in restaurants is to put rice grains in the salt shaker because rice grains very readily absorb water.
They're even better at absorbing water than salt is, so that helps keep the salt from sticking.
On the other hand, hydrophobic nuclei repel water.
Hydro is another prefix for water, phobic to fear.
Now, this is not rabies, a disease also called hydrophobia.
But water does seem to have a rabid fear of these hydrophobic nuclei.
Examples?
Oils.
Waxes.
Teflon.
Look on your new, nicely waxed car and you see water beating.
Look closely.
That water drop is practically on its virtual tiptoes, trying to get away from that waxy surface.
Now, hygroscopic or hydrophobic, there are no shortage of condensation nuclei in the atmosphere, even in clean air.
Condensation particles start off as small cloud droplets, and these small particles fall only very, very slowly relative to still air.
But collisions amongst these droplets can result in larger, faster falling drops.
And larger drops falling through a group of smaller particles may grow by accreting these droplets.
They coalesce.
This is the collision coalescence or warm rain process.
Warm rain means it does not involve ice.
We'll consider frozen water next.
We all know that 0C in 32F is the freezing point of water, but I should say the so-called freezing point.
Liquid water may not, and often does not freeze right away.
The reason is, at sub-freezing temperatures, tiny ice crystals try to form, but they're fragile and often rapidly disintegrate.
In fact, pure, undisturbed water can resist freezing all the way down to a temperature of about minus 40C or minus 40F.
At that temperature, homogeneous nucleation or spontaneous freezing occurs.
Water droplets literally and finally freeze on themselves.
But at higher temperatures, water needs a helper particle to freeze, what we call an ice nucleus.
And water is much more selective with regard to ice nuclei than it is with condensation nuclei.
In fact, the best ice nuclei are particles that are structured like ice, such as ice itself.
But until ice itself is abundant, ice has a hard time freezing. This is a real catch-22.
As a result, ice nuclei are not as common as one might expect, especially in the region of the cloud between temperatures of 0 and minus 15C or 32 and 5F.
The upshot is this. Due to a lack of ice nuclei and the selectivity and slowness of the freezing process, liquid water drops can persist in sub-freezing temperatures,
and we call this supercool liquid.
This is a significant aviation hazard because supercool liquid can freeze on contact with aircraft wings and other parts, impairing its flight worthiness.
In this situation, the airplane supplies the missing ice nucleus.
The Bergeron or ice crystal process for precipitation production is based on the fact that ice crystals will grow rapidly at the expense of supercool drops once they manage to form.
But recall that ice saturation represents the equilibrium state where the gain and the loss of water is the same.
In that case, there are enough vapor molecules to compensate for the escapees from the liquid.
In other words, the actual vapor mass and pressure equal the saturation vapor mass and pressure.
Sub-saturation means there aren't enough vapor molecules around to compensate for those escaping from the liquid.
But there's a difference between liquid water and ice. It's easier for water molecules to escape from prism.
The bonds amongst the ice molecules are much stronger and much harder to break.
So ice doesn't need as many vapor molecules hanging around to compensate for the escapees, at least when the temperature is below freezing.
In other words, the saturation vapor pressure over ice is smaller than that over water.
And it also means that ice can survive in conditions that would cause liquid water to disappear.
In a nutshell, ice outcompetes liquid in sub-freezing temperatures.
But remember, ice starts with a serious disadvantage, a lack of ice nuclei to kick-start the process,
particularly in the dead zone between 5 and 32 Fahrenheit, where ice nuclei are rare.
That's the idea behind cloud seeding. This represents an attempt to supply the missing ice nuclei.
The first attempt at cloud seeding used dry ice, frozen carbon dioxide.
Dry ice is extremely cold, minus 78C, minus 104 Fahrenheit.
This causes liquid to freeze spontaneously to homogeneously nucleate.
Subsequently, an atmospheric scientist named Bernard Vonnegut experimented with silver iodide as a cloud seeding agent.
Silver iodide has a crystal structure resembling ice and thus promotes the formation of more ice.
Vonnegut's research inspired his younger brother, Kurt Vonnegut, to write Cat's Cradle, a story of the ultimate ice nucleus.
Considerable work on cloud seeding continues, and it remains controversial.
So, let's summarize.
Warm air can hold much more water vapor than cold air.
We can express this as a vapor capacity VC, telling us how many grams of water vapor we can get into every kilogram of air.
Actual vapor content, also in grams per kilogram, is vapor supply, VS, and relative humidity is the ratio of the two.
Actually, air does not hold vapor. That's a convenient fiction.
In truth, as the temperature of vapor rises, it's more able to resist bonding with its brethren on collision.
That doesn't change the fact that the vapor capacity of warm air is enormous.
100 Fahrenheit air can contain 12 times more vapor than air freezing, although it usually doesn't.
So, vapor capacity is a very strong function of temperature.
And air temperature is very easy to change by adding or subtracting heat or by compressing or expanding air.
For a fixed vapor content, relative humidity will rise as the temperature falls.
So, dew and fog are most likely to occur around sunrise when the air is typically coolest.
And we can make clouds through lifting air, because that causes expansion cooling.
Forcing air to descend, on the other hand, is a great way to make air hot, as well as relatively very dry.
The air carried by the Santa Ana winds may start out cool and even relatively moist in Nevada,
but by the time it drops to sea level, it's a completely different story.
Both condensation and freezing processes need a nucleus, a surface to start on.
Condensation nuclei are abundant. Ice nuclei? Much more scarce,
leading to the existence of super cool liquid and clouds with temperatures below freezing.
Liquid water is still present owing to a lack of an ice nuclei until an airplane flies through the mother of all ice nuclei.
Cloud seeding is an attempt to augment the natural lack of these nuclei.
Let's look ahead. There's more to the story of precipitation, how it forms, how it grows, how it falls, and we'll return to this.
Our next step, however, is to use our useful concepts of vapor supply and vapor capacity to understand the ways in which air can be brought to saturation.
And this will lead us to an understanding and appreciation of how clouds and storms form, when, where, and why.
