Welcome back to meteorology.
In the last lecture, we started exploring the crucial
and central issue of atmospheric moisture.
In particular, we appreciated that the ability
of air to hold water vapor is a very strong
function of temperature.
We exploited this fact to quickly bring air to saturation
through expansion cooling.
In this lecture, we will see two more ways
of bringing air to saturation.
We'll also encounter two new kinds of temperature
that help us understand atmospheric moisture.
But a few questions to consider along the way.
What is black ice?
And when and where does it form?
And can ice really be black?
Speaking of ice, why are ice cubes you make
in your freezer so often cloudy in the center?
And why does it take longer to cook food
at higher elevations?
So let's recap our two moisture properties
that we learned about in the last lecture.
Vapor supply and vapor capacity.
Vapor supply is the amount of water vapor in air
expressed as grams of water vapor per kilogram of dry air.
Vapor capacity is also expressed
in terms of grams per kilogram,
but it tells us how much water vapor air could hold
at a maximum.
The ability of air to hold water vapor
is a very strong function of temperature.
Actually, we know now that it's the temperature
of the water molecules that's actually relevant,
but we're assuming that water vapor has the same temperature
as nitrogen, oxygen, and the argon
that make up most of the mass of the atmosphere.
So our concern in this lecture is bringing air to saturation,
and we've seen one way already,
lifting air in the dry adiabatic process.
This relies on the fact that air is compressible and expandable,
and the fact that pressure decreases with height.
So as we force air to rise,
the external pressure pressing in on air decreases.
And as the external pressure relaxes,
expansion is permitted and expanding air cools.
And as the air temperature cools,
the vapor capacity drops.
As a result, we can take air with even just a little bit
of water vapor and we can lift it to the point
where that air can no longer hold the water vapor it has.
At that point, the relative humidity is 100%
and saturation has been achieved.
We call this the dry adiabatic approach to saturation.
There was no heat exchange, just expansion.
There are two other ways of saturating air.
These introduce two new kinds of temperature,
the dew point temperature and the wet bulb temperature.
Actually, our familiar temperature
is also known as a dry bulb temperature
because it's measured with a thermometer bulb
that is not wet.
We'll see what makes the wet bulb wet pretty soon.
But first, I want to talk about the dew point temperature
and I'd like to do that via a story.
It was a hot and humid summer day.
I took a soda can out of the fridge
and I set it on the kitchen table.
After a few minutes, the can was covered
in a glistening, beating sweat.
My son, Tai, who was maybe four years old at the time,
was positively delighted by this.
And then he asked,
where did this liquid water come from?
I told him that the soda can is riddled
with thousands of tiny little holes.
And as the can warmed up, increasing pressure
inside the can forced the soda out through those holes,
making it appear to sweat.
My son knew that I like to pull his leg
and he said he didn't believe me.
And I asked him, how would you test my claim?
And he thought about it for a little while
and you can see the little gears moving in his head
and then he did something that I thought was really smart.
He took his finger and he ran his finger along
the outside of the can and he tasted the fluid
and he said it's not soda.
I admitted that he was right.
And then I said that the real story
is the air is filled with tiny bits of water
that are too small to be seen.
But when they come in contact with the cold can,
they catch it chill.
And this helps them grow large enough to become visible.
My son looked at me for a while and then he said,
nah, but actually that's the true story.
And what he had discovered was due
and the concept of the due point.
As we have seen, the regular or dry bulb temperature
tells us the vapor capacity of air.
Let's do an example.
For air at sea level, if the temperature is 20 degrees C,
68 Fahrenheit, the vapor capacity is 28 grams per kilogram.
But if the temperature is cooler, 10 degrees C, 50 Fahrenheit,
the vapor capacity is only 15 grams per kilogram.
The due point temperature tells us the air's vapor supply.
For air at sea level, if the vapor supply is 15 grams per kilogram,
then it's the air's due point temperature that is 10 C.
Do you see?
I'm using the same information we used previously.
The temperature tells me the vapor capacity.
The due point tells me the vapor supply.
At saturation, vapor supply and capacity are the same.
So the temperature and the due point are also the same.
So let's discuss the due point approach to saturation,
which is our second way of bringing air to saturation.
The adiabatic approach, which we discussed previously,
brought air to saturation without change of vapor content
by extracting heat.
And we did that by expanding the air,
by bringing it to a lower pressure.
We can also bring air to saturation
without changing its vapor content
and without changing its pressure by extracting heat.
This is a adiabatic process where extracting heat
and, as a result, the air's temperature decreases.
And when it decreases all the way to meet its due point,
we have reached saturation.
The due point approached the saturation.
So let's consider a sub-saturated sample of air.
And let's subject it to isobaric cooling.
We're going to extract heat without pressure change
and without altering its vapor supply.
So suppose I have a temperature and I have a due point.
The temperature reflects the vapor capacity of the air,
how much water vapor I can get in that air.
The due point temperature tells me vapor supply.
Since the temperature is larger than the due point,
the supply is less than the capacity.
But I'm going to cool this air now.
I'm going to cause its temperature to decrease.
How am I going to do this?
I can do it in many ways.
I can put the sample over ice.
I could stick it in the refrigerator.
Many, many ways of doing this.
But the point is, as the temperature decreases,
the air's vapor capacity decreases as well.
So its relative humidity,
the ratio between supply and capacity, is increasing.
When I've managed to cool the air all the way down to its due point,
the sample is saturated.
The sample is now saturated.
The temperature and the due point are the same.
Supply equals capacity.
Relative humidity, 100%.
Any bit of extra cooling now makes it super saturated.
And condensation will appear as a result.
Due has formed.
So the due point approach to saturation,
isobaric cooling without change of vapor supply.
Here's an example of air being cooled to its due point.
Let's start on a pleasant afternoon.
I'm showing you temperature as a function of height,
and how they might vary on this afternoon over stickman's height.
Note the temperature is larger than the due point everywhere,
so the air is substraturated.
But let's say after sundown,
the vapor supply of air doesn't change.
But the vapor capacity decreases
as the temperature of the air near the ground cools.
Why?
Because the ground surface under stickman's feet
has a low thermal inertia, and it's cooling quite well.
That causes the air near the ground to cool,
and the cooling is largest right near the ground.
If the air can cool all the way to its due point,
due will form.
Now as we discussed in the last lecture,
condensation requires a nucleus,
a surface to actually condense on.
But there's no shortage of those,
and the ground surface is a great condensation nucleus.
If the due point were below freezing,
then frost would form instead,
because the surface is also a pretty good ice nucleus as well.
In this case, we would call it the frost point.
But it's basically the same idea.
So let's talk about nighttime cooling.
The most likely place to find due or frost is at the ground,
since the ground typically cools better and faster than the air.
The most likely time to find due is around sunrise,
since under most circumstances,
that's the coolest time of the day.
The most likely place along the ground to find due
is on objects that have low thermal inertia
and are good radiators of energy, concrete, asphalt,
metal objects like railings, and soda cans.
Other good places are objects that have relatively large surface area
for their size, so that they can radiate away their heat overnight,
even more efficiently, in more directions,
like blades of grass and your car windows.
You've probably seen signs that say,
ice forms on bridge first.
In that case, you're seeing a combination of the factors
that we have discussed so far.
Bridges are made of materials with small thermal inertia.
They have more exposure to air,
radiating energy away on all sides, especially below.
Thus, other factors being equal,
the bridge will cool to the due or frost point
before the adjacent roadway will.
So this brings us to the topic of black ice.
A particularly dangerous kind of ice can form on roadways,
particularly bridges,
when sub-freezing air is chilled to the due or frost point.
But black ice is not black.
It's actually a very thin layer of very transparent ice.
It only looks black because it's taking on the color
of the underlying road.
The two dangers of black ice are, first,
it is difficult to see because it blends in with the road
because it is so transparent,
and black ice can be especially slippery.
Black ice is transparent in part because of its thinness.
As water freezes, dissolved air is squeezed out.
But oftentimes, some air is trapped and frozen,
and trapped air bubbles is what tends to make ice cloudy.
Your freezer's ice cubes are often clear at the edges,
but have a cloudy center.
Why is this?
The reason is because those ice cubes tend to freeze
from the outside in.
The air in the outer edges of the water, as it freezes,
can escape to the surrounding atmosphere
because it's first to freeze.
But the dissolved air in the water in the middle of the cube
has nowhere to go, so it is trapped.
Dissolved minerals can also make ice opaque,
but for thin black ice,
transparency is achievable and very dangerous.
Black ice is particularly slippery when newly formed.
That means the temperature is close to freezing.
Many of us, I certainly do,
have painful empirical experience that ice is slippery.
And amazingly enough, exactly what makes ice slippery
is still a subject of debate.
But one thing is clear.
If a thin surface layer of liquid water develops on that ice,
it is especially slick.
And you can melt a thin layer of thin black ice by friction,
by walking on it, by driving on it.
And that's easiest to accomplish
when the temperature is already close to the melting point.
If air were able to cool to the dew point
over a relatively deeper layer,
not just at the surface,
then we would have a fog instead.
A fog is nothing more than a cloud with its base
very near or at the ground.
Now, I'd like to give you a forecasting rule,
which is based on the information that we've discussed so far.
Under the right conditions,
air near the surface can chill to its dew point overnight fairly easily.
Particularly if that surface has a low thermal inertia.
If the winds are calm, the sky is clear,
and the moisture content of the air aloft is not too large.
Remember, water vapor is a greenhouse gas.
Therefore, dew is not uncommon, particularly in deserts.
And indeed, nighttime dew is a major source of moisture
for vegetation in places that otherwise don't get much rain
and not much moisture.
Once the surface air reaches its dew point, however,
further cooling is a lot more difficult.
Why is that?
The extra cooling would make the air super saturated,
and the excess vapor would then need to condense.
And condensation is a warming process.
When vapor becomes liquid, heat is released.
We call this latent heat, hidden heat.
Latent comes from Latin to lie hidden.
The Greek word to escape notice.
This heat warms up the air that holds the condensing vapor,
and that's the air that was cooling.
So this represents resistance to further cooling.
So here's the forecasting rule.
If you don't expect your air mass at your location to change overnight,
your minimum temperature will probably be no lower
than your afternoon dew point.
If the source and the nature of the air are not changing,
the vapor supply is probably not changing very much either.
Thus, the overnight dew point will probably not change very much.
And we may not manage to cool air all the way down to the dew point,
and many nights do, does not form, even on the most favorable surfaces.
But if we do manage to cool all the way down to the dew point,
if we manage to cool all the way to that point,
then further cooling will be more difficult
because now there's resistance to cooling in the form of condensation warming.
If the air mass changes, if the sea or land breeze blows by,
if a storm moves through, a front passes, etc.,
this rule doesn't work.
But this rule helps illustrate the importance of water phase changes,
a crucial source of heating and cooling.
So let's talk about evaporation.
Condensation is a warming process.
As we discussed, latent heat is released by the condensing vapor to the surrounding air.
Evaporation, in contrast, is a cooling process,
and of the two, I think this one is probably more intuitive.
When you step out of your shower, or even better, out of a swimming pool,
you feel cold, especially if the wind kicks up.
Why is that?
One reason is because you're warmer than the air and the water on your skin,
and water is a pretty good conductor,
but actually you didn't need to climb out of the swimming pool to feel that chill.
The major reason is because the liquid water on your skin is evaporating into the substraturated air.
It takes energy to break the bonds that hold water molecules together into liquid water drops.
Energy in the form of heat, and the heat required to break those bonds, comes from you.
This is, of course, why we sweat.
Our body gives up some of its precious water in the hopes of gaining some evaporation cooling.
So, what does the wind in this situation do?
The wind hastens the evaporation and the cooling by sweeping away those newly created water vapor molecules
from the liquid water that evaporated from your skin.
The water is evaporating since the air is substraturated, and the vapor supply is less than the vapor capacity.
That means there aren't enough vapor molecules to replace the molecules that have been escaping from the liquid water on your skin.
In other words, the vapor pressure is too low, less than the saturation value.
As evaporation proceeds, the number of vapor molecules around your skin increases,
and the vapor supply and the vapor pressure both get larger.
Thus, the vapor deficit, the difference between the actual vapor pressure and its saturation value,
the difference between the vapor supply and the vapor capacity gets smaller.
So, evaporation and the cooling it produces slows down.
Does this seem familiar to you?
It sounds a lot like wind chill.
So, how do you increase the evaporation rate?
One way is to take all those newly created vapor molecules hanging around your skin
and blow them away so the vapor deficit is again large.
You can push them away with the wind.
Now, let's talk about evaporation and the wet bulb temperature.
We have seen that evaporation also moistens the air that it cools, and thus it can bring air to saturation.
Saturation by evaporation cooling and moistening that results from that
is the wet bulb approach to saturation.
Let's consider an example.
Suppose I have a sub-saturated air sample, temperature 30C, 86F,
and the dew point is 10C, or 50 degrees Fahrenheit.
The vapor capacity of this air, 28 grams per kilogram.
The vapor supply only 8 grams per kilogram.
You're 20 grams per kilogram short of saturation.
You want to saturate the air, and this time you choose to do it by supplying the missing vapor.
Where's the vapor going to come from?
Why don't you evaporate some liquid?
Can you fit 20 more grams of water vapor into that kilogram of air?
The answer is no.
Evaporation does increase the vapor supply,
but evaporating that water takes energy from the air cooling it.
And as it cools, the vapor capacity decreases,
so the air is progressively less able to hold the water vapor you're trying to give it.
Can I draw an example that you might see in your kitchen,
or you won't see in your kitchen?
It's as if you had a juice glass,
and as you pour juice into that glass, the glass was actually shrinking.
You'd get a lot less into that glass than you expected.
The wet bulb temperature tells us what we should be expecting.
So let's start with sub-saturated air.
The vapor capacity is larger than the vapor supply.
The temperature is higher than the dew point.
And I'm going to evaporate some water into this air.
As the water vapor content increases, the vapor supply increases,
and therefore the dew point goes up.
But the temperature and the vapor capacity are decreasing.
They're decreasing due to the cooling.
The cooling is due to the evaporation of the liquid water that I'm using to raise the dew point.
So as the dew point rises, the temperature decreases,
and the temperature and the dew point are going to meet somewhere in the middle
at a new temperature, and that's the temperature we call the wet bulb.
For air brought to saturation by this process,
the new temperature and the vapor supply are larger than their original values.
But the temperature and the vapor capacity are also smaller.
You didn't fit as much water vapor into the air as you were expecting.
And that's the dew point, the wet bulb approach to saturation.
This also shows us the limitations of sweating.
Here's another way of looking at the dew point and wet bulb approaches to saturation.
Let's suppose we have a temperature and a dew point and we have sub-saturated air.
If I subject the air to isobaric cooling,
I can cool it all the way down to its dew point.
Evaporation gets me less cooling
because the temperature will only decrease to its wet bulb
because the dew point is rising as I increase the vapor supply.
So there's a limit to the cooling that I can get from sweating,
particularly on hot, damp days that might be most oppressive to us.
The best thing is to get some airflow going
so you're not constantly trying to moisten the very same air.
That's probably why you will fan yourself.
So let's do a very quick recap of our three temperatures.
Any sample of air has three temperatures to describe its vapor properties.
Its regular or actual temperature, its dew point temperature, and the wet bulb temperature.
All three temperatures tell us something important about humidity.
The actual temperature tells us vapor capacity.
The dew point tells us vapor supply, the actual water vapor content.
And it shows how much I can cool the air without changing the vapor supply
before saturation is reached.
If I do this, the actual temperature also changes,
becoming the same as its dew point, which is fixed in this particular process.
The wet bulb tells me how much I can cool that air by evaporation.
If I cool the air this way, its actual temperature is decreasing.
It's changing and becomes the same as its wet bulb.
The dew point temperature of this air also changes during this process as well.
At saturation, all three temperatures are equal
and it doesn't matter how we got the saturation.
At saturation, all three temperatures become the same.
And this makes sense.
If air is already holding all the vapor it can, it's already at its dew point because dew has already formed.
If the air is already saturated, I can't evaporate any more liquid water into it,
so it's already at its wet bulb.
If the air is subsaturated, the wet bulb temperature falls in between the other two temperatures.
The temperature is highest, the dew point is lowest, the wet bulb is in between.
We measure dew point temperature with a chart of the kind that I've been using.
But how do we measure the wet bulb temperature and why is it called the wet bulb temperature anyway?
So let's talk about that now.
We measure wet bulb temperature with a device called the sling psychrometer.
This consists of two thermometers that are mounted side by side.
One thermometer bulb is fitted with a sock which we make moist by dipping in water.
And this is what makes the wet bulb wet.
So this is the wet bulb thermometer and it will measure the wet bulb temperature.
The other bulb is left dry in order to measure the actual temperature.
So then we operate this thing by basically swinging it around.
Why am I swinging this device?
It's not changing the temperature that is measured by the dry bulb,
but the device is being swung to force air through the sock,
promoting evaporation of the air that is trapped between the sock and the wet bulb.
And that is the sling psychrometer and how we measure the wet bulb temperature.
So now let's talk about boiling.
You can make ice cubes in your freezer much more transparent,
like the black ice on the roadway, if you boil the water first.
Boiling purges dissolved air and minerals from the water that might make the water cloudy as it freezes.
What is boiling?
Boiling is actually very rapid evaporation, rapid evaporation from liquid to vapor state.
We of course associate boiling with bubbles and in fact the word boil comes from the Latin word to bubble.
What are these bubbles and why do they form?
Let's picture a pot of water on the stove.
We have liquid water is overlaid by air and the air pressure is pushing down on the liquid water.
Bubbles may form in the liquid water.
What's the fate of a bubble of water vapor that might form in this pot?
Atmospheric pressure is pushing down and also liquid water is pushing down on the water vapor bubble.
If the pressure pushing down from both of those sources are larger than the vapor pressure pushing back,
then the bubble will collapse and it will not last very long.
So how do you make a successful water vapor bubble?
Success comes with higher temperature.
The bubble is composed of water vapor at saturation so the relevant vapor pressure pushing back in the bubble is saturation vapor pressure.
And we know this increases exponentially with temperature.
So the boiling point is the temperature at which saturation vapor pressure pushing out from the bubble matches the external pressure pushing back.
This is why boiling point decreases with elevation above sea level.
Pressure decreases with height.
As we ascend there is less force pushing down not only on us but also on the bubbles.
So the temperature at which saturation vapor pressure in the bubbles is able to stave off this external pressure pushing down is relatively lower.
So therefore this is why food takes longer to cook at higher elevation.
Because the boiling point of the water is lower due to the lower atmospheric pressure.
This illustrates actually a very important point.
Phase changes occur at constant temperature as well as constant pressure.
Suppose we heat a pot of water on the stove at a constant rate.
And suppose we measure its temperature as a function of time and we plot it on a graph.
We would see the temperature increasing with time as we heat up the water.
But it stops increasing when the boiling starts.
During boiling liquid water is being converted to vapor.
But wait I'm still adding heat to the water so why isn't the temperature rising?
The reason is because the energy being added to my system is not being used to increase the temperature of the water.
Instead it's going to breaking the bonds between the molecules in the liquid.
Only after all of the liquid has been vaporized will the temperature of the water substance begin rising again.
The phase change, the phase change between liquid and vapor occurred at constant temperature.
So apply this to your food preparation.
Let's say you're cooking noodles by boiling them in water.
Heat from the boiling water is being absorbed by the food principally by conduction.
If the water boils at a lower temperature the food cannot cook as quickly because the water won't be as hot.
And you cannot make the water hotter by turning up the heat.
All you can do is make the water boil faster.
Now I'd like to talk about the latent heat of fusion.
The phase transition between solid and liquid water also involves latent heating and cooling.
This is called the latent heat of fusion or melting depending on the direction of the process.
The energy that went into the energy required to break bonds between molecules and ice is not as large as that's needed for water.
The latent heat of melting is seven and a half times smaller than the latent heat of vaporization
which is required for liquid water to convert to vapor.
So now let's summarize.
In this lecture we saw that there are three ways of bringing air to saturation, all three involve in cooling.
Air is sub-saturated when its vapor supply is less than its vapor capacity.
So saturating air is a matter of decreasing that capacity, increasing the supply, or doing both simultaneously.
Vapor capacity is a very strong function of temperature.
The very best way to decrease capacity is to lower that temperature.
The adiabatic expansion approach to saturation operates by expansion cooling.
The temperature drops as the pressure is reduced without change of vapor content until the vapor capacity and supply are the same.
The second way the dew point approach to saturation involves extracting heat at constant pressure, we call that isobaric,
until the vapor capacity equals the vapor supply.
The temperature at which the parcel would be saturated as a result of this isobaric cooling is called its dew point.
For the wet bulb approach to saturation, evaporation from liquid water provided the cooling,
and this caused the vapor supply to increase.
So the wet bulb temperature is reached when evaporation cooling and moistening have brought the air to an intermediate temperature
between the original temperature and dew point.
We also saw why boiling point decreases with elevation.
Boiling is a very rapid evaporation.
It was a matter of two pressures, atmospheric pressure pushing down, vapor pressure in bubbles pushing back.
We also looked at what happens during phase transitions including evaporation and condensation.
Latent heat is exchanged when water substance changes phase.
Latent means hidden, but the heat doesn't stay in hiding.
When water vapor condenses to liquid, this heat is released to the surrounding air.
When liquid needs to evaporate, this heat is taken back and stored.
It becomes latent within the vapor molecule.
So the water molecule is actually a very efficient carrier of heat energy.
This latent heating can be carried a long, long way.
In fact, one of the principal roles of clouds is to transport heat vertically with latent heat.
Latent heat release fueling potentially powerful updrafts.
Whether clouds can accomplish this, however, depends on how stable the environment is.
We'll start examining clouds and stability in the next lecture.
Thank you.
