Welcome back to Meteorology, our survey of the wonders of the weather.
You'll recall that we have three temperatures, our regular dry bulb temperature, our dew
point temperature, and the wet bulb. Each tells us something about moisture, such as vapor
capacity, vapor supply, and how much we can chill air through evaporation. If we want to bring
unsaturated air to saturation, cooling is involved. We can saturate air through expansion cooling
by evaporating liquid into it or by extracting heat with an air conditioner or something like that.
Cooling air reduces its vapor capacity. In this lecture, we commence a detailed
examination of clouds, how they come about, why are they thick or thin, long lived or short.
We'll introduce the very useful concept of the air parcel, a blob of air that will follow around
and monitor its temperature and humidity. We'll have three lapse rates to keep track of.
Lapse rates quantify how temperatures decrease or lapse with height. Lapse rates will ultimately
tell us if clouds are positively or negatively buoyant. Positively buoyant clouds grow
into the kind of deep clouds associated with severe weather. Some things to think about during
this lecture. We saw that we have warm air at the ground and bitterly cold air at the tropopause
just a few miles up. And yes, we saw that density decreases with height and that's why the troposphere
is not turning over. But why don't we give some of this warm air to the upper troposphere? And why
don't we just grab some of that cold air down and bring it to the surface? After all, they can do it
in the movies. We've been working hard on our moisture concepts. So let's start off by looking
at some cloud pictures. I became a meteorologist because of clouds. Probably a lot of us did.
I still study clouds. The study the way they form and die and how they move. My field is called
cloud dynamics. Because clouds are dynamic, they're always changing. Clouds can be very
beautiful in their own right and for the things that they can do with light. Many times, clouds
are very benign and even do appear like the proverbial ice cream castles in the sky. The
cloud particles reflect all of the colors of visible light to our eyes, which is why they
usually appear white. A common sight are these rays from heaven, which are called crepuscular rays.
That's a weird sounding word, but it comes from the Latin word for dark, crepuscular, implying dust
or twilight. But these rays can occur anytime that light is channeled through gaps and objects,
such as clouds. Here are crepuscular rays heading skyward, making an angelic halo around the cloud.
I took this picture. I was just walking down the street one day and I happened to look up.
It's one of my luckiest shots. Well, actually, maybe I wasn't so lucky. I look up a lot. That's
sort of an occupational hazard. This is a picture of Lake Tahoe at sunrise. The lake appears to be
on fire from reflecting the rising sun's light coming down from the clouds above. Many photographers
realize that what really makes a picture is how clouds manipulate the light. Clouds come in many
shapes and sizes. Mounded clouds with substantial vertical development are called cumulus clouds,
from the Latin term to pile up to accumulate. These lens-shaped or lenticular clouds often
result from lifting moist air near mountains. Lenticular clouds can look like flying saucers,
and sometimes they're even mistaken for them. But not all clouds associated with mountains are
quite so benign. These rotor clouds, downwind of California, Sierra Nevada mountains,
are the end result of violent downslope winds. We'll look at why these winds form later.
Clouds can take curious shapes. Here's a kind of water wave that cannot be surfed.
These waves result when the vertical wind shear is strong, and we'll talk about
shear in its role in cloud development later. Speaking of oceans in the sky, this strikes me
as a school of dolphins swimming in formation. I wonder what that says about me.
Band-like formations of clouds are very common, one reason being there are several different
mechanisms for organizing clouds in this fashion. We'll see more examples of this later in the course.
Clouds are dynamic. Nobel Prize-winning physicist Richard P. Feynman once said this about clouds.
As one watches them, they don't seem to change, but if you look back a minute later,
it is all very different. We can capture this change through time-lapse photography. Here is
perhaps 30 minutes in the history of a storm compressed into a few seconds. Note the storm is
composed of several short-lived elements. We call these cells. They seem to inflate like balloons,
reaching for the sky only to collapse. In long-lived storms, they get replaced by new balloon-like
cells. This storm is a long-lived collection of short-lived cells.
Here are clouds perched on a mountain range, or are they really perched? If you just glanced at
the mountains for an instant, you might think that the air was still and the cloud was just sitting
like a hat on someone's head. But in fact, the air could be moving and moving quite quickly.
The cloud could be bubbling and writhing, as in the case here. I'm picturing a giant white hand,
its fingers desperately crawling over from the other side of the mountain, blindly grasping for
something on our side. What is it grasping for? Well, I'm not sure. Here is a thunderstorm anvil
darkened by the presence of large precipitation particles. To the right, a precipitation shaft
can be seen where the rain is particularly intense. Probably hail is falling there as well.
To the left, the ominously lowered wall cloud, where tornadoes often appear. Beneath thunderstorm
anvils, this eerie bulbous formation called mematus sometimes appears. It isn't a thunderstorm
without thunder and lightning, which in a sense is clouds producing their own frightening and
beautiful light. Feynman also had this to say, anyone who has been in a thunderstorm has enjoyed
it, or has been frightened by it, or at least has had some emotion. And in those places in
nature where we get an emotion, we find there is generally a corresponding complexity and mystery
about it. We're going to learn about that mysterious complexity, but we will need more
tools in our toolbox first. Let's start with some terms, the names we use to describe and classify
clouds. We classify clouds with respect to the height of cloud base, low, middle, or high.
The three prefixes that we use to indicate cloud base height are first, strato, as in stratus.
That means spread out and straight. We've seen strato already in the word stratosphere.
Stratus are low clouds. Second, alto, which actually is the Latin word for high, but we use
it to mean middle. The reason is because our high clouds are cirrus, or cirro, from Latin to curl.
These are our high, wispy, and feathery ice clouds. We also have two suffixes, indicating the
degree of vertical development, sheet-like stratus, or lumpy cumulus. We can combine our
prefixes and suffixes in many different ways, so we can have cirrostratus, alto stratus,
cirrocumulus, and alto cumulus. We can even have stratocumulus, which seems like a contradiction,
but actually those are among the most common clouds on earth, sheet-like clouds punctuated with
lumps. We can have subtypes as well. An example of alto cumulus clouds is our lenticular clouds
produced by mountains, alto cumulus lenticularis. The tube-like roll clouds I showed you are
stratocumulus ungulatus, ungulating lumpy sheets. Cumulus humulus are our fair-weather
cumulus clouds. Humulus means humble. When clouds are heavy with rain, we insert the
word nimbo in the name. Nimbo stratus clouds darken the sky in sheets. And cumulonimbus,
that's our thunderstorm cloud. Now that we have names for our clouds, let's return to our cloud
recipe, which has two ingredients. Moisture and phase changes, we covered that in the last lecture.
An atmospheric stability and instability, we start on that now with the introduction
of the air parcel concept. I already mentioned to you that if we take a blob of air and force it
somewhere where the pressure is lower, the air expands. As a result of this expansion, the air
cools. And if it carries water vapor, its relative humidity rises. We can saturate moist air this way.
This was the dry adiabatic approach to saturation. In this thought experiment, we were making use
of the air parcel concept. We followed a sample of air around monitoring how its temperatures
like, how its properties like temperature and relative humidity changed. But we need to make
some assumptions typically when we follow air parcels around. So let's consider a parcel of dry
air for now. We'll add water vapor later. The typical assumptions and simplifications we have
to make are first, we assume our air parcel has flexible sides. So that the inside pressure
adjusts as the outside pressure changes. So as an example, I make a parcel near the ground
where the pressure is a thousand millibars and the inside pressure in my parcel is also the same.
Then I lift my parcel to somewhere where the pressure is 800 millibars. My inside pressure
drops to match the new outside pressure. How? By permitting the air to expand. Second, we usually
assume that the parcel is closed and insulated. Closed means no mass transfer with the environment
by which I mean its surroundings. No mixing. Insulated means no energy transfer with the
environment. No absorption or emission of radiation. No conduction. This is important. If a parcel is
dry, closed, and insulated, there's no way to change its temperature except through expansion
and compression by changing the outside pressure. That is the dry adiabatic process. So I think we're
ready for a very counterintuitive example. It's a hot day. Let's go outside and make a parcel of
that outdoor air, just dry air for now. It's 90 degrees Fahrenheit, a thousand millibar pressure.
The parcel is closed and insulated. Let's bring it indoors where the temperature is 68 degrees
Fahrenheit, but the pressure is still a thousand millibars. My parcel is still 90 Fahrenheit. I
have not changed its volume. So I go to the freezer and I put my air parcel in there where the
temperature inside the freezer zero Fahrenheit and the pressure 1000 millibars. My air parcel
is still 90 Fahrenheit. How is that possible? The reason is the parcel is dry, closed, and
isolated. We didn't change the exterior pressure, so the interior volume of the parcel did not change.
No volume change, no temperature change. Now I know what you're thinking. This seems ridiculous.
Eventually the parcel will cool off right down to the temperature of the freezer, right? Yes, it will.
But how long will it take? If we check back on our parcel after a few hours, we'll find that the
temperature of that air is definitely lower than 90 Fahrenheit. But what if we go back and check only
after a few minutes? Actually, we'll be moving these air parcels around pretty quickly. So this is
a better assumption than it might appear to be. Let's switch gears to lapse rates. A lapse rate
quantifies how temperature changes with height. Our expectation is that temperature decreases with
height. It lapses. So that makes for a positive lapse rate. We have already seen two lapse rates.
The first one is constant and fixed. If we lift a sub-saturated air parcel, it cools 10c per kilometer
or almost 30 Fahrenheit per mile solely due to expansion. This is the dry adiabatic lapse rate,
and I'm going to call it by its initial sometimes DALR. It describes how temperature changes with
height due to the dry adiabatic process. We also saw that temperature tends to decrease with height
in the lower part of the atmosphere called the troposphere. That was because air doesn't absorb
much incoming shortwave radiation, and it's also a pretty lousy conductor. Remember that temperature
decrease was huge, 140 Fahrenheit temperature drop over the seven and a half miles between the surface
and the tropopause. In metric, that 78 Celsius temperature drop over 12 kilometers. But in
either system, that's our environmental lapse rate or ELR. It checks in at 6.5 Celsius per
kilometer, 19 Fahrenheit per mile in the troposphere. In the stratosphere, the ELR is negative
because we have an inversion. Temperature increases with height. So we're already seeing that the
ELR varies in the vertical. It varies in horizontal space and in time as well. So suppose one day
the temperature profile looks like this instead. In the troposphere, I see two places where the
lapse rate is a little steeper, larger than the standard 6.5 Celsius per kilometer rate.
And there's something that we call a capping inversion a few kilometers above the ground.
This capping inversion could keep clouds from forming, and it also could mean that when clouds
do form, they're explosive. I also see the tropopause is a little higher. The stratosphere
a little colder in this particular example. The point is the ELR is as variable as the
weather itself. But 6.5 C per kilometer, 19 F per mile is a very reasonable average ELR
for the troposphere. Well, so what? We need to appreciate that the DALR and the ELR are two
very different lapse rates. Ultimately, that difference will reveal two things to us. Why we
can get thunderstorms and why we don't get thunderstorms everywhere or every day. Let's
start on understanding that. Let's lift the parcel. So let's make a closed and isolated parcel
of dry air. We're still ignoring moisture for now. And let's lift it. The inside and outside
pressure presumed same. Parcel expands as the surrounding pressure around it eases.
How temperature varies inside the parcel depends on expansion cooling, the constant DALR.
How temperature varies outside the parcel is governed by the ELR, which can vary from place
to place and time to time. Whether the parcel continues rising or not depends on the difference
between these two lapse rates. So when we lift a parcel, the extremely important question is,
will it keep rising? Remember, less dense air rises, more dense air sinks. Also,
recall that temperature, pressure and density are tightly related through the simple but powerful
ideal gas law. At the same pressure, warmer air is less dense than colder air. We are presuming
the parcel as the same pressure as its surroundings. This means that if the parcel is colder than its
environment, it is also more dense and it wants to sink. So let's try our new concept out on the
beach. It's a warm summer day. You're lying on the beach, frying like a piece of bacon, looking
up at that beautiful sky and wondering why it's blue. I'll tell you later. And it dawns on you
that it's as hot as you are. Sub-freezing temperatures are just a few miles above your head.
Say on this day the surface temperature is 90 Fahrenheit. Say the ELR on this day is 20
Fahrenheit per mile, pretty close to its long-term average. That means that one mile above you,
the temperature is 70 Fahrenheit. By two miles up, 50. By three miles up, you're already below
freezing. You leave the beach and you go to your dark-colored car, which has also been baking in
the sun. The temperature inside that car, 105 Fahrenheit. This air escapes when you open the
door. You just made an air parcel. This parcel is the same pressure as its surroundings, but
is 15 Fahrenheit warmer, therefore much less dense than its environment. It is positively buoyant
and it wants to rise. As it rises, it expansion cools at the dry adiabatic lapse rate, 30
Fahrenheit per mile. Meanwhile, the surrounding environment is also getting cooler, but at the
slower ELR. So one mile up, the parcel has cooled to 75 Fahrenheit. Its new surrounding environment
is 70 Fahrenheit. Our parcel started with a 15 Fahrenheit temperature advantage over its
surroundings and it's already squandered almost all of it. It is only 5 Fahrenheit warmer, but it's
still warmer and less dense than its surroundings, so it keeps on rising. By two miles up, the parcel
is now colder than its environment, inside temperature 45, outside temperature 50 Fahrenheit.
Up to now, we have had what we call free convection. Convection is heat transport by fluid motion,
heat transport by parcel ascent. The convection was called free because it was driven by its own
positive buoyancy. Now, further ascent can only occur if the parcel is forced, forced convection.
If the parcel were forced to rise much farther, it would become much, much colder, much denser than
its surroundings. By four miles up, the parcel would be 25 Fahrenheit colder. In reality, the parcel
isn't going to get anywhere near there. It would likely have remained near the level in the environment
where its temperature matched the outside temperature. We call that the parcel's equilibrium level.
There's an important lesson here. Let me illustrate it with a story. The story involves a low, down,
mean, dirty trick, so if you do this, don't blame it on me. We spent a lot of time at the beach in
this course, and you know kids love playing on the beach. They love digging holes in the sand,
and then they love filling up those holes with water. Go down to the beach and give a kid a bucket,
but give him a bucket with holes in the bottom. So the kid goes to the ocean or the lake, and he
fills up his bucket with water, and then he brings it back to the hole that he has painstakingly dug
in the sand, and he realizes that his bucket is empty. So he tries it again, and he comes back.
The bucket is still empty. All the water rushed out the bottom of the bucket. All of that nice
water there, his dry hole here, and no way of getting the water from there to here.
Nature is also frustrated, just like that kid. All that nice hot air near the surface,
how to share it with the bitterly cold tropopause just a few miles above, but we've seen that you
can't lift hot air very far. Hot air doesn't stay hot. We have just seen an important illustration
of a concept called atmospheric stability. Atmospheric stability is resistance to vertical
displacements. Let's look at this in a slightly different way. Here's the standard atmosphere
again with an average ELR 6.5C per kilometer. Let's make a dry air parcel out of environmental air
at some level in the troposphere. By look one kilometer above or below the parcel,
I would find air in the environment 6.5C cooler or 6.5C warmer than this new parcel.
But if I displace this parcel vertically, its temperature changes at the DALR of 10C per kilometer.
So if I push up this air parcel one kilometer, it cools 10C. It is now 3.5 Celsius colder than
its environment. It's 6 Fahrenheit colder than its surroundings. It's more dense at the same pressure
and negatively buoyant. It wants to sink back down where it came from. If instead I displace it
downward, it warms 10C instead due to compression. It's now 3.5C 6F warmer than its surroundings.
Less dense at the same pressure and positively buoyant. The parcel wants to rise back up
where it came from. We push air up. It wants to go down. We push air down. It wants to go up.
This atmosphere is stable to vertical displacements of dry air. This situation is called
absolutely stable. It also helps illustrate another powerful reason why the troposphere
doesn't just turn over. To see why, let's get on an airplane. You've probably noticed that aircraft
aren't particularly well insulated. They're cold and noisy. They're not pressurized all the way to
sea level pressure either. Let's see why. Picture an airplane flying at the tropopause 12 kilometers
up where the outside pressure is 200 millibars, outside temperature minus 60C minus 76F. Let's
say the cabin interior is pressurized to 1,000 millibars, but it isn't perfectly sealed. Therefore,
frigid outside air has to be brought in to maintain cabin pressure. It's going to be very cold in that
plane, right? No. Actually, the air conditioners on that plane are going to have to run full tilt,
and it has nothing to do with the number of bodies on board that aircraft. The reason is because we
need to compress air by a factor of five just to get it in the airplane. Outside pressure, 200
millibars. Inside pressure, 1,000 millibars. And as we squeeze the air into the airplane, the volume
changes, and the temperature changes. It's going to get very, very hot. This is equivalent to forcing
the air to descend those 12 kilometers from the tropopause to sea level, dry diabatically.
That causes the temperature to increase by 120 degrees C or 216F during that descent.
The air parcel started very cold at minus 60C, minus 76F, but the new parcel temperature inside
the plane once it gets inside is plus 60C, plus 140F, and all we did was change the volume by
changing the pressure. That's a big reason why planes aren't pressurized all the way to sea level
pressure, and reason why they're not too well insulated either. This example also helps illustrate
why the troposphere doesn't turn over. The troposphere represents warm air beneath cold air.
We previously saw that warm air rises and cold air sinks is not always true, but if we take the
tropopause air and we drag it down to the surface, we see it is much hotter, much less dense at the
same pressure than the air that's already there. And this works in reverse as well.
I mentioned in lecture one a scene in The Day After Tomorrow, the movie where very cold air was
brought down from the upper troposphere or stratosphere down to New York City. It reaches the
surface freezing, and it just flash freezes everything. We've just seen that that can't happen.
If we take air from the tropopause or the stratosphere and we bring it down to the ground,
it is very, very hot. We have gone as long as we could talking about clouds and stability
without considering the powerful role of moisture. Meteorology is not a dry subject.
Nature does have a way of lofting surface air to the tropopause, after all, in thunderstorms,
because water vapor is rocket fuel. We've already seen that we can lift air to saturation.
Remember as water vapor condenses, heat is released to its surroundings. That heat is the fuel that
we are talking about. So let's start contrasting subsaturated and saturated ascent. Rising air
expands and cools because pressure decreases with height, our dry adiabatic process. Remember
dry adiabatic really means subsaturated. The air parcel can contain moisture. It just must have a
relative humidity under 100%. And we've also seen the relative humidity of rising moist air
increases as well. That's how we created the cloud from lifting, because vapor capacity decreases
quickly as temperature goes down. Air is quickly becoming less able to carry the water vapor
than it's carrying with it. Further lifting of saturated air means further expansion cooling,
but now there's a vapor excess. There's more water vapor than the air can hold. This is
super saturation. Some of that excess vapor has got to condense, and condensation is a warming
process. What's receiving the warming? The air and our super saturated parcel. The net result
is that the parcel will still cool on ascent, but not as quickly. Instead of 10 C per kilometer or
30 Fahrenheit per mile, that cooling rate is going to be cut in half to 5 C per kilometer,
to 15 Fahrenheit per mile. We call this the moist adiabatic lapse rate, or MALR.
Unlike the DALR, the moist adiabatic lapse rate, MALR is not a constant, but we don't have to worry
about that right now. So let's go back to the beach. My example now is using Celsius in kilometers
instead. Here's my dry air parcel, which cooled at the DALR. It started off hot and positively buoyant,
but it didn't stay that way. Now let's make a saturated parcel. The same initial temperature
as its surrounding environment, 30 C, it doesn't get the head start my dry parcel did, but it's
carrying a lot of water vapor. Air of that temperature can hold 28 grams per kilogram.
If we push that parcel up one kilometer, it cools only 5 C at the moist adiabatic lapse rate.
Compare its temperature to its new environment. It's one Celsius warmer. It wants to rise on its
own. At two kilometers up, our dry and saturated parcels have the same temperature, but while the
dry parcel is running out of gas, the saturated parcel is just getting started. It's now two
Celsius warmer than its environment and it's rising faster. Let's jump ahead to four kilometers up.
At four kilometers, the dry parcel is 6 C colder than the environment. If we pushed it there and
let it go, it would drop like a rock, but the saturated parcel is 4 C or 7 Fahrenheit warmer.
That may not seem much to you, but that air is probably rising at 40 miles per hour.
So, let me ask a question. What we're noticing here is the environmental lapse rate at usually 6 C
per kilometer is actually larger than the moist adiabatic lapse rate at 5 C per kilometer,
so that rising saturated parcel can actually become warmer than its environment.
And the farther you raise that air parcel, the more warmer over its environment it'll be.
Then, you might ask, why isn't the atmosphere always in a state of constant chaotic mixing?
How often do you encounter saturated air near the surface? The answer is at the very tip of your
nose, not that often. Air typically starts off sub-saturated and cooling faster than the
environmental lapse rate before finally reaching saturation. Thus, air usually starts negatively
buoyant, and that's an obstacle to overcome. Can it be overcome? Will it be overcome?
Well, that makes this story much more interesting. So, let's summarize what we covered in this
lecture. Through photographs, we saw that clouds can be beautiful or threatening. They can manipulate
light and even make their own. We familiarized ourselves with some of the descriptive terms
we use for these clouds. We made use of the air parcel concept in which we identify a massive air
and follow it around as its temperature, humidity, and elevation change. How a parcel's temperature
changes on ascent depends on whether or not it's saturated. If the parcel is sub-saturated,
it cools at the rapid DALR. But we saw that we cannot lift hot, dry air very far at all.
We also saw that we can't make cold air descend very far. This situation is called stable.
But when the air is saturated, condensation warming partially offsets its expansion cooling,
resulting in a substantially slower cooling rate, five superkilometer, moist adiabatic lapse rate.
The key difference between these two rates, the average environmental lapse rate, six and a half
superkilometer falls in between. We can lift hot, saturated air a whole lot farther. Water vapor
makes the atmosphere a much more interesting and complex place. Let's look ahead. We will continue
exploring the mysteries of clouds in the next lecture. We'll see why mountains cause clouds,
why deserts form in the lee of mountains. We'll see the source of thunderstorm energy,
and why thunderstorms aren't more frequent than they already are.
