Welcome back to Meteorology, where we continue our survey of the wonders of the weather.
Early on, I made this statement, temperature differences make pressure differences and
pressure differences drive winds.
We saw this was true in the case of the sea and land breezes, circulations that are established
owing to temperature differences across a coastline.
There are a lot of reasons why one place might be warmer than another.
It might receive more direct solar radiation owing to Earth's ferricity and tilt.
It might receive more infrared radiation from the atmosphere owing to a greater concentration
of greenhouse gases, especially water vapor, and the presence of low clouds.
It might absorb more of the radiation it does receive because of the characteristics of
its surface.
It might not be able to resist the radiation it does absorb owing to a low thermal inertia.
It might experience more subsidence, descending motion, increasing the temperature by compression
warming.
Or water vapor may be condensing there, liberating latent heat.
Here's another statement that I've made that we've already seen an example of.
Nature wants to push air from high to low pressure.
Nature abhors extremes, excesses, and imbalances, including the imbalance of having more atmospheric
mass in some places than others.
Where there's more mass piled up, the pressure is higher, at least at the surface.
And nature wants to push that air away towards a place of relative deficit having a lower
pressure.
These two combinations help to explain the sea breeze as well as the land breeze, examples
of what we called thermally direct circulations.
And both are also part of a circulation that has surface winds blowing from a colder to
a warmer place.
The cool wind could cause a front, as it pushed inland, because air with different densities
do not want to mix.
Lifting at a front can cause clouds, if not also storms.
But these breezes weren't always cool, we saw that as well.
And that was when air had to flow down slope and experience compression, as in the case
of the Santa Ana winds.
Ultimately, the most important temperature difference is between the equator and the
pole, established because of the Earth's spherical shape.
If we applied the sea breeze model to the northern hemisphere, we would see it predicting
a surface wind blowing from the cold north to the warm south from the pole towards the
equator.
But sustained surface winds don't blow north and south in very many places.
In the middle attitudes, roughly between 30 and 60 degrees north, the prevailing wind
is from west to east, at least in places not directly influenced by topography.
In the tropics, southward of 30 degrees north, the prevailing winds blow from east towards
west.
So, I need to qualify my statement.
Now I will say, in the absence of other forces, nature will push mass from high to low pressure.
In the absence of other forces, nature will push mass from high to low pressure.
That's quite a concession.
The simple fact is, except in simple situations like the sea breeze, other forces aren't absent.
Nature wants to move surface air from north to south, but these other forces usually serve
as spoilers, interfering with nature's plans and raising her ire.
In this lecture, we start our examination of those other forces and how they participate
in determining how and where the wind blows.
The four principal forces that determine where, when, and how quickly the horizontal wind
blow are these.
First, pressure gradient force, PGF.
Second, the Coriolis force, due to Earth's rotation.
Third, the frictional force.
And finally, a centripetal or centrifugal force, depending on your point of view.
Two of these four forces, pressure gradient force and friction, are real forces.
Coriolis is an apparent force, and the centripetal-centrifugal is a little bit of both.
Along the way, I'll mention a fifth force, a curvature force owing to Earth's sphericity.
That's another apparent force, and one we usually neglect, except with very fast motions,
such as rockets.
You may be wondering, why are we even bothering the forces that aren't real?
We'll see.
So first, pressure gradient force.
We have seen that while pressure is a very important force, pressure differences held
the key to understanding the barometer and the water-filled straw.
The next step is to recognize the role of pressure gradients.
A pressure gradient is a pressure difference divided by a distance.
The pressure gradient is large when the pressure difference is large, or the distance between
the two are small.
Pressure differences drive winds, but pressure gradients determine wind speed, the velocity,
and the ferocity of the horizontal wind.
So average sea level pressure is about 1,000 millibars.
What would a large pressure difference be?
How about 10 percent?
10 percent would be 100 millibars.
So let's picture a 100-millibar pressure difference between two places.
What kind of wind would this pressure difference produce?
It depends on the distance.
If the two locations were separated by the entire hemisphere, the wind would be very
weak.
The pressure difference is large, but the distance is enormous, and the pressure gradient
is small.
That same pressure difference of 100 millibars over a distance of only a mile or two would
generate the enormous winds of the EF-5 tornado, the strongest winds on Earth.
Our second force is the Coriolis force, or Coriolis effect, which exists owing to Earth's
rotation.
It's named for Gaspar Gustav de Coriolis, the 19th century French scientist who first
explained the effect.
The Coriolis force acts to the right following the motion in the northern hemisphere, and
to the left following the motion in the southern hemisphere, it vanishes at the equator.
It's an apparent force, one that exists owing to our point of view.
And yet, we can use this force to explain why if we shoot a rocket straight towards the
north pole, we will miss.
We can use it to explain why hurricanes don't form on or cross the equator.
We can use it to explain why nature can't make a simple sea breeze circulation that
spans the hemisphere.
These phenomena are real, but our explanation is self-serving.
Let me make an analogy with the rising and setting sun.
It's morning, and it's bright.
Flowers open, bees start their rounds.
The sun has risen in the east, and temperatures are rising.
The sun will cross the sky, ultimately setting in the west.
The nighttime will be dark.
Flowers will close, and bees will sleep, and temperatures will drop.
All of these phenomena are real.
But if we explain all this occurs because the sun is revolving around us, our explanation
is wrong.
And yet, it's a very tempting point of view.
The Earth actually rotates very quickly.
Its spin velocity at the equator exceeds 1,000 miles per hour.
And yet, we cannot feel it.
It's much easier to believe that the sun is moving, and we are fixed in space.
It conforms with our observations, and, more importantly, it simplifies our explanations.
So we construct a frame of reference in which we are at the center of it all.
Everything revolves around us.
In theory, our explanations are wrong, but in practice they're convenient and they work.
The Coriolis Force is another convenient on truth.
Let's pretend for now that the Earth is a flat rotating disk, and let's look down
on the North Pole.
Chicago and New Orleans are roughly at the same line of longitude, they're roughly north
and south of each other.
Suppose the Earth were not rotating, and I fired a rocket from New Orleans towards the
pole.
The rocket would fly straight, and arrive at the pole just fine, having passed over Chicago
on the way.
But now, consider Earth rotation.
After a few hours, Chicago and New Orleans will have shifted counterclockwise, at least
seen from space, because the Earth rotates counterclockwise, looking down on the North
Pole.
On the Earth, I'm still in New Orleans, and looking north, I still see Chicago.
But as seen from space, North has changed.
Newton's first law of motion states this.
An object placed into motion continues moving in a straight line, at constant speed and
less other forces are acting.
We launched a rocket.
No additional forces are acting.
The rocket flies straight.
But that's not what we see.
From our vantage point, we see the rocket has turned, and it's turned to the right following
its motion.
We fired the rocket straight north, but it didn't stay going north.
Almost immediately, it started curving to the east.
And in fact, if I were depending on this rocket keeping a northward track, I'm in trouble.
On the rotating Earth, a rocket fired directly towards the pole will never get there.
The rocket didn't stay moving north, but the rocket didn't turn.
North did.
We see the rocket has turned, but the rocket didn't turn.
We did.
But the bottom line is this.
However we choose to explain the rocket's motion, it does not reach the pole.
If we can't do it with rockets, nature can't do it with air.
Nature can't make the wind blow directly from the pole to the equator or the equator
to the pole.
But it remains that, from our point of view, the rocket turned.
Again, Newton's law of inertia implies, if an object deviates from straight line motion,
there must have been a force.
In truth, there was no such force because the rocket didn't really turn.
So we invent a force, an apparent force to explain what we see, and the Coriolis force
is our explanation for why the rocket turned from our point of view.
The phenomenon is real.
The explanation is self-serving.
Of course, we can reach the pole with a rocket on the rotating Earth.
We can do it by adjusting the rocket's motion along the way, or by adjusting our aim to
account for the Coriolis effect.
We'll just shoot away from the pole and let the Coriolis effect turn it in to the pole.
But in any event, it's important to recognize that the Earth did not turn beneath the rocket.
Speaking of rockets, there's a popular story regarding Big Bertha, a long-range cannon
deployed by the Germans against the French during World War I.
The Germans placed their cannon over a hundred kilometers directly east of Paris and fired
shells at the city of light, startling the French as the bombs fell seemingly from nowhere.
But some of the stories claim that the Germans forgot to take the Coriolis effect into account,
so their shells kept missing Paris falling to the north, which would be to the right
following the motion.
Some claim the shells curved so far north they didn't even land in France.
The true story is both more prosaic and more curious.
First, the prosaic part.
First of all, the gun that the Germans trained on Paris was not the Big Bertha that they
used elsewhere earlier in the war.
Actually, it was a further advanced weapon called the Paris gun.
And according to reports, the super gun was able to push a shell a distance of 120 kilometers
in about three minutes, passing the tropopause on the way and becoming the first human-made
object to reach the stratosphere.
The shell covered this relatively short distance so quickly that the Coriolis deflection on
the rocket would only have been a kilometer or so.
Given the limited accuracy of the gun and the size of the target, it's not clear that
the Coriolis deflection would even have been noticed.
But now for the curious part.
Remember that from our point of view, Coriolis explained a curving motion that we saw that
didn't really happen.
The rocket went straight.
We saw a curve to the right because what we call north is not fixed in time owing to
earth rotation.
The curvature force that I mentioned briefly earlier is similar to this in the sense that
our compass directions north, south, west and east also vary with location on the earth
due to the fact that the earth is a sphere.
In other ways of saying that, they vary in space.
Consider any location on the earth other than the poles and consider the east-west direction.
That's the direction in which latitude is unchanged.
If we fire a rocket to the west, we expect it to continue moving straight west without
change of latitude.
But it cannot do so because in reality because the earth is curved, latitude circles are
curved as well.
The rocket in this case does fly straight, but in this case we see a curve to the south.
A rocket fired to the east also appears to curve to the south, but the rocket fired straight
west or east can't keep going in those directions and it's because west and east aren't straight.
We explain this apparent deflection with another convenient untruth, the curvature force.
For slower motions such as the winds, we can safely neglect this force, but for high-speed
rockets and projectiles like the Paris Gun shell, it's actually very important.
Note that in our example, the curvature force is working in the opposite direction to Coriolis.
Coriolis was trying to deflect the shell to the north following the motion.
Curvature is pushing it to the south from our point of view.
In fact, based on the reported shell velocity of 40 km per minute, which is about 700 meters
per second or 1500 miles per hour, the curvature deflection would exceed the Coriolis deflection
and the Paris Gun shell actually should have missed Paris to the south.
Two more questions.
Why does the Coriolis force act to the left following the motion in the southern hemisphere
and why does the Coriolis force vanish at the equator?
The first one is easy.
Take a globe and look down on the north pole and give it a counterclockwise spin because
the earth is spinning counterclockwise as seen from above.
But now, turn it over and look down at the south pole.
The earth is turning the opposite way.
Thus, as the northern hemisphere is turning counterclockwise as seen above the north pole,
the southern hemisphere is turning clockwise as looked at from above the south pole.
So the Coriolis force is acting to the left following the motion in the southern hemisphere.
Why does Coriolis force vanish at the equator?
This one is a little more complex.
The reason is again because the earth is a sphere and it's not a flat board or anything
else either as I used in that previous description.
First, let's consider something about vectors.
A vector is an arrow, generally representing a path.
Any vector can be broken down into its components.
Suppose this vector represents motion towards the northeast.
Part of that motion is towards the north and part of that motion is towards the east.
Combined, it produces the total motion which is towards the northeast.
Now let's consider our spherical rotating earth.
As seen from above, the north pole as I said, the earth is spinning counterclockwise, about
a spin axis that is oriented vertically.
We know that this axis also tends to be tilted relative to the sun, but that doesn't matter
in this situation.
We can treat the spin axis of the earth as a vector.
Its orientation is determined by what we call the right hand rule.
I take my right hand and I curl my fingers in the direction of the rotation, in this
case counterclockwise, and then I look to see where my thumb is pointing.
For a counterclockwise curl, my thumb is pointing up.
So the earth's spin axis is a vector that points straight up.
If you're at the north pole, the spin axis is in the local vertical.
It's pointing straight up from where you are.
For the wind blowing in the horizontal, though, the only component of this spin vector that
actually matters to us is what's in the local vertical, not what is relative to the earth's
north pole, because that's the spin that rotates our coordinate system, including north.
We refer to the magnitude or length of the vertical component of this vector as f.
That is a maximum at the north pole.
The vector has only one component there, pointing in the local vertical.
But as we move towards the equator, the spin axis direction is the same, but it's no longer
in the local vertical anymore.
So the important vertical component of the spin axis is becoming smaller and smaller.
The earth is still spinning, but less of that spin is working to rotate the coordinate system
at that latitude.
It is the component of the spin vector in the local vertical that the Coriolis force represents.
At the equator, the earth's spin axis is actually horizontal relative to the ground.
The vertical component of the spin axis is zero, so the Coriolis force vanishes at the
equator.
The earth spins, but north does not.
For the large-scale wind, that wants or needs to travel a considerable distance at moderate
speed, the two most important forces are pressure gradient force and Coriolis.
I will define the large-scale wind as a wind in which earth's rotation, expressed by the
Coriolis force, is important.
The pressure gradient force is the driving force of the horizontal wind.
The Coriolis force is always present on a rotating earth, but becomes important as the
velocity, length, and time scales associated with the motion become larger.
The Seabree circulation, spanning a few dozen kilometers and a few hours, is too local in
nature to be profoundly affected by the earth's rotation.
But the circulation nature tries to establish in reaction to the equator-to-pole temperature
difference that spans the hemisphere and Coriolis plays a powerful, frustrating role.
The wind that results when both pressure gradient and Coriolis force are both active and active
against each other is called the geostrophic wind.
Geo means earth, stroph to turn.
We've already seen that in the word troposphere.
This is the wind balance that is created because the earth turns.
So let's see how the wind comes into geostrophic balance.
We call this geostrophic adjustment.
Let's start with a pressure difference between two isobars, drawn in a horizontal plane.
We can take north at the top of the figure if we so choose.
And let's create an air parcel, but hold on to it for now.
The parcel is experiencing a pressure gradient force directed towards low pressure, but it's
not moving because we got our mitts on it.
But once we let go, once the air parcel is free to move, it will start moving, and it
will start moving towards low pressure.
But once in motion, the Coriolis force now appears, directed to the right, following
the motion.
The combination of these two forces will cause the parcel path to start deviating to the right
of its original path, so that it is no longer moving directly towards low pressure.
The Coriolis force is always directed to the right in the northern hemisphere.
So as the parcel starts turning, because the Coriolis force is tugging on it, the Coriolis
force keeps tugging rightward.
So the turning continues, and the turning continues, and it will continue until the
pressure gradient force and the Coriolis force finally lock into opposition.
And at this situation, the final state of the wind is where the wind is blowing with
parallel to the isobars with low pressure to the left.
We call this geostrophic balance.
Note these facts about the geostrophic wind.
It blows parallel to isobars with low pressure to the left in the northern hemisphere.
The wind is not moving towards low pressure as pressure gradient force wants.
The wind is not turning to the right, following the motion, as the Coriolis force is trying
to do.
Instead, it's a straight line wind.
Pressure gradient force and Coriolis force have come into a stalemate.
What we call the Bui Belola, named after a Dutch meteorologist, goes like this.
In the northern hemisphere, stand with the wind at your back, and then low pressure is
towards your left.
Actually, and we'll understand this better later, it's not straight west.
It's not straight left, because chances are the wind at your back is not purely in geostrophic
balance, but we're not done examining our other forces yet.
Why does this balance come about?
Could we disturb the geostrophic balance by pushing the wind harder?
If we push the wind hard enough, could we get the wind to move towards low pressure?
The answer is no, not for the large-scale wind.
Ultimately, the pressure gradient force determines the wind speed.
Weak pressure gradients mean weak winds.
But the Coriolis force itself is proportional to the wind speed.
An object at rest on the earth's surface does not care that the earth is rotating.
There is no motion to be affected.
The faster the object's motion over the rotating earth, the more profound the influence of
the coordinate system rotation is, and that's what the Coriolis force really is.
This means if we increase the pressure gradient so the wind speed increases, the Coriolis
force will intensify an equal measure so the wind remains flowing parallel to the isobars
in geostrophic balance just a whole lot faster.
On sea-level pressure charts, which we'll start examining pretty soon, we draw isobars,
lines of constant pressure, at a regular interval, typically four millibars.
The pressure gradient, then, is determined by the spacing of the isobars.
The more closely they're spaced, the larger the pressure gradient force.
Consider, as an example, two relatively widely spaced isobars between values of 996 and 1,000
The pressure gradient force is directed towards low pressure, but it's not especially strong.
As a result, the wind speed is not especially fast, which means the Coriolis effect is not
particularly large.
The geostrophic wind is blowing with low pressure to the left, but it's not blowing very quickly.
Now, let's pack the isobars more tightly.
The pressure gradient force is now larger, driving a faster wind.
Larger winds across the Earth's surface lead to a more substantial Coriolis effect.
The two forces still come into balance, but the wind is stronger, and note now it's still
blowing with lower pressure to the left.
This means we don't actually need to draw the winds on a sea-level pressure chart to
have a very good guess regarding either wind direction or speed.
If the wind is geostrophic, it's blowing with low pressure to the left.
If the wind is geostrophic, wind speed increases as the isobar spacing becomes smaller.
Let's do an example.
What is the wind direction and speed in this case?
Keep in mind that low pressure in this case is towards the northwest.
Remember, we name winds by the direction they're blowing from.
This wind is blowing from the southwest towards the northeast, so we call it a southwestually
wind in the northern hemisphere.
The wind speed is moderate, and that's determined by the isobar spacing.
Let's do another case.
What is the wind speed and direction in this situation?
Now the low pressure is to the southeast.
This is a northeasterly wind, blowing with the same speed as in my previous example because
the isobar spacing is the same.
Decreasing the isobar spacing implies a faster wind if the wind is in geostrophic balance.
Therefore, we don't need to sketch the winds, we just need to examine the isobars, how they're
oriented and how they're spaced.
Since the geostrophic wind blows parallel to and not across isobars, we might find ourselves
tempted to treat isobars as material surfaces, as if they were channels or walls.
That might help us appreciate why the wind speed increases as the isobars become more
tightly packed.
Our intuition tells us if we force a fluid like air or water to pass through a narrower
channel, its velocity will increase.
That is a helpful example.
However, we need to keep in mind that isobars are not material surfaces and there are important
situations in which air can cross them and thus flow from high to low pressure.
The local sea breeze was one such example.
Let's summarize.
We are considering the winds and the direction and speed at which they blow.
There are four fundamental forces that determine the horizontal wind.
We've seen two so far, pressure gradient force and Coriolis.
Pressure gradient force is directed from high to low pressure and in the absence of
other forces, nature moves mass from high to low pressure.
The Coriolis force acts to the right following the motion in the northern hemisphere, to
the left following the motion in the southern hemisphere and is zero at the equator.
The combination of these two forces, pressure gradient and Coriolis, geostrophic balance.
Geostrophic balance represents straight line flow parallel to isobars blowing with low
pressure to the left, at least in the northern hemisphere, and the speed of the geostrophic
wind determined by isobar spacing.
This balance applies to the large scale wind, not the sea breeze, but rather to air flowing
over long distances and blowing for days, weeks and longer.
But the geostrophic balance has already revealed to us why the equator-to-pole temperature difference
doesn't result in a hemispheric sea breeze blowing along the surface from pole to equator.
Earth's rotation through the Coriolis force has spoiled this.
But isobars are not always straight.
And to make air flow parallel to curving isobars, we need to add another force to the mix.
And sometimes we can make air blow across isobars from high to low pressure, even for the large
scale wind.
To make the air do that, we need to add still another force to the mix.
We have two more fundamental forces to consider, and we'll do that in the next lecture.
