Welcome back to Meteorology.
We are well along in our survey of the wonders of the weather.
There are four principal forces that determine when, where, and how quickly the horizontal
winds will blow.
We've seen two of them already.
Pressure gradient force, PGF, the driving force, directed high to low pressure, the wind
blowing from high towards low when acting alone.
The Coriolis force, our interpretation of the effect that Earth's rotation has on the
winds acting to the right in the Northern Hemisphere, objects bending to the right
when acting alone.
Together, they combine to produce what we call the geostrophic wind, geo-Earth, strophed
to turn, the wind that exists because the Earth rotates.
The geostrophic wind goes neither high to low nor does it bend to the right.
This applies to the large-scale wind, which is the wind for which Earth's rotation is
important, as opposed to a local-scale wind like the sea breeze.
In this lecture, we will encounter the other two important forces, friction and the centripetal
or centrifugal force, depending on your point of view.
Friction will help the large-scale wind move towards low pressure, at least a little bit,
and in those places where friction is active.
Centripetal or centrifugal will be invoked when air moves in circular paths, such as
around Santa Ana highs or hurricanes.
Once we have our four forces, we'll also see various combinations of them that explain
and do interesting things.
One of these will explain why the wind curves counterclockwise around our large-scale areas
of low pressure.
Another will explain why the large-scale wind can converge into those lows at least
at the surface.
That's important because it will reinforce why we associate large-scale low pressure
systems with interesting weather like storms.
A third combination will confirm to us that spin makes low pressure.
So let's get started.
Our third force is friction.
The Earth is rotating.
We have already seen that this has single-handedly prevented nature from doing one of the things
she most desperately wants to do, and that is to share the wealth of warmth received
by the tropical surface with the frigid poles, through creating a hemispheric circulation
resembling the sea breeze.
The air wants to rise over the warmer equator and sink over the colder pole.
Those air motions would normally lead to low surface pressure on the equator side and higher
surface pressure poleward.
And a surface wind directed from pole to equator from high to low would result.
But then Earth's rotation, through its proxy the Coriolis force, turns the wind so they
wouldn't even blow towards low pressure anymore.
Not the large-scale wind, anyway.
Instead it made the wind blow perpendicular to the pressure gradient, with low pressure
to the left in the northern hemisphere.
That's what we call geostrophic balance.
But nature has one last chance to tug the large-scale wind back towards low pressure,
something that will disturb the geostrophic stalemate, thanks to the roughness of the Earth's
surface, thanks to the Earth's surface itself, thanks to friction.
The only way we can disturb the geostrophic balance so that the large-scale wind will
blow towards low pressure is to introduce a force that selectively counteracts the Coriolis
effect.
Friction will do that.
Friction acts near the Earth's surface, and its primary role is to reduce wind speeds.
Friction disturbs geostrophic balance through weakening the Coriolis force.
The Coriolis force is proportional to wind speed, so as the wind is slowed, Coriolis
is less effective at opposing the pressure gradient force, which isn't directly affected
by friction.
Let's take a look.
Let's start with geostrophic balance.
I've drawn two isobars, low pressure to the north, higher pressure to the south, but we
can turn this figure any way we want.
The wind is blowing from low pressure to the left, and Coriolis is acting to the right
of the motion.
Friction opposes the motion, causing it to slow.
Since the Coriolis force is proportional to wind speed, it is weakened.
The pressure gradient force, as I said not as directly affected, is able to now gain
an advantage, pulling the air towards low pressure, at least at a shallow angle.
Note that even as the air crosses the isobars towards lower pressure, Coriolis is still
acting to the right.
Coriolis always acts to the right in the northern hemisphere, no matter which way winds, objects,
rockets, or going, but it isn't directly opposite to the pressure gradient anymore.
The result is a three-way balance of forces, pressure gradient, Coriolis, and friction,
in which air can move across isobars towards lower pressure.
You remember Buoy-Below's law?
We can modify Buoy-Below's law to state that in the northern hemisphere, low pressure is
roughly 15 degrees clockwise from left when the wind is at your back.
Friction is typically influential only near the ground, and when, through vertical mixing,
the air can come in contact with the ground and thus be slowed by contact.
A fair rule of thumb is friction is very important in the lowest kilometer or so of the troposphere.
Now let's consider a different three-force balance, which will help us understand what
we often see on weather maps.
We often see the flow exhibits curvature on the larger scales, by which we mean over distances
of hundreds of kilometers or miles.
In particular, wind tends to turn counterclockwise around large-scale regions of lower pressure
in the northern hemisphere, and the winds tend to curve clockwise around larger-scale
highs.
We call these lows and highs cyclones and anticyclones, respectively.
Cyclone comes from the Greek term to turn in a circle, but in the northern hemisphere,
we limit this turning to be in a counterclockwise direction, as seen from above.
So anticyclone merely implies turning in the opposite direction as the cyclone, so anticyclonic
flow is clockwise following the motion again in the northern hemisphere.
The names are the same in the southern hemisphere, but the directions are reversed.
Note these facts about curving flow that I've drawn in this figure.
The flow is still parallel to isobars of pressure.
This means that friction is absent.
Pressure gradient and Coriolis forces are still present, and they still oppose each
other, and we know that these two forces alone produce straight-line geostrophic balance.
Low pressure is still to the left, and yet the winds are curving.
The winds are changing direction along the path, and Newton tells us this direction change
requires a force.
This extra force is usually explained as a centripetal or centrifugal force, depending
on your point of view.
The combination of pressure gradient force, Coriolis, and centripetal or centrifugal forces
is called gradient-wind balance.
What are centripetal and centrifugal forces?
Centrifugal and centrifugal forces exist when there is spin or curvature to motion.
Centrifugal means to flee the center.
It is directed outward from the center of spin.
You may have noticed on sundials, oftentimes sundials have a Latin inscription, tempest
fugit, which means time flies or time fleas that contains the same root as centrifugal.
In contrast, centripetal means to seek the center.
It is a force directed inward towards the center of spin.
These opposing forces are obverse and reverse of the very same coin, and both terms appeared
together in Newton's epic work, The Principia.
So the canonical example of centrifugal force is to use a yo-yo and twirl it.
I'm going to use this rope instead, and I'm going to take this rope and I'm going to spin
it over my head.
Now I do this in class a lot, and I'm sure that some of my students are looking to see
if I'm going to hit myself with the yo-yo or the rope.
So far, that hasn't happened.
So I twirled the rope around my head, and you saw that of course that the rope became
taut, and we interpret typically this as the centrifugal force.
Something was pulling directly outward from the center of spin, which was my hand, pointing
outward and holding it taut.
And yet we're usually also taught that centrifugal force is false, and only centripetal force
is real.
Now by now we should be a little more comfortable dealing with forces that aren't strictly
real.
But we do need to ask, how can a force keeping the string taut not actually be real?
If you've been to an amusement park, you've often noticed that these amusement parks
have this ride, a big cylinder, and you get inside the cylinder.
And once they close the door and trap you inside, the cylinder starts to rotate.
And it rotates faster.
And it rotates faster and faster, and as it does, you find yourself with your back stuck
up against the wall.
And then that's when the pain starts.
And then as it's rotating very fast, they add insult to injury by dropping the floor
away from you, showing that they are in total control.
Now I think I'm expressing my disdain and displeasure for this ride.
I've done it exactly once.
And to me it felt like an invisible hand was pressed against my chest, pressing me against
the wall, squeezing the air out of my lungs.
So let's say you're there instead, and you're feeling this invisible hand, and it's pushing
you, it's pressing you.
And the pain is increasing, and you finally, with your last breath in your lungs, you scream
out, I hate centrifugal force.
But the person who's glued up against the wall next to you says, excuse me, I teach
physics, and I have to tell you that centrifugal force is not really real.
You want to hit the guy, but you can't peel your arm off the wall.
Is our physics professor right?
Obviously the pain is real, but is the source of the pain identified correctly?
Well, here you are in the cylinder ride, and we're looking down at your increasingly mis-shape
and body.
I'm showing the cylinder ride turning counterclockwise, but counterclockwise or clockwise, it doesn't
matter, it's all the same pain.
The key point to keep in mind is inertia.
Wherever you are, inertia is always trying to make you move in a straight line.
But the wall is preventing that.
So in this case, you're actually literally constantly crashing into the wall.
Now we interpret this as a centrifugal force, acting outward like an unseen hand, directly
outward from the center of spin, pushing us up against the wall.
But you know what, we know the centrifugal force is not real.
We know it's not real, because if suddenly, magically, the wall were to suddenly disappear,
we know we would not fly directly outward in the direction of the centrifugal force.
Instead, we'd fly off at a tangent as inertia desires.
So the important force here is provided by the wall, and the wall is pushing directly
inward, and that's the centripetal force.
So here's a rule of thumb.
Every time you infer a centrifugal force, it's really a centripetal force in disguise.
It's like the difference between having a cup that's half full of water.
Is it half full or half empty?
It's like the difference between partly cloudy and partly sunny.
You know what, even I don't know the answer to that one.
But in my example with the rope, the centripetal force, there was a centripetal force, and
it was produced by my hand in the string that I was holding.
And actually, that was the force that was keeping the string taut.
In any event, we can interpret the third force in gradient wind balance around large scale
lows or highs as being centripetal acting inward or centrifugal acting outward, whichever
is easiest for us to visualize.
For gradient wind balance, I'm going to choose the inward force because it's acting in the
direction that the wind is trying to curve.
So again, let's start with geostrophic balance, pressure gradient versus Coriolis force.
And we're going to add in the centripetal force now, keeping in mind that the centripetal
force always acts inward.
It's got a point either in the direction of pressure gradient or in the direction of Coriolis
force.
If I add it in the direction of pressure gradient force, the combination of pressure gradient
and centripetal forces joining forces against the Coriolis force is going to help guide the
air counterclockwise around that low.
Around the high, the inward directed centripetal force has joined forces with Coriolis instead,
guiding the parcel clockwise around the high.
I could have done exactly the same explanation with outward directed centrifugal.
It's just a little less obvious why putting an extra force this way makes something curved
that way.
So I've just given you the standard textbook explanation for gradient wind balance, leading
to counterclockwise flow around northern hemisphere lows, clockwise flow around northern
hemisphere highs.
But I find this explanation unsatisfying because it causes a chicken and egg dilemma.
Where did the centripetal and centripetal forces come from?
Air can't curve without a centripetal or a centripetal force, but there is no such force
before it starts to curve.
So allow me to give you a different explanation, one that I find a lot more satisfying, one
in which inertia plays a starring role.
Let's start again with geostrophic balance, the wind blowing with low pressure to the
left.
And again, I'll presume that pressure gradient force is pointing north, but that's not strictly
necessary.
Suppose the air parcel's path is taking it towards a place where the isobars are curving
in a counterclockwise fashion.
Now isobars can curve for many different reasons, and we don't need to be concerned with that
right now.
The key point is inertia wants the air to continue moving straight.
But notice, this would carry the air across the 1000 millibar isobar, towards higher pressure.
Now that's okay, the large-scale wind can flow across isobars, they're not material
surfaces, they flow across them when friction is active.
But let's pretend the parcel is your car, and the isobars represent the roadway.
And you want to stay on the roadway, you'd need to turn the wheel to stay in your lane.
Well the air parcel does have an automatic steering wheel of sorts, pressure gradient
force.
If inertia had its way and continued carrying the parcel straight, notice that the pressure
gradient force, which always points most directly towards the lowest pressure, is now not only
pointing to the parcel's left, but also pointing to the parcel's back.
If we zoom in on the parcel, we'll see that the pressure gradient force vector is two components.
One part pointing to the left of the motion just as before, but now the other component
is pointing to its back, it's opposing the motion.
Part of the wind's driving force is directed against the parcel.
Back to the car analogy, this is like slamming on the brake pedal, the air must slow down.
So what happens is the air slows down, as the air slows down, Coriolis force is reduced.
So here's another situation in which the Coriolis force is weakened, allowing pressure gradient
force to gain the upper hand, permitting it to change the direction.
Except, except this time it doesn't result in cross isobar flow, instead the parcel
remains following the isobars as they curve, keeping low pressure to the left.
So we've made a cyclone, with air curving counterclockwise around low pressure.
But keep in mind one thing about this situation, it was necessary for the parcel to slow down
to curve to the left, because it required Coriolis force to weaken relative to PGF.
Now let's consider what happens if the parcel approaches isobars that are curving clockwise
instead, it's a very similar situation.
Again inertia wants the parcel to continue straight, but this time that would carry the
parcel towards lower pressure, which is exactly what the parcel wants.
The pressure gradient force vector is now turning, so a component of that vector is pointing
in the direction of the parcel motion.
This is you pressing the accelerator, the parcel is going to speed up.
But this increases the Coriolis force, and Coriolis wants to make the air bend to the
right.
So it gains the upper hand on the pressure gradient force, and the air starts bending
rightward.
This keeps the air parallel to the isobars, but moving more quickly than it did when
the motion was purely geostrophic.
So to curve clockwise, it's necessary for the parcel to speed up.
In this explanation, constant curving of the flow clockwise or counterclockwise results
from an imbalance between the pressure gradient and Coriolis forces, and we can interpret
that imbalance as a centripetal or a centrifugal force, however we choose.
However, did you notice that the air had to slow down to curve counterclockwise and speed
up to curve clockwise?
I'll return to this asymmetry soon.
So now, let's combine our four fundamental forces.
Pressure gradient force and Coriolis make straight-line geostrophic flow, low pressure
to the left.
Centripetal gives us curvature, counterclockwise around low, clockwise around high, still parallel
to isobars.
Friction gives us a little cross-isobar flow into low and out of high.
This is what the flow around large-scale lows and highs looks like near the surface.
Notice that owing to friction, wind can cross isobars away from high and towards low pressure,
and note further, and this is important.
Note that it means that the air is converging into the low pressure from below.
If I bring air into low pressure at the surface, it's easy to see that I will be creating upward
vertical motion in the cyclone.
Rising air can become saturated and possibly unstable, resulting in clouds and storms.
This is one of the reasons, one of the reasons we associate cyclones with storms.
Meanwhile, the surface divergence out of the high implies downward motion in the anticyclone,
and we usually associate highs with very stable and clear conditions.
So we looked at four fundamental forces influencing the wind so far, and we've actually examined
five combinations thus far.
Pressure gradient force alone, that's what we did first, wind blowing directly from high
pressure to low, but that only works when the length and time scales are relatively short.
Pressure gradient in Coriolis, geostrophic balance, straight line, parallel to isobars.
Isobar spacing indicating the magnitude of the pressure gradient force and the wind speed.
PGF Coriolis and friction, a modified geostrophic balance allowing air to move at a shallow angle
across isobars towards low pressure.
PGF Coriolis and centripetal or centrifugal to gradient wind balance, clockwise around
highs, counterclockwise around lows.
All four forces together, a modified gradient wind balance with air spiraling counterclockwise
into lows and spiraling clockwise out of highs.
Remember we said isobar spacing indicates wind speed because it reflects the magnitude
of the pressure gradient force.
But we've also seen that isobar curvature affects wind speed as well.
So that when for the same isobar curvature as the air curves counterclockwise, the wind
is actually what we call sub-geostrophic.
It is slower than if the isobars were straight and we had the geostrophic balance.
In contrast, the flow around clockwise around highs is super geostrophic and faster than
we would have expected from the geostrophic balance.
This is an apparent paradox because we often see strong winds around lows and we associate
highs with weak winds.
In practice, isobar spacing around lows can be much smaller than around highs.
And that's what leads to the faster winds.
We don't usually see tight pressure gradients around highs and why is that?
The reason is the sixth combination of these forces.
Pressure gradient and centrifugal force result in cyclostrophic balance to turn in a circle,
spin.
Note Coriolis has no role in this.
It's local scale rapid spin.
This is what describes the amusement park ride as well as tornadoes and bathtub drains.
And yet this illustrates a very powerful point.
Spin creates low pressure.
Let me demonstrate that with a beaker of water and a spoon.
And I'm starting off with an undisturbed fluid here.
And if you think about the pressure at the bottom of the cup, which is our surface pressure,
the surface pressure is the same everywhere, the same amount of mass of water and also
atmosphere is pushing down.
So there are no pressure gradient forces and there is no motion.
But I can create a pressure gradient force.
I can create a pressure gradient force pointing inward towards the center of the spin I'm
about to introduce by stirring.
I'm creating a vortex.
I'm creating a vortex.
The spin has caused the fluid to pile up at the edges of the glass and dip down in the
center.
So now I have high pressure at the outside of the glass at the bottom here because the
fluid is deeper and low pressure in the center of the vortex.
I have a pressure gradient force pointing in.
And I can interpret this as a centrifugal force pointing out as well if that satisfies
us.
By the way, does it matter which way I stir the water?
No.
Do it for yourself.
Counterclockwise and clockwise spin both create low pressure.
Actually, there's a clue there.
With the large-scale wind, we only had counterclockwise flow around lows.
We had clockwise flow around highs.
But that's because the Earth's rotation was involved, the Coriolis force, and that's
not true here.
Instead, we're showing that spin by itself induces low pressure.
And this has so many applications in meteorology.
And the particular application at hand is it shows us why isobars can be so tightly
packed around cyclones and why they are not tightly packed around anticyclones.
Because of what I call the cyclostrophic effect, spin supports low pressure.
If I stir the fluid faster, the pressure gets lower.
By the same token, the cyclostrophic effect, if I stir winds clockwise around high pressure
faster and faster and faster, what am I doing?
I'm actually lowering the pressure in the center of that spin.
I'm killing the anticyclone.
So let's summarize.
In this lecture, we've seen that the third and fourth fundamental forces that helps determine
how and how quickly the horizontal winds blow, friction and the centripetal or centrifugal
force.
Friction acts near the ground to reduce wind speeds.
We saw that friction disturbs the geostrophic balance of pressure gradient and Coriolis
forces, which is the wind that is not blowing towards low pressure as nature desires.
It does it by acting directly and specifically against the Coriolis force, thereby letting
the wind find its way towards low pressure at least a little bit.
With the fourth force, we saw that we could choose to interpret it as centripetal or centrifugal
or centripetal versus something else, depending on what we found to be convenient.
But the centripetal or centrifugal forces appear wherever there is spin.
Centripetal forces act inward and are always real.
Pressure gradient force is its usual disguise.
Centripetal forces act outward, and even though they're an illusion, they could be a convenient
untruth, taking the blame when it's really centripetal force that's acting up.
Gradient wind balance was made when this two-headed force joined forces with pressure gradient
and Coriolis forces.
That explained why the wind turns counterclockwise around large-scale cyclones, areas of low
pressure, and clockwise around anti-cyclones or large-scale highs.
I also explained this in a different way, one that at least I liked a lot better.
Having friction to the gradient wind balance helped us understand one big reason why we
associate low pressure systems with bad weather, or should I say, good weather.
Friction lets air converge into large-scale cyclones at the surface.
This makes the air rise in the cyclone, push from below, and this air can diverge out of
anti-cyclones, leading to descent, one reason why we associate highs with clear weather.
We also addressed an interesting paradox.
We saw that to make the large-scale wind deviate from the straight and narrow path and turn
counterclockwise, we had to slow it down, we had to apply the brakes.
And to make it turn clockwise, we had to speed it up and hit the gas pedal.
So circular flow around highs is super-geostrophic, and around lows, it's sub-geostrophic.
And yet we often see strong winds and tight gradients around lows, but almost never around
highs.
The answer came from cyclostrophic balance.
Whoever you want to formulate this force balance, this showed that spin makes low pressure.
Cyclostrophic balance isn't just a tempest in a teacup, although it explained the tempest
vortex.
We're going to be seeing it everywhere, because spin is ubiquitous.
So let's look ahead.
In our next lecture, we will use our knowledge of how these fundamental forces combine to
produce winds and wind directions to come to grips with a key question that we've been
moving towards answering.
What is the large-scale atmospheric circulation on a rotating Earth that has equated a pole
temperature gradient?
And as part of that, let's consider this.
How did planetary rotation and sphericity combine to condemn the Sahara to be a barren
wasteland?
We'll see why in the next lecture.
