Welcome back to meteorology.
We've used four fundamental forces to explain where, when, and how quickly the wind blows.
The large-scale wind blows with low pressure to the left in the northern hemisphere, either
parallel to straight or curving isobars, or making a shallow angle to the isobars when
friction is active.
Earth's rotation has given us a hemispheric circulation with a complex three-cell system,
ascent at 60 degrees north in the equator, descent at 30 degrees north in the pole.
The prevailing winds are westerly in midlatitudes, easterly near the pole, and northeasterly
in the northern hemisphere tropics.
Air masses are continental or maritime in type, polar or tropical in origin.
So our four major air masses are CP continental polar, CT continental tropical, MP maritime
polar, and MT maritime tropical, and fronts are where different air masses meet.
In this lecture, we will examine surface weather maps and focus on the life cycle of the extra-tropical
cyclone.
There are actually two basic types of large-scale cyclones, extra-tropical and tropical, named
for where they originate.
Strong tropical cyclones are also called hurricanes and typhoons, and both are roughly circular
regions of low pressure, with counterclockwise flow in the northern hemisphere, and both
are associated with storms.
The differences, however, are major.
Tropical cyclones do not have fronts.
Their strongest winds are in the lower troposphere, and they typically die very quickly over land.
The extra-tropical cyclone is intimately connected to its fronts.
It is born, lives, and dies in and near air mass boundaries.
And it doesn't much care if it's over land or not.
We'll examine tropical cyclones later in the course.
For now, let's focus on the extra-tropical cyclone and its life cycle, and our first
key tool will be surface weather maps.
Here is a map depicting surface weather for the continental United States for 3Z September
16, 2007.
This map was produced by the Hydro-Mediological Prediction Center, which is part of the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
3Z means 3 a.m. Greenwich Mean Time or London Time.
During the Standard Time period, the Eastern Time zone is five hours earlier than GMT,
so this is 10 p.m. on the East Coast and 7 p.m. on the West Coast.
The contours you're seeing are isobars of sea-level pressure, which I'll frequently
abbreviate as SLP.
We draw isobars every four millibars centered on 1,000 millibars.
We see out West that there is a large area of high pressure.
This anti-cyclone had been bringing Santa Ana conditions to Southern California on the
previous day.
And there's a low-pressure system or cyclone in the Ohio Valley.
There is no explicit information regarding wind direction or wind speed on this map,
but we can make very good guesses at both using the knowledge that we have gained so far.
I've sketched on this figure some wind arrows based on reasonable guesses, longer arrows
intended to indicate faster wind speeds.
Remember, winds will blow with low pressure to the left, and isobar spacing reflects pressure
gradient force and thus wind speed, so the winds will be faster where the isobars are
more packed or closer together.
Note that the winds are generally curving clockwise around that amorphous region of
high pressure across the Rockies.
In most areas, the isobars are widely spaced there, indicating pretty light winds.
The winds across Kansas and Oklahoma are northerly, directed from north to south.
The winds curve counterclockwise around our Ohio Valley cyclone and are relatively faster,
as suggested by the narrow isobaric spacing.
Other things being equal, clockwise curving flow will be faster than counterclockwise
curving flow, but not all things are equal.
With tight isobar spacing around lows, that's pretty common, but it doesn't happen around
highs very often.
Now this is a surface chart, so we don't really expect the winds to blow perfectly parallel
to these isobars.
Instead, we expect some degree of flow across them towards low and away from high pressure.
The point is we don't need wind vectors for us to have a really good guess at wind speed
or wind direction.
All we need are the isobars, their direction, and their spacing.
Now I expect my guess is at wind direction and speed to be pretty good, but by no means
are they going to be perfect.
In addition to friction, local features, lakes, hills, valleys, cities, forests, mountains,
passes, and canyons could also exert a powerful influence on the direction and strength of
the winds blowing at various places.
We will examine actual wind reports from the stations used to make this map.
NOAA's HPC or Hydro Meteorological Prediction Center makes many charts available freely
to the public.
Some of the charts have station information plotted on them, so let's take a few minutes
to look at how to interpret them.
The surface map station model used in the United States looks like this.
Temperature and dew point are plotted in Fahrenheit.
Wind direction and speed are in knots, so we're still using old English units here.
There's sky condition, a coated sea level pressure I'll talk about in a minute, and
present weather information, and other information is sometimes included as well.
On the surface map, temperature and dew point are plotted to the upper left and lower left
of the station circle, the thing in the middle.
In this example, the temperature is 48 Fahrenheit, and the dew point is 45.
If you hear someone mention dew point depression, that's the difference between the two temperatures.
In this case, the dew point depression is 3 degrees Fahrenheit.
Wind direction.
Wind direction is indicated by the barb extending outward from the station circle.
The barb points to the direction where the wind is coming from.
This wind is coming from the northwest, so it is a northwesterly wind.
Wind speed is indicated by the flags extending outward on the barb.
A full flag means 10 knots, a half flag is 5 knots.
This wind is 15 knots.
A knot is a nautical mile per hour, and a nautical mile is 1.15 statute miles.
Though a naut is 1.15 miles per hour, almost 2 kilometers per hour.
This 15 knot wind is a little over 17 miles per hour, or 28 kilometers per hour.
For faster winds, pendants are used.
Each pendant represents 50 knots.
A 5 knot wind is indicated by a half flag displaced inward a little bit from the end of the barb.
The flagless barb is used when the wind is less than 3 knots.
A perfectly calm condition is reported by replacing the barb with a circle completely
surrounding the station circle as I show here.
Inside the station circle, that's where we report sky conditions.
Here are some of the more common symbols used to depict cloud coverage.
Our example station, therefore, has a cloud coverage of about half.
Obscured means the sky can't even be seen.
The three digit number at the upper right represents a coded sea level pressure in millibars,
to tenths of a millibar.
This can be a little hard to get used to reading at first.
The pressure is coded in this way.
If the first digit of the three is a zero, one, or a two, try adding a ten in front,
and then take the decimal place and move it over one place to the left.
Thus, our coded pressure of 138 becomes 1013.8 millibars.
If it's not a zero, one, or two, try adding a nine in front.
So here are two station reports.
Which of these stations has a lower sea level pressure?
Station B's coded report is 005.
So that makes 1,000.5 millibars after adding ten in front.
Station A's report is 898.
So I'll try a nine in front and make 989.8 millibars.
And that makes sense, so station A's sea level pressure is lower.
Always look for reasonableness in decoding pressures, keeping in mind that outside of
hurricanes and tornadoes, sea level pressures don't drop below 930 millibars very often.
So a code of 112 is more likely 1,011.2 millibars rather than 911.2 millibars.
The symbol between the temperature and the dew point at left indicates the present weather.
Two dots indicate continuous light rain.
There are many, many other symbols used to indicate present weather.
Let's take a quick look at some of the more common ones.
We use dots to indicate rain, heavier than drizzle but not freezing.
One dot, intermediate rain.
And the more dots we use, the heavier and more continuous the rain is.
We use asterisks for snow and commas for drizzle using the same convention.
Here are common symbols used for thunderstorms, which are storms involving thunder and lightning.
The angular R symbol indicates that thunder has been heard at the station at the report
time but no rain is falling.
Note the lower right part of the letter suggests an arrow, suggestive of a lightning bolt.
A thunderstorm with rain is indicated by placing a dot above the R.
A strong thunderstorm indicated by taking the lightning bolt and bending it back towards
the middle.
When hail is observed, a triangle is placed over the letter instead.
Here are some other common symbols, rain shower, snow shower, haze, fog, blowing sand.
Symbols indicating smoke, freezing rain and drizzle and other weather characteristics also
exist.
I've zoomed in on the cyclone in the Ohio Valley.
Individual station reports have now been plotted.
The first thing we may notice is that the winds do indeed swirl counterclockwise around
the cyclone, but most winds are angled across the isobars towards the low.
The angle is varying from place to place, partly reflecting local influences.
Recall further that creates surface convergence leading to ascent, one of the major reasons
we associate cyclones with clouds and storms.
And most of the sky reports you see here are indicating overcast, 100% coverage.
Near the cyclone center, we're seeing coded sea level pressures like 023, 013 and 019.
So those are decoding to about 1,002 millibars.
The cyclone central pressure is marked at just under 1,000 millibars at this time.
Is 1,000 millibars low?
We've been using this nice round number for average sea level pressure, but now let's
recall that the actual value, actual average sea level pressure is 1013.25 millibars, so
actually 1,000 millibars is low relative to that average.
Southwest of the cyclone center, there are no precipitation reports.
To the east and southeast, I see stations reporting two, three and four dots, continuous
rain of slight, moderate and heavy intensity.
Now let's turn to fronts.
There are four basic types of fronts and three of them are on this figure, cold front, warm
front and occluded front.
The fourth type is stationary front.
Let's take a quick look at the symbols that we use to mark these fronts.
Cold fronts are marked by triangular flags pointing towards the warm, less dense air
in the direction that the cold front is trying to move and their color blue.
Warm fronts sport red half circles extending towards the colder air.
We'll soon talk about occluded fronts and see that they share characteristics of cold
and warm fronts and their markings also represent a blend of the two.
Usually, fronts move when they don't, they're stationary fronts and that's indicated by
alternating flags and half circles located on opposite sides of the front.
As we know by now, the real story with fronts is density.
We use terms like cold front and warm front anyway because temperature contrasts across
fronts are real, important and relevant to us.
Pressure contrasts across fronts are typically fairly small so temperature differences are
a very good proxy for density differences anyway.
The cold air will almost invariably be denser and will want to burrow beneath the less dense
warm air if the winds are helping the cold air out.
But here's a question.
If a cold front is the boundary between cold air and warm air and a warm front is the boundary
between warm air and cold air, what's the difference between them?
Actually, there's a larger difference that might immediately be apparent but in a nutshell,
the front is named by which air mass is doing the pushing.
If the cold air mass is forcing the warm air to retreat, it's a cold front.
And if the warm air mass is pushing against the cold one, it's a warm front.
In this picture, note the winds on the cold air side are blowing more directly at the
front.
That's pushing the boundary towards the warmer air, making this a cold front.
Cold front, warm front, it doesn't seem like it actually should make a difference and sometimes
it doesn't.
A given front can alternate between being designated a cold front or a warm front during
its existence depending on which air mass is gaining the upper hand.
But remember, fronts are actually density discontinuities.
Think about a collision between more dense and less dense air.
Which do you think would do a more effective job of pushing the other?
I think of the difference between a rock and a feather.
A rock can certainly push a feather much better than a feather could push a rock.
So obviously, denser air is going to do a better job of pushing.
So cold frontal boundaries may look like they're warm frontal counterparts at the surface,
but aloft it can be a very different story.
Let's take a vertical cross section across the cold front from the cold air to the warmer
air.
This reveals that the cold front is actually the surface position of a dome of dense air
pushing against the warmer, less dense air ahead of it.
The colder air is underrunning the warmer air, forcing the less dense air to rise.
This lifting usually causes clouds in precipitation.
The lifting is typically strong and deep, yielding a relatively narrow band of moderate
to heavy precipitation, straddling along the cold front.
The cold front was cold and dense burrowing beneath warm air, producing vigorous lifting
in clouds.
But if we had a warm front with the warm air trying to do the pushing, we'd have warm air
gliding more gently over the cold air, which is far less likely to yield upon being pushed.
So it's still warm air rising.
We had that before, but the warm air is rising less vigorously, resulting in shallower clouds
and lighter, though usually more widespread, precipitation.
So how do air mass boundaries become colder warm fronts?
Why are they sometimes stationary?
And what are occluded fronts anyway?
All of these will be seen in the extra-tropical cyclone life cycle, which is our next topic.
In particular, I'm going to describe what is known as the Norwegian cyclone model.
It was formulated in the early 1920s by Jakob Björknas and his colleagues at Norway's Bergensk
School.
One of Jakob's collaborators was his father, Wilhelm, a famous meteorologist in his own
right.
Jakob later emigrated to America, escaping ahead of the Nazis, and settled in California,
founding the Meteorology Department at UCLA.
We can start describing the extra-tropical cyclone life cycle from the Norwegian cyclone
model in this way.
Let's start with a stationary front, separating cold and warm air.
And notice the winds are parallel to the front at this time.
That's why there's no frontal motion.
This is a stationary front.
Actually, this can be our polar front, which was created in our three-cell model at roughly
60 degrees north, separating the mid-latitude westerlies from the polar easterlies.
But in any event, it's an air mass boundary, say, between CP and MT air.
Now the pressure is low all along the front, but a kink, a kink, can sometimes develop
somewhere along the front and start a more localized circulation developing there.
Remember, spin makes or enhances low pressure.
So now the lowest pressure along the front is in the center of spin, and a cyclone has
been born.
The developing cyclone's counterclockwise circulation starts pushing the air masses more
firmly against each other.
To the west of the cyclone, it's pushing the cold air against the warm air on this west
flank.
And it's trying to push the warm air against the cold air on the east side.
So now the fronts are in motion, now we have cold and warm fronts.
But remember, the real key is density, and the dense cold air can push the less dense
warm air much more effectively.
This is one reason why the cold front moves much faster than the warm front, and it starts
to swing around the south side of the cyclone, like hands on a clock, but going in the wrong
direction.
So by this time, there may be a temperature difference between the cold air to the west
and the cooler air to the northeast.
The source of the cold air may be more directly from the polar regions.
As the fast moving cold front sweeps around the cyclone, it catches up with the slow moving
warm front first near the cyclone center.
This forms the occluded front.
In Latin, to occlude means to close up, to block off, to choke.
As the occlusion advances, the cold and warm front zip up like a zipper, starting at the
low and then proceeding on away.
Precipitation associated with the cyclone may be heaviest now, but take the word occlusion
at its meaning, the cyclone is choking, and the end is in sight.
The occluded low finally rapidly decays.
Meanwhile, the struggle between colder and warmer air goes on, and another cyclone may
form later, will form later, along this boundary.
So each step along the way that I showed you represents roughly about one day in the life
cycle of an extra tropical cyclone.
While the cyclone is evolving, it is also in motion, most commonly translating from
west towards east, owing to the mid-latitude westerly winds.
The occluded cyclone decays largely because the horizontal density contrast that the cyclone
started with is rapidly diminishing.
Remember, fronts are regions of large temperature and therefore large density contrast, and
the cyclone actually uses that as a source of energy.
But now, with the occlusion, its gas tank is running on empty.
Let's take a quick look at two vertical cross sections, one drawn across the cold and warm
fronts, which we've already seen, and the other drawn across the occluded front.
First, from A to B across the cold and warm fronts, we see the deeper lifting and heavier
rain at the cold front, and shallower lifting and lighter rain as the warm front pushes
much more poorly.
Note the warm air is located between the two fronts.
The occlusion occurs when the cold and warm fronts meet.
So what happened to the warm air in this situation?
Actually, it has been completely lifted above the ground, and that's why precipitation
is likely heaviest at this stage.
While the extra tropical cyclone is evolving through its life cycle, it's also moving
in space.
Most commonly, these cyclones move from west to east, guided by the mid-latitude prevailing
westerly winds.
Let's follow our cyclone's life cycle.
It's a little more complex than the textbook example.
Our cyclone formed along a stationary front, which extended along the Gulf Coast, one of
several cyclones that formed in a series along that front, and developed into eastern U.S.
snowstorms.
Our incipient cyclone has formed in eastern Texas six hours later, and its circulation
is already altering the formerly stationary front into cold and warm fronts.
The cyclone is evolving rapidly as it moves northeastward.
In fact, this cyclone occluded very quickly.
Other localized areas of low pressure are also now noted along the front, watch in particular
the one on the east coast.
Later on, the cyclone has moved over Ohio and is fully occluded at this time, cut off
from the front.
Two new cyclones are developing in South Carolina and in Delaware.
And of the two new storms, the northeast cyclone survives long enough to occlude.
That particular storm brought substantial snowfall to eastern Canada.
So let's put this picture together.
The typical extra tropical cyclone is in the middle of its life cycle depicted here.
The center of low pressure with counterclockwise flow and cold and warm fronts on either side
have already appeared.
On one side, the cold air is being pushed against warm air at the cold front.
Strong narrow lifting is resulting in heavy and localized precipitation.
On the other side, the warm air is doing the pushing and it's more gentle lifting being
produced as a result.
And this is resulting in lighter, more spatially extensive precipitation.
In this figure, I have also shown bands of precipitation in the warm air area ahead of
the cold front.
These are prefrontal squall lines and the heaviest rain and most severe weather could
be occurring in these lines.
We'll talk a lot more about these squall lines and other important features later.
Did you notice something?
The surface map I've shown you I described is a map of sea level pressure.
We've drawn isobars representing sea level pressure, not station pressure.
But virtually all areas are above sea level.
And so the elevation of sea level would be underground.
How do we get a pressure for sea level when the sea level is underground?
And why would we want such a thing?
Here's an example that shows why.
A pressure difference of 10 millibars over 500 kilometers near a city like Chicago would
result in a geostrophic wind of about 20 meters per second, or 45 miles per hour, and that's
a pretty stiff wind.
But we can get a pressure drop of those same 10 millibars in just 100 meters or 100 yards
in the vertical direction because pressure decreases so quickly with height.
So two locations 500 kilometers apart could have surface pressures that vary by 10 millibars
because their elevations vary by just 100 yards.
In order to determine surface winds, we need to adjust away differences in elevation.
So picture two stations, one located at sea level, and one located on an inland plateau
one kilometer above sea level.
Will the wind between these stations be directed offshore or onshore?
Will it blow into or out of the page?
We need to know the magnitude and the direction of the pressure difference between these locations
in order to know that.
The station pressures at the two locations may be 1,000 and 900 millibars respectively,
but that very largely reflects the one kilometer difference in elevation.
To determine the sign and the magnitude of the pressure gradient force between these
two stations, we need to adjust all of the surface pressures to a common elevation and
we choose sea level.
Now you may be wondering, how is that adjustment made?
We basically make assumptions regarding what the air would be like between station elevation
and sea level if there were air there and not rock and dirt.
Obviously this cannot be a perfect or perfectly accurate calculation.
So consider the high sea level pressure in Colorado and the low in Kentucky that we were
looking at on our weather map earlier.
The station pressure is much lower in Colorado owing to its considerably higher elevation.
After adjustment, we see the sea level pressure is actually higher in Colorado than Kentucky
and that means the winds across Kansas are from the north instead of from the south,
which it would have appeared to be if we just use station pressures and a difference of
a wind blowing north to south or south to north, that's a very big difference.
Let's summarize.
In this lecture, we started putting our wind, temperature, density and humidity concepts
to work at understanding the weather that we see in our day to day lives and on weather
maps such as surface weather charts.
We saw the symbols we use on surface charts and we examined a case in which an extra tropical
low pressure system, an extra tropical cyclone, developed and went through its life cycle.
In that case, we confirmed that the winds do indeed tend to spiral counterclockwise
around these large scale lows and they do tend to converge in towards the lows owing
to surface friction.
Extra tropical cyclones are born on fronts, they live their lives feeding off the density
contrast that fronts represent and even get wrapped up in their own fronts much to their
own detriment.
In the final stage of the extra tropical cyclone life cycle, the occlusion, the low pressure
system has been choked off and it goes off to die, but the fronts live on.
They're continually renewed and refreshed by the heating imbalances we've seen operating
on planet Earth.
So let's look ahead.
In our next lecture, we will start looking up, literally, and start considering the atmospheric
circulation above the surface.
We'll see that it's a little different from what the simple 3 cell model might have predicted.
And we'll see that the Norwegian cyclone model is a little too simple as well.
So we'll commence on a more modern and dynamic explanation for the extra tropical cyclone
life cycle.
In particular, we'll be looking at upper air charts and acquiring new concepts like trough
and ridge, warm advection and positive vorticity advection.
And these will help us understand the life cycle of the extra tropical cyclone we've
been following, such as, and understand questions like, why did it form?
Why did it move the way it did?
Why didn't it last longer?
So we'll consider all of these questions in the next lecture.
