Music
Welcome back to meteorology.
In earlier lectures, we examined the three-cell model of the atmospheric circulation,
representing the impact of Earth's rotation on an atmospheric circulation
made inevitable by our round planet's heating differences.
That model was complicated in both small and large degrees
by the arrangement of continents and oceans, especially in the northern hemisphere.
We've seen many times now that land and sea areas respond differently to solar radiation.
Solar radiation received at different times of day,
different times during the year, things like that.
Having land areas on our planet also introduces complexity,
and another complication is the fact that our land is not flat.
The Earth's surface has significant terrain features,
and these features can block air, they can channel air,
they can lift air, sometimes the saturation,
and they can steal moisture from air, making deserts on their lee side.
In this lecture, we will examine more influences of mountains on the atmosphere,
how the mountains can disturb the atmosphere into which they intrude from below,
and how these disturbances can be felt far and wide, vertically and horizontally,
and how sometimes the mountains save their most extreme influences for their own back sides.
This lecture will build on our concepts of atmospheric stability and structure,
forces and spin, and humidity.
So let's see some more examples of the influence of mountains on the weather.
You've probably found yourself in this situation,
flying in an airplane and encountering swelling and sinking motion
as if you were on a boat at sea traveling through waves.
Actually, it's likely you were traveling through waves,
waves in the atmosphere, waves possibly created by mountains far below that airplane.
The mountains represent a disturbance to the atmosphere that is felt far and wide,
and the atmosphere responds to this disturbance by producing waves.
You may also have experienced the more violent shaking motions of turbulence
as you passed over those mountains,
since this could also be a consequence of mountains and the waves they generate.
Actually, we're pretty familiar with disturbances making waves.
Think of throwing a rock in a pond.
You see waves are created propagating outward from the point of the disturbance,
and the waves are moving,
but you know they're not actually transporting water, at least not horizontally.
Instead, as the waves pass by, individual blobs of water are bobbing up and down.
We call these surface gravity waves.
We call them that because they propagate along a surface, in this case the pond,
and gravity provides the restoring force on the blobs
when they get too high, gravity pulls them back down.
Mountain waves are a form of internal gravity wave.
They move through the atmosphere, but things bob up and down as well,
and one of the things they bounce around is us.
Further, mountain waves are an example of stationary internal gravity waves.
Waves, like our pond waves, typically move horizontally.
At some speed, we call the wave speed.
But this wave speed can be modified by the winds.
If a wave is traveling one direction and so is the wind,
then the wave's motion in that direction is enhanced by the speed of the flow.
But a wave trying to move upstream, a wave trying to move upstream will be slowed,
and if the wave speed is equal and opposite to the wind speed,
then the wave is stationary relative to the ground.
Mountain waves are an internal gravity wave that form because wind blows across topography,
and that same wind makes them stationary relative to the mountain, horizontally stationary, that is.
The waves can move vertically, and mountain waves often do,
and that's why something that starts way down at the ground can influence an airplane flying miles above.
Let's take a look.
Mountain waves form in a stable atmosphere,
so let's review some of our concepts relating to stability that we learned in previous lectures.
Here's a stable environment, with temperature decreasing at 6.5 C per kilometer in the troposphere
and increasing in the stratosphere.
That's our ELR, our environmental lapse rate, and this is our average or standard atmosphere.
If I make a substraturated air parcel and I force it to rise or sink,
it cools or warms at the dry adiabatic lapse rate, DALR, 10 C per kilometer,
as long as water substance is not changing phase, that is.
Since the tropospheric temperature changes less quickly with height than it does for our parcel,
air displaced up or down wants to return to its starting point, and we call that stable.
Notice this means the stratosphere is even more stable than the troposphere is.
Now, let's try to visualize a stable atmosphere in a somewhat different way.
I'm showing you a vertical cross-section.
It's 400 kilometers wide, 14 kilometers deep, and I've drawn a bunch of horizontal lines
that I'll soon be using to indicate air parcel paths.
You can pretend that air is moving along these lines.
These lines are not isobars, they're not isohites, they're not isotherms, or even isotax.
They're called isentropes, lines of constant entropy.
Sounds very sophisticated, but let's not get distracted by that.
These lines actually will have some useful things in common with isobars
and those other more familiar lines.
The initial spacing of these lines is a measure of how stable the environment is.
The narrower the space between them, the more stable.
Notice that the spacing is changing at about 12 kilometers, and that's where the tropopause is.
And the spacing is narrower above that, and it shows that the stratosphere is more stable than the troposphere.
Now, the neat thing about these lines is that if all of our processes are dry adiabatic,
meaning we neglect latent heating, we neglect radiation, other heat sources, etc.,
the mass between any pair of these horizontal lines is fixed.
So our isentropes are functioning somewhat similarly to isobars.
It's not the same amount of mass between any two lines that I've drawn, but the mass is fixed.
So, that means if I take two isentropes and I force them to get closer together,
it means that the wind speed has increased between them as if they were isobars or better yet, material surfaces.
Also, importantly, if the originally horizontal isentropes were to be turned vertically,
that means air is not only rising or sinking there, but also the stability of the environment is decreasing.
Because when I make isentropes start bending, I am increasing their vertical spacing,
and that means I have decreased the stability.
So, it can be hard to picture at first, but mountain waves and mountains disturb the environment
in a way that can make the atmosphere less stable, at least in some places and sometimes, and we're about to see that.
Now, let's introduce a bell-shaped mountain standing 500 meters or three-tenths of a mile tall
at the surface in the middle of our domain.
Pushing a mountain into the path of these westerly winds has created a disturbance.
If we focus down near the ground level, we see that air has been forced to rise up and over the mountain,
and since the atmosphere is generally stable, the displaced air wants to return to its original elevation,
and in this case, it does so as the air works its way farther eastward.
But every piece of air that gets pushed is also pushing its neighbor above it.
This is sort of a game of vertical dominoes, so the mountain's disturbance isn't confined to near the mountain itself.
We have made mountain waves.
These mountain waves are stationary relative to the ground, but they are traveling upward.
In this particular case, the influence of the mountain is felt as high up in the atmosphere as you can measure,
but as we'll see soon, that isn't always the case.
Now, recall I said that where these isentropes turn upward, air is rising,
and when they get close to vertical, the environment is getting a lot less stable.
Notice the highlighted area on the figure. Two things are possibly happening here.
First, a cloud may form if the air is sufficiently moist because the air is rising,
and second, turbulence may be generated there.
Turbulence is more likely to occur where the stability is lower because then there is less resistance,
there is less stability, which fights against the kind of wild vertical motions
and thrashing about that turbulence represents.
Notice also that long-range aircraft typically fly at 10, 11, 12 kilometers above sea level,
so that's putting the airplane's pads right through these mountain waves and the turbulence they can generate,
bringing about an undulating and possibly bumpy ride as we fly over them.
Now, there are many varieties of mountain waves in related phenomena,
affecting air and winds upstream and downstream, as well as the atmosphere above,
but these things can change as conditions change.
So as the conditions change, the mountain waves and the response of the atmosphere to the mountain can change.
And by conditions, I'm including things like the stability of the environment and the speed of the oncoming flow.
The atmospheric response to the disturbance mountains represent often also depends on the width and the height of the mountain barrier,
but one of the most dramatic examples of mountain-associated weather is the downslope windstorm and the hydraulic jump.
A hydraulic jump is a sudden change from a thin, high-velocity fluid to a thicker and slower one.
You can make one in your sink, just direct a jet of water at a flat solid surface.
At first, the water spreads along the surface as a thin sheet of high-velocity water,
but then, often abruptly, the fluid slows and thickens, and that's our jump.
The jump is often turbulent, and we can tell that by looking closely at the water, we oftentimes see it's very bubbly,
so the turbulence is indicated by the bubbles we're seeing in and around the jump.
We can encourage jump formation by altering the environmental stability.
Recall, the ELR is not a constant.
It changes from place to place, day to day, sometimes even hour to hour.
So here's a somewhat different temperature profile.
It has a temperature inversion near the surface.
Temperature inversions can occur for a large number of reasons.
Cool, dry CP air is prone to developing inversions owing to the lack of water vapor in clouds.
They can also result when CP air intrudes beneath MT air, such as at a cold front.
In general, temperature inversions such as these can be present when we have vertical wind shear,
and the wind direction, not just the speed, is changing with height.
So in a number of these situations, you could be encountering two different air masses as you rise upward from the surface.
But whatever their origin, temperature inversions such as these can prevent.
They can prevent mountain-induced disturbances from influencing the atmosphere higher above.
Instead, it can concentrate or even trap the disturbance in the lower troposphere,
sometimes with very dramatic consequences.
So let's look at a situation in which a hydraulic jump forms in the lee of a mountain barrier.
So we're zoomed in on a two-kilometer mountain, representing a formidable barrier,
the Rockies, the Sierra Nevada, something like that.
Our domain is still 400 kilometers across, but now we're only looking at the lowest five kilometers above the ground.
The wind's still blowing from left to right, and the mountain is the gray shape in the middle.
And again, our yellow lines are isentropes, from which we can deduce parcel paths.
We see this mountain. This mountain has had a very profound influence on air passing up and over the summit.
Take a yellow line and follow it from left to right.
The pad suddenly plunged downward on the lee side, and the very narrow spacing of the isentropes there indicate the wind speeds are extremely large.
We have created a downslope windstorm.
In this case, note further that parcel paths are also vertical in two places,
not only on the mountain's lee slope, but also 50 kilometers or 30 miles farther downwind, farther to the right.
At that point, the fast-flowing air very abruptly slows down, and that's our hydraulic jump.
The vertical isentropes warn us that turbulence is probably being generated there.
Now, we can tell that the airflow is slower to the right of the jump,
and we can tell that because the spacing between the lines is again relatively large.
Keep in mind we started with a very stable atmosphere here,
and having places where air suddenly plunges or climbs several kilometers without a cause like latent heating is dramatic and very, very unusual.
And we may see clouds associated with this phenomenon in two places, on the mountain's upslope side,
which we've been expecting, if the humidity is high enough.
But also at the hydraulic jump as well, because the air is rising there.
And remember, it's rising very, very sharply.
So, I showed this photograph in lecture nine.
These are clouds forming over a hydraulic jump in the lee of California, Sierra Nevada mountains.
In this case, the air is blowing from right to left at very high velocity,
down the slope of the mountain range seen at the right, swiftly across the floor of the Owens Valley,
only to suddenly decelerate and rise violently again some distance downwind.
This is one of the most famous pictures ever taken in meteorology, and in my opinion, one of the most dramatic.
It was taken by Robert Simons, a pilot who took off from Bishop, California, in an airport in a P-38 airplane.
His plane entered the hydraulic jump's updraft, and with engine off,
it soared to a near-record, if not actual, record height in the powerful ascent.
His daughter, Patricia, told me that these ominous, almost evil-looking clouds on this day were made up of something different.
They were made up of dust. Dust kicked up off the valley floor by the extremely rapid winds.
I also showed this movie in lecture nine.
This was taken in California's Mojave Desert, looking at the Tehachapi Mountains.
This was the southern appendage of the Sierra Nevada.
The trees in the foreground are Joshua trees, and they're a common sight in this relatively high elevation desert,
and notice that they're not moving very much.
After capturing these images, I got back in my car, wanting to get a closer look at these clouds.
So I drove a few miles closer to the mountains, but I found myself amid such winds, I could barely get the car door open.
And once I got the car door open, once I was outside, I wish I hadn't gotten out of my car.
I couldn't even stand up, so I have no pictures to show you from there.
I had crossed over to the other side of a hydraulic jump.
Not one marked by clouds is in the previous example, because the air wasn't moist enough.
Here's a topographic map showing where I was.
The reds are higher elevation, and I was originally at the place marked X,
looking northwest into the winds which were coming down the California Central Valley,
up and over the mountains and towards me.
In my estimation, the jump was at the location of the black dashed line,
and it's simply astounding to me how the wind can change so very much over such a very short distance.
Downslope winds are also common in the Santa Barbara area, which is to the west of where I was,
and these winds are often called sundowner winds there.
These occur when the winds have a more northerly component,
and so are also moving perpendicular to the mountain range.
The sundowners seem to be more likely when there's cold advection in the middle troposphere above the mountains.
Cold advection means colder air is displacing warmer air.
Do you see a common thread here?
We started with a stable atmosphere.
Mid-tropospheric cold advection decreases the stability of the air above the mountains
because I'm putting colder air, which is making the lapse rate steeper.
In our other case, stability of the lower troposphere was increased instead by a temperature inversion.
So in both cases, it's less stable above more stable or more stable beneath less stable, whichever way you want to look at it.
Now, luckily, downslope windstorms and hydraulic jumps don't happen all the time.
It's a recipe in which the ingredients have to come together just right.
We can get some insight into what combination of ingredients we can get downslope windstorms from
by looking at a very simple system, not unlike a river flowing over a rock on the riverbed.
So here's our river flow in a situation in which there is no obstacle on the riverbed.
The flow is moving from left to right, the thin line at the top represents the river's free surface,
and the thick line at the bottom represents the riverbed.
What happens if we were to place an obstacle like a mountain in this river?
We're going to consider two situations, faster flow moving towards the obstacle and slower moving flow,
and think which one will provoke rapid downslope motion in the lee of the obstacle.
Let's consider faster oncoming flow first.
It turns out that this flow will slow down as it rises up and over the obstacle, which will make the fluid thicker.
Once it passes the crest of the mountain or the ridge of our obstacle, the flow speed will pick up again
and return to its original velocity farther downstream, as if the mountain had never existed.
So it slows uphill and it speeds up downhill, and we call this supercritical flow for reasons we'll discover very soon.
And this seems to be a very logical response.
You push something like fluid uphill against gravity, you expect it to slow down.
I mean, how could be any different?
If the initial oncoming flow is somewhat slower, however, it can be very different,
and this situation is called subcritical.
In subcritical flow, the flow actually speeds up over the obstacle and the fluid thins.
It's not actually necessary for the fluid's free surface to dip down, as I've shown it here.
All it has to do is get thinner and the flow will be faster as a result.
How could the fluid speed up going uphill?
Actually, this isn't such a strange situation after all.
I've mentioned garden hoses previously in this course, so consider your garden hose again.
You can speed up the flow through the hose by partially blocking it.
In this situation, the mountain is acting as a restriction in the fluid.
Just think about creeks with water coursing over rocks.
Actually, you've seen this kind of behavior quite a lot.
So we can have flow that speeds up or slows down by moving over the mountain,
both wind up by recovering their initial state somewhere downstream.
And did you notice? Neither. Neither resulted in a downslope windstorm.
To get that, we need to create an intermediate situation, a hybrid of these two situations,
one that starts out subcritical and becomes supercritical along the way,
so it has the best of both.
The flow will speed up uphill and downhill,
potentially achieving tremendous velocities in the lee of the obstacle.
It turns out that this flow can be characterized by a ratio we call the Froude number.
This is nothing more than a ratio between the flow speed
and something that actually kind of looks like a wave speed in the denominator.
The numerator of this ratio is the flow speed, which I'm going to call u.
The denominator is the square root of g times d.
g is the acceleration of gravity, 10 meters per second squared,
or 32 feet per second per second, and d is the fluid depth.
Now, technically, as I just said, the denominator is a wave speed of surface gravity waves,
but it's less helpful to think about it that way.
The critical point. The critical point is this.
The critical Froude number is 1 when the numerator and the denominator are the same.
So when the Froude number is greater than 1, we are in a supercritical state,
literally above the critical value.
How do we get a Froude number exceeding 1?
It's easy. We can increase the numerator or decrease the denominator.
That is, we can increase the speed of the flow or decrease its depth.
Now, notice, both happen when subcritical flow approaches the obstacle.
Here again is our subcritical flow.
It's approaching the obstacle.
The initial Froude number far upstream is less than 1,
so the flow speed is too weak or the depth is too great.
But the fluid is thinning and accelerating as it passes over the obstacle.
So the speed u in the numerator is increasing,
and the depth d in the denominator is decreasing,
and this is causing the Froude number to rise.
If the Froude number increases, but never quite reaches 1,
its critical value, the flow remains subcritical the whole way,
and it just slows downstream, and that's the case we saw already.
But if the Froude number reaches 1 at the top of the obstacle,
the flow becomes supercritical,
and in addition to accelerating up the slope, it also accelerates down.
You're seeing incredible wind speeds here,
spreading downstream of the mountain,
ultimately terminating in a hydraulic jump.
So we've shown a situation in which downslope windstorms could occur
owing to a trapping mechanism,
something keeping the disturbance in the lower troposphere.
In our case, we decreased the stability with height
with either a temperature inversion near the ground
or a cold advection farther aloft.
But both of those put less stable air above more stable air,
and we have discovered that that's conducive to trapping.
Another way we can trap disturbances is with vertical wind shear.
If the wind speeds increase with height to a sufficient degree,
here's a less dramatic and perhaps thankfully far more common type of trapped wave,
a phenomenon we call lee waves.
The disturbance is created when the mountain finds itself
and the waves created by the mountain find themselves trapped
by decreasing stability and or the presence of vertical wind shear.
So instead of being able to propagate well above the mountain,
the waves will instead extend downwind of the mountain,
the lee of the mountain,
and we see them bobbing up and down in our stable layer.
So picture air passing up and over the mountain.
And remember, air is basically following our yellow lines.
And the air is basically also bobbing up and down
above its original elevation,
much like a pendulum rising and sinking periodically
as it moves downstream.
If the relative humidity sufficiently high
when the air is rising,
the vertical motions can lead to clouds,
which then disappear when the air starts sinking again.
These were the lenticular clouds,
the lens-shaped clouds we saw in lecture nine.
There are many places on the web to find visible satellite imagery,
so you'll see a lot of features like this quite a lot.
In this particular picture,
we're looking down on the west coast
and we see California, Nevada,
and the southeastern part of Oregon.
And if we look carefully
and look down beneath the high-wispy cirrus clouds,
we can see rows of clouds,
and they're lined up basically from southwest towards the northeast,
extending downstream from the Sierra Nevadas and the Cascade Range.
They remind me of slices of bacon,
particularly when I'm hungry.
Now, let's turn to another important large-scale influence of mountains.
In lecture fifteen,
we saw this map of mean 500 millivar geopotential height during the winter.
While many meandering troughs and ridges form and decay over time,
and we saw that as well,
those have all been averaged away in this figure,
leaving behind a gently and persistent trough
hanging over the Midwestern and Eastern United States.
This mean trough exists in large part
due to the presence of the mountains of western North America.
Mountains make troughs.
They could also make extra-tropical cyclones.
So let's see why.
Consider, again,
westerly flow passing over a formidable topographic barrier.
We've often seen subsidence on the lee-side form.
So here are our isentropes.
They're two of them.
If our process is dry adiabatic,
the mass between these two isentropes is fixed.
Now, picture a cylinder of air
between the two curves approaching the mountain.
The cylinder may not seem to be spinning,
but it does have spin
if only because of the rotating Earth.
Subsidence on the lee-side
can cause the cylinder to be stretched vertically.
And as it is stretched,
we see that the spin increases.
Vertical stretching increases spin.
To realize that,
all we have to do is think about a very familiar example.
A figure skater.
We know what everyone knows what I'm talking about.
You've got a figure skater who goes into a spin,
and as she brings in her arms,
the spin is increasing.
In this case, we're decreasing the radius
and increasing the spin
by taking the air and stretching it vertically.
We can call that conservation of angular momentum,
but the real key point is that the spin
creates low pressure,
and we increase the spin by stretching.
So what has happened is that the pressure
in the lee of the mountain has been dropped.
It has been reduced.
It has been lowered by this stretching effect.
Here are the hotspots
of what we call lee-side psychogenesis,
the formation of new cyclones,
owing to the effects of mountains
and new cyclones that I just described.
And I'm also showing you the typical tracks
taken by these storms.
I've pointed two areas in particular
where extra-tropical cyclones and tropes
are most likely to form.
The northern track, those are referred to as Alberta Clippers,
due to their location of origin
and very fast movement.
Other favorable locations
for trough formation and extra-tropical cyclone formation
So, why don't we sum this up?
Mountains have a huge role to play in weather,
and their effects are powerfully felt,
not only in the immediate vicinity of the mountains,
but also far and wide.
Why? Because they represent disturbances to the air
trying to flow in, over, or near them.
Mountains can produce waves.
Under some conditions,
these waves can propagate far vertically,
giving you a bumpy ride as you fly far over them.
Sometimes, their influence is more confined to the lower troposphere,
owing to changes of stability and wind with height.
These trapped waves can not only produce clouds
and not only over the mountain crest themselves,
but also periodically downwind in the lee of the mountain.
In extreme situations,
trapping leads to ferocious downslope winds
on the mountain's backside,
oftentimes abruptly terminating
in the turbulent hydraulic jump.
Longer-reaching effects of mountains include
leeside cyclogenesis.
Air passing over mountains can become stretched vertically
as different parcels become displaced
by differing amounts from original elevations.
The stretching enhances the horizontal spin
that these air parcels naturally pack with them
thanks to our own rotating Earth.
And, as we are so familiar with by now,
enhancing spin lowers the pressure.
So we often see troughs,
like the trough we saw in the mean 500-millibar chart,
and extra-tropical cyclones
form in the lee of major mountain ranges,
particularly north-south-oriented mountain ranges
like the American and Canadian Rockies.
Why north-south?
Because our mid-latitude winds tend to blow west to east over them.
So let's look ahead.
I would be remiss if I didn't mention
that mountains can make deep, cumulus clouds as well
since they are so effective at lifting air.
Some of these clouds will develop into thunderstorms.
And thunderstorms are the topic of our next lecture.
