Welcome back to meteorology.
In this lecture, we will examine the Squall Line thunderstorm,
a common type of storm that forms especially in the warm season.
They often appear at or near cold fronts associated with extra-tropical cyclones.
We'll use a lot of our wind and moisture concepts in this lecture,
wind shear, spin, positive buoyancy, and now familiar terms like LCL, LFC, and CAPE.
So let's get started.
There are many sources of weather information on the web,
from the National Weather Service, universities, and private companies.
One of the great things about the Internet is we have so much weather information now
almost literally at our fingertips.
So I hope that what we've covered so far helps you interpret and appreciate this wealth of information that is available.
To me, one of the most interesting things to do is to monitor the weather in real time
when storms are happening, especially on radar.
Here are locations for weather radars called NEXRAD.
That stands for Next Generation Radar.
In the United States, these radars are operated by the National Weather Service.
We see many NEXRAD locations across the United States,
and real time weather information is never more than a click away.
If you were looking at the Lincoln, Nebraska radar display for the evening of July 8th, 2003,
this is what you would have seen.
A storm bearing down on eastern Nebraska.
You're seeing radar echoes.
The bright red ones indicate the most intense precipitation.
This precipitation is occurring in a quasi-linear area that is advancing eastward.
The yellows and greens indicate areas with progressively lighter precipitation.
The storm is very dynamic.
Little red blobs are appearing, they're moving, they're disappearing,
and all the while the storm is moving slowly, majestically eastward.
We're going to take a close look at what we're seeing in that loop
and how those data were collected.
First, how? Some background on radar.
Originally, radar was an acronym standing for Radio Detection and Ranging,
but now it's a word in its own right.
As its name suggests, it employs radio waves.
More specifically, it uses radiation at the shorter end of the radio section
of the electromagnetic spectrum, the microwave region.
The next rad radar I mentioned is an example of a pulse radar.
It has two alternating phases of operation.
First, the transmission phase, that's the pulse,
but actually it spends most of its time in the second phase, which is listening.
The amount of returned energy, the energy that is returned and picked up by the radar
indicates how much stuff is out there.
Waves scatter off what we call radar targets,
and the returned energy is referred to as backscatter.
And the time it takes for the energy to return tells us how far away the echo is.
The wavelength chosen for the radar is a compromise
between detection, penetration, and the size of the instrument.
Typical weather or precipitation radar, like our next rad radars,
use a 10-centimeter wavelength.
This sees precipitation-sized particles.
It sees rain, hail, and aggregates of snow crystals.
It also sees some insects, birds, airplanes.
And sometimes it sees other things as well, but it cannot see cloud droplets.
Radar can generally see quite far.
It has a useful range exceeding 140 miles or 230 kilometers.
But as I said, it can't see cloud droplets because it just passes right by those.
10-centimeter radar requires large disc-shaped antenna.
3-centimeter radar, a smaller wavelength, we call cloud radar,
and cloud droplets do scatter this wavelength.
But as a result, it cannot see very deeply in the clouds.
But the benefit of the 3-centimeter radar is it can have a much smaller antenna.
So it's much more compact, mobile, more easily deployed in field research, and also on airplanes.
Pilots rely on cloud radar in the cockpit.
And it may worry you a little bit to realize that pilots cannot see very far into clouds.
We're going to focus on 10-centimeter radar here.
What is radar C?
It's what we call radar reflectivity.
It's proportional to the sixth power of particle diameter.
Boy, that's big.
A certain amount of signal, that's what we're calling the returned energy,
could indicate a small number of very large particles or a very large number of small particles,
but radar can't tell the difference.
Reflectivity is measured in a unit called decibels, like sound,
but let's remember these are not acoustic waves.
And I'll be using a unit called DBZ to log scale with values ranging from minus 30 for the smallest targets
to 75 DBZ for the largest hailstones.
The typical useful range is 20 to 65 DBZ.
An important point is not all particles are equally reflective.
I already mentioned that small cloud droplets are effectively invisible to 10-centimeter radar.
Generally, frozen water.
Frozen water is less reflective, so radar will underestimate the amount of ice and snow out there.
But melting snow is very bright on radar.
And the reason is that as snow melts, it looks like a very big water drop.
And melting hailstones are the very brightest of all because they look like gigantic water drops.
But we need to keep in mind that not everything we see on radar is precipitation or even meteorological.
As an example, ground clutter is often seen near the radar,
as the radar beam scatters off nearby trees, buildings, hills, what have you.
Don't get excited by the deep reds in this figure.
Always check the color scale.
In this case, red is only 10 DBZ.
Weather radars are at the ground and they look up as well as out,
starting at a small angle to the horizontal.
What we call base elevation is a half a degree above the ground level.
And the radar beam expands with distance.
So the farther you are away from the radar, the higher the top of the beam is,
but also the higher the beam's bottom as well.
We're looking at clouds, we're looking at precipitation through a keyhole.
In so-called precipitation mode, in which radars operate when storms are in the vicinity,
radars execute a series of circular scans at nine different elevation angles,
ranging from that half degree above the horizontal to 19 and a half degrees.
This takes about six minutes and then the sequence starts over.
Let's take a look at an image from Nexred radar at Laughlin Air Force Base
in Southwest Texas from May 9th, 2009.
This image was recorded at 0054Z, that's 7.54 pm Central Daylight Time,
a few minutes after sunset.
Ground clutter is seen in the center of the image near where the radar is located.
To the Southwest, there's a storm on the Mexican side of the border.
Storms often form on the mountains there.
What are those other circular blobs?
Actually, these are bats emerging from their caves.
This is an animation of the radar scans that shows the bats emerging and dispersing.
Artificial echoes and noise are also appearing and disappearing into view,
but this illustrates an important point, not everything you see on radar is weather.
So let's return to our Lincoln, Nebraska radar image and ask, what are we seeing here?
This is a squall line.
It's defined as a continuous or broken line of thunderstorms with adjacent areas of precipitation.
These lines often appear in the warm sector of extra-tropical cyclones,
aligned parallel to cold fronts.
They can form near other boundaries as well.
Squall lines have these characteristics.
They're long-lived, they're unsteady and multicellular, I'll define that soon,
and they have evaporationally produced sub-cloud cold pools.
This cold pool is the line's principal propagation mechanism.
It's cold, it's dense, it's air spreading owing to its own weight.
Our focus here will be on mid-latitude squall lines,
but they're also common in the tropics,
and tropical squall lines are similar in many respects.
This schematic depicts a squall line in maturity.
It's moving to the right, and the leading or forward part is called the convective region.
It usually has a quasi-linear shape, as we saw in our radar imagery.
This is where you will find the most intense rain and the strongest winds,
and it is cellular in appearance.
Behind the convective region is the trailing stratiform region,
an extended zone of lighter rain.
This part of the storm appears later on in the life cycle of the storm as the storm ages.
Upon the storm's demise, it's oftentimes the last part to disappear,
and there's often a noticeable gap between the convective and stratiform regions,
again, as we saw in our Lincoln, Nebraska radar imagery.
We're going to look at the vertical structure and airflow through a squall line storm,
but before we do, I want you to think about two points.
Here are, here's how the West to East winds may be varying with height in some mid-latitude location.
The winds are westerly, an increase in magnitude with height.
We have westerly vertical winds here, and we remember we have that because it's colder to the north.
First, we remember that shear makes spin.
By itself, this westerly shear is trying to make the air spin in a clockwise fashion from our point of view.
This spin is in a vertical plane, so we call it horizontal vorticity because the spin axis is horizontal.
The next, and more important point we need to remember is we can change the frame of reference.
Suppose these are the winds where you are, so there's a westerly wind at your back,
slow us at the ground, and increasing with height.
Now get into your car and drive eastward, but faster than the winds at any level would be blowing.
What are the winds relative to you now?
Now they're easterly relative to you, and they're fastest at the ground instead.
And this is true of the squall line as well.
It's moving east faster than the lower tropospheric winds can blow in that direction.
But the point is, and this is the important point, we still have westerly vertical winds here,
and that shear still wants things to spin clockwise in this vertical plane.
So now, let's look at a vertical cross section across a typical squall line thunderstorm.
Here's our squall line cloud, it's huge, usually over 100 kilometers across in maturity,
and it's the depth of the entire troposphere.
It's sort of shaped like an anvil, and at the leading edge, the right side, we see the forward anvil at the upper right.
Below, that blue or aqua area, is the sub-cloud cold pool.
It's beneath the cloud shield.
It's very much like a cold front, but usually much stronger.
The leading edge of the cold pool is called the gust front, because the winds gust and pick up as it passes by you.
Often, but not always, these storms are oriented north-south and they propagate eastward in the mid-latitude westerly winds.
But as I mentioned, the storms also tend to move faster than the westerlies,
so that the storm relative flow is towards the line, and largest at low levels, where all the moisture is.
Notice also, we have westerly vertical wind shear.
We'll see the role that this shear plays later on.
So, we have a low-level inflow, and it's colliding with the cold pool's gust front,
and it's being lifted to saturation and positive buoyancy, thereby creating what we call the storm's front-to-rear flow.
Some of this flow overturns, and that's where the forward anvil comes from.
Beneath, beneath the front-to-rear flow, is the rear inflow current, extending from the storm's rear towards the front of the storm.
These are not westerly winds catching up to the storm from behind.
Rather, they're induced by the storm's own circulation.
Notice that the rear inflow is descending towards the surface as it moves forward.
This is actually because of precipitation.
Specifically, it's precipitation that evaporates before actually making it to the ground.
In lecture one, I told you that sometimes the most important precipitation is the precipitation that doesn't make it to the ground,
and this is what I was talking about.
The evaporation of precipitation in this air makes the rear inflow current air cold and negatively buoyant,
and sometimes this descending rear inflow can bring extremely strong winds to the surface and cause a lot of damage.
This is the part of the storm that's visible to 10 centimeter weather radar, depending, of course, on how far from the radar the storm is.
The principal echo features that we see on the radar are, in the convective region at far right, young, mature, and decaying cells.
In the stratiform region at left, a narrow bright band made by melting snow drifting downward from the trailing part of the cloud.
The freezing level is just above the bright band.
How do I know that?
Because our snow crystals are now melting, and that's why we can see them on radar, and that's why they're bright.
Squall lines are long-lived collections of short-lived convective cells.
Each convective cell in the line undergoes a 30 to 40 minute life cycle from burst to decay.
A great leap in our understanding of thunderstorm cells and their life cycle was achieved thanks to the first large-scale field program in the history of meteorology, the thunderstorm project.
Just a little history leading up to the thunderstorm project.
In August 1940, a DC-3 aircraft crashed during a storm, killing a senator from Minnesota.
That certainly got Congress's attention. You can say it put it on their radar.
In 1944, the Civil Aeronautics Board called for the study of storm air motions after another DC-3 lost lift.
In January 1945, the U.S. House of Representatives debated a bill to authorize the U.S. Weather Bureau, now called the Weather Service, to study thunderstorm causes and characteristics.
But World War II was going on at the time, and the end of World War II provided both the planes and the personnel needed.
The thunderstorm project was based in Orlando, Florida in 1946 and in Ohio in 1947.
Those locations being chosen on the basis of storm frequency and the proximity of military bases.
And in the project, airplanes and radar were pressed in the service.
One of the great accomplishments of the project was a detailed description of the individual thunderstorm cell life cycle, and that's what I want to talk about now.
The thunderstorm life cycle consists of three stages, the cumulus stage, the mature stage, and the dissipating stage, and we'll take them in that order.
In the cumulus stage, the cell is young, freshly made, air is rising. It has been lifted to its LCL, its LFC, and CAPE is being converted into kinetic energy, driving the air upward ever more strongly.
Condensation at this time is mainly in the small cloud droplets.
And these droplets are being lofted by the winds.
There are no large rain drops yet, nor any ice particles, because those take time to form, but they're on their way.
The rising air is creating divergence above our rapidly growing cloud, pushing mass out of the column and causing the surface pressure to start dropping.
That induces flow into the cloud from below, feeding more moisture into the cloud.
There's no downward motion in the cloud, at least not yet.
But the cloud droplets are growing.
While they're small, they cannot fall relative to still air, so they're just passively following the air upward.
You may wonder, why don't they fall?
Well, actually, they're trying.
They're trying, but air resistance, the drag force, prevents them from falling, at least falling very far, while they're very small.
Still, cloud droplets are also colliding.
The air motions are turbulent.
That's driving cloud droplets into each other, and some of these collisions are sticking.
And as a result, larger and larger drops are being produced.
When the drops get large enough that they can start falling, they overcome the drag force.
Now we have rain drops.
And as rain drops fall, they collide with smaller cloud droplets that haven't grown yet, and they collect those droplets by coalescence.
And at that time, our cloud has reached the second stage, the mature stage.
The mature cell is rising and sinking motions, updrafts and downdrafts.
And some of the downward motion has been caused by water loading.
That condensation that's fueling the positive buoyancy, that condensation has come with a price.
Condensation has weight, and as it accumulates, it exerts more and more drag on the air struggling to carry it.
And in part of the cloud, the air finally is dragged downward because it has become negatively buoyant.
The mature stage is the most intense period of our cell's existence.
It's growing upward, it's reaching new heights, parcels are attaining their EQLs and even overshooting,
but the end is in sight.
It has gotten too much of a good thing.
And our cell passes into the third and final stage, the dissipating stage.
In the dissipating stage, the cloud has reached maximum height.
Ice has appeared by now, it's taken a while, freezing takes time, scarcity of ice nuclei and all that we talked about before.
And there's little upward motion remaining at this time.
So the source of positive buoyancy, condensation, warming, fueling that ascent, it's basically gone.
All that's going to happen now is the cell's going to rain out and then it's history.
That was a single thunderstorm cell, those three stages, a single cloud.
But it's important to recognize that thunderstorm cells don't usually occur in isolation.
And our squall line, our squall line represents a collection of those cells,
each at a different, various stage of their life cycle.
So let's go back to our picture of the squall line and zoom in on the convective region.
This cartoon does double duty.
It can represent a family of cells spanning four generations,
but it could also be interpreted as the life stages of a single cell
as it evolves and moves through the storm from right to left.
We start above the gust front with an incipient cell, cloud droplets at this time,
nothing more than that so it's invisible to radar.
This is the cumulus stage of the cell.
Next to the left, it's a growing cell, much deeper now.
Precipitation particles have just appeared
and we have what we call the first echo, that tiny little red blob.
Next, the mature cell, heavy precipitation being formed at this time.
But remember, as I said, the end is in sight.
And finally, farthest to the left, a dissipating or decaying cell.
It's the detritus of the convective region.
It's passing rearward to become incorporated
in that light stratiform rain region to the rear.
Now, let's focus on the storm's inflow.
I noted that the storm was vertically sheared
and this resulted in horizontal vorticity, which was spin in a vertical plane.
By itself, the shear circulation is trying to make the cloud lean to the right with height
in the direction we call down shear.
That's the direction in which the wind is sheared.
In this case, down shear is to the right or east
because the shear is westerly from west to east.
But the storm isn't leaning down shear, is it?
Why not?
Notice that the circulation around the cold pool also has spin.
This negative buoyancy is also producing a circulation
and that circulation is counterclockwise from our point of view.
And it's opposite to the shear's induced circulation.
So we have two competing circulations
and the fate of air rising over the gust front and into the storm
depends on their relative strengths.
In this case, the cold pool circulation is the stronger of the two.
So the flow tilts up shear instead of down shear
as we might have expected if the cloud were a solid object.
Let's quickly recap this
because this illustrates why squaline storms need some vertical shear but not too much.
Shear alone would make the storm tilt down shear into the wind.
Well, so what?
Notice that this would make the cloud precipitate into its own inflow.
As the raindrops fall into the substratuated air beneath,
a lot of that rain is going to evaporate.
That evaporation is going to moisten the air but it's also going to cool it
and that's going to decrease the cape of its inflow.
So the storm is actually raining into the air that's trying to rise up into the cloud.
That cloud probably is not going to last very long.
But with only the cold pool and no shear at all,
the inflowing air might be lifted to saturation over that cold pool, over that gust front,
but it will also be accelerated very quickly rearward by the cold pool circulation
and this severely limits its lift.
But we see if we have just enough of each circulation,
this can result in the most effective lifting in the strongest storm.
The cold pool circulation has good and bad points.
It's lifting air up but it's also shoving it rearward very quickly.
The shear has good and bad points.
It's giving air that's moving towards the storm more strongly near the surface
but it's also trying to make the storm tilt and rain into its own inflow.
But if we have just enough of both, if it's balanced enough,
then the storm can have the best of both worlds.
Storms need to tilt a little bit up shear though
so that they unload their precipitation behind the updraft
and not on the other side and not into its own inflow.
So, why are these storms unsteady and multicellular?
This is actually because of a third circulation.
Positive buoyancy within the rising air
generates a circulation that winds up actually cutting itself off.
Picture high cape air from the inflow rising up from the surface
over the gust front associated with a new growing cumulus convective cell.
The positive buoyancy is generating a circulation
up in the cloud and down on the flanks
and that circulation is forcing drier, less favorable, cold, stable air
into the updraft from below and it chokes it.
As the choked-off piece gets carried rearward,
it'll live out its life cycle the same stages we discussed before
and it's growing and it's intensifying, but the end is in sight.
So, we've seen why storms move,
why they have convective and stratiform regions,
why convective regions are unsteady.
But I hope you appreciate that this is a truly remarkable machine.
The cold pool keeps the storm moving forward towards unstable air.
It lifts that unstable air to the LCL and then to the LFC.
The shear helps counteract the cold pool's negative effects
and enhances the inflow of moist low-level air
relative to the drier air in the middle troposphere.
The storm cells produce precipitation
that keep the cold pool cold and moving forward.
This process is self-sustaining
as long as there's the right amount of shear
and the right amount of cape in the environment.
So now, let's talk about a type of squall line called the bow echo
and the geratio.
Sometimes you see squall lines on radar
take on a very strongly bowed appearance
and these are called bow echoes.
Sometimes we need a little more imagination.
Behind these echoes, the rear inflow current
has descended to the ground,
potentially bringing very high winds.
Remember I discussed the rear inflow current
was this descending current of air
that was basically descending
because it was evaporating precipitation
falling out of the storm's front to rear flow.
And the winds are very strong.
The squall line is moving towards the east very quickly
and yet these winds are moving eastward even faster.
And downdrafts in the convective region
can take this rear inflow air
and drive it down to the surface,
delivering to the surface extremely strong winds.
This particular bow echo formed on August 4, 2004.
Wind gusts of 70 miles per hour
were recorded in northeastern Illinois
and the bow echoes have its particular shape
because we are seeing the rear inflow reach the ground,
pushing the gust front hard from behind
and making the line look much more bow shaped.
This bow echo is a visual manifestation
of wind storms we call duratios.
That's Spanish for straight, the key is straight line winds.
So let's look at a case.
A squall line that developed on April 2, 2006.
It's 18Z April 2, 2006, 1 p.m. Central Daylight Time.
A close to textbook extra tropical cyclone
is seen in South Iowa.
We have northwesterly winds behind the cold front
and southwesterly winds in the warm sector.
By 21Z, a squall line has appeared in the warm sector
ahead of and parallel to the cold front.
Location is marked by the orange dot dash line.
Three hours later, we see the cyclone
has already started to occlude
and the squall line has moved farther ahead of the cold front.
Squall lines generally move as their cold pools spread.
Here's a representative sounding from the warm sector
taken prior to the squall line passage.
We see a lot of familiar things in this sounding
and we've talked about everything here before.
We have a temperature and a dew point of a surface parcel
and we've lifted that surface parcel first to the LCL
and then to the LFC.
If we look carefully, we see there's virtually
no negative buoyancy at all.
There's virtually no sin here.
Basically, all we needed was some lifting
to get this show on the road.
Once the air parcel reaches its LFC,
there's a lot of CAPE there.
CAPE is measured in joules.
That's J-O-U-L-E-S, a unit of energy.
This sounding has 3,500 joules
and parcels that lifted from the surface
will reach temperatures up to 12C or 22F
warmer than the surrounding environment.
That's a huge amount of energy.
That's a tremendous amount of positive buoyancy.
Now, why are we looking in the warm sector?
If we had gone behind the cold front instead
and looked at soundings there,
we would see there's no CAPE whatsoever.
So it's the moist air, the unstable air.
That's the air that we'll see rise.
On the web, you're more likely to encounter
soundings presented in this way
rather than the Cartesian temperature versus height
graphs that I've been using so far in this course.
We call this a skew-T diagram.
Lines of constant temperature go from lower left
to upper right instead of straight up.
This takes a little getting used to,
but it's basically the same kind of information.
We lift parcels and we look to see
what's the difference between the environmental temperature
as a function of height and what the parcel path is
along the moist adiabat.
Here's a radar loop for this particular case.
This one's a little messier than our classic textbook example.
There's a lot of interesting stuff going on.
So, let's summarize what we've talked about
in this lecture so far.
In this lecture, we've seen
how the squalene thunderstorm works
and how it appears on radar.
Radar is one of our eyes on the weather.
It uses microwave energy to tell
where the larger precipitation particles are,
and precipitation appears in growing clouds
as cloud droplets produced by condensing vapor
on condensation nuclei grow,
and they grow by collision in the cloud updraft.
As they grow, cloud droplets become raindrops
and start falling.
The drag condensation exerts on the surrounding air
helps initiate and intensify downward motion.
And now we have downdrafts in addition to updrafts.
No cloud lasts forever.
A typical cell lasts about 30 or 40 minutes
before it has rained itself out.
But cells can appear in an organized fashion
as part of an organized system we call the squalene.
The squalene is a magnificent machine
with 15 air to saturation and positive buoyancy
and keeping it moving forward
towards fresh sources of moist unstable air.
As long as the inflow remains favorable,
this machine moves on,
owing to the weight of its sub-cloud co-pool.
Let's look ahead.
Squalelines form in environments with vertical wind shear,
not too little and not too much.
Another form of thunderstorm is the supercell thunderstorm.
It loves shear.
It uses shear to create horizontal rotation,
including the ultimate horizontal rotation, the tornado.
We'll see how in the next lecture.
