Music
Welcome back to meteorology.
In previous lectures, we examined the lifecycle of the extra-tropical cyclone,
a mid-latitude phenomena fueled by horizontal temperature gradients
and intensified by sources of ascent, including spin,
an upper-level divergence produced by positive vorticity advection and warm advection.
We recall that horizontal pressure gradients are revealed by height changes on isobaric surfaces,
and that the thickness between two isobaric surfaces reflects the average temperature of that layer.
We've also seen horizontal temperature gradients manifested as the vertical shear of the horizontal wind,
which profoundly influences storms and mountain waves.
In the last lecture, we examined the ocean, and we saw that the temperature of its surface
not only varied with latitude but also with time of year.
Warm sea surface temperatures followed the sun northward as the days got longer
but with a considerable lag so that sea surface temperatures in the northern hemisphere subtropical
and mid-latitude oceans didn't reach maximum until September or so.
We also saw the consequence of west-east sea surface temperature gradients across the tropics,
the Walker circulation.
That led to persistent ascent and convection above the very warm waters of the western Pacific,
the maritime continent, at least when El Nino wasn't on the prowl.
In this lecture, we turned to tropical cyclones, the generic term for hurricanes and typhoons.
I'll sometimes refer to them as TCs.
Like their name suggests, TCs are born in the tropical areas of the Earth,
but no tropical region is favorable to tropical cyclones at all times,
and some never see tropical cyclone development at all.
And once formed, many tropical cyclones don't see fit the stay in the tropics.
That usually doesn't do them any good, or us either.
We've already discussed some similarities between tropical cyclones
and their mid-latitude extra tropical cousins.
Like them, TCs are roughly circular regions of low pressure,
often more perfectly circular than extra tropical cyclones can ever be,
with counterclockwise turning winds in the northern hemisphere.
That was gradient wind balance, pressure gradient, coriolis, and centripetal forces.
But in other ways, TCs are very different from their ostensible mid-latitude cousins.
TCs don't have fronts, and they don't form in places with horizontal temperature gradients
that are very substantial.
That means that the TC environment typically doesn't have a lot of vertical wind shear.
That's good for tropical cyclones anyway.
Vertical shear is injurious to them, and we'll see why.
Unlike extra tropical cyclones, the strongest winds in a tropical cyclone
are near the ground, although not right at the ground owing to friction.
In other words, wind speeds decrease with height in the fully formed tropical cyclone,
the opposite of what we typically find in mid-latitude cyclones.
And finally, while extra tropical cyclones may exploit the ocean
for its ability to increase the horizontal temperature contrast, particularly in winter,
they don't need the ocean.
But tropical cyclones do.
They form over water.
The sea surface temperatures have to be high enough.
The vast majority of TCs die quickly over land, and usually fairly quickly.
This lecture is dedicated to the tropical cyclone.
Let's begin.
Shakespeare once said a rose by any other name would smell a sweet,
and by any other name, tropical cyclones would be just as awe-inspiring and potentially disruptive.
In the Atlantic and East Pacific, intense tropical cyclones are called hurricanes.
This comes from a Caribbean Indian word, hurricane,
representing the evil god of the winds, and apparently originating with the Mayans.
In the West Pacific, these storms are called typhoons.
The obvious immediate connection is to make with the modern Chinese word typhong, which means great wind.
Etymologists note, however, the similarity of typhoon with the ancient Greek word used for whirlwind,
tufan, itself named after a monstrous creature.
This word traveled eastward, possibly becoming the Arabic tufan and the Indy Urdu word tufan.
It has been claimed that the British fused all these words together into the modern word typhoon that we use today.
In any event, special words for special storms.
In the Indian Ocean and Southern Hemisphere, however, these storms are just simply called cyclones,
from the Greek to go around in a circle.
Now you're looking at 2005 Hurricane Rita as captured by Nexred Weather Radar,
making landfall on the Texas-Louisiana border.
Remember, Nexred is 10 centimeter radar designed to detect precipitation-sized particles.
And we can see the rapid counterclockwise motion of the radar echoes,
which are taking the shape of rain bands surrounding a relatively echo-free core we call the eye.
The lack of echo on this radar display means that it's free of precipitation-sized particles,
not that there's no cloud there.
Although often, there's little cloud in the eye either, as we will see.
Soon, we will examine the structure of the storm and see why it packs its strongest punch relatively close to the ground.
First, however, let's look at when, where, and how hurricanes form.
In the last lecture, I showed how sea service temperature varied through the average year,
focusing on the North Atlantic.
And here's the movie again, but in this loop, there are only two colors, blue and gold.
I admit, I chose UCLA's colors.
And UCLA gold here indicates where sea service temperatures exceeding 26C or 79F are found.
Sea service temperatures at least this high are needed for hurricane formation.
That's unnecessary and not a sufficient condition.
Therefore, we see that hurricanes are a phenomenon of the summer and fall seasons.
It extends as far as it does into fall only because of the high heat capacity of liquid water.
Why do hurricanes need such warm water?
One reason is that very warm ocean water extending over a wide area helps make the tropical atmosphere moist and unstable.
And theories suggest that maximum intensity of hurricanes is strongly influenced by the sea service temperature the higher the better.
Certainly, the hotter the water is, the more moisture it can provide to the air above it.
Let's see where hurricanes form.
Here are all tropical cyclone tracks for the year 2005 from the National Climatic Data Center.
One of these is Rita and another is Hurricane Katrina.
The starting and ending points of each track are not identified, but we should realize that they start closer to the equator and then move away.
In the northern hemisphere, we see track clusters in the Atlantic, the East Pacific, and the West Pacific as well.
The Atlantic and West Pacific tracks share a similar shape.
They're generally moving northwestward at first away from the equator and then curving eastward.
Why? It's summer and the hemispheric circulation is dominated by the Pacific and the Bermuda highs,
and the clockwise turning of the winds around those massive anticyclones explains a large fraction of this motion.
The East Pacific storms also tend to track northwestward or westward, but you don't see as much curvature in their paths.
These storms tend not to survive very long as they move out of the tropics,
and one reason is that they encounter water that's too cold for them to survive.
Keep in mind the West DC service temperature gradient we discussed earlier.
But if these tracks did curve like they do in the West Pacific and Atlantic, they might actually find themselves swinging around and hitting California.
Southern California has been hit by a few tropical cyclones, but not as frequently as in the movies.
Our cold California current affords some protection.
Note that while tracks often originate close to the equator, they don't form on it and they don't cross it.
Remember, Coriolis force banishes at the equator.
Still, weakened as it might be in the tropics, we will see that Coriolis is an indispensable ingredient in the hurricane recipe.
For one thing, it determines the sense of tropical cyclone rotation, counterclockwise in the northern hemisphere, clockwise in the southern hemisphere.
If a tropical cyclone were to cross the equator, it might quickly find itself very confused.
Now we're looking at cyclone tracks for a 61-year period from 1947 through 2007,
and the color coding indicates the storm's intensity aqua and green for weak and yellow to red for strong storms.
We see the majority of the storms are weak, but you can see yellows and reds poking through.
This plot is making use of the Saffir-Simpson intensity scale.
Designed by civil engineer Herbert Saffir and pioneering hurricane meteorologist Robert Simpson, the scale has five categories for hurricanes.
There are also two classifications for storms beneath hurricane strength, the tropical depression, and the tropical storm.
The Saffir-Simpson scale is based on maximum sustained wind speed.
It's not based on gusts, central pressures, storm surges, or rainfall intensity.
And that wind is measured at a height of 10 meters or 33 feet above the surface.
Or rather, I should say many times it's estimated, as actual measurements in that precise place are not always available.
In the United States, a sustained wind means a one-minute average, which excludes the strongest gusts,
and therefore local winds could exceed the officially sited intensity.
The hurricane will have winds stronger than the official intensity anyway,
because remember, 10-meter winds are definitely influenced by surface friction, which decreases with height.
In other parts of the world, a 10-minute average is used for the sustained wind instead, resulting in apparently smaller intensities.
The tropical depression classification refers to a closed cyclonic circulation with maximum one-minute winds under 39 miles per hour at 10 meters.
If the maximum winds are between 39 and 73 miles per hour, we call it a tropical storm.
Hurricanes are TCs with max winds equaling or exceeding 74 miles per hour.
That's 64 knots, or 119 kilometers per hour.
The Saffir-Simpson scale's five hurricane categories are roughly logarithmically spaced.
Cat 1 tops out at 95 miles per hour, and category 2 at 110 miles per hour.
It is categories 3, 4, and 5 that are usually referred to as major hurricanes.
Cat 3's winds are up to 130 miles per hour and labeled dangerous.
Cat 4, up to 155 miles per hour, extremely dangerous, and anything higher is potentially catastrophic category 5.
Major hurricanes represent only one-fifth of all tropical cyclones that make landfall in the U.S.,
but they together account for more than 80% of the damage.
But, that said, even tropical storms can produce significant damage due to flooding.
Our 61-year map of TCs also even more clearly shows that TCs don't form too close or cross the equator.
It also reveals that tropical cyclones are found across the tropics, except for two places, the Southeast Pacific and the South Atlantic.
Part of the reason is that sea surface temperatures there are either too low or not warm enough over a sufficiently large area to support tropical cyclones.
Here is average sea surface temperature for February and March, which should be prime TC time in the Southern Hemisphere.
And again, the gold color indicates sea surface temperatures above the usual threshold for tropical cyclone genesis.
We see that the ocean circulation is unhelpful to TC development in these two barren areas.
Two more ingredients in the hurricane recipe are weak vertical wind shear and a pre-existing source of cyclonic relative vorticity.
We previously saw the vertical shear played an important supporting role in the squaleline and the supercell thunderstorms.
But for hurricanes, vertical shear is bad. Here's why.
Here are some isobars in a vertical plane. Pressure decreases with height as usual,
so the isobar label P1 has a higher pressure than the one labeled P2, etc.
And note there are no initial pressure gradients, at least in this plane, so we're off to a nice calm start.
But a cloud actually representing a complex cluster of thunderstorms might start growing in this initially calm environment.
And what will it do to its surroundings?
The storm complex is pushing air upward, fueled by latent heat release,
and the combination of latent heating and upper level divergence is causing the pressure beneath the cloud to start decreasing.
That low pressure is helping to draw in warm, moist air into the cloud from below.
This is okay for short-lived clouds, but we know that as lifetimes get longer,
the Earth's rotation through the Coriolis force becomes more important,
even in the tropics where the Coriolis force is relatively small.
We're in the Northern Hemisphere, where the large-scale winds with lower pressure to the left
that means that on the right side of our cloud, the air will start blowing into the screen,
and it will come out of the screen on the other side.
Do you see that we have a cyclonic surface circulation? We have a hurricane.
Well, not quite yet.
Even though we don't have a hurricane yet, we can learn a few things.
For example, look at those isobars.
We already have calm winds in the center of the whole thing,
where the wind direction shifts from out of the screen to into the screen.
Next, take a look at the isobar mark P2.
It isn't as distorted as the isobar P1, is it?
The horizontal pressure grading across P2 is smaller,
so while the wind direction there is the same as it is at the surface, the wind speed is smaller.
I mentioned that hurricane wind speeds decrease with height,
and here's the first indication why.
The largest pressure gradients are near the ground,
and the only reason why the fastest winds aren't right at the ground is surface friction.
Now, let's look farther aloft,
and notice that the isobars are blowing upward there instead of downward.
This means the pressure gradient and the wind direction has reversed.
So far above our hurricane cyclone, we're going to have an upper-level anti-cyclone with clockwise flow.
That's another big difference between tropical cyclones and extra-tropical cyclones.
Now, let's be careful.
The vertical symmetry of the circulation is not as strong as I've drawn it here,
but the important point, the important point is vertical shear distorts this process, literally.
Suppose we impose a shear directed from left to right on our cloud.
By itself, vertical shear makes the cloud want to tilt down shear to the right with height.
But that's stretching horizontally the heating and the upper-level divergence that help create that surface load to begin with.
That means the lower tropospheric pressure gradients aren't as large.
They're stretched also, so the winds are weaker.
Therefore, vertical shear weakens hurricanes.
In the last lecture, I mentioned El Niño,
a phenomenon associated with anomalous warming of the tropical sea surface in the East Pacific.
And I also mentioned that this displaced warming affects the atmospheric circulation.
And one place El Niño appears to influence at least sometimes is the tropical Atlantic.
Specifically, the Atlantic tropical atmosphere appears to have more vertical shear during many El Niño events.
As a result, there are generally fewer and weaker Atlantic hurricanes during El Niño seasons.
In contrast, there appears to be greater hurricane activity in the Eastern Pacific during the same El Niño events.
During El Niño, the subsidence from the Walker circulation is displaced away from the Eastern Pacific
and the sea surface temperatures are warmer as well,
so less subsidence and warmer waters are making for more favorable conditions in the Eastern Pacific for hurricane formation.
We've been looking at hurricane development so far from the side in a vertical plane,
but actually we're a long way from done.
Hurricanes are remarkable for the fact that they develop distinct eyes.
Now remember, the eye doesn't have to be cloud-free,
and often there are low clouds near the sea surface in the eye.
But the most dramatic hurricanes are noted for the incredible clouds that form the eye wall, the eye wall clouds.
This is a view of Hurricane Katrina from a NOAA satellite at 1545Z August 28, 2005.
That's 10.45 a.m. Central Daylight Time, one day before landfall.
Katrina had just become a Category 5 and had winds of 173 miles per hour or 278 kilometers per hour at this time.
Its central pressure, 907 millibars, over 100 millibars lower than average sea level pressure.
Katrina had just completed a period of rapid intensification.
It was very close to its peak intensity at this time.
Look at its size relative to the U.S. Gulf Coast. Katrina was a very large storm.
And although the storm weakened prior to landfall, hurricane force winds still extended 120 miles outward from the eye as it came ashore.
Here's how Katrina was plotted on a National Weather Service map at the same time.
You notice it's a circular area of low pressure and no fronts.
The central pressure was actually 80 millibars lower than what's indicated on the map.
We could have drawn a lot more isobars on this map very, very close to the center of the storm.
Here's an oblique view of Katrina taking at the same time.
To some, the spiraling rain bands are reminiscent of galaxies in outer space.
To me, it looks like a buzzsaw.
For landfalling storms, the worst damage is often to the right of the eye or anywhere where the winds from the storm and the storm's motion are in the same direction.
Here's a spectacular view from inside the eye of Katrina courtesy of a NOAA P3 aircraft.
Notice that the eye wall seems to be somewhat bowl shaped, sloping outward with height.
The light is from over our left shoulder and about halfway up on the eye wall,
we're actually seeing the shadow of the opposite eye wall on the eye wall we're looking at and that's more proof that it's sloped.
After landfall, Katrina's eye filled in pretty quickly.
It's no longer visible in this satellite image.
Remember that hurricane winds represent gradient wind balance.
Pressure gradient, Coriolis centrifugal, but also with a little bit of friction.
Until landfall, that is.
After landfall, there's a whole lot more friction and that increases low level convergence into the eye.
Well, so what?
Extra tropical cyclones can handle surface friction and they even like it.
It promotes a scent from below, it helps make storms.
But it also works to bring mass into the cyclone.
It works to fill in the cyclone and raise the sea level pressure.
It isn't a low pressure system if the system's pressure isn't low.
So recall from our previous discussion that even extra tropical cyclones won't survive this frictional infilling
without other supporting ascent mechanisms like a positive vorticity advection and warm advection.
And those mechanisms were operating when our mid-latitude cyclone was east of the mid-tropospheric trough
and they disappeared when the extra tropical cyclone became vertically stacked,
the surface cyclone beneath its own trough.
Hurricanes don't have those mechanisms available.
That's another difference with extra tropical cyclones.
Hurricanes are already vertically stacked. They are their own trough.
So they cannot handle the degree of frictional infill that happens once they start passing over land.
And note also that the tropical cyclone has lost contact with its primary source of instability,
its primary source of fuel, the warm sea surface.
So by the day after landfall there wasn't much left of Katrina's original tropical cyclone structure.
Although strong winds and heavy precipitation continued, Katrina was a goner
unless she can get herself back over warm water.
Actually, that can happen, and it has happened.
The previous year, Hurricane Ivan made landfall as a category three storm
in Alabama's small footprint on the Gulf Coast.
And as would be expected, Ivan weakened first to a tropical storm
and then to a tropical depression while moving inland,
moving generally northeastward towards Virginia.
But do you remember the perfect storm of lecture one?
Ivan managed to get itself over warm water and it got a new lease on life.
And in fact, he eventually worked his way back to the Gulf
and made landfall again as a tropical storm, this time in Texas.
So let's continue thinking about how the eye might form.
We were considering a deep convective cloud complex in the tropics born over nice warm water.
Late in heating and ascent, encouraging low sea level pressure,
which induced surface convergence.
Looking down from the top, we see this in-cloud ascent indicated by the target symbol
and the low level convergence I just mentioned.
But over time, over time the Coriolis force will guide the winds into gradient wind balance
with counterclockwise flow around this thunderstorm complex.
And as the spin increases, the eye forms.
Now there's no single accepted theory for why this happens, at least not at this time,
but the explanation will undoubtedly involve the cyclostrophic effect
maintained and supported by Coriolis spin makes low pressure,
our tempest in a very large teacup.
The eye wall is the donut shaped cloud around the hole.
Under it, the strongest winds will be found.
But note now we have downward motion in the center of the eye,
which is one of the reasons why it's largely cloud free.
This makes the eye wall warm, especially in the upper troposphere, because of adiabatic compression.
We call this a warm core structure.
It's a distinguishing characteristic of the tropical cyclone.
And tropical cyclones cease being tropical when this warm core goes away.
Further beyond the eye, the rain bands are also forming at this time.
Here is a numerical simulation of the development of a hurricane-like vortex
starting with individual thunderstorms.
The domain shown is roughly 300 kilometers on a side.
The wind vectors represent the magnitude and direction of the 10 meter wind,
33 feet above the sea surface.
The colored field, sea level pressure, the bluer the lower, and the model is run for three days.
The whole process started with a large bubble of warm moist air
bringing out over nice warm tropical oceans with sea surface temperature of 29C or 84F.
This bubble is positively buoyant, and it soon rises, creating storms.
Early on, horizontal convergence into the central area of ascent is obvious,
but that eases as the Coriolis effect starts getting started.
Soon, we have counterclockwise rotation, and we have a hurricane.
And that's when the surface pressure really starts dropping,
as indicated by the deepening blue shading.
Descending motion in the eye is causing compression warming,
and this warming is making the surface pressure drop further.
Wait a minute.
We've been saying that latent heating lowers the surface pressure,
and now we're saying that compression warming lowers it too.
One was ascent, the other is descent,
but the main point is they're both warming from above.
This both increases thicknesses and pushes those isobars in the lower troposphere down.
The card certainly seems stacked in the storm's favor.
This storm's eye is about 30 or 40 kilometers wide at the surface once it finally forms,
and its central pressure at the end of the simulation gets as low as 965 millibars,
with 80 mile per hour winds a mile or so above the sea surface.
We have a Category 1 hurricane.
Now let's look at a vertical cross section across the center of a mature hurricane.
I've sketched the clouds in white.
Sizes of hurricanes can vary a lot.
I've drawn something here that's about 12 kilometers deep and maybe 300 kilometers across.
Depending on how you define the storm, it could be wider or narrower.
The eye is depicted as a completely cloud-free zone that's not always true,
but it's about 50 kilometers in diameter, which is pretty close to average.
And the eye is flanked on both sides by the donut-shaped eye wall.
It has the deepest clouds and storms.
Farther outward are our rain bands.
Most of the flow is going around in circles cyclonically in the lower troposphere in and out of the screen.
But some air, some air is able to enter the storm at low levels in what we call the radial inflow.
This is another secondary circulation that is more than secondarily important.
That air and the radial inflow is skimming along the sea surface, picking up moisture along the way.
And combine this radial inflow with the counterclockwise circulation,
we see that air is spiraling into the hurricane at low levels.
Some of that inflowing air gets all the way to the eye wall
and rises up in the eye wall cloud, lofted to the upper troposphere, where it forms part of the cloud outflow.
Vertical velocities and hurricane clouds are generally pretty unimpressive
compared to squall lines and supercells, 6 to 9 meters per second, 13 to 20 miles per hour.
It just doesn't compare to those 100 plus mile per hour drafts possible in our other storms.
Note that the eye wall is slanting outward with height.
Recall we saw that in the Katrina photograph as well.
In fact, the slant is much more pronounced than I'm showing since my figure's aspect ratio is distorted.
Eye wall slants are often about 40 degrees from the vertical.
So why the outward slant?
Isn't that like vertical shear?
Isn't slant bad?
Yes.
But the slant is not helpful to the storm, but like death and taxes are for us,
it's unavoidable for tropical cyclones.
And the explanation for the slant involves an important observation we made earlier.
Hurricane winds decrease with altitude.
The horizontal winds are in gradient wind balance.
But as we ascend, the horizontal pressure gradients get smaller.
So the winds get weaker.
So let's start on an explanation.
I've already made reference to conservation of angular momentum in this course.
The classic example, the figure skater whose spin increases and decreases
as her arms move radially inward and outward.
Angular momentum is radius times spin velocity.
And in the absence of sources and sinks, angular momentum is conserved.
Other sinks?
Yes, friction is one.
When we can neglect it for now, this doesn't make this explanation too simple.
So picture an air parcel circling around the hurricane at some radius,
which I'll call r2 from the center.
It has a radius, it has a spin velocity, and therefore it has an angular momentum.
The radial inflow is trying to bring the parcel inward to the eye wall at smaller radius r1.
Let's say its original radius has been cut in half.
That means its spin velocity has been doubled.
It has to double so the angular momentum is conserved.
The wind speed has increased a lot.
But what happens to our parcel now?
It's going to rise in the eye wall cloud updraft.
But angular momentum should still be conserved.
We've even left the surface and its friction behind.
But if the spin velocity were to decrease for some reason,
the parcel would have to move outward with height to increase its radius.
Remember that the horizontal pressure gradient and cyclonic winds of the hurricane decrease with height?
As the parcel ascends, its spin velocity does have to decrease
because the pressure gradient is smaller, it's getting less and less of a cyclonic push.
So therefore, to conserve angular momentum, the parcel's radius must increase to compensate.
And therefore the parcel must find itself moving radially outward as it ascends,
and that's why the eye wall is sloped.
In a subset of hurricanes, the eye wall undergoes something we call replacement.
The original eye wall contracts, becoming smaller and smaller in radius
and then a new eye wall appears farther out.
This is known as an eye wall replacement cycle.
The contraction likely results from that radial inflow I mentioned
and the storm gets stronger and stronger in this period
as the winds increase due to angular momentum conservation
and the enhanced spin that results lowers the central pressure.
But then the new eye wall forms and takes over and pressures rise and the winds weaken.
The contraction process may start over, but all of that is going to take time.
The dynamics of eye wall replacement is an active area of research,
but the cycle can be a good thing.
Hurricane Katrina underwent an eye wall replacement just before a landfall,
then its winds were weaker at that time than they could have been.
I mentioned that TC formation benefits from pre-existing vertical vorticity and thunderstorms,
and one major source of both, the ITCZ, that zone where northern and southern hemisphere air collide.
That area has thunderstorms aplenty and also a horizontal shear that represents vertical vorticity.
When it comes to shear, it's all a matter of direction and orientation.
Atlantic hurricanes are also often associated with the propagating disturbance we call easterly waves.
These are like our extra tropical planetary waves.
They have troughs and ridges.
And we often see these waves as squall lines over West Africa
that subsequently propagate westward over the tropical Atlantic.
Many times our weather in North America is really tied to the weather in Africa.
Although TC's form over a large portion of the tropics,
the frequency of occurrence varies from place to place.
In the northern hemisphere, the most active region is the West Pacific,
a long-term average of 26 storms and typhoons per year.
The East Pacific sees only about 14 or so named storms per year,
and the Atlantic averages only 9 or 10.
Storms are given names when they reach tropical storm strength.
A naming convention varies from place to place, but let's look at the Atlantic.
A century or more ago, Atlantic storms were given saints' names from the Catholic calendar.
So for example, if a hurricane were to strike on February 14th, it would be St. Valentine's hurricane.
That's not likely to happen in the northern hemisphere. The sea surface temperatures are too low.
But one problem with this is the same storm could have different names on different days.
In the U.S., the military alphabet, Abel Baker-Charlie, Dog Echo Foxtrot, was used for a while.
But the fourth storm of every year was Hurricane Dog.
In 1941, a novel called Storm by George Stewart inspired the practice of giving women's names to tropical cyclones,
even though Stewart's storms were winter storms.
World War II forecasters adopted this practice,
and the first list of names for Atlantic hurricanes was issued in 1953,
including, it is said, names proudly contributed by the female employees of the U.S. Weather Bureau.
Male names were added in 1979, and actually six lists are rotated with time.
So that means there has been a potential hurricane Katrina every six years since 1981 when Katrina was added to the list
until 2005, when it became infamous enough for its name to be retired.
Her replacement on the list, Katya, may become famous someday as well.
So, we sure covered a lot in this lecture,
but we made great use of the tools and facts we've already learned,
so it's time to move on to shed some light on lightning.
