Welcome back to meteorology.
This lecture is dedicated to light and lightning,
and we'll be using a lot of the knowledge
gained as a result of this course.
For example, we learned about air's constituents
in lecture 3, which included ozone,
which mainly resides in the stratosphere.
In lecture 4, we learned about the electromagnetic spectrum,
which incorporates both visible light and radio waves,
used for weather radar,
and about what is absorbed, where and when,
and also what is not absorbed.
Lecture 7 introduced us to the condensation process
involving condensation nuclei,
including dirt, salt, sand, and soot.
In lectures 18 and 19,
we learned about kinds of thunderstorms,
but before that, we studied why and how clouds form
and why clouds are sometimes shallow and other times deep.
In lecture 21, we learned about hurricanes,
after equating ourselves with the powerful role
the oceans play in weather and climate in lecture 20,
and the forces that direct the winds around.
Light and lightning.
Let's get started.
First, I'll talk about light
and how it moves through the atmosphere.
At the outset, let's remind ourselves
that the colors we see with our eyes
are certain wavelengths of electromagnetic radiation,
which also includes ultraviolet, infrared,
radio waves, and more.
Blue and violet have short wavelengths
around 0.4 microns.
Still shorter than that is ultraviolet.
Orange and red are at the long wavelength
of the visible about 0.7 microns,
and beyond that is infrared.
But importantly, color is also partly perception.
It is what we perceive it to be.
After all, there's nothing intrinsically special
about visible light other than the fact
that there's a lot of it around
because the sun's output is maximized at those wavelengths.
It certainly made sense to develop eyes that exploit
what is available in the largest abundance.
And that leads me to the simple fact that colors are,
as our eyes perceive them.
Our eyes have three cones,
each sensitive to different selection of wavelengths.
They're commonly referred to as the red, green, and blue cones,
but it's actually more complicated than that,
since different wavelengths trigger
these different cones differently.
How these cones react determines what we see
and what we see is in our eyes.
You know, the fact that various kinds of color blindness exist
demonstrates already that we're not all seeing
exactly the same thing.
And you know what? I can vouch for that.
In fact, my own two eyes do not see the same colors.
They're a few shades off.
So, let's take some sunlight
and push it through the atmosphere.
As we know, sunlight entering the Earth's atmosphere
can be absorbed, and it can be scattered around
in all directions owing to collisions
with objects like air molecules.
It can also be refracted.
That's a direction change as light passes through
translucent objects like water drops
or through air layers having different densities.
Differential scattering.
Different colors scattering differently
is what makes the clear daylight sky blue.
Differential refraction,
different colors bending differently,
gives us the rainbow.
Let's look at the sky's color first.
To a large degree, our blue sky
owes itself to a phenomenon called Rayleigh scattering,
as first explained by English physicist Lord Rayleigh.
Rayleigh scattering occurs when the wavelength
of electromagnetic radiation
encounters an object that is much smaller in size
than the radiation's own wavelength.
As an example, blue light's wavelength is very small,
but molecules of nitrogen and oxygen in Earth's atmosphere
are even smaller so they act to scatter this blue light.
Rayleigh scattering is also an operation
in cloud and precipitation radars as well.
And susceptibility to scattering increases quickly
as the wavelength gets shorter.
Upon encountering air molecules,
the longer wavelength colors,
like oranges and red, are least influenced.
So blue, indigo, and violet
are the colors that are most strongly scattered.
So you might wonder, why isn't the sky violet instead?
There's two reasons for this.
It's partly the sun and it's partly our perception.
First, the sun produces more blue than violet.
In lecture four, we saw that the wavelength
of peak radiation for the sun
is in the visible near the colors yellow and green,
so there's more yellow than blue,
but there's more blue than violet.
Second, our eyes are more receptive to blue than violet.
Blue light actually triggers all three icons to some degree.
Violet, only one.
Rayleigh scattering also explains
why the setting sun turns orange and red.
The key point in this point, optical path length.
How far through the atmosphere does sunlight have to travel
before reaching a particular location?
And the closer the sun is to the local horizon,
the longer the path that is.
When the sun is only a few degrees above the horizon,
the optical path is 15 times longer
than if the sun were directly overhead.
And the longer the path, through the atmosphere,
the more opportunity there is for scattering along the way.
So blue and violet are lost first and fast,
then green and then yellow.
That leaves red and orange relatively unscattered,
giving us the reddish setting sun.
That was scattering.
There are roles for refraction and absorption
to play in the color of the sky as well.
Let's consider refraction next.
As the setting sun's light traverses the long optical path
towards our eyes, the light isn't just scattered.
It's also bent.
It's refracted by passing through the atmosphere.
And when you think of refraction, think of a prism.
Sir Isaac Newton demonstrated that white light
is actually a combination of colors, blue, green,
yellow, orange, red, et cetera,
the familiar rainbow of colors.
And in fact, the rainbow is created
because each color bends a little differently
as it passes through the prism.
And again, it's a matter of wavelength.
Short wavelength, blue bends more,
long wavelength, red bends less.
This differential refraction is responsible
for the dramatic but fleeting phenomenon of the green flash
that is sometimes detected above the setting sun.
The sun is very near the horizon.
The red and orange light is managing
to make it directly to our eye.
Where's blue and violet?
They're long gone, having been scattered out already.
Some of the greens and yellows are lost to scattering, too.
But what remains is refracted more than red
so it gets bent up.
We're seeing the light that has been bent up,
so it appears to us to be on top of the setting sun's disc.
The light bends as it passes through atmospheric layers
that are progressively more and more dense
along the optical path.
So the green flash isn't blue
because blue is already scattered away.
You might wonder why isn't the green flash yellow?
And actually, it often is.
And the flash also occurs at sunrise as well
for the same reason all we need is for the sun
to be very low on the horizon.
The green flash involves refraction only.
The colorful atmospheric rainbow
involves refraction and reflection.
And both occur as sunlight encounters liquid water drops.
Let's take a look.
Here's a drop of liquid water suspended in the sky.
White sunlight, including all the colors of light,
enters the drop.
There's a density change, and there's a big one.
So the light bends, and blue and violet
are bending more than yellow and red.
Some of this light then reflects off the backside of the drop,
and it exits the front side again,
now actually heading towards our eyes.
Crossing the drop surface bends the light yet again,
and again blue is bent more.
But wait, look at the picture.
This makes it appear that blue should be on top of the rainbow,
and everybody knows that red is on top
at least of the primary rainbow.
The key is to remember that the rainbow isn't in the sky,
it's in your eye.
Notice that blue is exiting the drop,
making a shallower angle to the horizontal,
and red light continues downward more steeply.
You, on the other hand, you see the rainbow when you look up.
So when you are looking at the shallow direction
that blue is coming at you, you see blue.
Now raise your eye level slightly.
That's where you see red.
So red's on top, and actually it is all about you.
Sometimes secondary rainbows form.
These are less bright than the primary rainbow
because they involve two reflections in the water drop
and more of the light is extinguished or scattered
or otherwise lost along the way.
And the second reflection reverses the image,
and now blue is finally really on top.
We explained the blue of the daytime sky using Rayleigh scattering.
Remember that was when the scattering object
was very small compared to the wavelength encountering it.
Very tiny aerosol particles associated with some trees
also selectively scatter the color blue,
creating the famous blue haze
of the Blue Ridge Mountains of Tennessee, Virginia,
and North Carolina.
We call this dry haze.
It's often hazy along the ocean shore,
also in a way that sets it apart from lakeshores,
riverbanks, and other inland water sources.
The key ingredient here, salt.
Tiny salt fragments enter the air
when ocean waves break or water drops evaporate.
And these salt particles act as scatterers,
making the near-surface air a hazy blue.
The salty air doesn't have to stay very blue,
or however, salt is an extremely hygroscopic nuclei.
Remember we talked about this in lecture seven.
Hygroscopic nuclei attract water,
and as a result, as the water drop grows
around a salt particle,
the particle becomes more and more equal in size
to the wavelength of visible light impinging upon it.
At this point, at this point,
all colors are scattering with about equal efficiency,
and now we have wet haze, and wet haze is white.
This is also the reason that clouds appear white.
All colors are being scattered as sunlight passes through,
and all colors are reflected as well.
So far, we've talked about daytime and sunset phenomena,
blue sky, green flash, rainbows, haze, dry, and wet.
Let's talk about twilight.
The sun is set, the disc is gone,
and the beautiful sunset is just a memory.
Only a very small amount of light remains,
illuminating the very upper reaches of the atmosphere,
and the sky's color is turned from the daytime blue
to a deep blue, even just a little bit violet.
This is sometimes poetically called the blue hour.
Rayleigh scattering theory predicts
the twilight sky should be yellow.
So what went wrong?
You're actually seeing evidence of stratospheric ozone.
In lecture four, I noted that there is very little absorption
of visible light, radiation between 0.4 and 0.7 microns.
But actually go back and look.
I did admit there's a little bit of absorption,
and it tends to take out the longer wavelength colors,
orange and red, rather than the shorter ones like blue.
And that absorption is thanks to ozone in the stratosphere.
It's not much, but it's enough to color
the twilight sky a deep blue.
Ozone absorption of visible light
was discovered by a French chemist, James Chapuis.
It is strongest at the wavelengths
of yellow and orange and red light, as I said,
so this leaves the sunlight with a bluish cast
because the other colors have been removed.
So in a sense, ozone has acted as a color filter,
selectively removing some of the colors.
But this absorption is so minor
that it makes no significant contribution
to the color of the daytime sky.
But at twilight, it's a different story.
And again, it's due to path length.
The twilight light is passing through
an enormous distance to reach your eye.
That gives ozone much, much more opportunity
to filter out the warmer colors
and given enough of a chance,
ozone absorption finally amounts to something.
By sunset time, two-thirds of the sky's blue is due to ozone.
The twilight sky is all ozone show.
So far, our light topics have involved sunlight,
manipulated in various ways.
Let's now turn to atmosphere's own light show,
lightning.
First of all, without lightning, there are no thunderstorms
because lightning creates thunder.
It does so by superheating the air
so abruptly and so intensely
that the air literally trips over its own virtual feet
trying to get out of the way.
When a lightning stroke occurs,
the air in a very narrow channel surrounding the stroke
is heated to 30,000 Celsius,
54,000 Fahrenheit very suddenly.
What happens when you heat air in a more leisurely fashion?
Usually, the air expands.
But this heating is so abrupt
that the air does not have the chance to expand,
and so instead, the pressure increases.
The pressure increases a lot.
Remember the ideal gas law.
And this creates enormous pressure gradients in the air
immediately surrounding the lightning bolt.
The tremendously increased pressure
pushes air away from the bolt
at speeds exceeding 800 miles per hour
or 1,300 kilometers per hour.
That's faster than the speed of sound,
so a shockwave, a sonic boom is produced
and thunder has been created.
Lightning is an electrical phenomenon.
Ben Franklin almost got himself killed demonstrating that.
With electrical currents,
we can differentiate between good conductors
and poor ones, just as we do with heat conduction.
In both cases, metal is a good conductor,
and air is horrible.
As a result, electric fields
must build up an air to considerable strength
before the current will start flowing
and when it starts flowing, watch out.
Lightning is as dramatic and intense as it is
because air's electrical conductivity is so poor.
I find a very nice parallel between why storms exist
and why they produce lightning.
To have lightning, we need a charge separation.
That's when an atom gains or loses an electron.
It becomes negatively or positively charged,
and at this point, we call it an ion.
We need to have positive charges in one place
and negative charges in another.
And then lightning will try to bridge this gap
to try to relieve the charge imbalance.
Now, how clouds become charged separated
is not completely known.
There are many theories, and it's an active area of research,
but there are a few things we do know,
so let's take a look at those.
It may surprise you that even in clear weather,
there is a general charge separation already,
what we call an electric field,
and specifically, we call it the fair weather electric field.
Under typical circumstances,
there's an excess of positive ions in the free atmosphere
and an excess of negative ions in the ground.
But let's be careful.
That doesn't mean there are no positive ions in the ground.
It's just that there are more negative ions than positive ones.
And this charge separation between atmosphere and ground
is what gives us the fair weather electric field.
In many ways, it's not unlike a pressure gradient force,
just applied to electricity.
So instead of millibars over distance,
it's volts over distance instead.
And that electric field is about 100 volts per meter.
Is that large?
No, not at all.
In fact, it's 100,000 times smaller
than the field strength needed to provoke a lightning strike.
Where did this very weak fair weather field come from?
Actually, it's a residue of thunderstorm activity itself.
Cloud to ground, or CG lightning,
generally deposits electrons into the ground.
And as we'll see, positive charges leave the ground to the atmosphere.
So over time, this has given the ground a negative charge bias
and leaves the free atmosphere with an excess of positive ions.
So how does charge separation in the cloud come about?
Most lightning-producing storms contain ice
and abundant supercool liquid.
Remember, water vapor needs a condensation nucleus
to change the liquid from vapor.
And generally, these nuclei are very abundant.
Liquid water then needs an ice nucleus to freeze,
but those are a lot rarer.
As a result, ice takes time to form.
In fact, the thunderstorm cell that generates lightning
is likely middle-aged.
Still strong enough to produce condensation and supercool liquid,
but also old and mature enough to have ice.
Mid-latitude multicellular and supercellular storms
are often prodigious producers of lightning.
The typical multicell yields up to five strokes of CG lightning per minute.
The supercell ranges up to a dozen or so strokes per minute.
In contrast, hurricanes are often weak producers of lightning,
averaging only a couple of strokes per hour.
As ferocious as the hurricane's horizontal winds are,
its cloud updrafts are typically much weaker
than those of the supercell and the multicell storm.
Now, there seems to be an exception to everything,
and some hurricanes have been found to produce a lot of lightning.
2005's Hurricanes Katrina and Rita are examples.
One representative explanation for the creation of charge separation
in the cloud goes like this.
This is not the whole story, but probably a good part of it.
It involves two instances of induction charging.
Induction charging is where a charge of one sign is induced in an object
by putting it nearby an object that has opposite sign.
Let's take a look.
First, recall that the ground surface typically has a surplus of negative charges.
So, picture a deep cloud, miles thick,
with a cloud base that's a lot closer to the ground than it is to cloud top.
Now, picture an ice crystal and a hailstone.
I have not drawn them the size here.
The negatively charged ground induces positive charges
at the bottom parts of these particles,
and so that leaves charge of the opposite sign on top.
But these particles are not ionized yet because they have no net charge.
Then, the small ice crystals are transported upward to the cloud top by the updraft.
Meanwhile, hailstones are heavy, and they tend to gravitate towards cloud base,
where contact with super cool liquid helps them to grow quickly.
Collisions between the small and big ice particles will occur along the way,
and it is these collisions that appear to transfer negative charges
from the top of the ice crystal to the hailstone.
So, we end up with a surplus of positive charges at cloud top,
where the ice crystals go, and cloud base heavy with hailstones
and larger ice particles becomes negatively charged.
But now note we have a negatively charged cloud base facing a negatively charged ground,
and we know that like charges repel.
The charge at the cloud base is larger than the charge in the ground,
the cloud wins, and it chases those other negatively charged ions away.
Thus, the cloud has induced positive charge in the ground beneath the cloud.
There's our charge separation, so now it's time to light up the sky.
To the casual observer, lightning appears to be one quick stroke from cloud to ground.
We even call it cloud to ground lightning.
But a typical lightning stroke actually has four parts.
Two strokes down, two up, and it's the upward strokes that pack the biggest punch.
The first part of the stroke sequence involves the creation of something we call the stepped leader.
This is a little stream of negative ions looking fitfully for a path to the ground.
It steps downward in a series of quick jumps, maybe 20 meters or 60 feet at a time,
and it often branches out along the way.
The stepped leader is ionizing the air, smoothing the path for what's to come.
As the stepped leader nears the ground, positive ions reach upward to meet it.
The first and best source of these positive ions are from tall objects that are closest to cloud base,
particularly pointy ones like trees, church steeples, and tall buildings.
This sets the stage for the return stroke, a rush of positive charges from the ground to cloud base.
This is bright, intense, deadly, and it's heading up.
Many, if not most, lightning sequences actually involve two strikes in rapid succession.
And this may account for the very familiar strobe-like effect that we associate with lightning,
anecdotal evidence of two flashes in very rapid sequence.
This may occur because the air channel established by the stepped leader and the return stroke
has been ionized and now much more favorable to the transmission of current.
The second pair of strokes starts with what we call a dart leader,
but in many ways it's very similar to the stepped leader.
Finally, a second return stroke occurs.
Some people say lightning never strikes twice.
They're wrong thousands of times a day.
But why doesn't this keep on going?
Well, it will, in other places, at other times, perhaps soon and very nearby,
but in this place it's likely the charge separation has been sufficiently reduced by the flow of current,
plus the storm is usually moving anyway, to new ground and new induction charging.
So nature abhors the extreme of charge separation and has used pretty drastic ways of putting an end to it.
This process results in what we call negative cloud-to-ground lightning.
Negative charges move down from cloud base.
Positive charges float upward to the cloud.
But positive CG lightning also exists.
It's a lot rarer, maybe 8% of all lightning involving the ground,
but it's the deadliest lightning of all.
The reason is positive CG has to travel over the largest distance from cloud to the ground.
Therefore, it has to overcome the greatest amount of resistance due to air's lousy electrical conductivity.
Positive CG usually occurs from thunderstorm anvils,
which are made of ice crystals, probably positively charged, but hanging far above the surface.
You may not even see the thunderstorm anvil where and when the lightning strikes.
This is the most likely source for so-called bolts out of the blue,
lightning that seems to have come literally from nowhere.
Here are a few more lightning facts.
CG lightning is most frequent on the Gulf Coast near Florida,
that region receiving 9 flashes per square kilometer per year.
That sounds like a lot to me.
Lightning becomes less frequent as you move north and west away from the Gulf Coast.
But be careful, thunderstorms in the Great Plains aren't weaker by any means.
Just think about squall lines and supercells.
They're just less frequent at any one place.
The Gulf Coast lightning frequency is high in large part
because of sea breeze-initiated thunderstorms taking place day after day after day.
Lightning is also very rare along the West Coast,
and the reason is because much West Coast precipitation falls in the winter
from cold clouds that have very little supercooled liquid.
They became glaciated a long time ago.
When lightning threatens, try not to be the tallest object around.
The stepped leader might find you.
But don't lie flat on the ground either for two reasons.
First, the ground conducts electricity very well.
And second, lying flat increases your horizontal area.
You want to be as small as possible, so minimize your contact with the ground.
Stay away from water and metal, both excellent conductors of electricity.
Experts say the safest place of all is to be in an enclosed building
with lots of plumbing and wiring because they act as lightning rods bringing the bolt to ground.
If no suitable building is nearby, an enclosed car or van
affords some protection from lightning strikes.
We've often heard this is due to the rubber tires,
but actually it's less due to the tires than it is to the car's metal frame,
which directs current around the exterior.
That's called a Faraday cage.
The effect of the rubber tires is secondary at best.
Don't forget your external radio antenna is a lightning rod,
and in high wind situations, your car could be a death trap.
You're probably expecting me to tell you that that old story about the hair on the back of your neck
standing up prior to a lightning strike is a myth?
No, I'm not. That's true.
Other types of lightning also exist.
The most common, cloud-to-cloud lightning.
Cloud-to-cloud lightning, when it's hidden behind other clouds,
appears to light up the sky in a flat sheet of light,
and we call that sheet lightning.
You may have heard of heat lightning, but actually that's misnamed.
Usually this lightning is seen from thunderstorms that are so distant
that they cannot be seen and the rumble of thunder cannot be heard.
Dry lightning can occur from pyrocumulus,
cumulus clouds resulting from intense heating of the surface by fires.
Usually those clouds, they may produce precipitation,
but it's so dry that any precipitation that might fall from the cloud evaporates on the way down.
You may wonder, have we humans done anything to change lightning
to make it more common, more rare, or more intense?
And the answer is maybe, by putting more aerosol particles in the air.
Aerosol particles are just suspended stuff, including salt and mineral particles,
but also anthropogenic aerosols owing to pollution, like combustion byproducts.
And these particles can serve as condensation nuclei,
helping vapor find its way to liquid when relative humidity conditions are right.
In a sense, they give condensing vapor places to sit down.
And that's a good thing, right?
Well, in this course so far, we've seen examples of too much of a good thing,
haven't we, and this may be another one.
When there are a lot of aerosol condensation nuclei in the air,
like over land compared to over ocean, and over polluted cities most of all,
cloud droplets tend to be small and numerous starting out.
Why? Because there are so many places for vapor to condense.
When condensation nuclei are more scarce, cloud droplets tend to start out fatter.
The condensing vapor is spread out amongst fewer seats.
And fatter particles are happier particles, because in this case, growth favors girth,
the larger the cloud droplet, the more rapidly it can grow
through attracting more vapor, through collisions and coalescence.
Small cloud droplets struggle to get going.
When the cloud droplets start off too small, the formation of rain is delayed
and ice formation is delayed as well.
And one consequence of that? More super cool liquid.
Many aspects of this process remain unknown at this time,
but it appears that having more super cool liquid and delaying ice particle formation
assists with charge separation, and that leads to more lightning.
In fact, studies have demonstrated there's more lightning over polluted urban areas,
places with lots of aerosol, and as a consequence, smaller cloud droplets starting out.
Of course, it could be all those church steeples too.
So, let's summarize. We're coming to an end of another electrifying lecture.
I hope that it shed some light on some of the phenomena that we find ourselves encountering
and surrounded by on a daily basis.
We looked at why the sky was blue, and the reason was because the wavelength of visible light
is very short and atmospheric molecules like nitrogen and oxygen
knock it around as it comes through the atmosphere.
The very shortest wavelengths scattered the best, making the daytime sky blue.
It wasn't violet because we're less good at seeing it, and the sun produces less of it.
The setting sun was red and orange because the long wavelength colors they represent
are scattered the least.
The separation among the colors became more pronounced as the path of sunlight
took through the atmosphere got longer. We called that the optical path length.
Refraction, or bending of light's path, also occurs as sunlight passes through translucent objects
like raindrops, or through atmospheric layers of different density.
That gave us the green or yellow flash we sometimes see above the setting in Rising Sun,
and it also gave us rainbows.
Sir Isaac Newton explained the rainbow with his prism.
Remember I told you in lecture one that the poet John Keats complained that Newton's
lucid explanation took the romance out of the rainbow.
But to me, knowing how and why just makes it more special.
After the sunset, the sky turned a deeper, different shade of blue,
thanks to stratospheric ozone absorption.
So ozone managed to remove the warmer colors that might have remained,
leaving us with the blue hour.
What the Scots call gloming, Scottish word for it to glow.
The atmosphere makes its own light, too, lightning, the key, charred separation,
which can build up because air's no better at conducting electricity than it was at conducting heat.
A lot of questions remain regarding how clouds become charred separated,
but we discuss some of the likely reasons.
They involve collisions of small and large ice particles with super cool liquid in the mix.
The small particles acquire positive charging and head to the cloud top.
The larger, heavy ones hung out around cloud base and they had a negative charge.
From there, the negative ions sought a path to the ground
after first inducing positive charge on the ground below.
That occurred in several steps in quick succession.
That was negative cloud to ground lightning, where the negative ions were heading down,
and we discuss more deadly positive cloud to ground lightning as well,
which doesn't happen until enormous resistance has been overcome.
Pollution may be changing the character of lightning by altering the abundance and type of condensation nuclei
and controlling how much super cool liquid and ice we get.
So let's look ahead.
I've used a lot of numerical simulations in this course thus far,
which I made myself using a variety of models from simple to very sophisticated.
These models can be used to simulate tomorrow's weather
or to show how molasses might spread across your kitchen table.
Next, we'll look at how these models are made, what they do right, and what they don't.
We'll see you then.
