Let's play this dumb Eric Weinstein clip, or Weinstein clip, or whatever the hell he is.
The, this is on Trigger Nometry.
Are you?
That's, are you serious?
This is a real thing, yeah.
That's the name of the podcast. I mean, it's just like,
the, just, the, it is, it's just, it's unbelievable.
Serious people.
It's, it's, it's unbelievable.
So is, it's, so it's math, but it's about ending wokeness.
Being anti-woke, yeah.
It's being anti-woke. It's, it, this is, we bring you into a,
a dorm room at a college full of sophomores who, and none of the other kids like.
And, and so this is what they do.
Hey, kids, it's good college like this, actually.
You know the word Trigger, now I'm a true man. It kind of sounds like Trigger.
Where are you starting? Is it at 22?
Okay, yeah, okay.
The frame, so give us the frame, the way that you think the frame should be.
Well, my, my, my first comment is, is that you're going to use words like Palestinians.
You're going to use words like occupied, occupied territories.
Somebody else may use Judean Samaria.
Somebody else might say Palestine.
As soon as I know the language, I know that the arguments are going to be.
Okay.
This is not my language, and I don't believe these things.
And I've agreed to be more or less silent on a bunch of things while there was a peace process.
Okay, pause it. I'm sorry.
It's not your language.
It is not your language. You're right.
It's the language of the United Nations.
It's the language of Amnesty International.
It's the language of Human Rights Watch.
It's the language of scholars who actually cover this.
It's the language of people within Israel who write for 972 magazine.
It's the language of people who write for Haaretz.
It is the language of many scholars and experts on this very topic, which he is not one of.
Palestinian is the word he's objecting to?
Well, I mean, look, this is what he's doing is actually telling on himself.
Because there are people who have said there is no such thing as Palestinian.
And that was a goal to my ear, famously former prime minister of Israel.
And it's just Arabs, they say.
Well, the idea being that there was no nation state there within the ideas
in which we perceived it, which is also sort of funny in so far as like,
you know, there are some people who say that you can't say that Israel is a settler colonial
project because Jews were there 2000 years ago.
But let's just, I mean, imagine the idea of, I saw someone use this example on Twitter the
other day, the idea of an African American in this country whose ancestors came from somewhere
in the eastern part of the African continent.
They were forcibly removed, kidnapped, brought to this country.
You imagine the claim that they would have just a short 200 years.
I'm not talking 2000, not talking 1500 years.
I'm talking 250, 300 years later to go to some place in East Africa and not just settle there,
but to forcibly remove people living there to say like, this is where I was.
And then concentrate them in a small space, 141 square miles, 2.4 million people control all the
doors.
It's more than that though.
The details are secondary in terms of the question of like settler colonialism.
Like that idea would be ridiculous.
People would laugh at you if you said that.
Well, I mean, the colonial history of Liberia actually has a lot to say about that and it
played out exactly how you'd expect.
But what Weinstein's doing here is he's telling on himself.
Because I can hear his language and it is because it is anomalous to what is basically what the
world agrees these terms to mean and that he has an issue with them, but he was silent because
he didn't want to disrupt the peace process.
Island on a bunch of things while there was a peace process because peace processes are about BS
to a certain extent.
You have to lie through a peace process in order to get something at the end of it and that failed.
So, you know, the first thing I'm going to say is I don't believe that this is an occupied people.
I don't believe that the Arabs are under occupation.
Now, that's going to sound crazy because you're not exposed to any perspective that sounds like that.
So, how could you ever come to that conclusion?
You have groups of people who are offered a state who you're not listening to.
They do not want the state that they're offered.
They're offered a choice between the state.
Pause it for one second. I just want to make something clear too.
And this is an interesting slide of hand.
They're not talking about the people who live in a specific area.
When you say Arabs, you're talking about essentially an ethnicity.
And if you say Arabs, like all Arabs are the same, then why wouldn't, you know, if I was
grew up in this area in Palestine, why wouldn't I be shipped to Egypt?
I'm an Arab. Why can't they go to Jordan? I'm an Arab.
I mean, the point is they lived there. Whatever there you want to call there is.
Okay. If I'm living in Massachusetts, which is really not fundamentally different
once the borders are taken away, the laws from like Rhode Island or Connecticut or,
you know, New Hampshire or Vermont. And the idea you move me is like, well,
they're New Englander. It doesn't matter. Like, let me give me a break. It's absurd.
And then there's also the underlying racial undertones of it there.
Without a doubt. But here he goes in to explain how like they're little children who are not
accepting things. Go. I want the state that they're offered. They're offered a choice between a state
and a chant. And if you know the chant, it's from the river to the sea. From the river to the sea
is what they chose. You could have a state or you could have a chant. And they want the change.
I'm sorry. Pause it. It's not a chant. It is a chance at the protest. But is he saying that he
doesn't think that the if in a two state solution, which he's talking about here, which Israel has
taken over so much territory that this makes this quite difficult, but like it that the
Palestinians should not have access to both the river and the sea? Is that really what the
central claim is here? It's not a chance. He's saying that the chant is basically calling for
the elimination of Israel. And but the the false dichotomy that he's setting up here is that there
was an option between a state if Israel as a body politic had legitimately want wanted and saw that
as the future, they would not have been on a multi decade project to put illegal settlements in the
West Bank. I mean, this is this is like this is quite obvious. And if you say to me those
literally tens of hundreds of thousands of people in these illegal settlements is a bargaining
position, I can say to you, so is a chant. Good. State or you could have a chance.
And they want the chant. They are the tip of the spear in the global battle against Western
hegemony against an occupying European power in holy Arab land. And they're not going to give up
on that as a collective political entity for a relatively modest, prosperous state.
All right, pause it. So just to be clear on what he's saying, because this is really sort of like
full on insanity, he is saying that the Palestinians are actually just simply part are being used in
part by the greater Arab world. You hear this all because there is a holy Arab site. We should be
clear. You're not a holy Arab site. There is a the third most holy location for Muslims,
but a holy Arab site. And just if you need the differentiation, you know that there were Arabs
whose Christian church was bombed in Gaza, just so that like, you know, but let these geniuses
be able to make their sort of like broad generalizations here. And he is suggesting that
they the Palestinians represent an assault on Western hegemony. First of all, like, okay,
Western hegemony, ostensibly by all the other Arab nations are using the Palestinians as a way,
like this is the way you break apart Western hegemony in Israel. It's,
yeah, it's funny. He says that he went on level derangement that we have to like,
we're pretending that we're accepting as some sort of like legitimate political
discus. I mean, with regards to Western hegemony, it's funny. He uses the term tip of the spear
because that is literally what the armed portion of the African National Congress
translates to the MK. So, you know, in stain where this, you know, speaking of word clouds,
modest, prosperous state trading with it with the occupier with, you know,
joint economics, joint fate. That's very troubling to us because we have this idea,
why wouldn't you want a state? You can have a state, you can be prosperous,
you can send your kids to Purdue, you know, and that's, that's not easy for us. This is basically,
if you think about motherhood, you don't think about monkism by proxy.
What? Right. Now, what do you deal with a deal? What do you do when you have a mother who comes
to the hospital with a child who's continuously getting sick, you know, and getting harmed?
You know, you have to ask, well, is it possible that the mother is harming the child? So, you're
about to see tiny children pulled out of rubble in northern Gaza. You're going to see it ad nauseam.
You're going to see people rushing to the hospital. You're going to see mothers wailing.
So, we can talk about the whole thing, about the martyrdom and how everybody
prays that their family will be martyred. And you know what? Sometimes it's true. Sometimes
you see on camera somebody saying, thank God they took my son, you know, blah, blah, blah.
What? But those are actually much more complicated things. Sometimes you turn the
camera off and the person is crying because they know what they're supposed to say and
and they know what they're actually feeling. So, my problem with this is that
this is so much more complicated than the discussion we're pre-programmed to have that is guaranteed
to fail. The richness. Sorry, but of this problem. You don't have to cut. But maybe have anybody
competent to discuss it then, if it's so complex. I hadn't known where this was going. So, when I
called this QAnon level derangement a second ago, he's just now essentially saying that the
mother's wailing. Some of them, some portions, some are wailing earnestly, but some are crisis actors.
Very, very serious person over there at Trigonomics, Trigonometry, Trigonometry,
whatever the hell it is. Well, this is, this is a, there's the long-standing sort of like a
chant that folks like Weinstein views in the past have been, they, when they love their children
more than they love killing Israelis, that's when, you know, this will end. And that's sort
of what the territory he was in. But he did concede that maybe part of that might be a function of
like they're part of a political movement and they're oppressed. He doesn't say oppressed. He
doesn't believe that they're oppressed. He doesn't even believe that they're occupied, which is a
bizarre thing to do because that is, you know, to the extent that the word occupied means anything
in any context. The measurements we have are the international community and there's no,
there's no controversy there. Yeah. But he's just decided, he's just decided that's a made
up term for, you know, that people like if they want to frame it in a certain way. That's just
a reality. I mean, liberal Zionists are saying that. They're saying using the term occupied,
occupied, genocide, apartheid, all are anti-Semitic tropes. But what's fascinating about that is he
starts to go down this way. You're going to see horrible images of babies being pulled out of
rubble. And then he realizes like there's really nothing that he can say that is in somehow going
to mitigate that. So he's got to shift quickly to saying that the mothers are happy that their
kids are dead. And then he realizes like, well, I've probably gone a little too far with that.
I mean, the fact is the reason why there are posters, I see them all over New York now,
of kidnapped Israelis is because activists are trying to keep these, there's really two things.
One, keep people in mind that there are 200 hostages taken by Hamas. And two, to sort of mitigate
the impact of the images to the extent that we have any of the several thousand children who have
now been killed and the parents who are having the several thousand adults killed and the parents
and the sisters and the brothers of people who have been killed there. Those are the two reasons.
And the first, I think, is fairly legitimate. I would also recommend that they make sure that
they put those posters around BB Netanyahu's residents because they clearly don't care.
I mean, the reporting coming out of Israel is that the families of the hostages want a ceasefire
and negotiations at the hostage transfers, which is what's happened in Israel before. But
the it seems to me, and this is again by Udi Greenberg on American Prestige, but that the settler
component of the Netanyahu government, Likud, prefers, of course, to use this as a pretext
to Ram Gaza. I also frankly think that I suspect that the story of those first couple hours and days,
frankly, in the Hamas attack, we're going to find it's not so clear cut in terms of how much
the potential for hostages were, how that was treated by the Israeli government. I mean,
there are, you know, and I'm just reading stuff in Haaretz and there's only so much that I can
read, but we'll see. But nevertheless, he's out there trying to say, to figure an argument where
when you see these images, here is an ability for you to not have them impact you. To dehumanize.
To dehumanize. And notice also how he's invoking a very well trodden, anti-Muslim,
anti-Arab trope about the way that they value their own lives and their own children's lives.
He's trying, in essence, to evoke imagery of suicide bombings and things of that nature,
of martyrdom when he says people pray that they are martyrs. That is essentially saying,
look at these savages on the other side who don't support gay rights. That's another trope that
you hear all the time, that don't support gay rights in Gaza. They're just uncivilized. I mean,
they're engaging in a holy war where they're fine with being martyred and dying because they'd
rather chant instead of listen to us, the civilized white folk over here who are offering them this
generous statehood. Yeah, they're pathological and they can't govern themselves. I've seen that a
lot. I like to be both sides about this, but the Hamas stack proves that Palestinians can't
govern themselves. What this whole situation proves is that there's one state there. There's
one government governing, and it's not capable of governing, and we need an international solution.
It can't be trusted for the post-Gaza thing. It can't even be trusted, I think, even if it doesn't
do the ground invasion. We need the international community to step in and say, we need to put
this on a different track. Let's just listen to a little more of this because it's a huge
opportunity for us now that there's not a peace process that I want us to connect with.
I mean, think of that delusion. I've been holding back because I wanted to let the parties,
but now I speak. This is so much more complicated than the discussion we're
preprogrammed to have that is guaranteed to fail. The richness of this problem, where Hamas is
effectively the mother in a monk-housen-by-proxy situation, right? And the children, you damn
straight, you're going to be pulling babies out of that rubble because that's what Hamas wants.
And Israel cannot figure out how to extricate herself from this dance of death.
But that's why we're here. That's what we're talking about.
Right. So what I'm trying to say is you don't get out of this. You have a very unconventional
thought in Hamas and in totalitarian Islam and in jihad and in ISIS and al-Qaib.
But incidentally, how does this explain the West Bank where you have secular leadership?
How does it explain the nurturing of Hamas when the PLO and Fatah were essentially
secular organizations and Israel wanted to disempower them?
Not terribly different from us funding the Madrasas and the Mujahideen against
the Soviet Union at the time. But you know, that's details, details.
I mean, they're both Muslims. This is details.
That's what he'd say about the West Bank is that in their Arabness, they're supporting
Hamas anyway. The IDW special.
Yeah.
Just a little more.
Mainstream media refuses to show us the images that they showed us during the Vietnam War
through mainstream outlets. If you saw what I've seen,
if you if you watched the Hamas videos, the ISIS videos, the
if you read the beak, if you did any of this stuff,
you'd be sick to your stomach. You'd be a changed person.
Well, I mean, first off, I mean, he goes into talking about the images from Vietnam and
that we never saw the falling man from the Twin Towers. There is no doubt.
The footage of the Hamas attack would be stomach turning to watch.
There's also no doubt that there's a reason why Israel put Gaza into a complete blackout because
they didn't want images coming out of there as well. There's a reason why there have been
dozens of reporters targeted and killed because they don't want images to come out.
This is not there. There's no profundity there.
And the the dynamic between ISIS and Hamas
to the extent that there's any shared tactics, the situation is completely different.
Um, but again, the
where does he go with this?
It ultimately is a way of basically just saying,
I'm not advocating a complete annihilation of the Palestinians living in Gaza,
but I'm also telling you, don't have your heartstrings pulled by all these images you're
going to see. Let's just let things take their natural course.
Yeah. Um, Bradley, I just wanted to shout this out because friend of the show,
Francesca Fiorentini, you know, she is her partner. Matt Leib is a comedian. He's also,
you know, he's a Jewish man. He put this out here. And this is just like a great,
short, funny kind of it's good for levity explanation of all of these arguments that
you're hearing and how absurd it is on its face. Just because it was so much of what
Weinstein was deploying there is what Matt is talking about here.
Hi, I'm an American Jew. I'm going to tell you how to correctly criticize Israel without being
accused of anti-Semitism. Here are some don'ts. Do not overstate your case. Don't go thrown around
the word apartheid state. Apartheid only ever happened in South Africa and you can't use that
word again. You can't just keep using words. Call it something that is correct, like a kerfuffle,
you know, just be like, oh, kerfuffle. Do not mention the Palestinians or the occupation. Okay.
If you want to talk about problems in Israel, talk about how there's a lot of stray cats and
how the traffic's really bad. Do not throw around the word genocide. You guys just throw it around
like it's just nothing. Do not support a one state solution. If there was a one state solution,
Israelis might lose their demographic majority. And that is literally genocide. Do not support
a two state solution. Do not support a solution. Well, you think you got all the answers? You're
so smart. Do not be a Palestinian, an Arab, a black person or a Muslim. Okay. All of those groups
are racist against Jews. And I think I know a thing or do about racism, because I just said
something racist. Do not be a reformed Jew. The only real Jews are religious Jews or, you know,
Israeli citizens. Do not be an anti Zionist Israeli. What the f**k are you doing? Do not
be an anti Zionist Orthodox Jew. That ruins my narrative. F**k my s**t up. I don't like that.
Do not call yourself an anti Zionist. There's many definitions of Zionism. There's the nice one,
and then there's the what's actually happening. And while you may be against what's actually
happening in Israel right now, when you say you're an anti Zionist, you make me think that you're
against the fantasy version of Zionism that I have in my head. Just call yourself a liberal Zionist.
It's that easy. Do not be a liberal Zionist. Liberals are basically leftists, which are
basically socialists, which are basically communists, which is Stalin and Stalin hated Jews. So what
are you Stalin? To be safe, call yourself a Zionist. Do not not be a Jew. If you are not a Jew, and
you're like, oh, but what about the Palestinians? And like, how am I supposed to know that you
actually care about the Palestinians? What if you're just crying because you hate me? Do not call for
it. Okay, so that's basically it. I just thought that was such a good explanation of like the boxes
that you're put into to avoid saying what's react and what's actually happening here. And just don't
it's hard right now, but don't don't back down what history will remember this moment. Trigonometry
is the math that you do to figure out who's going to get the biggest whiff when four guys sit around
smelling fart. And I'll just say like, you know, we talk about I distinctly differentiate myself
from like the isolationist like not another tax dollar, not their tax dollar to like an
exclusionist ethno state, absolutely. But if this was a one state democratic state where we could use
our government money to try to actually build a state where people could live together and we
could maybe withhold. Okay, if the Palestinians aren't treating if it's going to be a Jewish minority,
then we start with drawing funding like and we use our leverage that way. I actually don't
have a problem with that. I'm not so I think we can actually afford that given like the position
America's been put in. I don't I don't disagree. Yeah.
