Welcome to The Basin of Conspiracy. My name is Gatina Stanton.
I'm Inyash Brotsky.
And I'm Steven Zuper. And Inyash, I think you were going to introduce our topic for today.
Yes. We were talking last episode about gender and how it isn't necessarily a completely binary thing,
and that got me thinking about the concept of concept networks.
And I thought that would be fun to talk about today because it helped to clear up my thinking on a lot of things
when I read through that initial sequence, and I thought it would be fun to share with other people.
Sure. Can you define what a concept network is?
Actually, I don't know if I can give whatever the official definition is, but I can give what, how I understand it to be.
When people think of a particular thing that they have a label for, like a bird, for example,
there are a lot of attributes that go into that thing, like small, has feathers, can fly, makes tweedy noises, has a beak, stuff like that.
And when all those different things are recognized, that is when we pull the concept of a bird from that.
So how about an ostrich?
An ostrich is a good example of a fringe case where it sets off some of our nodes.
Yeah, is the term that I'm going to use, because it was the term used in the post that I read.
It sets up some of our nodes, but not all of them.
And so then we have to start trying to ask things like, well, is this a bird? Is it not a bird?
What are we really asking when we ask if something is a bird?
The example given in the original post by Eliezer was these blue eggs and these red cubes, which are called blagues and rubes,
just as, you know, a mash-up of the two words, and trying to decide if something was a blague or a rub,
and there were various fringe cases that he introduced until it was made clear that the reason they were being sorted was because inside the blagues was one compound.
I'm going to go with uranium here, because I'm working off memory.
I think it was vanadium and palladium.
Something close to those words.
Those are too similar to each other.
I'm going to go with uranium and gold, because they sound very different, and everyone knows what both of them are.
I have no idea what the palladium and palladium are.
That's fine.
Do you know what that is?
They're heavy elements.
Okay.
So see, like uranium, I think, nuclear bombs and gold, I think, shiny things.
So they already have strong concepts in my head.
It doesn't really matter what's in them.
The point is that, yeah, there was an important distinction that was being made.
Right.
So when someone was asking for the purposes of the job, is this a blague or a rub, what they were asking is,
what are the compounds I can extract from it?
So the ultimate question was, what is within it?
But that is not necessarily always what we want to know.
Like when we ask as an ostrich a bird, we're not using the ostrich for anything.
We just kind of have this label of a bird, and we want to know whether the ostrich fits in it or not.
So the question is, are you asking if the ostrich can be used for feathers or something?
Or are you asking about the evolutionary, does it have a recent shared evolutionary history with other things that would be classified as birds?
Yeah, those are the various things you can ask.
And those are better questions than is a bird.
Those are much better questions.
But the point was made that in a true network, the only nodes are things that actually exist in the physical world,
and you can nail them down like, does it have feathers?
What is its evolutionary history?
Does it lay eggs?
Things like that.
But you can answer all those questions for something like an ostrich or for a fringe case,
and still, at the end, be confused as to, so is it a bird?
And that points to the fact that there is a node in our head which does not correspond to anything in reality labeled bird,
and that can be a bit of a problem.
And the most classic example of this, because it's something that I have seen blood spilled over, is whether Pluto is a planet.
And we can determine what the mass of Pluto is, how spherical it is, whether it has swept out its orbit, how far from the sun it is.
All those things can be nailed down and answered exactly with scientific precision.
But then people still debate, but is it a planet?
And then the knives come out.
Well, I mean, we don't even have to go to a planet, planetary, astral body example for that.
We still talk about birds, because a lot of times people will say, but is it a dinosaur?
Ah, see.
Right?
Yeah.
And that is a good question.
Because, you know, birds are descendants of dinosaurs, and often people would call them modern-day dinosaurs,
and then that kind of sparks something in people's heads to think about dinosaurs, birds.
And it can be really useful in getting people more interested in evolutionary biology, right?
So there's that approach to it.
You can misfire that node of dinosaur in their head to get them intrigued.
Exactly.
Yeah, that's an interesting strategy.
But it seems like it would get people interested.
And I'll bet a lot more people were paying a lot more attention to different kinds of astral bodies when it came to the Pluto as a planet debate.
But there's no actual tag in reality that you can place on the thing itself that says planet or dinosaur or whatever.
Exactly.
So you can just measure Pluto.
But it is a label.
It is a tag that you're placing on it.
Not like it's distance from the sun or it's mass or it's spherical-ness, right?
There's nothing intrinsic to it.
There's no planet-ness to it.
There's a bunch of atoms that have collected under their own gravity and swept out their orbit or not,
but there's no planet attribute of the matter that is there.
There's just protons and electrons.
In other words, we have invented these labels to help us sort different things into bins, right?
Yeah.
In biology, we talk about that all the time.
Are you a lump or a splitter, right?
Those are cool terms.
Yeah.
Do you like to lump things together or do you like to split things into lots of little tiny bins?
That's awesome.
And where are you on the lumping and splitting continuum?
Let me back up just a step and go with the network model itself.
One of the reasons it's possible that it seems that the way humans think is not in terms of just individual attributes that you can nail down.
In our psychology, it seems there is kind of a core of is it a bird or not?
Is that a boy or a girl, right?
I don't want to know all these various things about genetics and social structures.
Just give me a label.
And it seems that possibly one of the reasons for that is because it's a lot faster.
It works in real time when you see something in the bushes that is orange with black stripes and furry.
It's very important for your brain to go tiger run, you know, as opposed to when the actually you use neural networks in computers.
It's a while for it to activate all the various connections and come to a consensus, I guess, for lack of a better term.
Inclusion, at least.
Where it weighs each node and they weigh back and forth.
And by the time you finish your calculation, by the time you finish that in real time, you're your tiger food.
Exactly.
And there's many ways.
There's many reasons that it's important for us to use labels, right?
No matter what your philosophy is coming in on them.
Quick communication.
It might take a little bit longer if you are going to talk about one.
I mean, Pluto is a label, right?
For that thing.
That's super helpful because it's specific to that.
But if you're going to be like, well, there's this rock.
It's this wide.
It is made of these things.
Here's where you can find it.
That's it.
That's tedious.
It's tedious if it would be just easier to call it by its name or a planet because it gives somebody an idea.
I'm not saying that it is a planet, but to give it an example, to call something like that a planet helps give people a lot of information about it quickly.
Yeah.
Yeah, you use two syllables and you've conveyed a ton of information about what Pluto is if they never heard of the word Pluto before.
Right.
Or if you're trying to explain that it was different than the cartoon dog, right?
She's like, I've got this thing.
It's not the cartoon dog.
It's called Pluto.
It's the ninth planet from the sun.
Convays, that felt just weird saying because I can hear Neil deGrasse Tyson in my head yelling at me.
It's like the 27th dwarf planet.
But yeah, so that conveys a amount of information to people if they already know what a planet is, right?
And if you're working in science, then you also start out by defining your terms.
And once you do that, if you're working within a definition that everyone likes, I don't think there's anything wrong with working with terms.
It's a time saver for that reason, right?
Another good example of a fringe case is like, you could say fish are the things that you catch that live in the ocean and that you need a harpoon or a fishing hook to catch.
And that would include whales.
Whales aren't fish, but for all the reasons that you're interested about fish, they count as fish.
If you're looking to catch and eat one, you're not going to chase it on the savanna with a spear, right?
So depending on what information you're trying to convey and what use you're having, you can call it a fish or not.
And as long as you're not talking with a modern day scientist, people aren't going to be upset if you use the word fish, right?
Right. Also, you know, you might be taking advantage of people's willingness to expand their moral sphere to contain mammals and more closely related animals to humans
by clarifying that it's a mammal, a whale's a mammal, a whale has a big brain, whales feed their babies milk.
They're just like you.
One of the neat things, because you guys were just talking about definitions, right?
And that is what a lot of it tends to come down to.
People say, okay, well, let's define planet to mean this thing.
And then, you know, Neil deGrasse Tyson steps up or whatever.
But the neat thing that I liked from this post that I really got out of it was that it still feels like once you have nailed down
all these various terms, it still feels like you want to ask whether something is a planet or not.
That's why we go ahead and we make a definition and have that conversation with each other.
But in if something was a network natively, once you've nailed down all the nodes, all the other attributes, there shouldn't be anything left.
There shouldn't be a definitional question anymore.
And so the phrase that was coined for this was, this is what an algorithm feels like from the inside.
That you have this algorithm to figure out whether, you know, all the attributes of a thing.
And it feels like afterwards, once you know all them, it feels like there is still something that hasn't been answered yet.
You're still not sure is it a dinosaur, you know, and the fact that you feel there still needs to be some discussion had as to what the definition is,
is what it feels like to have that to be an algorithm running, running that, running that.
That's not just diagnostic.
I don't think I'm picking up what you're putting down.
And because we were just talking about why, why we want to know what the label is, why it's useful, why it's useful to, you know, sometimes put things in categories together, right?
It can open up new areas of thought and study.
And so we have all those good reasons for it.
I think that this is not like weird or magical that we still want to know how to label something after we know its attributes.
No, but I think it's a mistake.
Yeah, they're like, is there a reason that we really need to define whether a chicken is a dinosaur or not?
Yeah, so if the question is, is this insect in the same family as this other insect?
And we, you know, is it this kind, right?
Then we can follow through with that information and compare it to others of that kind, figure out if it does have differences, why it has differences from others in the group, right?
And actually get to, you know, some deep ecological and evolutionary truths that way.
Well, okay, see, so the one that gets me specifically, the one that I relate to personally is spiders, because they're not insects, right?
That's correct, they're arachnids.
Yeah, see, fuck that, in my personal opinion.
They are an insect in every single way that matters.
And I will call them insects forever because how are they not an insect?
So you're saying, to run back to an earlier example, that whales are fish.
They're arthropods, right?
If you say so, they're creepy, crawly, little tiny things that I want to smush.
Okay, so yeah, you just define them as creepy, crawly things that you want to smush.
Yeah.
Which I imagine does not extend to all spiders or all insects.
Ladybugs?
If it was in my house, I would smush it.
Everyone loves ladybugs.
What's a cuter bug?
That's my go-to.
There are a lot of really cute bugs.
What about that plant hopper that I shared for the signaling episode?
That was wonderful.
I love that thing, and I would never smush it.
I think, like...
But just to give you the spider example, it's really important to be able to lump spiders
into a group together of arachnids or, I mean, and then we're including animals like scorpions.
Such as other kinds of animals as well, because they simply have different attributes,
and some of the more obvious attributes will be they have a different number of body segments.
That's a big deal if you have two versus three body parts.
See, in my opinion, they're an insect with three body parts.
Insects do have three.
They're an insect with two body parts.
They're an insect with two more legs than all other insects.
They're just a special case of insect.
I think what this works with is...
I think it's an allegous to the example with whales and fish.
For all the reasons you care about, you've got this big bucket in your brain called bugs.
It includes everything from ladybugs to spiders to scorpions to bees.
For my hypothetical fisherman, it was like everything that I need to catch in the ocean is a fish.
That might even include, to them, starfish and octopus, whatever they can eat out of the ocean.
The word doesn't really matter.
What the word is isn't a factual question unless you're going to just run to the dictionary and say,
well, the dictionary says you're wrong.
You don't need to know.
You don't need to know, I guess, the difference between spiders.
You don't need to know the difference between arachnids and insects.
You don't need to know arthropod and crustaceans.
All of those things are not need to know for you, because I guess you're not going to...
You don't care about having general knowledge and...
Oh, sick burn.
That's like in Sherlock, you didn't know how many planets were in the solar system,
because it's like, well, how is that going to help me solve mysteries or solve cases?
And it's like, it's the solar system, dude.
It's general knowledge, yeah.
I have a buck in my brain for bugs and spiders are in it.
And you don't look in it because it's full of spiders.
Yeah, exactly.
I understand.
That said, I know that spiders are different than ladybugs, but I see where you're coming from.
So like the standard thing, the reason I think why it's a mistake to ask,
after he's got this running definition of what matters to him about it,
there's the standard question, like if a tree falls in the forest and no one's around here, it doesn't make a noise.
And Inyash says yes, because, well, you just say yes.
Katrina says no.
I'm filling this in for both of you, because...
I understand where you're coming from, Inyash.
Yeah.
When I worked at the aquarium, I remember one of the things that we would tell people was,
this bird is, although it looks like an owl, it's not in any way related to owls,
which was a thoroughly simplistic thing to say that I disagreed with.
But the people who...
It wasn't useful to anybody we told that.
It's like, oh, it's a bird with big eyes.
It's just random trivia.
Like there's those moths.
It's random trivia.
It's so not...
Because if we were really going to get into it, and there's no way anyone would care,
I'd say, well, this bird is actually really closely related to night jars,
and the night jars are more closely related to owls than, you know,
and that nobody cares about that unless they're a biologist.
Right.
Another good example might be like those moths that look really like butterflies or vice-versa.
For the outsider who's not a biologist, they're just like, well,
they're both basically like what I consider butterflies or moths, whatever it looks the most like.
So you follow Neil DeGrasse Tyson a bunch, right?
A bit.
Does he...
Is there a useful reason for him to have...
For the astrophysicist to have defined Pluto to not be part of the planets?
It didn't weigh heavily enough on the nose that all the other planets fit into.
Okay.
So like it's too small.
It's orbits at an angle that's atypical.
It's not as far moved from other small bodies as other parts of...
Or as other major celestial objects.
All reasons that they just felt like, well, if planets can talk about all these things,
and it's going to include Pluto too, then planet means a lot more than we're trying to mean.
So we're going to just shove that out.
And that turned out to be when he started getting hate mail.
Okay.
So that, I mean, that to me feels like the point that there's no reason to fight over this definition really.
We have all the important information we need, and yet people will still fight over the definition anyway.
Yeah.
And people...
Because that's important.
Interestingly enough, these are people who I don't think really would have cared like a week before.
But then Pluto suddenly became super popular.
And I think I did hear somewhere that Pluto was rated them like the most popular, most favorable planet in the solar system by people.
What?
And I'm like, you guys realize...
Who has the favorite planet?
Mine's Earth.
You were right.
And I'm amazed that wasn't the most...
Not Earth favorite planet.
I'm amazed that wasn't like 95% of people.
But I think maybe like, I forget what the...
I don't know if I could take this up.
It was something I read five or ten years ago.
But it was something where people really liked Pluto for some reason.
And I have no idea why.
I think it's because it reminds me of the cartoon doc.
That reminds me...
That doesn't actually remind me.
But to go back to why we kind of came up with this concept, or Inyash came up with this concept in the first place,
is I was talking about gender in the last episode.
I guess the question to ask is what's your true question, right?
So I was talking about...
Oh, maybe there's a lot of overlap in these nodes, I guess,
between the concept of man and woman or boy and girl.
And that makes it less useful.
I know somebody who said to me,
well, what about mixed martial arts fighting in which someone who...
In which somebody who takes medicines to change their body
or identifies as female still has bone and muscle densities associated with being male or something.
Somehow this comes up every time I hear about...
I guess that's the argument that they use.
There is a fair bit of structural difference when that happens during puberty and growing up.
It's such a fringe case.
What's your real question?
What's the real question when...
If a man or a woman, if they're competing in martial arts,
what's their bone and muscle density?
Does it fall within this range or within that range?
The really weird part about it is that we already have weight categories,
and we want things to be sort of fair in a fight, so it's just not a ridiculous blowout.
But on the other hand, people who do extremely well in their chosen sport are genetic freaks anyway.
Michael Phelps has a really long torso and arms and short legs, right?
I think that anybody can do really well in their chosen sport.
We can all do as well as Michael Phelps.
There is a lot that actually comes down to the physical biology when you're the top two or three people out of seven billion humans.
It makes a huge amount of difference, and there's the most fascinating article about why Olympic records keep getting broken more and more every year.
It's not like the human race has been evolving over the past 50 years, but it's mainly selection effects.
Part of it is that training has gone up.
It was a really cool talk.
Just different materials used both in the tracks that are run on and the shoes.
But part of it also is that your typical runner nowadays has longer legs that are thinner in the upper part and widen more towards the ankles,
which didn't used to be the case, but it helps with the runner.
It didn't used to be the case because those people weren't running necessarily?
Yeah.
Okay.
So it starts to get weird because the people in the MMA things are generally kind of on the fringes of human bodies anyway, right?
It's not like your average Joe is going to walk into an MMA and be really good at it.
Even with training, there is a lot of it that comes down to, well, I got some good genes here.
I managed to get particularly dense bones in my body.
Yeah.
So why don't they have classes based on weight and bone density?
Right.
That is a good question.
So you have weight and gender and gender identity.
It's interesting.
I heard this lengthy discussion I heard about this topic was with Joe Rogan.
I forget who he was talking to, but he's got his feet in a lot of things.
He was a TV host.
He was an MMA fighter.
He's a stand-up comedian.
He does a podcast called The Joe Rogan Experience and self-admittedly, he's aware that he's not an expert on stuff,
but he asks questions and that's his whole thing.
So I'm just asking questions.
He made Brian Dunning's list of the top 10 celebrities spreading pseudoscience.
Good thing that you've been advertising him so carefully for the past however many minutes.
The past 15 seconds.
I put that disclaimer on purpose so that people would be aware that if you're going to go look at Joe Rogan's stuff,
be aware that he's not universally agreed upon to be an expert on stuff, but at least he's fair about it.
Anyway, he made the case that it was like putting in somebody of a different weight class,
even though they had similar weight, that there just happens to be different deviations of bone mass,
and whether or not that's true is an important question, and that's a factual question.
I think what it comes down to as far as tying more back to whether or not it fires the correct note or not,
is it's pointless once you've talked about all the things that you care about,
is to ask, well, is that person really a boy or really a girl?
That's where there's this intuition that people feel like there's an unanswered question there,
but there really isn't.
If you've answered all the better questions, that isn't just a label question.
And so as far as whether or not there's a difference, that's something that people should look at.
And I guess maybe why they wouldn't separate it, like separate fighters in different leagues based off of bone mass,
maybe because if it turns out that there actually is a standard deviation that's way different between males and females,
then that would be why they don't bother, right?
But if that's not true, they should measure for that, and they should correct for that in fights, right?
The Boy or Girl question is kind of interesting too, because as a...
There was a follow-up by Scott Alexander, who's writing as Yovane at the time,
which touched on the fact that after Eleazar did this whole thing about talking about how we don't need the central note that doesn't really exist.
He's like, yeah, but actually that central note is used by a lot of things.
It has a lot of moral connotations.
And like the Boy and Girl example is a pretty good example,
because there's still large sections of our society that simply wants to know whether someone is a Boy or a Girl
because they want to know how to treat them.
And there can be a lot of things that affect the way someone is treated because of a label.
I think the one he was talking about is diseases specifically, was whether obesity is a disease or a personal failing.
If it's a personal failing, then you should tell the person, ah, stop being so lazy and eating so much.
And if it's a disease, you're like, oh, you have my sympathy.
Let's see if we can find some way to work about this.
And he's like, people attach a lot of moral significance to these notes.
What was the name of that essay?
Disease Thinking, I think.
So that was on Slate Star Code X.
No, no, that was actually on Less Wrong.
Disease Thinking?
I saw it on Slate Star Code X also.
Oh, was it?
Yeah.
Okay, definitely.
He wrote a similar point on Less Wrong under the handle Yovane, like you said.
Yeah.
And I think that was a different post from prior time.
But I want to link to all these because they're all really interesting.
And there's no way to, there's no good way to summarize Scott Alexander.
He writes really long posts, but they're not long-winded.
So they don't, they don't do well for paraphrasing.
I think that, you know, like we said, Planet and Spider and Bug have important connotations.
Boy and Girl have important connotations.
There was a great, I'm going to plug Skeptoid twice in one episode.
Skeptoid episode a few weeks ago, talking about the concept of race in humans.
How did Boy and Girl have important connotations?
I was going to get to that.
Okay.
But the, the, the race thing is a good analogy.
Asking for someone's races is not scientifically useful in a technical sense.
And there's all kinds of obvious bad reasons why people have bad affiliations or something
or bad connotations with certain races if you're talking to a racist.
But it can be a great shorthand for like, are you going to be susceptible to sickle cell anemia?
Or, you know, do you have, so there are different things that are popular, like especially genetic
issues in certain groups, like intolerance to alcohol in some Asian demographics.
So those, those are great little shorthands only because you don't have the time to get like a full
genotypical divulgence into their, their history, right?
Or into their, into their ancestry.
So like if you want a, a very quick rule of thumb, if you don't have time to run their genes,
that can give you some information.
So I think that people would argue that there are similar things between Boy and Girl.
I think it's much more of a social thing.
I think both the race and the Boy-Girl thing is people put a lot of importance on that because
it tells them how to treat those people.
And that's sort of a problem, but it's not, it's not a thing that's going to be easily fixed.
I agree.
And I agree that there's probably less obvious, useful distinctions between Boy and Girl than
someone might argue, like in the case of like quick medical diagnostics for race, like a race
checkbox in your medical intake sheet.
And it, at least there are at least as many important ones because you could say that
people under category girl usually have a uterus, not always, but usually have a uterus.
And I bet you that they have uteruses at a higher rate than people from Africa have resistance to
sickle cell, you know, or have sickle cell anemia.
I totally agree.
And if you go in with stomach pain, they're not going to check to see if your fallopian
tubes are, I don't know, clogged isn't the right word.
I knew somebody in their teens who had a novarian cyst in their fallopian tube and it was causing
discomfort.
And so like, they're not going to check that for, if you went in with abdominal pain.
Did you just say that they had an ovarian cyst in their fallopian tube?
It apparently was in root.
There was some, there was some issue.
That was what they called it.
And maybe I'm misremembering because I was 13.
Whatever it was, they had a cyst, maybe not a novarian cyst.
Okay.
Or maybe it moved.
There was some complicated thing.
But yeah, all of these, all of these can be very useful shorthand.
But what about at the point that it starts hurting people?
Right.
I totally agree.
One of the general lessons to take away from this intuition that people have to, you know,
ask, is it really this?
Is it, did it really make a sound?
Is a fish really a, or is a whale really a fish?
Those aren't really good questions.
You, you have good questions that satisfy whatever your criteria are.
And then that, that hanging node that isn't really attached to anything in the world isn't
really a good question.
So like, you know, whatever information it is that you're after, there's nothing left
to ask.
Well, is that person really a warrior?
Is that person really a girl?
That to me doesn't seem like, that seems like as fringe, or as pointless of a question
as, is an ostrich a dinosaur, right?
Or as Pluto a planet, right?
Does that make sense?
Yeah.
It's an ostrich dinosaur is a way cooler question.
Then is Pluto a planet?
No.
Is that person a boy or a girl?
Okay.
In my humble opinion.
It depends on who you ask because there are cultures that have very strong norms about
how you're supposed to treat boys and how you're supposed to treat girls and they're
very different.
And if you screw that up, you could be subject to social censure.
Well, I think that we might be one of those cultures.
I, well, yes, I think there's sub subcultures in the US where that is more important than
subcultures where it is far less.
And there's probably other parts of the world where it's a much bigger deal.
Right.
Where if you wanted to challenge your quote assigned gender, people would not just disagree
with me, but they, I mean, I violently disagree with you.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So which I mean happens, you get hate crimes in the US, but like you don't get like publicly
stoned to death.
Right.
Often.
In Slate Star Codex, in the disease thinking article that you were talking about, one of
the examples that they gave of people holding on to definitions for morality reasons reminded
me of people's response to making lab grown meat.
I've never understood that.
Can you, so what is the response to lab grown meat that people dislike it?
I think, I think most people like it, but you will always see if somebody posts about lab
grown meat and the, the big organizations are definitely for it and hugely in support
of it because the goal is, is to lower animal suffering.
Period.
Right.
But you'll always see people say, just stop eating meat.
Like what's wrong with you?
You can stop eating meat.
Why can't people just not eat meat?
And it's because, well, the idea is because what they're doing is virtue signaling.
Right.
Right.
They put all this effort into doing a thing that it was a good thing.
And now people are getting the good effects without having to put in all the effort.
So it's like cheating.
Their argument is just be good.
Just be good.
And then we wouldn't even have this problem.
I'm not going to support lab grown meat because by the way, I support lab grown meat.
Totally.
No, the people I've run into that don't support lab grown meat are like, ew, that's gross.
I'm not even eating meat.
And those people like just, I cannot even, like, is your meat more tasty because it contains
suffering?
What, what is the, what is the...
So you're talking to meat eaters.
Yes.
Yes.
I'm coming from it from the other, the other side where I had someone share a link to this
lab.
I mean, it was like, I would never eat this.
Well, maybe they're just afraid of change.
Satisfied, quo bias.
Yeah.
That seems like a weird motivation though.
Cause like you said, like, so does the suffering add any extra zing or like, is it like less
weird to think that you're hacking off part of an animal and putting it in your mouth?
Or like, then it is to like think that this was never part of an animal in the first place.
I don't know.
Both seem kind of equally weird to me.
It just, it seems like evil for the sake of evil.
Just to say, I want my meat to come from an animal carcass.
Yeah.
That's a weird thing.
And I think there's an obvious error in that, in that thinking.
I saw a Star Trek TNG episode recently where they were telling people from another planet
that they don't, they don't enslave animals anymore for their meat.
It's made through their transporters.
Replicators.
Replicators.
Can you replicate full people in Star Trek?
Well, sorry.
I didn't mean to detail this, but that sounds like a really important question.
Yes, but they're evil.
What?
Seriously?
That's hilarious.
Not always evil.
Sometimes they're evil.
Yes, you can basically replicate full people.
That's how the transporter works.
It breaks you down, atom by atom, just directly scanning you, and then sends the information
off and then recreates you.
I thought the replicator was a specifically different machine.
Didn't we already talk about this?
Not the replicator.
The replicator, that's right, we did talk about this once.
We talked about the transporter.
But then I actually saw the episode more recently.
The replicator works on the same principle.
It's slightly simpler.
It just makes two of them, or it doesn't break you down, it just copies you.
The replicator actually just makes things out of pure energy, which is a cool thing.
I just think that it sounds really obvious, now you've got a fleet of all the universe's
best ship captains, and all the universe's best gunners, and all the universe's best
philosophers.
It's one of the frustrating things about Star Trek that they do not explore the implications
of this technology.
Womp.
Every time they do it, they accidentally make an evil twin.
Maybe that's the problem.
You don't want a fleet full of evil captains.
I'm sorry to have derailed you.
I couldn't resist jumping on that when I heard about it, though.
I just came out as not having seen Star Trek.
I don't know if I talked about that last time we talked about Star Trek.
It's okay.
We forgive you for this moral failing.
That's okay.
Okay, thank you.
My Steven node still has a goodness next to it.
There's different reasons that somebody might be overly attached to a label, right?
Some of them could be good reasons.
The ones that, I think, was it addiction?
He brought up, sorry, Scott, in the post, I believe, brought up addiction.
He said that in the absence of biological remedies like drugs that can break the addiction
and cure it, having scorn and social, what's the word for negative social pressure?
Consequences?
I guess.
But calling someone a loser who doesn't do anything in general makes people's lives
worse.
It's a psychological attack.
It's punishment.
Yes.
If there's no other way to stop people from getting on drugs, then the amount of pain
that punishment causes is worth the less drug addiction that you have.
But once we have a greater level of technology where we can give someone a drug to break
their addiction, there are people who would say, that's cheating.
It is a moral failing that they were addicted in the first place and they should break the
addiction the true way, you know?
There are drugs to help people get off of heroin and painkillers.
Right.
Those are the drugs you're talking about.
And that's one of the reasons why CRATM, I believe, is one of those drugs that's kind
of a painkiller, drug herb, and that's one of the reasons why the Department of Drug
Enforcement, or the DEA, hasn't listed it, hasn't scheduled it yet.
They put it off, possibly for good, because people are actually using it to successfully,
apparently to successfully get off of addictions, harmful addictions.
That's fantastic.
But there are people who say that that is a moral failing to use drugs when you should
be shaming people into not taking drugs.
Which is probably one of the arguments of the other side.
Right.
He mentioned specifically that he's talked to doctors in his real life that did not
want to recommend gastric bypass surgery for people, even though they were good candidates
for it, because they were like, well, am I encouraging social laxness that these people
should just watch what they're eating and exercise like good virtuous humans do?
Maybe they're afraid of weakening the signal in general.
Right.
I think, well, that's kind of the point, that you can weaken the signal completely if you
can take care of this problem another way.
And then it falls down to, well, are we doing something wrong?
Are we weakening society?
Are we doing some, is there some failing by having a medical intervention to fix these
problems?
Yeah.
And it's hard for me to see, he does lay out like the moral theories behind it, you know,
the deontologist says, well, no, it's all about character and stuff.
And he's like, yeah, I'm the utilitarian or I'm the consequentialist, right?
So I just care about, well, this person's not going to die at 35 of a heart attack if
I give them gastric bypass or a lap band or something, you know, whatever it takes to
keep them healthy.
But not everybody is a candidate for a lap band.
Right.
So if you're weakening the signal that helps people who aren't candidates for that, increase
mortality overall, not, not that I'm arguing that, yeah, but that is the argument that
can be made.
That's a good point.
I don't have a great response to that other than I guess to say these are hard questions
on that.
Right.
Yeah.
So it is the kind of thing that like a doctor would have to actually analyze and not me.
And that a good utilitarian would take into account.
And the fact is shaming people and scorning them does cause harm to cause a psychological
harm.
So then you got to ask, is that harm worth the benefits that some people will not gain
weight because they will feel so shamed that they will, you know, not eat even though they're
hungry when, when there are other possible alternatives that don't include quite so much
psychological pain.
Yep.
Leave that to the professionals.
Yeah.
Because you know, I'm really sorry I interrupted when you were talking about Star Trek.
I jumped on the replicator and I couldn't not see if that was something that they talked
about and I interrupted.
I was just happy that somebody else envisioned a beautiful future, you know, back in when
was TNG the 90s?
TNG was started in 88, I think, so late 80s and early 90s.
Okay.
It was seven seasons.
So that long ago, somebody was envisioning a beautiful future where there was only fake
meat and and that humans no longer, I liked how they said, enslaved animals.
That's a good show.
It's a good thought experiment to just imagine like, what will we be doing, you know, 5,000
years from now?
Well, can you, can you really imagine what we're doing?
Some of these things, like the kinds of experiments we've done on chimps in the 50s, right?
We're already doing less and less of those.
And so it'd be weird to imagine that we'd come up, bring those back so like it seems
like moral progress to not be doing that.
TNG certainly isn't rational fake, like you said.
They didn't use their teleporters when they could have, but, but it's still utopic and
nice.
Which one was well-wheaten in?
That was TNG.
TNG is short for Trek Next Generation for the hardcore fans.
I've been watching a lot of tabletop games, which is a YouTube show that well-wheaten
hosts and it's a lot of fun.
Excellent.
And, and therefore TNG must be the best Star Trek.
Which one, which one has Patrick Stewart?
That is also TNG.
Oh, then yeah, that's the best one.
Yeah.
TNG is the best one.
Like just objectively.
Anyone who thinks otherwise is wrong.
And the hate mail comes flowing in.
I actually don't think I will get very much hate mail at all.
Oh, challenge accepted.
Yeah.
You heard that.
TNG is a different, at least two of the different seasons.
The original series and TNG, I've been watching them one, you know, switching off each episode.
TNG is really not that good so far.
Are you in season two yet?
Nope.
Okay.
Season one is known to be bad.
It has its moments that are good, but it really doesn't hit its stride until season
two.
Okay, good to know.
Yeah.
Which is not a thing series can do anymore nowadays.
Consider yourself.
You have to be good at season one or you get canceled.
Consider yourselves forewarned.
Yes.
So I did want to jump back to talking about this in the context of gender issues about
the idea of concept networks.
There are people who choose not to identify it with gendered pronouns, which I'm sure
most people are aware of, that there are people out there that do that.
And that seems to me like a step to draw attention to this disparate and pointless label attachment,
right?
Neil DeGrasse Tyson, you know, he doesn't jump on board with like the atheist train
or anything.
He's the only kind ofist I am as a scientist because he doesn't, he specifically doesn't
like the labels that carry, because everything carries more baggage.
And I think it's for that, for similar reasons that people would say, you know what, if there's
40 nodes that come along with the label boy or the label man, and I'm maybe hitting on
15 of them, I don't really want to have all the extra baggage come along with it.
So I'm going to not, I'm going to try and encourage people that know me to not use those,
those pronouns with me.
So I think, I mean, Katrina knows more about this than I do, but it's, it was something
that I didn't even know about until like two years ago.
So I have had the, for me, it's fun.
Like coming across something that I haven't, I'm not familiar with being confused and then
realizing stuff and then updating.
I, some people find that painful, I find it exhilarating.
That was my jumping off point.
Did you have anything you wanted to add to that?
No, we've discussed this a number of times because for a while I was trying not to use
gender pronouns for myself.
It turns out it's difficult because I live in a gendered world.
People see me as a woman and it's hard enough to get people not to refer to you as a girl.
So I respect the hell out of people who use the neutral pronouns and I try really hard
to do it, but it is, it is a hard shift for my brain to make.
And so I try to, when I'm around people like that, I try to just use their names a lot.
Same.
Yeah.
Because it's, it's, I'll find myself slipping and like, I admire them for doing that, but
I feel bad when I get it wrong.
I do too.
And maybe that, maybe that's part of the point that, that, that I think that they're trying,
they're not trying to like hurt your feelings, but they're, I think the whole point is to
draw attention to this problem and, or to, for what them is a problem, right?
Like I, I don't really mind the label for myself.
I could see the, the benefit if there were more words, I might not identify with the
same pronouns as other men, but since we only have the two, this is the one that I more
closely identify with and picking a third, I think kind of like Katrina said, there's,
there's a lot of, of work involved and I just, I'm way too lazy to put in the work.
And I think that there would be like, it's not just laziness.
There's also like,
It's worthwhile though.
Well, I think the conversation with my parents and like, they're not bigots, but like getting
my people that aren't on the same wavelength as we are to get on board with that and like
not make a deal out of it.
I got, I got not flak, but it was brought up every year for all the years that I was
a vegetarian.
I like Thanksgiving with my family and they weren't, they weren't being dicks.
They were just like, you still a vegetarian nudge, nudge.
And I'm like,
That's kind of being a dick.
Yeah.
But like it wasn't like, oh, this fucking, you know, leaf eaters.
So like they, I mean, they could have been rude.
They were just, they could have been mean, but they were just rude.
Well, you're experiencing what it's like to have some sort of minority label attached
to you.
And everybody, everybody in our culture has been inculturated with, you know, male and
female pronouns for everything.
It's super, super common and it's difficult for everybody, including people who are age-endured
to make those transitions, but because it's, but it's worthwhile to do.
Right.
And it's super hard for you because you do like have a lot of the female gendered things
that like just trigger, right?
Like generally I've, the, the couple of people I know that do this have some markers that
you can tell pretty quickly right on.
It's, uh, the, um,
They're probably pretty useful for them.
Exactly.
That they look androgynous or, or age-endured.
Yeah.
There's, there's something done where when you look at them, there's a visual reminder.
Oh, hey, you know, don't use the standard pronouns.
So I don't know.
I don't know what you could do.
Did you get some facial scarring?
No.
That's a bad idea.
I don't want to have to do that.
Yeah.
I was going to make an inappropriate joke.
Like, well, they got all just wear armbands with a symbol on them.
That's not like where you were going when you, you're talking about tattooing their faces.
I don't.
I'm, anyway, that was obviously, uh, an inappropriate joke.
You're right though.
How is it?
How is it that the, you know, no, no, no, but that's weird that I had more of an emotional
reaction to your armbands thing just because of the Nazi thing as opposed to my face tattooing,
which is the objectively more traumatic and significant thing.
I think, I think that everybody else should get face tattoos to show that they associate
with gender and then people who don't shouldn't have to have face tattoos.
That could work.
Like everyone should be forced to wear some kind of ornamental thing at any rate.
No, that was a joke.
Oh.
But I definitely don't think that that should happen.
I think that people should just.
Not bad.
They've read a lot of sci-fi books.
The other distinction was that yours was voluntary and mine had the connotation of being involuntary.
Oh, that's true.
And I didn't mean it voluntarily as well, but historically it wasn't.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I, Katrina, what is, I think that they is the preferred gender or neutral pronoun because
it's already English and singular they is something that you can use in conversation,
um, when talking about like an unknown person, like, so for example, on my way here, there
was a downed car and they just stopped in the, in the left lane.
I don't know who, who they were and that, that's a perfectly valid English sentence.
And I think I'm not sure as it's still around, there was like a push for a while for like
Z and Zae, uh, like with an X or a Z.
That, that has a little bit of a different connotation to it, potentially.
So they is, is pretty neutral, whereas Zee, please feel free to correct me, might include
people who are androgynous or gender fluid.
So it's a new pronoun rather than like an existent neutral one.
Potentially.
Okay.
I might be misremembering this, but I've always gone for they because it's pre-existing.
I recently started playing a, uh, Korean dating sim game, which I, yeah, right.
Uh, but you know, it's, it's not in Korean.
It's been translated English.
I don't speak Korean, but it's an interesting thing in the translation.
When they refer to, uh, see, there it is again, they, uh, when they refer to people
who are of an unknown gender and it's just one of them, they translated it as it, which
when it, when I saw that, I was like, it stuck out to me.
Because first of all, like, wow, way too things, somebody.
That's not a person.
And then I was like, huh, why don't we use it?
Because it has baggage.
It does have baggage.
It has, it has a bunch of nodes that you do not apply it to a human being, except
apparently it used to be applied to children.
Really?
Yeah.
In our history.
In our history?
Yes.
Or like in the last, in the last 20, 30 years?
No.
Oh, in human history.
Um, in our Western.
I could see that.
Western history.
You're not barely human anyway.
No.
There, there was a book that came out some years ago, but they're less children
are automatically less gendered because they haven't gone through puberty.
So the reason I asked for the origin of it was?
No, I don't think so.
Sorry, I didn't mean to talk.
Oh, no, you're totally fine.
The reason I asked for clarification was because I know that there was a book that
was around, I don't know, 15 years ago that was, I think it was pushed on Oprah.
It was a child called it and it was, that was apparently like a bad thing.
So I was like, this can't have been around 15 years ago and I just wasn't aware of it.
And there was some traumatic thing from this person.
If you read really old news, when they refer to things that happen to children,
they refer to the children as it.
That's really interesting.
So little, little Abigail so-and-so and then the rest of the pronoun for, for
that child is it.
Huh.
So I wonder when that switch happened.
There's an interesting look into it.
Yeah.
There's an interesting thing there.
So like, I think I doubt that was the purpose, but maybe they're trying not to
gender the children.
I'm so, I'm somehow doubting that they were that forward thinking, but that would
be, well, maybe they didn't simply didn't think that children were.
People.
Gendered.
Oh, that too.
Yes.
People, maybe not gendered.
I mean, it was common for-
Maybe they would think that we're gross nowadays, right?
Why are you sexualizing your kids?
Yeah, it's weird.
It was common to dress kids in very simple white gowns, whether they were boys or girls.
Okay.
So I'm, I can picture the period in history you're talking about, because my, let's
see, my dad's dad or my dad's grandpa, we have a picture of him somewhere in their
house of him as a baby.
Yeah.
That was common for a while.
Yeah.
In a white dress gown thing.
So that would have been, that would be around the period where they're calling
them it in newspapers.
Maybe a little early.
Well, yeah, actually, that's interesting.
Maybe around there.
I always think of Montgomery Burns from The Simpsons, skipping around in the
dress with a lollipop.
I always think of Mr.
Burns just all the time.
Do you want to switch over into listener feedback?
Okay.
Were there any pieces that you wanted to correct if I missed out on anything
talking about gender levels or something?
Or, because you know a lot about that.
I'm sure, I'm sure that some of you were very offended by some of the things that
we've said and feel free to tell us about it.
And we will apologize.
And read your comment on the air.
And feel free to tell us, maybe, feel free to tell us nicely.
Like I, if I, if I missteped, I am making an effort.
So I, I think it's, I think a dead marble.
It was something that I wasn't familiar with.
It's common.
Um, I will say one thing that kind of pricked my ears.
It's common to complain about how difficult it is to remember to call people the
pronouns that they prefer.
And, um, I know that some people are pretty sick of that because it's difficult
to, you know, identify with different pronouns, but, um, but the truth is it is
difficult, so all of those things are tough.
I'm sure it's way more difficult to identify as a gender neutral pronoun.
And it's way more comfortable for like, excuse me, with a gender, with a gender
neutral pronoun, uh, than it is for like me to slip up.
Um, I think that that's, that you were just talking about your own experience.
You weren't obviously talking about theirs.
And it'll get easier with time and with practice.
Yeah.
All right.
Well, that was fun.
We were talking about.
I never got around to the whole, uh, the cool, um, Google uses.
There's plenty of time.
Okay.
I talked for a lot.
Talk about your, talk about your Google stuff.
Well, no, it, okay.
So, um, it's kind of interesting.
The, the one of the ways, one of the things I got into with this was, uh, Google has
been doing a lot with, uh, it's Google translate lately where it's been using,
uh, deep learning networks, which work kind of like this, uh, like concept networks.
Yes.
Exactly.
Uh, which, um, not exactly at all, but the concept is similar.
It's, it's much more technical and, and difficult.
Uh, but the thing that really blew my mind was one of these networks, they were, uh,
using a deep learning network and training it to recognize objects.
It was a visual network.
So they just fed it several million still frames from YouTube.
It just does its thing, runs its learning on it.
And they found that it had fixated on a certain, um, not image, but a, a certain
grouping of features that is a cat.
And I thought that was the coolest thing.
Cause no one in the process of this training ever pointed to a cat and said,
this is cat, recognized cat is just after seeing millions of frames, network picked up.
Hey, there's this thing that appears a whole lot and it kind of looks sort of like this.
And when a human looks at it is like, oh, that's a cat, the network has discovered
what a cat looks like, which also says about how many, how many cat videos
there are on YouTube.
And how apparently universally liked cats are.
Yeah.
Yeah.
But it was really cool that just by aiming a, a learning network at YouTube, it
could discover what a cat looks like on its own.
And I was obviously joking about cat loving, being a common feature across
mind design space, but, uh, that even machines love cats.
Yeah, that, that's a really interesting thing.
We should definitely link to that article.
Yeah.
The, the other thing that this, uh, visual recognition program picked up, uh,
saw a lot in its environments was these bizarre sort of animal things that were
described in the article as looking sort of like half Ottomans, half goats.
And it got me thinking, what are these half Ottoman, a half goat creatures
that we cannot see, but are observing us at all times?
It is, it is a little creepy.
What are you talking about?
They would pick that up in just background images that didn't have any animals in them.
Is that what you're saying?
Yeah, they would just, the, the, there was, it was a thing that they also
recognized, uh, very often like cats and we don't see anything like that.
And it's, I realize it's not actually a thing that exists, but every now and
then it would make like a very good horror premise that there is these things
in our environment, which we cannot see for some reason, but the computer's picking
up on it.
Uh, the mind of a horror writer.
Well, I'm not a horror writer, but yet your last mindset.
Your last one was kind of scary.
Okay.
Thank you.
All right.
Shall we move on to listen to your feedback?
Let's do that.
Let's do it.
We got a, a write in, which reminds me, if you're okay with us using your name
or if you have a preferred pronoun, go ahead and put that in an email.
Our general rule of thumb is we don't read the names of people who write in
stuff since it's private, but we'll read Reddit handles and email or comment names.
Anyway, so we did have a, an email write in and they said that they enjoyed the show.
Thank you very much.
But their biggest complaint was that, uh, the sound quality varied wildly and
especially my voice.
And a lot of that is stuff that, uh, would take wizardry post-production to fix.
I talk fast.
I talk low.
I tend not to look at where I'm talking.
So I'm often not facing the microphone.
Uh, hopefully this episode, you noticed a big jump in our sound quality.
We're working with a new sound tech or with a sound tech.
That's not one of us.
And, uh, some of our older better equipment that has more flexibility.
So let us know if this episode sounds better than the others and we'll keep
doing more of what we're doing.
So I have, uh, these, we've skipped a few weeks of listening, listening feedback.
So this goes back for a fair bit, but Westward 101 wrote on the children episode
that I, we, Stephen and me talked a fair bit about how we don't like the idea of
having our values changed by having this child pop up.
And all of a sudden we are emotionally invested in it and we are different people.
And Westward 101 says, obviously women are subject to major hormonal shifts in
the course of pregnancy and birth that men are not.
And he, they're not saying that men don't undergo changes in value, but it's not
as dramatic as puberty that plenty of people have their value shift significantly
during their lifetime, not just due to four hormones and that fear of value shifting
seems really weird.
Like at the same time he says he's not going to shoot heroin, even if he knew
that once he was a junkie, he wouldn't care about being a junkie and would just
be happy.
So he does sort of understand the value shift thing, but on the other hand,
plenty of people have children and it doesn't seem to turn them into radically
different doppelganger pod people, which I think is a fair point.
Yeah.
I mean, my thinking on that is, I guess, pre puberty.
I wasn't, you know, sentient enough to know that I really liked my current
utility function and looking back, I prefer the one I have now.
And it's completely plausible that I could update into a better version of myself
that looking back at me now, I would just be like, man, why was he content?
But I don't know.
You don't know that going in, right?
And if you're just throwing dice, you don't, uh, I think I talked about this
in episode, I thought I, I guess I see where they're coming from, but I thought
I might, my case, that doesn't really come back to the, the case that I made
that like, you know, if I currently find something very, you know, like if I
was working at an EA charity or something, if I was doing something really
important, and then all of a sudden, the most important thing I could think
of to do with my life was push my child on the swing.
Well, I would, I would feel like I lost something.
If I knew beforehand, that's where I was going to be.
Yeah.
I think it may affect different people differently.
Like I've talked to some parents who said, yes, it is a radical life change.
And you cannot even explain it to people who don't have children.
It's just a thing you have to experience.
And then I've talked to some other parents who were like, eh, didn't really
change me that much.
Basically the same kind of person I was before.
So maybe varies on the person.
You're in a relationship with a parent right now, Inyash.
What about that person?
I would have to ask her.
Okay.
I should have thought to do that.
Come to think of it, I know a lot of parents in my life.
I should just go and ask them.
And you're very, you're very close to them.
Yeah.
So they seem to be pretty good people, even though they've popped out some babies.
I didn't know any of them before they had the babies though.
And I certainly, I don't want to disparage parents.
I think that there's a, there's a great thing to loving your children,
obviously for, for all kinds of, I mean, like obvious evolutionary reasons, but
also like personal reasons, like it feels really good.
And like, you don't feel like you're wasting your time pushing your kid on
the swing or putting a puzzle together with them or something.
You find it extremely valuable.
And I think that it's, it's a different kind of valuable than like other
values that you might have, right?
But it's, it, that doesn't make it less important to you, right?
Westward did have a follow up question since you brought up the puberty
thing specifically, if you could go back in time and stop yourself from
undergoing puberty, would you?
And I think you already said no, but you like the person you are now better.
Yeah, I can't make that comparison very fairly.
Cause like I said, pre-teenager Steven was, I think barely sentient.
I think, I mean, I was like, I was aware I had a thousand feelings more
of an it than I am now, but I don't, I wouldn't want to go back to pre-puberty.
I think a lot of that is that you don't remember who you were then.
You don't remember your feelings.
You don't remember your thoughts.
You don't remember how you mold over things.
That's true, but I also just have distinct memories of like not really
molding things the way that I do now.
Like I was just genuinely less thoughtful.
I was more acting than I was thinking.
Maybe that's not everyone's childhood and my memories are very hazy, but.
No, you know, it's really interesting.
I have had that exact same thing happening in reverse over the past few years.
It's weird.
I used to be much more of a person who would just sit and read and think
about philosophy and stuff.
And over the past few years, I've done a lot more of like making things
in the world like I bought the house that was a wreck and renovated it.
And that felt good.
And I'm working on a novel now and I've got the methods of rationality
podcast and more I make those sorts of things, the more I find myself more
interested in making things and less interested in like talking about stuff,
which it feels really weird.
I just came to that realization a few weeks ago that I am not nearly as
much the same kind of person who would just get off talking about crazy ideas
for hours that I used to be.
And I still like doing that.
I mean, I go to the less wrong meetups.
I'm on this podcast for those reasons, but not nearly as much as I used to.
Things have changed and it's weird.
I think that's a third thing.
You're not more like my child itself.
You're more like a different person because childhood Steven just like ran
around, got candy and played outside.
Like there wasn't it was a lot like what I imagine it's like being a dog.
You know, like you're just you're just you're responding to things in the world.
You're you're not but you're not sitting there weighing consequences, right?
I suspect that you're not being fair to childhood Steven.
That's my suspicion.
That said, though, I do know that childhood Steven would be OK with this
with this assessment, I think I was a very weird kid in that.
Like I remember I had some habits and I would be like, you know,
somewhere between 10 and 13 years old, let's say, you know what?
I know I'm not going to be doing this in 10 years, but I'm OK doing it now.
Like I know this is just something that I'm doing and it'll it'll wear off.
I was I was I just knew that future Steven would be different and I was OK with that already.
Huh. See, I never I always thought that I would be the same forever.
I will love video games for my entire life.
And and, you know, that changed eventually.
And I never thought it would.
Maybe I just don't share a lot of core values.
Just I just still like candy.
I just like video games.
So it is interesting, though, when I was I think when I was 12,
I calculated what my age would be in the year 2000.
And I was like, oh, man, I'm going to be 19 years old then.
I'm not going to be old enough to really party and enjoy it
because I'm going to be a responsible adult. That's hilarious.
Yeah. So wait, so were you saying you're too old to party and enjoy it or too young?
No, I would be too old because at 19, I mean, when you're when you haven't
hit puberty yet, anyone who's gone past puberty is like an adult, right?
And so my my model for adults was my parents.
So I was like, oh, I'll be responsible then.
That's really funny.
Probably be married. Yeah, exactly.
Definitely have a house.
Oh, no, I got engaged to my first wife at 19.
So. Oh, I see.
Sorry. No, no, it's cool.
I was stupid.
I've been stupid most of my life.
In your defense, you overcame a lot.
I think I think the job was witness upbringing really started you out in a hole, right?
I it's possible.
So I wouldn't I wouldn't hate on yourself on your younger self too much.
My younger self was OK.
I think it's sort of an unfair question to ask.
Would you want to go through puberty knowing what you know?
Because you can't ask the person who's alive.
Would you rather that the dead person be alive instead?
It's like, no, I'd rather be alive.
So, no, obviously, I'd rather be me than than the kid.
But I'm not sure if the kid would have the same answer.
I had one here.
This was in our debate and conspiracy email.
So without the value judgment on the aggregate, you might not be maximizing
happiness or minimizing suffering.
Take the self-flagellator or the house self.
He has a desire to serve.
And if he fails, he punishes himself at the point before the self-inflicted pain.
There is one, a natural desire to not feel pain.
And two, a culturally desire, a culturally imposed desire to feel pain.
Obviously, if the result is to whip himself, then the balance of desires
is fulfilled and desirism is satisfied.
It's fine leaving the self-flagellator at one degree above breaking even
on the scale from suffering to thriving.
A more moral action might be to intervene, even against the self-flagellator's will,
to modify the culture to remove the desire to cause self-harm.
The only motivation and desirism to fix the situation is some vague notion
of having a desire to create a world where other people don't feel bad
for failing to serve something they care about, or maybe a desire to not
have your mirror neurons fire whenever you witness a house self fail in his duties.
Pretty weak, question mark.
So I think part of what I liked about that was that it got to the point
that I was trying to make that I didn't feel like was answered very satisfactorily
in the episode.
He kept insisting that it wasn't, excuse me, Alonzo,
kept insisting that it wasn't about maximizing satisfied desires.
It was the desire itself, which I get as a shift from my consequentialist thinking.
But it's hard to see, like, he also said that it would be that you shouldn't
let someone sit there and beat themselves for failing or whatever, right?
Because they were having a bad desire.
Or I think he did.
He said something along those lines, and this was sort of a reply to that,
that sort of built on the fact that, yeah, but then the only solution
is to build a better world that doesn't involve those desires.
That seems to be a consequentialist thinking, in my opinion,
it's always been a flavor of consequentialism.
But, you know, as they say, a consequentialist sees consequentialism everywhere.
So, yes, the answer would be that he is maximizing his desires when he does that.
But the desire, its desires themselves can be evaluated based on how they
interact with other desires, whether they tend to fulfill other desires
or thwart other desires and a desire to beat yourself
if you didn't clean your house well enough is one that tends to thwart
other desires because it leads to, you know, bodily harm, the time wasted
beating yourself, the desire to not be in physical pain.
Yeah, exactly.
It thwarts those desires.
And so the answer would be yes, create a society where that desire
to beat yourself is not instilled in people because it is definitely
a subpar desire based on how many other desires it thwarts.
OK, so that's the scale by which you assess whether or not
the desires are good or bad desires.
Yeah.
And how well they mesh with other desires.
OK, I can dig that.
There was a remaining question on that that right in about we use the word
thought crime and I think in a context that was different than is typically used
like 1984 thought crime versus the way that you were using in that episode.
Right.
I mean, I used it a little bit different.
But the fact that all crime really boils down to what was going through
the person's head when they committed the crime is, I think, a very interesting
point and kind of makes thought crime not as open and shut a place
as people would think like you're allowed to think anything.
But when we punish someone for doing something, we're punishing them
for what they were thinking when they did it.
But we're also punishing them for actually doing it.
Yes, you have to do the thing too.
You can't just think it.
I think that was something that wasn't explicitly said.
Right.
And in the 1984 case, they were punishing people for just thinking
things without doing anything.
Right.
So there's difference in thinking, treasonous thoughts and doing
treasonous things.
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah, all right.
Although if you're really insecure in your power,
you probably want to beat up anyone who's even thinking treasonous things.
Right.
Yeah, that is a bad desire, though.
Fair enough.
I got one more, which I'm not sure if this is cheating because this was not
posted on the subreddit or anywhere else.
I just thought it was neat and relevant.
A certain person that we all know posted on Facebook about created white sapphires.
Yeah, this actually has zero things to do with our this is not listener feedback.
But this is something that you saw on Facebook.
Yeah, but it touches on signaling.
And did we want to venture it?
Yeah, of course.
There's also you linked to that great thing on the subreddit that someone made
a comment on some other thread about signaling.
Oh, yes.
And so that's that's on the subreddit for that episode.
There was a great link to another Reddit comment about signaling for in
their context of Christmas gifts.
We can skip through it, but it's worth reading his entirety.
The thing about the created white sapphires is really neat because they
there's a lot of created gems nowadays, which are just absolutely fantastic.
Lab-grown gems.
Right, but they're gems that are not dug out of the ground.
They're made in a lab and they are.
They're generally flawless and they can be made much cheaper in some cases.
And white sapphires are one of the ones that can be made very cheap.
You can get a carrot or two for less than a hundred dollars.
And the white ones look very much like diamonds, like unless you're an appraiser,
you're not going to be able to see the difference.
And it was brought up that this is a very useful hack to use one of these instead
of a diamond and save yourself literally thousands of dollars.
And my comment was like, yes, but that depends like who you're signaling to.
If you're if you're getting the diamond because you want to signal to strangers,
hey, look, I can afford fancy diamonds.
Then it's an awesome hack and you should totally use it.
But on the other hand, if you're trying to signal to you're like an old
first old fashioned person and you're trying to signal to the person you love,
I love you enough to burn $5,000 on a rock that is otherwise worthless.
Then you have just defeated the point of that signal.
That's right.
You're like, I love you enough to burn $60.
Or if you're trying to signal to your in-laws and you're not interested
in bald face lying, right, then spending 60 bucks might be might be difficult
depending on who your in-laws are.
Yeah, I mean, the whole point of signaling is that it is costly.
And if if you're faking it and you you may have to lie to people.
I've experienced somebody feeling pressured to buy expensive jewelry
because their their future in-laws would judge them otherwise as not
being able to provide for their new spouse.
Damn, that would be a rough situation to be in.
I would hope that, I mean, I'm not an advocate of lying, but I might just say
I don't want to tell you how much it cost.
But I think it's the classy route.
Yeah, there was a, we mentioned the Lugas Tyson earlier.
There was like a Nova special that he was on where he went and visited
one of these places where they make diamonds different than the white sapphires.
But they actually just lay down layers of diamond and make a little
lattice of fake sellable diamonds.
And there are people whenever he talks about it or maybe on the show even
that there are people who say, you know, I or my wife really still want
real diamonds and say, these are these are real diamonds.
I mean, like old fashioned like earth rock diamonds.
These are atomically identical.
Yeah, but there's it's different.
Like so people have that other weird attachment to it.
And these these ones are almost like they have a hanging node.
Yeah, exactly.
So it ties in and these the fake diamonds aren't all that less expensive either.
So like they're still a costly signal in that in that context.
But people have this exactly.
Is it really a diamond?
Yeah.
So yeah, good stuff.
As far as that the other signaling comment, it was on the rational
subreddit when it was on the thread share your optimum or excuse me, share
your most optimized winter holiday gifts.
And it's a very long comment, but the two long didn't read is giving
each other equal amounts of money slash requested items is missing the point
of gifts and you should just agree to not give gifts.
Giving unequal amounts of money slash requested items is better assuming
the person who receives is more in excuse me, is in more material need.
People are iffy about receiving material support and special occasions are good
workaround.
So, you know, if you know somebody's hard up, you know, you can give them cash
on Christmas or something.
Was there a rule against giving charity dollars in that particular thread?
In this thread, I didn't read the whole thread because I am one of the best
gifts that I got this Christmas was a certain amount of money and to choose
to give to charity, whatever charities I wanted.
I a lot of people when they give gifts, it in my less charitable charitable
moments, I think that a lot of people when they give gifts want the gift
receiver to see the gift every now and then and remember the gift giver.
Think like, oh, I remember this person.
He gave me this.
What a nice person.
I value our friendship.
And the problem with giving money to a charity as the gift is that you don't
ever see it again once it's given.
And so people are like, at least in my opinion, people are like, well, I don't
want to give charity money because the gift receiver won't ever see that
and think of me.
So I have only once, no, twice in my life, but it was from the same person
just two different years.
Only twice have I ever gotten money donated to a charity as a gift, even
though that's all I ask for generally from anyone.
And the one time it happened, I wrote a special handwritten thank you note,
which is the only time I've ever done that because it's the only time
someone's done that to me.
And I think the joke is on everybody else because I do not remember 98% of
the crap that I get, which goes into the trunk and then gets thrown out after
a few months.
And I still remember to this day that someone gave 50 bucks in my name when
I asked, or if they give you a piece of crap to put in your house and look at it,
you can just look at it and remember how that person gave you a worthless
piece of crap instead of charity money that is just taking up space.
I think the charitable version of the gift giver's intention isn't so much
that they want you to be constantly thinking of them.
It's that they genuinely enjoy the feeling of giving you something.
And so I tried to talk my parents into not giving me stuff, but to give it to
charity and they literally laughed it off for Christmas this year because I
wasn't going to be able to give them stuff.
And so plus they're like, who shops for their parents?
They're impossible to shop for.
So, oh man, I should just give them cash next year.
That'd be just hilarious.
Anyway, so, and I asked, I was like, you know, why?
This is actually what I want.
And my mom was like, no, it's really, I just like giving you stuff and it
makes me feel good.
And I, and I, that's, that's, you know, this works out for both of us.
So for both happy, you know, so you get something that I think you need.
And I get to feel good about giving it to you.
Well, bless her.
My mom also really likes to give things.
And my dad, my dad kind of gets where I'm coming from.
So good dad, good dad gives charity.
I got this pair of jeans.
Oh, sweet.
Yeah.
I was noticing them.
Oh, see, perfect.
I should be happy to hear that.
In the, in the thread that you were just talking about, that we're going to link
the gifting a signaling thread, one of the major themes that is brought up is
that signals are supposed to be costly and hard to fake.
And one of the guys kept saying it's so inefficient to give people gifts
because you're just, you're giving them things they don't really need or want.
And it would be more efficient just to give them money so they can get what
they want.
And the reply was like, yes, signaling is, it's supposed to be hard to give
someone a decent gift.
That's what makes it a good signal.
If you have actually know someone well enough to know, oh, this is a thing
they will like and pick it out and give it to them.
That takes a lot of effort.
It takes knowing that person very well.
It's extremely hard to fake that.
And so it is a very good signal that you actually do know someone well
and care about them was, was the counter reply to that.
Yeah.
And I think that person's pretty spot on with why people.
So like there's this trend of like, I think people are more happy to give
gift cards than cash, which to me, gift cards are everything.
They're limiting.
Yeah, they're everything that is good about cash, but or excuse me, they have
cash is limited.
Cash is better in every single way.
Cash is what gift cards are, but better.
Like I have two gift cards on my desk that each have less than a dollar
balance on them and I have no idea how to spend it.
All right.
I think I can go to Amazon and give myself like, you know, a dollar seventy
eight cents credit or something.
But even that sounds like a lot of work to do for under two bucks.
And like the best gift card is just like a Visa one, right?
Where you can spend $50 anywhere on anything.
It doesn't matter.
But then why didn't you just get cash?
And then you have that, you know, the $1 and 50 cents left over problem.
Yeah.
Oh, well, holidays are now over.
We can all just hold our breath until next year with why are gift cards
viewed as better than cash?
Is it just because it has the word gift in it?
I think it's partly because like, especially if it's to a place, it's
like, I don't know what video games you want, but I know you like to go to
game stuff.
Okay.
So like, I know you like video games, but I don't even know what console
you have.
So you're showing, you know, a little bit about exactly as far as like a Visa gift
card, I think that's just because for some reason cash is seen as tacky.
Yeah.
And I do consider like the Visa one slightly tackier than like a
GameStop gift card, but I consider them way more useful.
Yeah, exactly.
So I guess tackiness and usefulness aren't mutual or are not necessarily related.
So yeah, I don't know what to say to that other than I give cash.
Yeah.
Cash is the way to go.
I give cash and I am super classy.
I might be the classiest person in this room.
That's right.
Probably.
Wow.
No, I actually, I don't know, maybe someday it'll come up, but I do
consider you to be like a class above mine.
It's super classy to talk about a class that you are.
Oh, that's your eye.
See, I'm trying to drag you down to my level.
Wait, so are you still?
So you were the classiest person in the room before you said you were the
classiest person in the room.
Yes.
Okay.
It's okay to joke about it when the plebs are around.
We're just giving you shit.
There was last thing.
Oh, I was actually thinking about the gift card versus cash thing just as a
random, I'm not a conspiracy theory oriented person, but I'm wondering if
there was some deliberate ploy, because if I give you 20 bucks for Christmas,
Uncle Sam doesn't get a cut of the, of the taxes on gifts, the, the
businesses nearby don't get the revenue.
You could put that cash in a savings account where no one gets to benefit
from it, except for one bank.
I mean, it is deliberate because a lot of people don't use their gift
cards and therefore the companies get that money.
And they also, if people do use it, they come in and they spend more than
is on the gift card in order to use the entire balance.
Yeah, you kind of have to.
Yeah.
Oh, damn.
So it definitely benefits companies to put out beautiful gift cards.
That'll be my new steadfast rule for next Christmas.
No gift cards.
It's a good, probably a good rule.
Yeah.
Yeah, fuck the man.
There's some cultures where the companies, the companies are the man in capital
the capital M.
Yeah.
The, um, now there's some cultures.
It's interesting with there are certain situations where it's considered rude
not to give gifts, not to give cash.
There, there, um, I think, but I think in China, when you get married, there's
like a special red envelope with a special seal and you should, you're
supposed to put cash in it and give that to the newly married couple.
But anyways, uh, if you were to try to give a present that is not cash, it
would be considered gauche.
Be like, this is a newly starting out couple.
They need cash to buy things.
Screw you and your stupid wedging registry stuff.
Hmm.
But I mean, there's like a special envelope and everything.
Yeah.
To go with it.
Well, the nice thing about a wedding registry is you don't have to go to the
store, wait, you already do to pick out stuff.
Nevermind.
They take it back.
Or you can do on the store's website.
The nice thing about a wish list there, he'll say that, is you can, you can send
that to people and they can go out and do the hard work of driving to the store and
buying the thing for you.
Or just clicking on the wish list Amazon and having it shipped to your door.
Yes, or that's a much better way to do things.
I'm not a huge fan of the holiday.
Like I love the, I love the family stuff.
I hate the gift part.
I get like why people like it, but it stresses me out.
So I'm really glad it's over.
That's just my last two cents on it.
All right.
Well, shall we, shall we say goodbye?
We're nearing the end of our time.
That sounds good.
All right.
Thank you guys so much for listening.
You can contact us at bayesianconspiracypodcast.gmail.com, write comments at our
subreddit r slash the bayesianconspiracy and come visit our website for more
information that is thebayesianconspiracy.com and it'll have a link to our brand new
Patreon.
Yep.
And if you haven't yet, you are so inclined, don't hesitate to leave a review
at iTunes.
All right.
Thank you.
Bye.
Bye.
