Okay, great. So, welcome to this month, YQG seminar. Today's speaker is Leonardo DiGioia,
and Leonardo did his master's studies at the University of Campinas and graduated there
in 2019. Since then, he is a PhD student under supervision of Giorgio Paolo Pitelli, and
he will actually finish his PhD still this month. Leonardo's research focuses on celestial
holography and related topics, but he's also interested in quantum gravity in general and
in string theory in particular. Today, he will give us an introduction to celestial
holography and its relation to the flat space limit of ADS CFT. So thanks a lot for accepting
our invitation and being here today. And whenever you're ready, please feel free to start.
Thanks for the introduction. Thanks also to the organizers for the invitation. Let me share
my screen here. So I'm going to talk about an introduction to celestial holography and a
connection to the flat space limit of ADS CFT. In particular, this last part about connecting
to ADS CFT is the subject of my work, and it's based on these two papers here with Leonardo.
So here is a brief overview of what I plan to talk. And basically, I'm going to start reviewing
celestial holography. And then I'll start talking about the motivation for this flat space limit
of ADS CFT. And finally, how we suggest the connection between celestial holography,
celestial CFT in general, and a dimensional reduction of standard conformal field theories.
So first, I want to start introducing celestial holography. And let me start with the motivation.
And basically, the motivation is to apply the holographic principle to a syntactically flat
spacetime. So the holographic principle is this general principle that a quantum theory of gravity
should be equivalently described by a non-repetitional theory in lower dimensions. And it's motivated
in part by the black hole entropy, which is proportional to its area instead of the volume.
And while this is a general description of what the holographic principle is, we need to formulate
it precisely in a case-by-case basis. And in particular, in asymptotically ADS spacetimes,
it admits a very precise formulation in terms of the ADS CFT correspondence. So one example of
this duality, the ADS CFT duality, is given by a modus senus conjecture, which basically is the
statement that type 2B superstring theory in ADS 5 cross S5 is dual to any post-forward
supersymmetric angles theory in the conformal boundary under certain identification of the
couplings between the two theories in the two sides of the duality. So this is just one example,
which started this whole ADS CFT correspondence. However, there are many other examples and it's
believed that in general quantum gravity in ADS should be dual to a conformal field theory that
lives in the boundary of ADS. So this is particular to asymptotically ADS spacetimes, and the extension
to more general spacetime such as the real world is an open problem. Well, in particular one possible
extension would be to asymptotically flat spacetimes, which approximates several situations in the real
world that are of interest. And in particular, this is basically the Penrose diagram of Minkowski
space. And the idea of an asymptotically flat spacetime is that it may be very different from
Minkowski deep in the bulk, but as one goes to large distances, it becomes like Minkowski. So
basically it has the same asymptotic structure of Minkowski spacetime. So in this diagram here,
deep in the bulk, this time can be very different, but it will have the same boundary structure as
Minkowski space. In particular, its boundary is more complicated than that of ADS. In the
ADS case, we have a time like boundary, but here we have actually these null surfaces,
which are future and past null. And that is scrip plus and scrip minus. And that's in part what
makes flat holography different than ADS holography. And basically, there's no line,
there's no surfaces, scrip plus and scrip minus. They have the topology of a null line
cross a sphere cross S2. And this sphere of null infinity is what we call the celestial sphere.
So the idea of celestial holography is that a quantum theory of gravity and asymptotically flat
spacetime should be dual to a two dimensional theory that lives in the celestial sphere of
null infinity. So it's a bit different than ADS because the dual theory lives in two dimensions
less than the boundary theory, instead of in just one dimension less than the boundary theory.
And we call this theory in the celestial sphere celestial field theory because it shares
several properties with conformal field theories, but it also has some unique features,
as I'm going to review. And the motivation for celestial holography is the connection between
asymptotic symmetries that has been discovered in the last decade. So the idea of studying these
asymptotic symmetries is that whatever the holographic duality asymptotically flat spacetime
should be, the symmetries between the two of the two theories they should match. So in particular,
an asymptotic symmetry is a gauge transformation that respects the boundary conditions that are
imposed in the theory, but has non-trivial action at infinity. So as we approach that boundary,
one has a non-trivial action. In particular, given this definition of an asymptotic symmetry,
one defines the asymptotic symmetry group to be the quotient between the allowed gauge
transformations, meaning those that preserve the boundary conditions, and the trivial ones,
which are those that die off at infinity. So there is a whole literature on the study of
asymptotic symmetries and of these asymptotic symmetry groups. And in particular, in the case
of gravity in asymptotic dual-flat spacetimes, asymptotic symmetries have been studied, for
example, by Balendi, Wunderberg, Mastner and Sachs in the 60s. And they found, by carrying out this
analysis of asymptotic symmetries, they found what's now called the BMS group. So they have found
Lorentz transformations, as would be expected. But instead of just finding the usual translations
that we have in Minkowski space, they have found what infinite dimensional enhancement of translations
that are called super translations. So to describe what those symmetries do near the
boundary, in the case of super translations, they act on the generators. They act on plus and
square minus, here I have square plus, by shifting along the no generators in an angle-dependent
way. So basically, they shift each point in these spheres, in this cross-section of spheres,
differently depending on the angle. So that's what they do. On these, they enhance the usual
four translations, because the four translations, they are particular super translations, but we
have here extra one. There's an infinite dimensional enhancement. On the other hand,
Lorentz transformations, they are the usual transformations that we know from Minkowski
space. But when we study Lorentz transformations at infinity, we find that they act on these
celestial spheres as global conformal transformations. So the action that Lorentz
transformations perform on the spheres at infinity, they are just the global conformal
transformations of these spheres. And it has been proposed by Barnett and Versailles sometime
ago to generalize these Lorentz transformations to transformations that are called super rotations,
which means that we enlarge the global conformal algebra of these spheres to the full local
conformal algebra. Now, when this is done, the boundary conditions that BMS studied are violated
at the singular points of the vector fields. However, there is justification for this enhancement
that comes from soft theorems as I'm going to review in a bit. So once we have these symmetries,
we can study the charges that generate these symmetries in the classical theory or in the
Hilbert space in the quantum theory. And in particular, in a canonical formulation,
we can find charges that are defined at the boundaries of square plus and square minus.
These are surface charges. They are integrals over a cut dimension to surface in the boundary
of spacetime. And basically, there is a whole algorithm to compute these charges that is known
as the covariant phase, space formalism. But the important point is that these charges in the
classical theory, they are conserved and they're a suitable and typical identification of the
boundaries of square plus and square minus. But what's relevant, and here is where lies the
connection to soft theorems, is that these charges, one can study their reward identities
in the quantum theory in the sense that we study basically the commutator of the charges
with the S matrix. So the symmetry statement in the quantum scattering problem is that these
charges commute with the S matrix. And we have expressions for these charges and we can expand
these out and study these conditions in detail. And what we find when we do that is that these
charges, they admit a soft hard composition by which I mean that they have one part,
which is linear in the gravitational field, which is called the soft part, and a part which is
quadratic in the gravitational field and depends also on the matter fields called the hard part.
And what's important is that this soft part, it contains creation and annihilation operators
of gravitons with energy taken to zero. So it involves limits of graviton operators as we take
their energies to zero. So these are soft insertions. So to establish these asymptotic symmetry
reward identities, what we need to do is to study the behavior of the S matrix when we
insert additional gravitons and take their energy to zero. And in fact, this has been studied
also in the sixties, well, the first studies were in the sixties by Weinberg, for example,
and some of our people in the context of QED, but in gravitational case by Weinberg.
And these soft insertions, they are given by the so-called soft theorems. So basically,
when we insert a graviton in the outgoing state with energy omega, it turns out that we have a
factorization in which we get one expansion in the energy times the S matrix without that graviton.
So these expansion in the energy, it starts with a pole, and this first term here is called the
leading soft term, the leading soft factor, and it has been found by Weinberg, it takes this form.
And the civilian term has been found just more recently by Cachazan Strominger,
and it takes this other form here. Here, these Q-hat vectors, there are no vectors in spacetime
that capture the direction of the particles. So they're basically embeddings of the sphere
on the light cone. And these epsilon's here, they are the polarization tensors of the gravitons,
while these J's, they are the Lorentz generators acting on the K particle in the S matrix.
So the subleading, for example, the subleading soft factor is actually an operator acting on these
S matrix here, while the leading soft factor is really just a number. There is also a sub-subleading
soft factor here that has also been found by Cachazan Strominger. Now there is evidence that
this expansion actually continues down to further sub-leading orders. Now, given these results
here, these soft theorems that can be proven by standard quantum field theory methods, one can
go back to those word identities and compute them exactly and start with the soft part of the
charges and check that the hard part is reproduced. So starting from these expressions of the soft
theorems, it is possible to prove that the asymptotic symmetries word identities hold true. So in particular
soft theorems, they imply an asymptotic symmetries of the scattering problem. Well, of course,
this depends on the validity of the soft theorems, and there is one remark that I want to make,
that the leading soft graph on theorem does not receive quantum corrections.
However, the subleading soft theorem does receive quantum corrections. In particular,
it has a one-loop exact infrared divergent contribution to that soft factor. But it has
been shown that these one-loop exact infrared divergence can be eliminated by a renormalization
of the generator. So the symmetry survives at the quantum level. And there's just some
subtleties here because it could be the case that in some cases, there could be some finite
corrections as well to that subleading soft theorem. However, this is not, I mean, in the
examples that have been studied so far, these finite corrections, they do not appear, they are zero. So
there is good evidence that super rotation symmetry also survives at the quantum level. So
these remarks, they are to say that these symmetries, they are implied by the soft
theorems, and it's believed that they are actual exact symmetries of the S matrix.
Now, why this has anything to do with flat space holography? And the answer is the following,
is that for certain parameters of the super translation and the super rotation, so for
particular super translations and super rotations, these symmetry statements, those worded entities,
they take the form which is characteristic of symmetry statements in a two-dimensional form
of field theory. So in particular, if we define this Pz to be basically the soft part of the
super translation chart for this particular super translation here, where Zz bar is one
fixed point on the sphere, it turns out that insertions of this Pz here, well,
this is the super translation worded entity for this particular super translation. So basically,
insertion of this Pz here, take this form, which is basically the form of a U1 cat's duty
worded entity on the sphere, where the operators are placed at the various
points on the sphere at which the particles enter or exit space time, and where the charges are the
energies. And likewise, if we define this Tzz here to be the soft super translation chart,
sorry, super rotation chart for this particular super rotation vector field,
it turns out that the super rotation worded entity takes exactly this form here,
which is basically the form of a two-dimensional conformal field theory stress tensor worded
entity, where again the operators are placed at the various positions at which particles enter
or exit space time on the celestial sphere. These HKs here, they are what would be the
conformal weights. And it turns out that they are actually operators. So they are basically
these operators here. So they are given by this form, where SK are the spins of the
various particles that we're scattering. And where this quantity here, omega d by d omega,
displays the role of the conformal dimensions. So it turns out that the S matrix, it behaves
in many ways as a conformal correlator on the celestial sphere. However, it turns out that
the operators seem to have these non-standard conformal dimensions, which are operator value.
So these mode weights want to diagonalize these dimensions, diagonalize these operators here.
And that in fact ends up being the starting point of celestial holography,
because we can find a set of states that diagonalize these operators here. And it's very simple,
we just take this melancholy, in the massless case, it's very simple. We just take this melancholy
here of the standard energy momentum eigenstates. And this melancholy transform
exchanges the energies of the particles by these conformal dimensions. So this is at the level of
states. And at the level of wave functions, we map the plane waves, which are momentum eigenstates,
to these functions here, which are called conformal primary wave functions. So these
wave conformal primary wave functions are labeled by a point on the celestial sphere,
which indicates the direction at which the particle is moving, is the direction of the momentum.
And we also have this conformal dimension here, which can also be interpreted
from the bulk perspective as a boost weight. This is for scalars. And for spinning particles,
we need to dress with polarization vector tensors or spinners here. Again, this is just,
this is the story for massless particles. In fact, I'm only talking about massless particles here.
There is a different story for massive particles, but I'm not going to discuss that in this talk.
Now, the idea of celestial holography then is that the S matrix when written in these bases,
it behaves in many ways as a conformal accelerator. In particular, it obeys a stress tensor worded
entity, where now the operators are placed at the various positions at which particles enter or exit
spacetime. And now they have standard numeric dimensions, they don't have any more these
operator value dimensions. So the basic idea is that the S matrix elements in this conformal
primary basis, they are what we call celestial amplitudes or celestial correlators.
And what's the idea of celestial holography is that we interpret these celestial amplitudes
as actual conformal correlators on the sphere as conformal correlators of a two-dimensional
theory defined in the celestial sphere. And then we can study several properties of these
conformal correlators. One comment here is that up to this point, most of the analysis have been
in a bottom-up approach in which the bulk defines whatever is in the boundary. So these
conformal correlators on the sphere, these celestial amplitudes, they are actually defined to be
melding transforms of the standard S matrix going from the standard energy momentum basis
to a conformal primary basis. So in fact, the connection to ADS CFT is in part motivated
to try to give one intrinsic construction of a celestial CFT without resorting to the bulk
in the first week. So well, here's a very short list of some celestial CFT results.
So one results that conformally soft theorems have been established. So when we go to the
conformal primary basis, we exchange the energy for a conformal dimension and then it's not clear
what is how these soft theorems translate into that basis, since they are statements about
the low energy behavior of some insertions. However, it turns out that it's possible to
translate them in the so-called conformally soft theorems, and that's one point I'm going to give
some more details. Also, there has been studies of IR and UV properties of four-point celestial
amplitudes and also a prescription to define one infrared finite S matrix. One operator product
expansion in celestial CFT has been shown also to arise from collinear singularities in the bulk,
and that's another point I'm going to give some more information on. These OPEs have also been found
to be fixed by symmetry arguments. These OPEs have been used to understand the so-called
holographic symmetry orgebras and to understand the W1 plus infinity symmetry of gravity,
and this W infinity symmetry of gravity has also been shown to be realized in the Einstein
equations of classical general relativity at no infinity, providing one check of these ideas.
So this is just one very short list of some results. There are many others in particular.
There are some very interesting connections to Twister theory and some other stuff.
That's one very short list, but some very important results. Now I'm going to just go through a bit
of some features of celestial, of celestial holography, and then I'll go talk about the
flat space limit of ADS CFT. So for example, one thing that can be studied in celestial CFT
are the Poincare constraints. This is the most basic symmetry that we have in the bulk. And in
particular, the Lorentz group, as I have already said, it acts on the celestial sphere as the global
conformal group by global conformal transformations. And as a result, Lorentz constraints on celestial
amplitudes, they translate them to the well-known global conformal constraints on correlation
functions of a two-dimensional conformal field theory. So that's the standard symmetry from
a CFT perspective. Translations on the bulk, on the other hand, they are additional charges
that will act on these celestial operators. And these, they are not there in a generic one
standard conformal field theory. And what they do, translations, they basically, the non-trivial
thing they do is that they shift the dimensions of these celestial operators. So they act as weight
shifting operators on these, on these celestial operators. And this imposes additional constraints
on celestial amplitudes on top of the standard conformal constraints. In particular, one example
of such constraints is this one, that when we shift each of the dimensions of a conformal
correlator, of a celestial correlator and sum of them up, we should get zero, this one constraint
that's non-trivial and it's not there in the standard conformal field theory. And moreover,
translations constraints also imply that two, three, and four point functions of a celestial CFT,
they have singular dependence on the points on the sphere, which is also a non-standard
feature of celestial CFT. One particular case in which these constraints, well, we can, we can see
how different they, what, what they imply in difference to standard conformal field theory
is in the case of the four point function. And in the case of the four point function,
the celestial four point function takes this form where this k here is a conformally covariant
pre-factor, where these z and z bar, they are the conformal cross ratios here, they are conformal
invariance built from these four points, z1, z2, z3, and z4. And this beta here is the sum
of the dimensions. So in a standard conformal field theory, we would have the conformally
covariant pre-factor here, that's the standard part. And then we will have a function of the
cross ratios. The non-standard and unusual features that we find here is that we have
the singular dependence on the cross ratios by this delta function. And we also have this
dependence on the dimensions that occur only through their sum. So these are some unusual
features and they are result of bulk translations. The conformally soft theorems, well, here I am
just giving some more details of what happens with that. And the basic idea is that the standard
soft theorems, they have to do with limits as the energy of a particle goes to zero inside
correlation functions, sorry, inside of estimate tricks elements. And it turns out that because
of this delta function identity here, when we take the Mellon transform, it's possible to translate
the soft theorems, the omega, go to zero limits into limits in which dimensions go to particular
values, which are these values one minus s, whereas s is greater or equal to zero. So we have
negative dimensions here. And operators at these negative dimensions, they basically capture exactly
the soft theorems to various subleading orders. And so in particular, these facts here imply that
these conformally soft operators, when we insert them into these celestial correlators,
they obey a factorization, which is similar to the standard soft factorization, where now we
have this conformally soft factor. And finally, well, the last thing that I want to talk about
celestial CFT in general before going to the flat space limit of ADS is the celestial OB.
And so basically, scattering amplitudes in a plane wave basis, they have singularities when
two particles become linear. So this is for massless particles. And these singularities,
they basically, they are singularities of the form one over z12 and z12. So they are singularities
that translate to the coincidence limit singularities in the celestial sphere.
And scattering amplitudes are known to factorize in this limit. And it turns out that when we take
the Mellon transform of this factorization, we find something that resembles one standard OPE,
in particular, these G's here, they are graphed on operators. And we have these OPEs here,
they can be derived by taking the Mellon transform of these collinear singularities.
And these OPEs can also be constructed from symmetry arguments. In particular, these OPEs are
very important, too, that has led to the realization that gravity enjoys this daily one plus infinity
symmetry. And the basic, the basic two in doing so just skimming through it's just one schematic
idea of what happens is that we take a transform called the light transform of these gravitons.
And then we take dimensions to approach the conformally soft values. And when we do that,
apart from a divergent piece that we can, we can subtract, we get some operators on the sphere
which encodes currents, which obey the so-called debut infinity algebra. So what's actually going
on here is that these soft symmetries that we started talking about, which were the super
translational super rotation symmetries, we get several others that come from the further
subleading soft theorems, and they reorganize into this, into this algebra. So these are
basically some results of celestial CFT. And as I said, there are many others. Now,
now I'm going to talk about this flat space limit of ADS CFT. And the motivation to study that
is that contrary to standard ADS CFT holography, in which we have several dual pairs that we
can construct from string theories, in celestial holography we do not have a general framework
to construct dual pairs. And in particular, one very important open question is how to intrinsically
define a celestial CFT and how to construct these dual pairs. In particular, very recently appeared
a construction in self dual gravity. So in self dual gravity, now we have one particular construction
of that. We have one one proposal of a dual pair. But it would be nice to have one general
framework to construct such dual pairs. And in particular, one way to do that is to connect
to ADS CFT. That's the that's the proposal. So geometrically, what happens is that it's known that
we can take one limit in which the ADS space becomes Minkowski space. In particular, this is
the ADS metric in global coordinates. And what we do is that we make a red definition of coordinates
by rescaling by the ADS radius. And we take a large radius limit. And when we do that, we get
the Minkowski metric. So geometrically, as I'm going to show in a picture soon, what we're doing
is that we are zooming into a region near the center of ADS that turns flat as the ADS radius
is large. So there are several studies to connect conformal correlators in ADS CFT to the S matrix
in Minkowski space. And more recently, one such proposal was that conformal correlators with
operators near global times plus or minus pi over two in the ADS boundary should give rise to
the S matrix in momentum basis after we take some some integral transforms. So motivated by that,
we take this flat space limit configuration in which we basically redefine the coordinates in
the bulk and to take that flat space limit. And in the boundary, we expand about plus or minus
pi over two. And so we take this limit of large ADS radius. In particular, here is the geometry
of what's going on. And basically, this here is ADS. This is for the picture is for a shock wave
flat space limit, but it's just to illustrate the point. Basically, this is ADS. And this small
region here, this small diamond is what turns into the flat Minkowski space as we take the
large ADS radius. And basically, the minus pi over two and pi over two, they are the relevant
points on the boundary because light rays coming from minus pi over two will go through the center
and reach pi over two. So that's the basic idea of this flat space limit. And as I said, while
there are some studies on the flat space limit of ADS CFT, in order to construct the momentum space
S matrix, the S matrix in the base of momentum eigenstates, we would like to directly construct
the celestial amplitude, the celestial correlators, and therefore relate celestial CFT to standard
CFT. And a way to do that by recalling that in perturbation theory, the dual CFT correlation
functions are calculated by means of ADS width and diagrams. So this is one example of a width
and diagram, one pre-level exchange diagram. And the basic idea is that these width and diagrams,
they are made of basically three constituents, which are external lines, which are the bulk
to boundary propagators, internal lines, which are bulk to bulk propagators, and vertices,
which are basically integrals over ADS. And our strategy is then to expand the individual components
of large ADS radius. And when we do that, basically, the bulk to boundary propagators,
when we expand them by setting the operators at polar minus pi over two, is that we find that
they reduce to the conformal primary wave functions. That's the main aspect of this,
of this proposal. So it's necessary to make one anthropoid identification of the two slices,
because we need to place operators at pi over two at some point, and then at minus pi over two at
the antipodal point. So that's a technical detail of this calculation in order to get the correct
conformal primary wave functions. But we get these conformal primary waves as we expand the
bulk to boundary propagators in the flat space element. The bulk to bulk propagators, they can
be studied by looking at the equation they obey. And if we just take the defining equation of the
bulk to bulk propagators and expand the equation at large ADS radius, we find that the plus operator
becomes the standard flat space wave operator. This delta function becomes the standard flat
space delta function. And we get the equation for the leading order in the larger expansion.
We get the equation for the final propagator. The mass of the exchange is then related to whether
we scale this dimension, this intermediate dimension with the ADS radius or not. So we can get either
massive or massive exchange. So the bulk to bulk propagators, they become the standard
final propagators as we take the ADS radius to infinity. And vertices, they are integrals over
ADS. And we can expand those integrals. And when we do that, we recover flat space,
flat space integrals. So the basic
components of an ADS within diagram, as we take the ADS radius to infinity in that flat space
limit configuration, they reduce to the corresponding final diagrams, elements computing
celestial averages. And the reason for that is that we get the position space final rules
for S matrix elements in which the external states are the conformal primary wave functions.
Because basically the external lines, they are not the plane waves, but rather the conformal
primary wave functions. All of that, of course, provided that there are no subtleties in expanding
those integrals. And that's something that is still being studied. We're still studying that.
But the important point is that we have evidence that correlation functions of a whole graphic CFT
when operators are placed that plus or minus pi over 2 reduce to celestial amplitudes
when we take this flat space limit of ADS CFT. In particular, this can be checked explicitly
in a shock wave. So that picture was a shock wave in ADS. And we can compute a two-point
function in the shock wave background. And then we have one explicit non-perturbative
check of this connection here because that the shock wave two-point function is non-perturbative.
And so in particular, what this suggests is that celestial CFT may arise as a dimensional
reduction, as species of dimensional reduction of a standard conformal field theory.
And I want to remark on two generalizations. The first is that these arguments that I have given,
they are for scalar operators, but they can be generalized. And so we can also recover spin
in celestial amplitudes and spin in exchanges as well from this flat space limit of ADS written
diagrams. And while we have in this argument place at the operators exactly at plus or minus pi over
2 in the ADS boundary, we can more generally place them at a small infinitesimal one over
r displacement of plus or minus pi over 2. When we do that, this additional variable,
you can be traded by a shift in conformal dimension by one integral transform,
but it can also be suggested by symmetry arguments. So I am going to, I'm not going to show it right
now. Let me just see how. So, well, and then the idea is that we can, motivated by that,
study the symmetries of the celestial CFT in the sense of trying to understand how
they emerge from this dimensional reduction procedure, how they emerge from standard conformal
field theory on these, when we basically localize to the neighborhood of some
time slice in the boundary. So the basic idea is that conformal transformations,
they are generated by conformal killing vectors, which are values obeying this equation here.
And we can study this equation on the cylinder in the neighborhood of some of some time slice.
And basically, when we do that, we find, since we have this parameter to expand,
is this r parameter here, find a family of vector fields that are parameterized by a function on
the sphere and the conformal killing vector on the sphere, pretty much like BMS transformations,
which are these vector fields here. And it turns out that we can reorganize,
sorry, before that, it turns out that these vector fields, they obey almost of all of the
conformal killing equations. So except one of them, in which we have these one over r terms on the
right hand side, we should, the conformal killing equation demands this to be zero.
And it turns out that if we want to solve the equation for finite r, so away from
this limit, we need that this function be constant and that this conformal killing vector on the
sphere be actually global. So these are the standard, then we recover the standard conformal
transformations of the cylinder. However, if we take r to infinity, the equations are satisfied
and we get one infinite dimensional enhancement. It turns out that it's possible to reorganize these
these these vector fields in such a way that we basically take these linear combinations of them
and these L, Y and T, F vector fields here that we get, they obey exactly the BMS four
algebra, actually the extended BMS four algebra, because these Ys, they are the super rotations,
they are actually locally defined conformal killing vectors on the sphere. So basically,
the client is that what we have found is that if we just study conformal symmetry of the cylinder
in this limit as we expand about a time slice, basically we can we find a set of vector fields
parameterized by a function on the sphere and a conformal killing vector on the sphere
that obeys the BMS, the extended BMS algebra. This is the algebra that one finds in flight
space and it's rather remarkable that this algebra that is found by studying asymptotic
symmetries in asymptotic reflux space times emerges that the conformal symmetry of the
Lorentzian cylinder on a small neighborhood of a time slice. In particular, we know that primary
operators transform in this way conformal. And in particular, we can study how conformal primary
operators transform under these extended symmetries that we have found. Sorry to interrupt you,
but we have a bit of connection problems. Maybe you can turn your camera off or some
just for the moment to stabilize the connection maybe a bit. Thanks.
By the way, how long do I have? I would say 10 minutes. 10 minutes, okay. So
a three-dimensional primary operator, as I said, it transforms in this way under conformal maps,
infinitesimal conformal maps. And we can we can study this transformation law for these
vector fields that generate what we think to be these rotations. And in particular,
that's interesting because what are the times lices? So we will then be seeing how operators
transform when they're restricted to these times lices. And when we do that, the
claim is that if we take these super rotation vector fields here on the cylinder and study the
transformation laws because of a conformal primary operator in CFT3, we get exactly the
transformation law of a two-dimensional primary operator on the sphere, except that its conformal
weights, they are operator value to pretty much like what happened when we studied the S matrix
in asymptotical flat spacetimes in the standard plane wave panes. Here, the geometry of this
statement is basically that what's going on is that a three-dimensional primary, when just
restricted to a times lice, does not transform as a two-dimensional primary. Rather, it has this
operator value mentioned here. And J3 here, it's basically the spin, the angular momentum along
the three-direction. And well, these three-dimensional primary, so we just get the spin. But these
dimensions, they are actually operator value. And only when we set the operators exactly at
plus or minus five over two, we really get something that diagonalizes two-dimensional
conformal transformations. So, saying this differently, what happens is that if this capital
D here is the three-dimensional dilatation generator, and this script D is the two-dimensional
dilatation operator, these three-dimensional primaries diagonalize this D here on the origin,
but they don't diagonalize the two-dimensional one on the origin of when we place them on the
origin on the sphere. Rather, we get this extra operator area over. However, as one does in flat
space, when we diagonalize that, and that's done by a time, malign life transforms not exactly the
malign to something a bit different, but we can do that. And these molds here that we extract
from the operator, they now transform exactly as two-dimensional primary operators with these
dimensions here. So, the idea, a summary of this is that we can find transformations on the cylinder
that they impart two-dimensional conformal transformations on the time slices,
and we can then extract from any two-dimensional primary a continuum of two-dimensional primaries
that transform as two-dimensional primaries would under these transformations. And in particular,
this is the transform that I said at the level written diagrams that can be introduced to you
with that small coordinate about plus or minus pi over 2. And this is just normalization that can
be chosen for convenience. And all of this generalizes two conformal field theories in any number
of dimensions, and celestial conformal field theories in one dimension less. So, here is one
very quick comparison with standard Kaluzha Klein reduction. So, in Kaluzha Klein reduction, we have
a field in this product space, which is rd cross some compact k, and we have the mass
chasm here on the higher-dimensional space. The mass chasm here on the lower-dimensional space,
this rd, and a few diagonals, the mass chasm here on the higher-dimensional space. But when we study
the action of the lower-dimensional mass chasm here, we rather get an operator here. We don't
really get, it doesn't diagonalize that. But we can diagonalize the lower-dimensional mass chasm
here by integrating over this over this compact k. And when we do so, we introduce this tower of
fields of several masses. In our case, we have a field in the cylinder, and we have basically that
the diagonalization is on the origin on the higher-dimensional space, but on the lower-dimensional
space, it doesn't. And we can diagonalize that in the same way by integrating over now,
we integrate over r instead of over a compact space. In particular, since here we have a
compact space, in general, we get here discrete tower of fields, and here we instead get a
continuum of fields because r is non-compact. So, what we have really is a dimensional reduction
of a conformal field theory. That's really what we are actually constructing here.
So, these are just the remarks that I just made. In particular, one particular case is that we can
take that parameter of the transform that lambda we can take to 1. And when we do that, the limit
is singular. And nevertheless, we can extract a residue. And when we do that, we recover operators
exactly at u equals to 0. So, again, we recovered that prescription of placing operators exactly
at minus pi over 2. So, that's one special case of this diagonalization of the two-dimensional
dimensions. So, finally, and that's the last part, I mean, we can then ask about the soft
symmetry. So, a t-signature of celestial CFD are the soft symmetries. And we could try to
find out if they emerge in this dimensional reduction. And in particular, it's non-trivial
that they use so because it's non-trivial that a standard three-dimensional or higher-dimensional
conformal field theory can have this large amount of symmetry that the celestial CFD have because
of soft theorems. So, the answer to this question is that they do emerge from this dimensional
reduction procedure. And the way that is basically to call that leading and sub-leading
conformally soft nodes, they have dimensions equal to 1 and 0. The stress tensor in a conformal
field theory has dimension D while a current has dimension D minus 1. And there is a transform
that's called the shadow transform that maps an operator of dimension delta to an operator of
dimension D minus delta. So, in particular, it maps the stress tensor to a dimension zero operator
and it maps the current to a dimension one operator. So, it seems that naturally shadows
of the stress tensor and current they have conformally soft values. So, when we restrict
those to exactly plus or minus pi over 2, we are going to get operators in the reducer theory
that have the right quantum numbers to give rise to soft operators and to reproduce soft theorems.
So, that's something that we can, in fact, we can check. And for the case of the stress tensor,
we can basically construct this shadow which is basically this D tilde here.
And then from the shadow, we can construct these two operators we call NAB0 and NAB1.
And it's easy to see that NAB0 has dimension one because the shadow stress tensor has
dimension zero while NAB1 has dimension zero. So, they have leading and sub-leading
conformally soft-graviton dimensions. These indices here, they are tangent to the sphere
in particular. And the claim is that these operators, they are exactly the leading and
sub-leading conformally soft-gravitons as we insert them on correlation functions,
we reproduce the soft theorems. And that turns out to be the case. And it's implied by the stress
tensor worded entities. So, if we start with the stress tensor worded entities, we can check that
NAB0 when inserted in correlation functions takes this form. And this is exactly the leading
conformally soft factor. So, basically, we reproduce the leading conformally soft-graviton
theorem. And for NAB1, the same is which is basically the sub-leading conformally soft factor.
In particular, the reason why this is exactly the sub-leading conformally soft factor is because,
well, these are the conformal generators, the global conformal generators acting on these operators.
But it's possible to show that in this formula here, the indices are restricted in a certain range
in which the global, the cylinder conformal transformations, they reduce to the lower
dimensional Lorentz transformations acting on conformal primaries. So, that's basically,
so this takes the form of the sub-leading soft. So, both leading and sub-leading conformally soft
theorems do follow from this dimensional reduction. So, let me just summarize. So, celestial homography
proposes a duality between quantum theories of gravity and acetyl free-flat spacetimes
and two-dimensional celestial conformal field theories in the celestial sphere of no infinity.
With a key aspect being recasting the S matrix as a conformal correlator or actually an object
that shares properties with a conformal correlator by means of changing the basis of asymptotic states
to conformal primaries. It's possible to show that celestial amplitudes, they naturally arise
as we take a large ADS radius limit of ADS with diagrams with particular kinematics.
And these results suggest that celestial CFD is closely related to dimensional reduction of
conformal field theories and in particular we can show that the symmetries at least,
the first field soft symmetries do emerge from this dimensional reduction procedure
as expected. So, I will stop here and thank you.
Okay, thank you very much. I enjoyed this talk very much. I think we have now plenty of time
again for questions and I would say we first start maybe with an anonymous question.
So, we have three anonymous questions here. I'm going to read them in order.
So, the first one is, under which circumstances does the omega one plus infinity algebra show up?
I guess on tree level or some other highly constrained regiments, regimes such as self-dual
gravity? What about loop level and quantum deformations?
Okay, well, the analysis of the...
Sorry, your connection failed there first. Could you repeat, please?
Can I go? Yeah, right. So, yeah, the table one plus infinity has been the analysis of the table
one plus infinity so far has been done at tree level and rover it focuses just one. Well, there's
one important point that I basically glossed over that when we take these, let me just get back
here to the slide. When we take these coincidence limits on the sphere,
right, we can take either a holomorphic or an anti-holomorphic limit and it's important which
of them we take because there are some subtleties related to order of limits issue.
And that's also related to, I mean, the helicities of the particles that we are considering. So,
in this construction of the...
Basically, we start with positive helicity graph. So, the currents, they are generated by
positive helicity soft graph. So, that's something else. So, there are some restrictions,
like the analysis has been at tree level, it considers just half of these currents because
it just considers the positive helicity ones. About corrections, I mean, as far as I know,
loop corrections have not been worked out. It turns out that in self view of gravity,
it has been shown that W1 plus infinity is not is not corrected. So, this W1 plus infinity is,
it remains in self-do gravity, but not focusing on self-do gravity. As far as I know,
there has been no results on loop corrections and corrections due to effective field theory
operators. I mean, recently, there was one analysis of one such possible correction to the
analog algebra in gauge theory. But it was said that in the paper that
a similar story should occur in gravity and it's probably something that is going to appear
at some point. Well, summarizing, there are several sources of possible corrections to this
that still have to be understood better. Great. Thanks. So, the second one would be,
what is the benefit of using celestial holography instead of ADS-RFT? And what is celestial
holography in quotes better? Well, it's different because it's not it's better,
celestial, it's not a choice, right? Because ADS-RFT is holography and asymptotically ADS
spacetime. And celestial holography is holography and asymptotically flat spacetime.
ADS-RFT is great and there are several results that are that have been derived since it began.
In particular, it's possible to use ADS-RFT to learn more about conformal field theories, for example.
But, I mean, for several scenarios in the real world, that's not really what we want. So, we would
like holography and asymptotically flat spacetimes or holography and asymptotically DS spacetimes.
That's another possibility. A syntotically flat spacetime is just one situation which
approximates well many real-world scenarios. And so, it's just it's different applications.
There's not one that's better than the other. And, I mean, they're just for different purposes,
different asymptotics of the spacetime. Okay. The last one is, given a celestial CFT,
can we reconstruct the gravitational bulk spacetime?
Yeah, that's a great question. I mean, as far as I know, there have been no
discussions of that yet in celestial holography. In ADS-CFT, we have, for example,
a very well-known procedure for that, which is the HCL-L bulk reconstruction. And there are several
developments starting from that. But as far as I know, there has been no
known analog of that in celestial holography. But I agree that it's a very important question,
because if it's really, I mean, in holography, we believe that the bulk theory, anything about
the bulk theory should be encoded in some way in the boundary theory. So, there should be some
way to do that. So, I mean, I believe it's something that needs to be better understood as well.
Okay. Thanks. So, before we
proceed with the questions from the audience, let me just stop there recording.
