OK.
OK, welcome, everyone, to the Young Researchers
of quantum gravity seminar.
Today, it's a great pleasure to have
physicist and mathematician Roger Penrose as a speaker.
Roger Penrose was awarded a Nobel Prize for Physics in 2020
for his fundamental work on black formation
and classical gravity.
But his contributions extend far beyond the singularity
theorems.
Many of us know Roger Penrose in relation
to cosmic censorship, to conformal diagrams, spin
networks, all in relation to his work
on understanding consciousness from the principles
of quantum mechanics.
In today's seminar, he will introduce
us to one of his approaches towards reconciling quantum
theory with the structure of spacetime
within what is known as Twister theory.
We will hear a 45-minute talk, which
will be followed by a session of open questions
from the audience.
And so with this, we would like to thank you, Roger Penrose,
for accepting our invitation.
And please feel free to begin whenever you're ready.
Well, thank you very much for the invitation.
I want to talk about, well, basic Twister theory.
So most of what I say will be about old stuff.
And then just a little bit at the end
about what is very recent.
Twister theory, let me try and make sure I can move the slides,
which is a tricky thing.
I can't move the slides.
Why are they not moving?
No, it doesn't work.
Oh, I pressed that.
You can click.
Careful, because I'm at it.
Can I go backwards, though?
Oh, yes, I can.
OK, fine, sorry.
OK, so that's the title, basic Twister theory,
bi-twisters and split-octonians.
Now, the bi-twisters and split-octonians
are the new stuff, which I'm afraid I
shall have to rattle through just at the end.
Mainly, I shall be rattling through several many, many years,
I should say, of work on Twister theory,
starting from the initial motivations.
So the initial motivation basically
arose a long time ago when I was in, I guess, in 1950s.
And I shared an office with Engelbert Shooking.
And he was a wonderful person to share an office with,
because he knew pretty well everything you needed to know.
It was unusual that he was also an original person,
because usually these two qualities are not in the same person.
But anyway, he was very useful to me.
And one of the things that he emphasized to me
was the importance in quantum field theory
of splitting your field amplitudes
into positive and negative frequencies.
And another thing he stressed to me
was that Maxwell's theory was conformally invariant.
And I was intrigued in conformal invariance
for various reasons.
I was thinking I had quite worked on talking about scry,
or non-infinity at that stage.
But I had my eyes on bringing infinity around
to a finite place and so on, things like that.
And I was interested in the conformal invariance of Maxwell's
theory, but the trouble with the positive and negative
frequency splitting, well, that's usually
something you do in terms of Fourier analysis.
And that's not conformally invariant.
But then I realized there was this other way
of representing things.
And this is what this picture is trying to show.
You imagine the Riemann sphere.
So this is the complex plane compactified into a sphere.
And we have the equator, which is to represent the time,
if you like.
It goes all the way around.
So time minus infinity and plus infinity are identified.
And you consider your function as a function of time.
And your positive and negative frequency ones
are those which depends on your conventions.
I'm having it here.
The convention is that you go into the northern hemisphere
conscious positive frequency and into the southern hemisphere
conscious negative frequency.
So this splitting is very much conformally invariant.
Even though the splitting into the Fourier components
is not conformally invariant, the splitting
into positive and negative frequencies
is conformally invariant, as you can see from that picture.
Now, I had the idea that this is only just
talking about one dimension of time.
That's the equator in this picture.
And I would really like to be able to do the same thing
globally for the whole of space time.
I'm thinking really of Minkowski space, not just
general relativity at the moment.
So Minkowski space.
And how do you do that?
Well, you see, you can think of complexifying Minkowski space.
But then you'll get a space which has, well, four real dimensions.
So when you're complexified, it's eight dimensions.
And the real space does not divide it into two halves.
So it doesn't work.
So then it doesn't work when applied simply directly
to space time.
But eventually, after a lot of towing and froing,
I had the idea that not thinking of space time,
but you think of the space of light rays.
And the space of light rays represents the points
in the space I'm talking about.
That's on the right-hand side.
That's the point.
And the light rays represented by a point.
And if you want to represent a point in space time,
you represent by the family of light rays through that point.
And I was well aware that the celestial sphere in relativity
is really a complex one-dimensional space.
It's a Riemann sphere in the sense of the Lorentz transformations
correspond to a conformal map of the Riemann sphere.
Or the celestial sphere, if you like.
The space of light rays is the celestial sphere.
And that celestial sphere is, if you have two observers looking
at the same sky, moving at great speed with respect
to each other, the transformation from one to the other
as a conformal map of the sky.
So I can think of it as a Riemann sphere.
So this is what this picture represents.
The space of light rays and a point
represents the space in that space.
Now that's the space, which I want
to stretch into a top half and a bottom half.
And that will be the equator, which
divides the two spaces with the top half from the bottom half.
And that is exactly what's going on here.
And to be roughly speaking, the top half represents not just
photons.
You see this space, which I'm calling Pn.
I'll come back to why it's called Pn in a minute.
But the space of points, that's the space I had a minute ago,
which was just the space on the right-hand side of this place
here, which is five-dimensional.
Space of light rays is five-dimensional.
And you create a six-dimensional space
where you include the sort of helicity of the massless particle.
So I've got this plus helicity photon
and the minus helicity photon.
And the space of those, I'll say a little bit more.
Why you'll get a complex space if you do this?
But that is the projective trist of space.
So the space T is trist of space, which
is a complex four-dimensional vector space.
But if you consider the projective space,
so you're looking at the rays in that four-dimensional space,
you have a six-dimensional real space.
In other words, a three-complex dimensional space.
That's the piece that's for projective.
And so you have the top half and the bottom half,
top half representing positive helicity,
bottom half negative helicity.
And you do indeed get this splitting of the space
into two halves in this way.
So it did exactly what I wanted.
It took a long time to realize what I was doing here.
I won't go into the complications, the root,
which I had to take to think about this.
But that was what I settled on as the right sort of thing
to think about.
That is the twister space, in fact.
But to describe the points in the top half, they're not really.
You see, in this picture, I have on the left-hand side
a wiggly light ray to indicate the photon.
But geometrically, it really is this object here,
which I want to describe.
It's why it's called a twister, if you like.
This is a family of circles.
It's actually a projection into three-dimensional space,
can form a stereographic projection
into three-space of a family of Clifford parallels
of a three-sphere.
So you take the three-sphere and what people call the hopf map.
It's really, you got it from Clifford.
So it's a family of circles, great circles on the three-sphere.
And these projected stereographically into three-space
gives you this configuration.
And that's why it's called a twister,
because you have these circles all twisting around each other.
And they do represent a point in the top half or the bottom half.
It's right-handed if it's in the top half
and left-handed in the bottom half.
Now, I should explain where that configuration comes from.
And one way of doing it is the following picture.
It's a bit of a mess.
Don't worry about that.
But this, again, you can see PTT plus.
That's the top half of twisted space
in the bottom half of projective space.
That is the P. So we're looking at six-dimensional real spaces,
in other words, three complex dimensional spaces,
split into two halves.
And if you take a point in the top half,
see what does that represent?
That's that point Z alpha in the top left part of this picture.
And the dual of that is a plane.
And you have a form, which has two pluses and two minuses.
So it's symmetrical with regard to plus and minus.
And with respect to that form, you have a dual to the point.
And that's a plane.
And that plane intersects the real space.
That's the space of light rays in that red thing in the middle.
The red thing is the PN space we just had before.
And to see, to represent that point Z,
you think of the plane, which is its dual,
that cuts the space of light rays in that little bit
in the middle there.
And each straight line through Z,
which meets that thing in the middle, meets it in a circle.
You see, the line through Z is a line.
But that line is a complex line.
So it's a sphere.
And that sphere meets the blue thing in a circle.
And as that line moves around, joining all the points
in that intersection to that point,
you get a whole family of circles.
The whole region is a three sphere.
So you S3 at the top represents that intersection
of the plane with PN.
And we therefore have this three sphere.
And that sphere is fibred into this projective space here.
So in this family of Clifford parallels.
So I knew about all this.
And it really came from a configuration
that Ivor Robinson had been playing with.
He was looking at families of light rays
because he was looking at how you represent a family
of shear free light rays.
And this family of shear free right rays,
he considered to be joining to a line, a single light ray
and that single light rays displaced in the complex.
And then you look at the real part of it all.
That's what it started from.
So the idea came from Ivor Robinson, basically.
But this was what this,
I don't think he knew that it was a Clifford parallels,
but that was what I concluded it was.
And I realized this is just what I was looking for
because you see this real space divided into,
well, the complex space divided into two halves
and you have the real things which you see directly,
which are the light rays on the intersection.
What to do that took a long time.
There were a curious story when I,
I won't go into that, I'll talk about it later.
But it's easier to think about these things
in terms of two component spinners.
So that's really the key thing to play with
in order to get these constructions.
Here we have what a two, geometrically,
what a two component spinner is.
On the right-hand side, I have a little flag
which represents the two component spinner.
That little flag is a null flag.
So its flag pole lies along the light cone.
And so therefore I'll see on the left-hand side,
the direction of that flag pole is a point.
So you see a particular point on that sphere,
which represents the direction of the two spinner.
And the flag plane gives you the phase of the spinner,
if you like, and that is represented
by a tangent plane to the sphere.
So you have that little arrow on the left-hand side,
which represents the intersection of that flag plane
with the space-like plane on the right-hand side,
which cuts through the cone to give you the sphere,
which is on the left-hand side.
So this gives you representation of two spinner.
It's complete representation of two spinner up to a sign.
The two spinner is a spin on the object.
So if you rotate it through two pi, it becomes its negative.
You have to rotate it again through two pi
to get back to where it was.
So the flag plane, as it goes once round,
all the way around to where it started,
then it's become its negative.
So you have to keep this in mind,
but apart from that,
it's a nice geometrical representation of a two spinner.
Okay.
Now, what's the representation of a twister?
Well, the twister is described by two two-component spinners.
One of them is the thing I'm calling omega at the bottom,
and the other one I'm calling pi.
The reasons for those two Greek letters
is pi is what represents p.
It's a momentum,
but that a p is usually used for momentum or for momentum,
so that the pi represents the momentum
of this massless particle, if you're right.
I'm thinking of the case of the real light ray
for it here in this case, though.
So the light ray Z has a particular direction,
which is represented by the pi,
which is also that it's got a momentum too.
So it's got a scale to it as which pi,
the size of pi, if you like,
gives you the scale of the momentum.
And what is omega?
Well, it really gives you the moment about the origin.
So it's an angular momentum thing.
It gives you the moment about the origin.
And so that little spinner at the bottom is the omega part
and the pi part is the one you see at the top.
Those two spinners represent the twister.
So the twister is a pair of two spinners.
Actually, let me go back to that in a minute.
If they represent an actual light ray,
then it's a condition that pair of objects,
you have a norm on it,
which tells you it's the pi times omega bar
plus omega times pi bar.
And those two things give you the norm of a twister.
If that norm is zero, then you have a light ray,
just in the case here.
If the norm is not zero, then it still gives you a twister,
but you can't represent it as a light ray
and that's where we go back to the,
well, this thing we had before.
So you can certainly see, represent it.
And it does represent a particle with spin,
which I'll come to later,
but for the moment, it's just a piece of geometry.
Okay.
Now, you can use these things
or the two spinner notation very conveniently
to represent massless fields.
And I just wanted to indicate the kind of algebra
that one uses all the time here,
algebra of two spinners.
And when you, I like to use abstract indices
so that when I write A or A prime,
A is the spinner index,
A prime is the complex conjugate spinner index.
B is a spinner index,
B prime is the complex conjugate spinner index.
And if you want to make a vector out of it,
you have to have one of each.
So you have a prime and an unprime together
and the abstract index notation means I can write little A
actually stands for the abstract index A
and that you can think of also as a shorthand for A prime.
So it's a convenient notation.
You can convert back between the tensor notation
and the two spinner notation.
Just, I was kicked myself
because there was a time when I think John Wheeler
and there was people wanted to know what notation
people should be using for tensors and vectors.
And I didn't reply, I should have replied
because everybody else wanted to have Greek letters
for tensors and I would have said,
no, no, no, no, I want to have Latin letters.
Because if you use Greek letters,
then the capital is terrible
because they don't have a proper alphabet
which you tell when you're using Greek letters
and when you're not.
So I said, no, no, you should have,
I didn't say that, I was not kicking myself.
I've always used Latin letters for the reason
that you can use it, translate backwards between spinners
and vectors very conveniently in this way.
But anyway, never mind about that.
So the little letter A for the tensor index
corresponds to capital A, capital A prime.
And it really, an index, the abstract indices,
they are the same thing.
But the point about the spinners
is you can manipulate the individual parts
and flip them around without moving the tensor indices
around as a whole, that's very limited.
And you can write down the metric,
it's a product of the epsilon with the epsilon primed
and the epsilon is a two-dimensional skew object.
So it's very simple object.
And now here at the bottom,
I've got the Maxwell field tensor
and I've got the vial curvature tensor.
Zero rest mass fields in general
are represented by symmetrical tensors.
And the general field equation I've got at the bottom,
you write down this symmetric index,
well, let's say two S index where S is the spin
and all unprimed or all primed,
depending on whether it's left-handed
part of the right-handed part.
Left-handed part is all unprimed.
I think I've got the conventions that way around.
If you want to represent the Maxwell field tensor,
then you can split it into the two parts,
the self-dual and the anti-self-dual part.
One part is represented by symmetric two-spinner phi AB
and then you complement that with the epsilon,
gives you a skew-tometric tensor.
That being anti-self-dual.
And then the other part is the complex conjugate part.
And if you want the vial curvature,
this is where it really makes a lot of simplification
because the vial curvature as a tensor
is a complicated object.
You've got to move all the traces of the vial curvature,
which to do explicitly is a little bit complicated,
but in spinners it's very, very simple
because the symmetry of the vial curvature in spinners
is simply completely symmetrical.
So your psi represents the vial spinner
and that's got four symmetrical indices,
couple of epsilons to make it into a tensor.
And then you've got the anti-self-dual
and the self-dual parts.
I guess the left-handed and right-handed parts,
whichever their way around it is,
and they all of them satisfy
the zero-res mass field equation.
So it makes a nice kind of way of talking about
zero-res mass fields all at once.
Okay, now, how do you do this with twisters?
Well, this picture, I should perhaps have started
with an easier picture,
which is to represent nice simple fields
which satisfy the massless field equations.
You can do these things,
which are called elemental states, I think they were.
No, elementary states, sorry.
And these are particular simple fields,
but let me not bother about this.
I want to describe a general positive frequency field
if zero-res mass field.
And I can do this with this construction.
Now, the left-hand side, so strister space,
and I have on this strister space a homogeneous function.
The degree of homogeneity represents the spin
or the helicity, really.
So I'm calling S the helicity.
S could be positive or negative.
S positive means right-handed, as far as I remember.
S negative means left-handed.
And if you have a function,
which is homogeneous to the degree minus two S minus two,
that gives a solution, a general solution
of the field equations, of the massless field equations.
And this picture describes how you get it.
The field has to have a property of having singularities
which are separated in the top half.
This is to make it into a wave function,
make it positive frequency.
So it has singularities which are separated in the top half.
The elementary states were constructed
by having two planes where your singularities lay
and these two planes intersected in the bottom half.
And so the top half, you had the two singular regions
which were on these two planes.
We're in the denominator,
and so therefore gave you poles of some sort.
So these two regions represent singularities.
Now, I have an arbitrary line in the top half.
If that line represents a point in spacetime,
if it was on PN, it would be a real point.
If it's moved up into the top half,
that's a point in the forward tube.
So the thing is, if you want to have a solution
of the field equations
which are non-singular in the forward tube,
that gives you a positive frequency solution
which you can use as a wave function.
So that's the idea.
I'm thinking of wave functions
and they would be positive frequency solutions
of the zero or mass equations.
And you get these automatically by this construction.
You construct, you take a general holomorphic function
which is homogeneous of degree minus two S minus two.
And singularities are separated in the top half.
And then you take your line in the top half
which represents a point in the forward tube.
That's where you want it to be non-singular.
It reaches into two separate regions.
Now you look at the right half of this picture
and you do your contour integral
which is a closed contour on that sphere.
In other words, on that projected line
which is lying in the top half there
which is topologically a sphere.
And you do your integral around that contour
and that splits the singularities on two sides
and it gives you a non-singular function.
So that was the construction which I had.
It looks awfully complicated to do this
and I struggled with trying to understand
what I was doing for a long time.
I can't remember the reasoning behind it all
but I had a problem which I needed to get solved
and I couldn't quite see what I was doing
and I consulted his singer about this
and he said, oh, to solve that problem
you just solve these equations.
And I went back to Oxford.
I was in the US at that point,
went back to Oxford and I asked Michael Atier
because I didn't want to solve the equations.
And he immediately took me to Blackboard
and explained what it was all about.
And he has to do what, homology.
Hormology, yes.
This is where we're driven.
What is cohomology?
Well, I'm talking about first cohomology.
I can describe what that is.
I'm talking about not functions
on the top half of Twisted Space.
I'm talking about elements of cohomology
on the top half of Twisted Space.
So what are they?
Well, I think of this,
it's really going back to this previous picture
where they have functions
which that would be a representative of the cohomology.
It's got singularities in those two separated regions
in the top half.
The way I'm thinking about it
is I'm looking at the places where it's non-singular.
And this bottom half,
the picture doesn't look much like the previous picture,
but think of the two humps,
the two camel humps in that picture
as being the left-hand side
and the right-hand side which are not shaded
in the top half of this picture.
So that's where the camel humps are.
So that's where you get your singularities in function.
So the function's got singularities
in those two separated regions.
And the contour integral will take place
in the intersection of those two regions.
But the cohomology way of looking at it
I'm thinking of the top half of Twisted Space
as covered by two open sets.
So this is Czech cohomology.
I have two open sets
which cover the top half of Twisted Space.
One is the left-hand part
which includes the dotted part in the middle.
One is the right-hand part
which includes the dotted part in the middle.
The union of these two regions
is the whole region I'm looking at.
The intersection of these two regions
is the region where my function is defined.
So the function is defined on the intersection
of the pair of regions.
And when I do my contour integral,
it's on that intersection region.
Now you see in general in cohomology,
you may split your space into a zillion different regions
that may help be a whole lot of them.
But you can get away with two here
which is the nice thing about it.
And this is the simple thing that you can...
It's good enough for what we want to say here.
But if you want to know the invariance of it,
you would do Lorentz transformation
and then this thing got a little twisted around
and what used to be a nice splitting into two halves
is in a different place.
So we want to add something to something
which is rotated as a mess.
So what you really have to do is think of these
as this cohomology element
where you fact it out by all these things.
And the cohomology remains independent
of how you've described it
in terms of this splitting into these two halves here.
Now that's a long story.
I'm certainly not going into it,
but I just want to give you a sort of how we run through.
This is a quick run through twist of theory.
It's driven into this notion
that your functions are described by cohomology
on the, if I'm talking about wave functions
on the top half of twist of space.
Cohermology is sort of understood
if you take this picture.
You see locally, you've got what it means,
but cohomology describes the discrepancy
in trying to fit this together as a whole.
If you imagine splitting this into pieces,
you can imagine splitting it into two halves
by, say, slicing it horizontally by a plane
which cuts the top half of sort of lambda-shaped thing
and the bottom half, which is the rest of it.
And you glue it together
and you try to glue it together in a way
which gives you something interesting, not just trivial.
And this thing just gives you an element of cohomology
which is what this just as triangle describes.
One way of describing cohomology
is to talk about impossible objects.
I won't really go into that here,
but I just thought I'd send it.
Now, once you've got the hang of cohomology,
which I don't expect if you haven't known it already,
probably this rapid description isn't good enough
to explain the idea,
but nevertheless, that's what it is really doing.
So this is now going way back to the motivation
right at the beginning is finally realized.
It took ages and ages.
I can't remember how many years it was.
It really does do what the picture on the left
is trying to do.
You're splitting your positive and negative frequencies
into two halves, sorry,
you're splitting your function into two halves.
Your positive frequency part is in this,
extends into the top half,
your negative frequency part extends into the bottom half.
And the analogy here is very close,
but now it's not functions, it's cohomology.
The cohomology which splits into the top half
describes positive frequency into the bottom half
describes negative frequency.
So it finally achieved what I was trying to do
after many years.
So that was a great relief to see it really did it.
Your PN is the space which represents the light rays
and that's what you see most directly
and your wave functions you can see,
you can stem them into the top or the bottom half.
And that's what, sorry, that's what I'm just describing here.
Now, there's another thing about this,
which is, I can only mention it rather briefly, quickly.
You see here, I have a function
does describe how I glue the left half
and the right half together.
And the function is then described as a cohomology
on the whole space.
Now, cohomology is something else.
It allows you to just deform your space.
So I can consider an infinitesimal defamation of my space.
I can describe that as cohomology.
You can imagine building your space
out of the different pieces of the cohomology,
pasted together and that gives you a space.
I pasted together out of bits.
Here, I'm just thinking of pasting my space out of two bits.
But I'm now not just thinking of that passively
sitting on the intersection here,
but I'm thinking of it as doing something.
I'm sliding one half away from the other half.
So my twister space is glued together
over that patch in the middle.
I'm afraid it's rather a messy picture.
I got it from my previous picture
and cutting it up and gluing it together.
I'm afraid rather hastily.
Sorry about that.
But once you've moved one half of the twister space
with respect to the other,
what used to be a straight line going through,
I'm just drawing it as a sort of space line.
It's really a sphere.
That long pencil thing in the middle,
which is really a sphere.
And you can see that on the right-hand side of the sphere.
But that sphere has to go through smoothly
from one side to the other.
And in doing so, it produces a sphere.
If it's just an infinitesimal displacement,
it gives you a function
which describes the infinitesimal displacement.
If it's a genuinely finite displacement,
it actually gives you a solution of the Einstein equations.
So this was, I call, the nonlinear graviton construction.
It gives you complex solutions of the Einstein equations
by means of this very construction.
In fact, you can do it explicitly.
You can find a function which moves this thing.
In fact, not just infinitesimally,
but by a finite amount.
By using generating functions,
you can move it by a finite amount.
It's a little bit of a job
to find where there's Riemann spheres are.
There's a theorem which tells you,
this is a theorem due to Kodara,
which tells you if this move, but isn't too much.
It's a finite displacement, but not too much.
Oh dear, I've got to move my thing here, sorry.
Okay, there we go.
That finite displacement
actually gives you a finite solution
of the Einstein equations.
The trouble is, it's a complex solution.
That's all right.
But the main trouble is that it is a solution
which is of positive helicity.
So it means that your vile curvature,
half of it is zero and the other half is not.
When I say half, I mean the self-deal
and the anti-self-deal part.
I think the self-deal part is zero
and the anti-self-deal part is there.
And that gives you a left-handed graviton.
So I thought, well, this is the problem.
All you've got to do is try and find
how to do the right-handed half.
Well, I can do, I can just change all my conventions
and I get the same construction, give you the right hand.
But I want to put them together.
And how on earth do I do it?
Well, that's what's called the googly problem
because the googly is a cricket ball
which is bold, such a way to look like
a right-handed spinning particle
and it actually spins left-handed.
I can't remember where I got my left and right,
the right way around, but never mind.
It's maybe it's the left-handed one
and you're trying to make it spin right-handed.
I think it's that test.
Anyway, that's the googly problem
and it's been with us for a long, long time.
There are various ways of trying to get around this problem
but the way I want to describe getting around
to this problem is trying to follow this route.
And to follow this route,
let me go and talk about quantized twisters.
I did talk about the angular momentum and momentum before
and I talked about the omega and the pi before.
The picture in red on the right-hand side
is what I gave you before,
but now I want to go a little bit further
and to say that it actually describes the momentum
and the angular momentum, strictly speaking.
Now, the momentum is given by the pi part.
I did say that before.
You multiply pi by pi bar and that gives you p,
which is the momentum vector, four vector.
The angular momentum is also given
when you mix the pi's and the omegas together
and that is the expression given
at the bottom right-hand side of this picture.
Now, I want to say this in a slightly different context.
Suppose you quantize your objects.
So we're talking about quantum theory now.
Then P and M have a quantum commutation rule.
So that P and M become operators,
which do not commute, they satisfy certain commutation rule.
Now, that commutation rule comes very beautifully
out of a twister commutation rule,
which is a commutation rule between Z
and its complex conjugate Z bar.
You see, you've got barred quantities
and non-barred quantities.
So the twister involved in the P and the M
involve both the twister Z and its complex conjugate.
So this is what I want to do.
I want to combine the commutation rule is now written here.
Z and Z bar are canonical commutated.
They're canonically commute objects
and they're canonically conjugate variables.
So the Z's commute with themselves,
that's the bottom first part of the bottom line
and the Z bars commute with themselves.
That's the second part of the bottom line.
But the Z and the Z bars have this canonical commutation
rule between the two.
And if you have this very simple canonical commutation
rule for the twisters, that gives you
the complicated looking commutation
law that momentum and angular moment actually
have in Minkowski space.
Now, I'm doing the same thing here,
but I'm just thinking of what I'm calling now a bi-twister.
A bi-twister has both a twister part and a dual-twister part.
So the top part I have, the script A represents the bi-twister.
It has an ordinary commutating twister
as the coefficients of the Z part and a dual-twister
as the coefficients of the Z bar part, which I'm calling do-w.
The w is really Z bar, if it's real.
But I'm allowing it to wander around by itself independently
of Z. OK, so the bi-twister is the object curly A, which
has eight components, eight complex components.
Four of them are in the downstairs A.
The other four are in the upstairs A.
I'm writing it as A again.
I could have perhaps have chosen a different letter.
But when the index is up, it means a different thing.
They're completely independent objects from the other A.
When I make the real bi-twister, then
I want to make it the complex conjugate of the lower A.
But I don't have to do that for the moment.
Now, these bi-twisters are not commuting objects.
They have a commutation rule, which
comes directly from the commutation of the Zs with the Zs,
which you had before, Ws with the Ws,
and the Zs with the Ws, which give you
the canonical commutation rule, which I hope
I've written down there.
They can't see it, was I?
Yes, the Zs with Ws.
That's right, the first of the middle line.
And Zs with Zs and the Ws with Zs
are the second part of the middle line.
And for a real bi-twister, I say that the A upper
is actually the complex conjugate of the A of the downstairs A.
OK, now I construct this triple object, which
is constructed out of three bi-twisters.
I multiply them together, and I form this sum, which
is, you see this funny notation on the sum?
I've got plus or minus a wheelie arrow, circular arrow.
What that means is that sum consists
of six terms where I consider all permutations
of A, B, and C, or six possible permutations,
but added together with a minus sign
when it's an odd permutation.
So that's what it means.
So that triple bracket is that expression on the right-hand side
at the bottom there, where they'll
have a minus sign whenever it's an odd permutation.
Now this is all just saying what happens,
and you work it through, and I won't go through the details
of this.
I'm calling that a bi-twister, and I
have this operation of multiplying them together.
It's a triple product.
I have a given three bi-twisters,
I can construct a fourth one.
So that's what it is.
It's not an ordinary product of two.
Now if I have a real bi-twisters,
then I make there A equals A bar, and so on and so forth.
And then it turns out that this triple product is real also.
OK, now what more do I get?
I have an object which I call multiplying by i object.
I need that too.
And the definition of that is given by the second line here.
It's the product of A with B. Now that's
the ordinary product of A with B, not the triple product I
told you.
And I then put that expression that you see there.
That's the multiplying by i operation.
Now the point about these things
is that these are things which will involve h cross.
They all are.
I'm sorry, I don't know if I've gone back the right way.
I meant to say, yes, I did that bit.
Yeah, I did this bit.
Now I'm so sorry.
I had all this before.
I seem to be going backwards.
I'll ask you why I'm going backwards.
Sorry, yes.
Yes, don't worry about the complications all there.
So I've got a product with three by-twisters.
And what I want to say is that these things actually,
I should have put Planck's constant in the products.
I think I did that.
Yes, you could see it on the right-hand side.
But these expressions that I get all depend on Planck's constant.
If Planck's constant was zero, everything would vanish,
and I wouldn't get anything.
So they really are quantum objects,
which I'm talking about here.
I then make put Planck's constant equal to one,
so you don't bother them right at the top.
I can put Planck's constant equal to one,
and then I don't worry about it anymore.
But these objects are quantum expressions.
And these are real by-twisters.
And that is the multiplying by I operation,
which also is defined when I have the by-twister operation.
Sorry.
Oh, yes, no.
That's why I couldn't put h cross equal to one,
because all these quantities go to zero and h goes to zero.
And then I have this algebra, which is a quantum algebra.
Now, if I want to construct the split-octonians,
I need to introduce a unit element.
So this is the element E, which is constructed out
of a particular by-twister, which I choose.
And it has a E at the bottom line.
You see, E times E is equal to two.
That's just to make it a unit element.
Never mind why it's two and not one.
It's because it counts itself twice.
That's really roughly speaking one.
So the element E, you choose this arbitrarily,
but where E is a positive, well, I want its unit,
product with itself, to be positive.
So I can normalize it to be one.
And then I can construct the object, which
is the middle line here in the page here,
is a product is a multiple of E.
And that is a multiple of which is orthogonal to E, you see.
The z part is, I don't know if I said it right.
Now, here we have that one I'm trying to say.
Here we have a vex, any by-twister
can be represented as a sum of what I'm calling a real part
or a scalar part and a vector part.
It's like quaternions in that sense.
So the scalar part is defined by curly A, the S at the top.
So it's a multiple of E. That's the scalar part.
And the vector part is what's left.
So the scalar part is one dimension,
and the vector part is seven dimensions.
So that gives you what's left.
And the scalar part is orthogonal to the vector part.
And it's very much like what you do
when you construct quaternions.
You have a scalar part and a vector part.
And the cross product comes from multiplying the vector parts
together.
And quaternions represent the two operations of vector calculus.
You've got the scalar product on this part of the scalar part.
And the vector part is the product of the vector part.
And with the by-twisters, you do pretty well the same thing.
But now the vector part is represented
in terms of the triple part.
And I have to take the multiplying by i part.
I could have put that on the outside rather than all the way
through it.
Just the conventions work better with putting it
all the way through, but never mind.
Anyway, this gives you the split octonians.
And so it's a way of seeing that within the by-twister
construction, you can provide a representation
or a way of demonstrating these very curious objects,
the split octonians.
I get wondering whether they've got anything
to do with particle physics, which they might have.
If you don't fix your unit element,
then you have what's called spin 3, 4, which is a much bigger
group.
But the group of symmetries of the split octonians
is this thing called G2 star, which
is a very remarkable special group.
There's nothing I want to say about this.
What is this going to say?
Yes.
Now you see, the hope would be that this has something
to do with how you would construct a resolution of the problem
that I had before of trying to get your twisters to represent
equally the right and left-handed part.
You see, there is this curious fact
that twisted theory started off by trying to split a space
into two halves, giving you the positive and the negative
frequency.
And you go through the rigmarole of twisted theory,
and you end up with something which does that.
It splits into two halves.
But it's really giving you positive and negative helicity,
not make no positive negative frequency.
And it sort of muddied the two ideas together.
They shouldn't really be muddied together.
You want to have a formalism which
is symmetrical between the two things.
And the positive, I mean, it's really
sort of the positive and negative frequency.
Also, they are in muddied things.
Some of the things I was describing,
because that was also true.
But it's sort of muddled up with the helicity.
And positive frequency is muddled up with positive helicity.
So to get it un-muddled, you want something
which equally describes a twister and a dual twister.
So I'm saying that these objects, the bi-twisters,
the curly A thing at the top of this pickplex here,
is really something which could be used
to describe general relativity.
That you've got a right-hand part and a left-hand part.
And then you try and do the nonlinear gravitan
construction, but with the whole thing,
rather than just with the twister space,
do it apply to the bi-twister space.
Now, I haven't done that.
I haven't seen how to do that.
I barely tried.
So I'm telling you something which
sort of at the cusp of what I'm trying to do now.
So sorry if it's got confusing.
Thank you very much for listening.
All right, let's all thank Roger Penrose
for this inspiring and illuminating talk.
And with this, I think we can open the question session.
So if you would like to ask a question,
please raise your hand or type your question in the chat.
You may also use the Google Form for anonymous questions,
which will then be read by a person from the YRQT
committee.
Leave it.
I think I might want to move in.
OK, so please go ahead.
Yeah, I can see Tobias has a question.
Please unmute yourself.
Yes, so thanks a lot for this very nice talk.
First, I wanted to ask, so most of what you presented here
seem to rely a lot on masslessness, right?
So how does mass come into play in this Twister framework?
Well, I think of it normally in the sort of way
you think of an electron.
Well, I mean, when I say you think of it that way,
it can be thought of.
I mean, a Dirac spinner really is a pair of two spinners,
right-handed and left-handed, or say a primed
and an unprimed spinner.
So the way you would think about mass
would be as a sort of interacting pair of fields,
one talking about the right-handed part
and the left-handed part.
It's a sort of zitter-bevegan thing, too,
also you've got this jumping between right and left-handedness.
So when you write things in two spinners,
that's really the way I would do it.
So you would think of massless things for a spin-half.
You would have the two parts like splitting the Dirac spinner
in two pieces.
If you have higher spin, what are you basically looking at?
I mean, the basic paper, which does this,
the best way is Dirac.
I mean, they have all these different,
what are they called, nothing camera,
and I can't remember them all, the different ways
of writing higher spins.
But Dirac had this paper in which he described
all the spins at once using two spinners quite remarkably.
So this is where I learned about these things often
from this Dirac paper.
So you can talk about particles of higher spin
representing them in terms of pairs of two spinner
representations.
So that would be the way I do it,
but I haven't thought too much about putting mass in.
And you're a very good point to raise this question,
because as you say, it has been very geared
to thinking about mass as objects.
Clearly, when you bring mass in, then
you've got other groups coming in, which
involve rotating the two parts around with each other.
And sure.
But then you lose your conformal invariance, too.
So mass has to be something which, well,
I'm interested particularly in masses things also,
because at the two ends of the universe, if you like,
when you look at the very remote future,
well, the very remote future I think
you mean dominated by photons.
And when you're looking at the Big Bang,
then your energies get so big that mass becomes
a secondary quantity, and everything
is effectively massless, so that when
you try to join the future, remote future to the past,
you're really talking about mass as objects again.
But you're right to bring up.
I mean, you obviously have to handle mass.
Absolutely right.
And what's the best way to do it?
I tend to think the best way to do it
is to write things in two spinners,
and then mass becomes a bit of a composite kind of notion
at that stage.
OK.
I see.
Thanks a lot.
All right.
So there is another raised hand, but also question in the chat.
Let me first read the question in the chat,
and then we can let Igor more ask his question.
So the question in the chat, but Sophie,
is why is the construction in the end called split octonians
and not just octonians?
Yes, the split octonians, because the quadratic form
that you come up with, I didn't sort of stress that.
I could find it again, I guess.
The quadratic form you come up with, with the ease at the end.
Is it there?
No, it's there.
Yes.
Yes, I can't quite see where it's written.
You do have a quadratic form.
A quadratic form is four pluses and four minuses.
So ordinary octonians, you'd have all plus, plus, plus, plus,
plus, plus, plus, plus, plus.
With the, it's basically if you write down,
I mean, I had wondered about whether Twister theory might
be connected with split octonians for quite a long time,
and it took the lockdown, I think,
for me to have enough time to think about these things,
and actually to look at what I'd been worrying about before.
You see, if you take the Twister scalar product,
you've got two Twisters, and you just take the scalar product,
and you write it down in terms of real and imaginary parts,
you've got, each Twister has got four components,
and they're complex, so when you write the real imaginary parts,
you've got eight numbers.
And those eight numbers, the quadratic form
has got four pluses and four minuses.
So the natural quadratic form connected with Twister theory
is that split octonionic form.
So it's plus, plus, plus, plus, plus, minus, minus, minus.
And so that means that you're going
to have devices of zero and things like that,
as you do have with, well, split octonians are not really
such a nice subject.
The octonians do split nicely into four pluses and four
minuses, so it's not quite the same as the octonians.
The algebra, they're complexified.
So if you take the complexified version of each,
they're identical.
So complexified octonians are indeed
the same as complexified split octonians.
But when you make the real objects,
then the split octonians have this natural quadratic form,
which has four pluses and four minuses.
I can't see my slides very well to see
whether which one I should be staring at.
Yes, the quadratic forms in here, I think.
Yes, it's at the bottom.
That's right.
A dot B. That's what it is, yes.
But that's before I put h cross equal to 1.
I've got A dot B. You can define it
in terms of the expression at the bottom, yes.
Lower A, upper B, plus upper A, lower B.
And the upper and lower comes from the multiplying
by I operation, is that right?
Anyway, it's the A dot B. Yes, the A dot B
comes from the multiplying by I operation.
So you could see that in the middle line.
And then that gives you the quadratic form
that you get out of that has four pluses and four minuses.
So that's why it splits on turn-ins.
But I guess I should have said that.
Thank you for the question, yes.
OK, thank you for the answer.
So there are questions in the Google form,
but first of all, Igor Moel wanted to ask a question.
Please unmute yourself.
I believe that palatial twisters and unbe-twisters
are proposals to solve the Google problem.
So what's the relation between palatial twisters
and unbe-twisters to the split-octonium bi-twisters
that you explained to us today?
Well, they're more closely related to two.
Sorry, you said the word a minute ago, and it's gone out of my head.
You have bi-twisters.
Sorry.
Ambi-twisters, you necessarily have to have the scalar product zero.
You see, they're talking really about complex light ray,
complex null geodesics.
And the problem arises when you try
to make the scalar product not equal to zero.
When it's zero, you can have the geometric interpretation
as a light ray, or it could be a complex light ray.
And that's really where ambitwisters is going.
It's not resolving the problem of, how do I say it,
the Google-y problem.
I don't regard it really as solving the Google-y problem,
because you're not going into the complex analysis part
of the twisterspace.
You're concentrating on the light rays, and it's all right.
I just want to talk about light rays,
and there's a theory of these things.
So those are ambitwisters, but they're not the same.
Now, you're asking me about palatial twisters.
That's right.
Now, I think palatial twisters are related to these things
more closely.
The trouble is, it took so long for that article to come out.
I'd always forgotten about them at the time.
It is out now.
That is in the new spaces volume.
And that came out just very, very recently.
So that article does have palatial twisters in it.
But since I haven't seen that article for so long, which
is about, I don't know, it's about five years or longer
than that, I think, before the final proofs went in,
and the article actually appeared.
It was a great length of time.
Now, those you see, I think you have a pair, a twister,
and a dual twister in the same way.
See, the bi-twisters are relating them
in this very particular way in which you have the non-commitative
rule of multiplication.
Whereas palatial twisters, I don't think I had that.
I think they need to be combined with palatial twisters.
They're much closer to palatial twisters
than they are to ambitwisters.
Because ambitwisters, you have to restrict them to have a zero-scaler
product, if you like, so that you really are talking about light rays.
And you don't try to interpret them if I have it right.
I'm not sure where ambitwisters has gone, because I didn't really
follow the subject in too much detail.
But that was my understanding of where it goes.
You really are talking about complex and RGD6.
But you see, you're already on the space PN.
You haven't got off it, in a way.
So you're not really talking about these twisting things, which
I like trying to go off the line at the place PN.
You're trying to wander out into the top or bottom half
of twister space.
But I think that probably by using this non-commitative picture
here, you see the palatial twisters are
I don't know.
It needs thinking about more.
I mean, good.
It's a problem.
Think about how palatial twisters relate to bi-twisters.
But they do, in a sense, relate quite closely, because you've got
proper twisters in the sense of having a full twister space.
I'd have to remind myself whether the palatial twisters, I don't think
you had a geometrical interpretation of them.
You needed to stay in a neighborhood or something and extend
them in that neighborhood.
And you have to have a way of joining them up from one neighborhood
to the next.
And you can use a generating function to do that.
I think it would be very worthwhile to explore the connection
between bi-twisters and palatial twisters.
There could be something interesting there.
Yes.
OK.
Thank you.
Would you like to follow up?
Yes, please.
Oh, thank you for the homework.
OK.
Yes.
No, please let me have the homework.
When you've done it, let me have it, please.
Sounds good.
Thank you very much.
Thank you very much.
Thank you very much.
I would like to read the questions from the Google form.
Yes, sure.
So we got three questions.
The first one is, can you explain again the relation between
projective twister space, Cp3, and the motivating case of the
Riemann sphere in two dimensions?
There you have Cp1, which is compactified C,
but in four complex dimensions, C4,
not Cp3.
So can you explain again this missing dimension?
Yes.
Let's see if I can, I can answer your question and have to go back to the,
probably the early things you had, things like that.
This picture.
Well, you see, it's not directly connected.
Well, this really.
See, Minkowski space is the left-hand space.
And that's,
twister space is on the right-hand side here.
Now I'm not, you see, you can compactify Minkowski space,
certainly, as you were saying, which gives you,
well, it's a,
it also depends on how many times you go around and so on.
You can immediately compactify it,
and you, you get an S1 cross S3
by gluing the scri plus to scri minus.
There's also a question of whether you want to go four times round,
because the twister, you can pick up a factor of i every time you go around.
So there's a little bit of a problem there.
I think I call the Gurgon index.
Now, that, of course, is a different space
from the twister space.
The twister space,
you're looking at,
whether you're looking at the light rays, if you'd like to begin with,
but then that only gives you PN.
It doesn't give you the complex parts.
So you'd have to complexify it.
Let's just try and think.
I mean, you can take that Minkowski space and look at the alpha planes and beta planes in it.
Sure.
But you've got to complexify it.
It's not the real space.
The alpha planes in complexified Minkowski space will give you the points in the twister space.
And the alpha planes will only, if they're,
if you're lucky, then they intersect the real space in an actual non-JDSIC.
If you're not so lucky, they won't intersect the real space.
You can represent them using the Robinson congruences or the twister picture.
So that's the picture here.
So that's a bit complicated.
It's a space of alpha planes.
I mean, I think the answer to your question, as far as I can give it,
first of all, you have to complexify the compactified Minkowski space.
So these complex null surfaces in it, which I call alpha planes or beta planes,
well, that's the terminology coming from algebraic geometry.
If you have a quadric, you have alpha planes.
The compactified Minkowski space is really a quadric.
And you complex, you look at that, it's a four dimensional quadric.
Now, when you make that complex, that four dimensional quadric has
a unit of two types. One is the alpha planes and the other is the beta planes.
Now, the points of twister space can be represented as the alpha planes in the
complexified Minkowski space, compactified Minkowski space.
And the planes in twister space are interpreted as the beta planes in twister
in the complexified spacetime.
The points in the complexified space, spacetime, are the
what am I saying, the points, alpha planes and beta planes,
the points of the lines in the, I mean, you have to,
I'm not sure I'm answering your question very well.
But the thing is you have to complex, the connection with compactified Minkowski space
is not so immediate because you have to complex it out first.
So you complexify the compactified Minkowski space, and that gives you a
complex quadric, a complex quadric, four quadric.
That complex four quadric has in it these alpha planes and beta planes,
the points of twister space correspond to the alpha planes in this construction.
The planes in twister space correspond to the beta planes,
and the lines in twister space correspond to the points.
I've got that right.
So the lines in twister space are the points, yes, try.
So that's where, that is the answer to your question.
I don't know if it's.
Yeah, I also don't know.
So I hope this answers.
You really have to complexify it.
I mean, you don't in the sense you can look at the Robinson congress if you like,
but it's complicated.
So you can find the families of these light rays which twist around in the
nature of this complex, complicated picture, which I showed you here.
And you find those families of lines.
I mean, those are like families of light rays in the Minkowski space.
Each one of those families of light rays.
Twisting around gives you a point in twister space.
So that that is it if you like.
It's not so simple.
You have to think of.
And that's what I call Robinson Congress, because it was either Robinson who
found these solutions of the Maxwell equations, which looked like the family
of no lines, which meet an online.
So you think of the light a single real light ray, then all the light rays which
meet that light ray form a family.
You don't like it very much because they had this singular place where that
light ray is.
So in order to try and construct solutions based on those families of light rays,
he displaced the light ray shifted it translated it by an imaginary amount.
So it's displaced into the complex, but yet his light rays could be remain real.
They could remain real.
So you could still say this light ray intersects that's displaced light ray to
the complex, and that gave a family of light rays winding all over the
Minkowski space.
Now that's what I named a Robinson congruence.
Now the Robinson congruence is to do with this picture.
I didn't know that already before I started.
He said trying to understand I was Robinson congruences.
I think he didn't call them Robinson congruences I did.
But they represent this family of light rays which fill up Minkowski space and
they twist around in this complicated way.
So I said well how do you understand what they look like.
Well you can take a plane through an ordinary space like three planes.
So you can say take a moment of time in that space of the twisting lines.
Now a moment will each of the light rays will intersect that plane in a certain
direction.
So you have in your three space Euclidean three space a family of
directions at each point there will be a little arrow which tells you which way
that light ray points.
Now you find out that those little arrows point along these circles of this
configuration.
So that was exactly where it came from.
I knew what these families of light rays looked like and so I knew it was this
place here and then I counted the dimensions.
That was a key point.
I counted how many dimensions it didn't have and I was really struck by the
fact that it had six dimensions.
The light rays themselves have five dimensions.
You can flexify them you ought to get as ten dimensional space.
But in this way of looking at it you only get a six dimensional space.
So you've added one dimension.
So that space is the twist projective twist of space and the projective space
as one dimension to the things that you see directly.
That's the light rays.
So the fact that these can represent the angular momentum structure of a
massless particle.
I didn't know for a long time until later.
It really is physics.
It tells you how the angular momentum of a massless particle would spin, how
the angular momentum twists around itself as you move around space time.
And it actually does describe that.
Now I don't know if it's answering your question.
You see it's not quite the simple.
I thought about it earlier.
It's been the simple thing of saying okay well it's the same as compacted in
Minkowski space looked in the, well it is looked in a funny way.
But it's a very funny way.
You have to look at these twisting congruences of lines.
And those represent the points.
That's what they are.
So you take in this compactified Minkowski space.
Those robins, those twisting congruences of lines which are the robin
lines and congruences.
And those represents the points of twisted space.
A projective twisted space.
Okay, that's the best I can do it.
Thanks a lot.
Yeah, I hope this answers the question.
Then I continue with the other questions we received.
So the next one is what is your opinion on so called twister string theory.
This is a super symmetric version of twister space as target space.
Oh, this is a touchy question.
Would you see.
Clearly it was a,
I mean it was curious how it came about historically is I was visiting Princeton.
And I visited Ed Whitten.
And I talked to Ed Whitten and he said he wanted to talk to me about something.
And Ed was going to talk to me about string theory and so on, which I wasn't too keen on, because it had rather large number of dimensions, which I had reasons for not wanting to talk about.
Mainly because you have such a huge functional freedom and the things that you're describing in high dimensions, have an enormous functional freedom, and how you kill off all those extra degrees of freedom.
So I mean, I don't think they do. I think there's a big problem in string theory, for that kind of reason, if you have all those extra dimensions.
But anyway, so I talked to Ed, and he surprised me by talking about, he wanted to know more about twisters, and I was very struck by that.
I was glad to talk to him about it. And so we did discuss these things a bit and he wanted to try and bring twisters into the picture somehow.
And I thought that was a nice idea.
So he described described to me what he was trying to do and he said well if you're interested I'll write a short note on this which I'll send to you.
Sure, please send me a short note on this.
I waited a couple of months, and then I got this 100 page document on what you might call twister strings.
And I then told Lama Mason about it and that he got very excited about it and they started to, I think there was a conference really quite soon after this in the next following I think I visited Princeton in the autumn, and it was the
spring when there was a conference organized partly by Lama Mason I think I can't remember Andrew Hodges possibly who did the organizing.
And they wanted to learn more about how string theory might be useful in twister theory.
And in fact, it did develop.
Andrew Hodges certainly benefited greatly from this notions of, I think that the trouble is you see as far as I was concerned is that it's all right if you're still in four dimensions.
When you go up to talking about higher dimensions and I lose the thread of it, because of this functional freedom issue.
But there was another point, which didn't get clear at the beginning and I'm not sure how clear it was later on.
But in a certain sense, the way that Whitton was looking at the twister space is what I would call pseudo twister theory.
I'm using the word pseudo in a technical sense it's not an insult I should say absolutely clearly it's not an insult, because in particular, the kind of geometry that's used in general relativity is pseudo Riemannian geometry.
It's not Riemannian geometry pseudo Riemannian geometry.
It's pseudo it's pseudo because the differential form that you're looking at is not positive definite you have one of one sign and three I like to have one plus sign and three minus signs.
And that's why it's pseudo it's very respectable subject it's the subject of Einstein's wonderful theory of general relativity.
And if you talk about black holes.
It's features, which you don't get in ordinary manian geometry. I remember giving a talk in a long time ago and this was the Bertel Ron Contras, and I did talk about black holes, and I talked about the horizons.
And I remember that in the audience was very distinguished mathematician. Oh, gosh, his name's gone out of my head this very second.
And he was stunned by the fact that you get these features in pseudo Riemannian geometry that you don't get in ordinary Riemannian geometry. So that is, you can have now things and it makes the subject a different subject.
I mean a lot of things are the same a lot of the calculations the same. But when you talk about geometry and topology and things like that is really a different subject, and the techniques are different.
And that was the point that I was trying to say that pseudo whatever the kind of geometry that you're talking about, can be an interesting subject. Okay, that's the point made.
Now, when wisdom got involved with twisted theory, he tended to do the opposite thing.
It's very interesting because there are two types of pseudo twisted theory. One of them is what I would call a tier to a theory, which is making your space time having all plus signs.
And they can have a nice subject. Very lots of interesting things which have been used in differential geometry, and twisted theory has a role to play but it's their pseudo twisted theory of the kind where your differential form, your quadratic form sorry,
your quadratic form is all pluses plus plus plus plus through space time if you like is all pluses. Fine, it's a different subject, fascinating subject, but it's a different subject.
Now with him wanted to do the opposite thing he wanted to pluses and two minuses. That's a different subject altogether. It's different in the sense.
If you like, the all pluses subject is really quaternionic. It's quaternionic twisted theory. The plus minus minus minus subject which I like is it is a complex.
That's the complex subject. So it's complex analysis which I like. I'm fond of complex analysis so the fact that uses complex analysis with a great bonus as far as I was concerned, but that is the genuine twisted
theory I'm calling that the genuine one because that's the subject that started it all off you see one plus and three minuses for your space time.
Now wouldn't wanted to pluses and two minuses for the space time. Why do you want that you wanted that because then your twisted space is real.
The way it works is that the four pluses gives you a quaternionic twisted theory, the three, three and one gives you the complex twisted theory, and the two pluses and two minuses gives you real twisted theory.
It's a different subject. But it's interesting, because you can then talk about delta functions and step functions and that's why it wouldn't wanted that he wanted to talk about things with step functions and delta functions.
And if you want them, you've got to have a real subject. So that's why he had two pluses and two minuses, and a lot of twisted theory is done in that sort of framework.
I, I've sort of left last touch with a lot of the work that is done. I thought Andrew Hodges did a lot of very interesting work. And I'm sure a lot of that can be translated back into the twisted ideas which become a general that sort of thing.
I'm I lost track of a lot of it so I can't really, it's what it's what's being done in Oxford.
As long as twisted theory was still being done in Oxford. And then it tended to be maybe pseudo twisted theory in the sense of two pluses two minuses in the pure mathematics departments attended to be all plus all pluses.
The one plus and three minuses I'm not sure how emphasize that was, but you kind of lost track of what the sign was and a lot of it was complex, I think.
I don't know to what extent what I've said now is any kind of answer to your question.
But it's what I was stimulated to say.
I can't remember what you were asking me about twisted diagrams or something.
I think the question was, what is your opinion on twisted the string theory.
Just a string theory.
Right.
You see, that's the trouble I have is, if it's got too many dimensions.
I lose interest in it.
Because not because it's not a subject. I'm sure it's a subject.
Not the wrong number of spatial dimensions. And it tends to be.
Oh, often it's got the Ades CFT business.
We are talking about some attitude to space it's got the wrong sign for the cosmological constant.
It's all it's a subject but it's not physics. As far as I can see what I think all this physics, you've got to have the signature right. You've got to have the right number of dimensions to me if you're really doing physics.
Now you could do these other subjects for there might be interesting for all sorts of reasons.
But to what extent are they really physics. I think the idea is that at some stage you do a kind of wick rotation, and you rotate it back into into space time.
But to me that's not really.
I mean you're lucky if you get back to the right thing, because wick rotations.
Well, the symmetry you're not really talking. If you're talking about stationary systems it's all right, because you've already bought the symmetry.
So then if you want to rotate the stationary time axis into an imaginary space axis or something.
It's not so bad because you've already, you're really not talking about Lorentz in geometry we're talking about rotation space.
Euclidean space.
So then it's all right.
So I guess I don't like it, because it's got the depends what the subject is, but it's got the wrong number of dimensions. And that's the most serious point.
And the wrong sign for the cosmological constant, which is, it may not be what you're talking about here.
That's the idea safety, which says that the twist of strings is a meandering subject which involves
you see strings tend to involve higher dimensions. If you could do it in the proper number of space time dimensions I'd be all for it.
And when I first learned about string theory I was a dead king on the idea I thought it was a really beautiful idea.
And it was only when it sort of went drifting off and they decided they couldn't do it in three plus one dimensions and so it had to introduce all these extra dimensions.
And so there is that if you treat them as like space dimensions, then your functional freedom, your functions are functions of that many parameters.
When they're functions of that many parameters, they're far too many of them.
You've got to cut down the number of functions you're interested in into those which have the same functional freedom as functions of of three dimensions of space.
You actually have a differential equation to carry you into time. So it's, it's the number of functional freedom is functions of three variables.
And twisted theory, as I understand twisted theory sticks to that.
That's my grumble. I'm sorry.
It's a bit of a grumble. Yes.
All right, no worries. I think since we're approaching 90 minutes, we would take one last question from the audience may by Dan was raised his hand.
And then we will finish the seminar. So please start and read yourself.
Hi, thank you.
Whoops.
Sorry, sorry.
Hello.
So, the question I had had to do a bit with a motivation of, of, of the introduction of twisters I'm sorry I've missed the first few, few minutes of the talk so it might be that you said this but
the idea was to say to
combine geometry with this positive and negative frequency splitting. Yes, that's correct. Yes.
But as far as I understand the reason why you want to split into positive and negative frequency quantum field theory is to construct a vacuum date, which has a
positive momentum spectrum.
And all that. And while this is important for let's say a white man quantum field theory if you want, if you have a more general algebraic quantum field theory this is not strictly necessary to do and also on a curved background, for instance, if you want to
use a quantum field theory there. There's not really an obvious split into positive and negative frequencies that you can do so I wonder when you say splitting into positive and negative frequency is some crucial element of quantum theory.
How you, how you mean that exactly because that is something I did not fully understand.
I think you see you may have other ways which hide it and you don't sort of say it at once. I mean it's there in quantum field theory. Of course you've got to choose your vacuum and issues.
You're certainly right to say this splitting in a curved space is problematic. And this is all to do with the fact that quantum gravity is problematic.
Now you see when people talk about quantizing general relativity and things like that.
I worry about it. I think I worry in a way which wasn't so obvious.
A long time ago.
The worry is, is the following.
The idea of gravity is combining quantum mechanics and gravity in the way that you're imposing the rules of quantum mechanics on general relativity.
The idea somehow quantum mechanics is this correct theory, which is now to all other theories of physics are to succumb to this theory.
All I have with quantum theory is that it is inconsistent with itself.
Now when I say that I'm really talking about Schrodinger's cat if you like, I'm talking about the fact that the Schrodinger equation does not describe the way the world behaves.
The Schrodinger equation provided your system can be maintained as a quantum system in the sense that we call a quantum system a quantum system.
Then you preserve you to charity, and you don't collapse the wave function. Now in the real world, the wave function collapses.
You don't have unitarity evolution. I'm presenting my view and I'm sure there are grumbles all over the room when I say these things.
But the way that the observed real world behaves is not in accordance with the Schrodinger equation as Schrodinger himself stressed very much.
That's why he introduced his cat after all. He's saying my equation and Schrodinger's question.
If you follow that equation, you produce a cat which is dead and alive in the same time, which is a load of rubbish.
I'm sort of paraphrasing what he was trying to say.
Whereas people these days say, oh, well, we can have a very elaborate experiment which produces a Schrodinger's cat. No, he wasn't trying to do that.
He was trying to show up the problem in quantum mechanics that the collapse of the wave function is not described in the theory.
I'm going to take the view that it's a conch conscious of use to take the view. There's a conscious being comes along and looks at the state. I don't believe that works. It's not bad.
It's more the other way around. There is a physical process. Now I tend to believe and I definitely believe I should say not tend to believe that it is where gravity comes in.
Finding quantum mechanics with gravity is not so much imposing the rules of quantum mechanics on gravitational theory is coming to a nice compromise between these two mutually incompatible theories.
Now general relativity, and I do have this little argument that I presented sort of the term of the century, where you consider a little experiment in the room where you want to take the gravitational field into consideration.
And you can do all your quantum mechanics, and there are two ways you might do it. One way is thinking of the gravitational field is just like any other field, but it's in the Hamiltonian chug away in the usual way.
Okay, that's what most physicists would do. If you want to take general relativity, the print the Galilee Einstein principle that you can eliminate gravity with free fall.
You can do it another way. You choose your coordinates of free fall, you do your calculation all over again. You almost get the same answer. Why do I say almost, you get the same answer, except you're in a different vacuum.
You get the vacuum of free fall.
It's okay to do it that way.
It makes a difference only when you consider a varying gravitational field so you might take a gravitational field, which is part of your calculation so you might have a lump of material which is put into a superposition of two locations.
Then that superposition of two locations is part of your quantum system. How do you do that until in the Galilee Einstein perspective.
You're stuck.
Okay, you can start and try to do it, and you try to do it and you find you can almost do it, but there's an error. There's a sort of what I call a well you could call it an error, you could call it a
error. There's an uncertainty in the energy of the system that uncertainty in the energy of the system comes about purely from the gravitational contribution, and this tells you, maybe that your system has a lifetime.
Forever, like the Heisenberg energy time uncertainty.
It tells you that there's a, if you have an energy uncertainty that suggests that your state has a lifetime, like an uncertain and unstable particle unstable nucleus, it has an energy uncertainty which is reciprocally related to its lifetime.
So that's the general idea. And that tells you that the collapse of the wave function is a gravitational phenomenon. Okay, this long winded
tirade, which I'm giving you here is meant to say that you want the, the most immediate physics we should do is to see how gravity affects quantum mechanics, how to gravitate quantum mechanics and get rid of the collapse problem.
That collapse problem is a gravitational problem, I'm saying, by experiments or by theory or by what we ought to be able to see how it's a gravitational phenomenon. So that's the thing I'm trying to say.
There is the other side of the problem. How does gravity succumb to quantum mechanics, sure, and very, very, very, very tiny scales.
But it's at such a scale that it has nothing whatsoever to do with physics that we can directly observe as far as I can see. If you're talking about 10 to the minus 32 centimeters or whatever it is, I can't remember.
Okay, or has it got something to do with a big bang, we might say, well, yes, but that's another story in another lecture and I don't want to go into that here.
It's all part of this query, where does quantum gravity coming to observable physics.
I think it's the other way around, which where gravity affects quantum mechanics.
Maybe it does come into observable physics but it's not much good getting rid of the singularities in black holes this way, because they're in black holes and you don't see them.
So that's the problem there might come into use when you're black hole evaporates away by Hawking evaporation and you worry about the little pop at the end. I don't know.
But that's not much of observable physics at the present day.
It could be if we think about cosmology but that's another story.
Alright, thank you. I think this is a good time to close today's seminar. Thank you once again Roger Penrose for introducing twisted theory to the community of young researchers, and thank you to all of you for joining and see you next time in the next seminar.
Bye bye.
