And we can go ahead.
So welcome everyone once again to another of our sessions for our student talks.
As I said, it's a little bit modest to call this a student talk from Seth.
But so we are very happy to have Seth Asanta here with us.
Seth studied initially at the African Institute for Mathematics and Sciences for his bachelor's
where he also returned as a tutor some years later.
And he did his PhD at the Perimeter with Bianca Dietrich and Liz Molen.
Currently he is doing a postdoc at the University of Vienna with Sebastian Steinhaus on the topic
precisely of spin from quantum gravity.
I believe that Seth's academic interests cover a wide range of topics, but in particular
I would point them out to be, I have my notes here, well besides spin from quantum gravity
of course topological field theories, holography, and general mathematical physics.
Seth will, as I mentioned, talk about effective spin forms for quantum gravity.
We are very excited to hear you, Seth.
Please go ahead.
Let me just mention the talk will take 15 minutes approximately.
You will be able to ask questions during the talk if you wish to do so.
Seth is very happy to welcome those questions.
And we also have an anonymous Google form for any questions that you might want to ask
anonymously.
You can find the link for that both at the chat of our Zoom meeting as well as in our
server on Discord.
So please, Seth, go ahead.
We're very happy to have you.
Thank you, Jesse.
I'm also very happy to be here.
First of all, I want to thank the organizers for inviting me to give a presentation about
the recent work I've done.
I'm happy that I have two of the organizers in my, I share an office with two of the organizers,
so it's really nice.
And thank you for the good job you're doing.
I think it's a very nice organization.
So today I will tell you about effective spin forms for quantum gravity and maybe I'll just
go right in.
This is a fairly recent work that I did together with Bianca, Hal, and Jesse recently.
So in the 2020, that's just around the time before I finished my PhD.
That's when we started this work.
And if you, yeah, if you're interested, you can check these three papers.
There's a short article on PRL, which contains, you know, like a bit pedagogical information
on how to get started with effective spin forms.
And also, we started creating like a website on WordPress for effective spin forms.
So if you check this webpage here, it's still under construction.
So there's not too much information, but you'll find some resources that maybe you can check
out for these effective spin forms.
We hope that maybe we'll keep working on this so that it has more information.
Okay, so I'll just go right in.
So the problem that I'm interested in is quantum gravity.
And so I think of it as trying to model what a quantum spacetime will look like.
And this is, of course, an old problem.
It's not new.
And most approaches usually start of the, the approaches were non-petitive methods.
And that's the thing I'm also interested in.
And when it comes to the non-petitive approaches, there are several approaches out there.
I did not list any of them here because there are too many, but I'm sure most of you here
are also working in some of these aspects of non-petitive quantum gravity.
But for the purpose of this talk, I'll be interested in path integral approaches.
And if you think of path integral for quantum gravity, you will look at a partition function
of this form.
If you think of gravity as Einstein told us, like, it's a property of the geometry of space.
So what I have written here is a path integral over some geometry of spacetime.
And then you integrate over some measure on your geometry of spacetime.
And this path integral method has, I mean, that's what most people would want to do,
but it has many questions, you know.
For example, you have to first answer the question of what's the degree of freedom that
you are using to define, have a world-defined path integral.
You have to specify what the degrees of freedom are.
And yeah, so there are many schools of thoughts out there on what the degrees of freedom of
gravity should be.
There's the metric.
There are also some bi-vectile variables and, you know, they are different variables.
One can consider to be the degrees of freedom.
And for example, if I'm in the Lorentzian setting, I can also ask, do I impose some
causality conditions on the geometries that I allow?
Do I allow topological changes in the evolution?
You know, these are many questions that you can ask if you want to do this kind of path
integral formulations.
And there's even the question of how do we compute this Lorentzian path integral?
You know, remember there's an I here for the action, so this is not the Euclidean action
if you are doing Lorentzian action.
This integral would be very highly auxiliary, so you need some special methods.
I mean, in the past, people have resorted to doing a recrotation to go to the Euclidean
formulation and then, yeah, and make sense of this path integral.
But those formulations come with the conformal factor problem, which is that Euclidean action
is unbounded from below.
And so, and that's problematic, you know, yeah, so how do we deal with this path integral?
So these are the sort of questions that I'm interested in that I'll be talking about in
these effective spin forms, okay?
So about the question of what are the fundamental degrees of freedom, I'll pick one.
So there are, I call them the area variables in four dimensions.
And there's actually a support, like a lot of support for these for picking area degrees
of freedom as your fundamental variables for describing what a quantum spacetime looks
like.
And I mean, I listed some of the supports that I found.
So I mean, if you work in spin forms and LQG, you already know that your degrees of freedom
by vector variables, which, yeah, they live on two dimensional surfaces.
So these are like sort of area variables.
And also, you know, I mean, I'm not going to go through all of them.
If you, if you think about black hole entropy, they really define it as it's proportional
to area over 4g by area of your minimum surface.
And if you think of black hole entropy as contents and microstates of your theory, then,
you know, it's somehow relating the area variables as their fundamental degrees of freedom.
So these are some vague arguments, but, you know, it supports that area variables are
maybe that 10 we should consider talking about spin forms.
There are also many others, like, you know, these corner edge modes, boundary variables,
the corner sources some, you know, like it's, yeah, in these formulations, your edge modes
are sourced at the corner variables, which describe some area variables, you know, and
that's all supports these choosing the area variables as your fundamental variables.
Okay.
So the question that I want to ask you is that if we pick area variables as a fundamental
degrees of freedom to describe what content gravity will look like, what are the implications?
Okay.
So that's what effective spin forms tries to do.
And so this is just the motivation for the talk.
So I, yeah.
So I mean, if it's too basic, you can always show me.
So I mean, aren't we already doing that in LQG, we are using what a spin at work is described
the area degrees of freedom, doesn't it?
Yes, yes.
So, I mean, yes.
So yeah, that's right.
So these are all support from some quantum gravity theories out there, which supports
all these using these area variables.
So, yes.
So, but what I'm trying to do is, you know, I'm getting some feedback.
Is it something different?
What?
So I'm just saying that, you know, I'm sorry, I got some I thought it was okay to ask questions
during the talk.
No, no, no, Deepak, you're, you're, of course, it's a lot to ask questions.
I'm with you because there was some feedback and I thought that Seth was responding.
I'm sorry.
That kind of feedback.
Yeah.
And I guess, Seth, you were, you were doing something different from, from what I'm saying.
I mean, it's, it's, you know, I would say, okay, it's a little bit different, but it's
not so different.
So, because these, like I put them in fact, the spin form, so they are somehow spin form
motivated.
Okay.
They are using the same variables, like you would consider in the spin forms, but in a
different sense, I think you will see what I will talk about in the talk.
So you see how I define these area variables and how they come about.
So, you know, be directly using the same language, but it's, yeah, it's all the same kind of
variables.
Okay, I'll, I'll be more patient.
Thanks.
Yeah.
Sure.
Okay.
So, so yeah, I split this talk into two sections.
I will first introduce what effective spin forms are and then it's, and then I'll give
some, so the next session will be testing this effective spin form model.
So there will be some numerics at the end.
Okay.
So, but before I go into what effective spin forms, I just give you a summary of what effective
spin forms are in general.
And so effective spin forms, you can consider them as geometric path integrals for quantum
gravity, which are based on area variables as I have motivated before.
And they are, we call them effective because they provide, you can think that they provide
spin forms with efficient and, you know, a very compute, computable dynamics to now.
So I say this because the amplitudes which we will consider in effective spin forms are
very simple.
And so it allows to do a fast computation compared to all the other spin form models out there.
But the other effective in another sense that this I will also talk about during the talk
that imposing some constraints, which appears in the description of these effective spin
forms, that you can describe like a general family of spin forms.
And so in this sense, we don't consider these effective spin forms as approximate, but they
can be a theory in their own right.
Okay.
And already, I mean, these models are new, but they've already been used to show that
one can recover discrete gravitational dynamics in both Euclidean and Lorentzian signatures.
So they've been successful already, I would say.
Okay.
So I will begin the first part of the, yeah, after the talk.
So effective spin forms, like I said, I mentioned, they are discrete path integrals based on
area variables.
So when we talk of discrete patterns, because they are discrete, like, yeah, that motivates
us to start from a discrete formulation of gravity, which has been already introduced
by Regi in the 60s, specifically 1961, in the name of Regi Cacos.
So Regi introduced a discretization of gravity, and the way he did it is to use some flesh
adding composition of your spacetime manifold.
And in principle, or in particular, you assign, yeah, so first of all, you consider manifold,
you discretize it using some simplices, and then you assign length to your triangulations
of your spacetime.
And this already defines you a piecewise flat geometry.
And because it's about gravity, we talk of what are the curvature, the curvature distributed
on co-dimension two objects.
So if you are in two dimensions, they will be distributed around your points.
If you are in three dimensions, it will be edges and so on and so forth.
So how you describe curvature in the discrete formulation of gravity is to somehow consider
all the simplices that are around a point.
So for example, and then you calculate the angles inside the simplices, and then you
compute its deviation away from, like I say, your flat value.
So in this point, in Euclidean, it will be the deviation of some of these angles around
two pi, something like this.
And this defines your curvature in this series.
So as I mentioned in three dimensions, the curvature will be sourced around edges and
so on and so forth.
And Regi already wrote down an action for this theory, and we call it the Regi action,
and it's in a very simple form.
So in four dimensions, it will be some of areas around triangles multiplied by these
curvature degrees of room that I told you about.
So these are these epsilon c's are the deficit angles.
We call them deficit angles, and you can think of them as describing curvature in your theory.
And already, you can write down the equations of motions for this action, and this is how
it looks like.
You only have the variation of the areas because there's an identity called the Schlafly identity
which tells you that the variation of the angles multiplied by the area is vanishing
and so you only get this and this approximates Einstein's theory.
So this is like an approximation of the Einstein-Hibbert action and this equation of motion approximates
Einstein's equations.
And I mean, there have been numerical tests for these Regi actions.
It's used in the numerical relativity a lot also.
So in four dimensions, the two, the co-dimension two objects will be triangles, and so curvature
will be sourced around triangles in your triangulation.
And already here, we can see, I mean, if you look at this action, you can see that, okay,
these are the areas and these are the angles.
If you look at this Schlafly identity equations, it gives you somehow, I say here, the simplistic
structure, which tells you that the areas seems to be conjugated to these angles, which
looks to be, which seems nice.
But here in Regi, the fundamental variables are the edges, the edge lengths, and these
actually have complicated conjugated variables.
If you check the, if you do a simplistic analysis of these things.
And so here already, we have a hint that maybe using the area variables might be a better
option to quantize these theories.
But like I described, effective spin forms are based on area variables.
And these, yeah, this action that I described here are based on land variables.
But there's a very simple way to go to area variables starting from these land variables.
And this is what I described here.
So if you consider your triangulation, the building blocks of your triangulations are
four simplices.
So, and each simplex, as maybe some of you might know, has 10 triangles and also 10 edges.
And so if you want to go to the area formulation, then you can start from this Regi formulation
and locally invent these edge lengths and area variables or triangle areas.
So you can do this easily actually using this old formula by a hero of Alexandra.
It's called the Heron's formula for it gives basically gives the area of a triangle as
function of these edge lengths.
And you can write a set of like, you know, you write a set of all these equations, there
will be 10 of them, 10 equations, 10 variables, you can solve them, right?
And this is what you can do.
And if you do this, you can then express the length as function of areas and use this in
the Regi action and you already get your area Regi action.
So this is how you get the area variables, your area action.
So already here, we can see one difference that if you have this area Regi action, let's say,
you know, these areas are your variables now, not length anymore.
If I do a simple analysis, you know, what are the equations of motion?
I find that these curvatures look to be a zero because Schleife's identity still holds.
So I find I find somehow flatness.
But, you know, already it's argued that recently in the literature, especially by Bianca, that,
you know, if you think of these obsolescence as curvature, then you would see flatness.
But once you didn't think of these as curvature, and I would give a reason why you shouldn't
think of these as curvature, maybe in the next few slides.
I mean, maybe the simple reason is because, you know, using the area variables, you lose
some shape matching conditions in your geometry.
And so these are not only describing curvature, but they are describing something more.
OK, but already I mean, this is also it's going to this area version.
It's not it's not new.
It's it's also it was already.
Hello. Hello.
Just to clear the point that I could not understand actually.
So when we write the reaction, so in the action itself, the information about the curvature
of the space is embedded in the 80 terms.
Or where is it like whether it is a negatively curved space or a positively curved space that
is being discretized where that information is stored in the reaction itself.
It's it's thought in these epsilon tanks.
So a little.
So yeah, I define epsilon.
And yes, I think you'll see how much it deviates from the left.
Right, right.
So OK.
No, thank you.
OK, you're welcome.
So I mean, but.
Area of regi action, which I have described here briefly, it's different from the Lent
Regi Action, first of all, because you're using different variables and the equations
of motion given different things.
So there was already a question post in the past that's area of action lead to a discretization
of general activity.
You know, so I'm not going to answer this question here, but you know, I'm just saying
that people have talked about this in the past.
But the short answer is maybe yes, but you have to do more work to get the answer.
So OK, so one other thing I will consider here is that, you know, now we switch from length
variables to area variables.
And if you are using area variables and also maybe a triangulation is made of simplices
which are glued together into some complex.
And if you look at every and the building blocks of these simplices are simplices, right?
So all the triangulation are simplices.
And these simplices, they glue along tetrahedra, for example.
And if you look at the tetrahedra, there are four triangles in the tetrahedra.
So you get four areas.
And if you want to describe the geometry of a tetrahedra, you need six lengths.
So there are six lengths to describe the geometry of the tetrahedra.
So already here, we have like you can get some mismatch information if you are thinking
of different simplices.
So I say this like if you because remember, I described to you that how you go from lentry
area is that, you know, locally you solve for some area variables in terms of our length
in terms of areas and you use this.
If you do this in different simplices, so let's say I do this in this simplex and this
simplex, I will get some variables for the areas for this set of tetrahedra.
And they could be different.
So this is the mismatch I'm talking about.
And yeah, this is already characterized by Kapovic-Melson phase space.
And so if I want to have a good geometry, I want to make sure that these, the geometry
of the set of trihedrons, they match and this introduces some constraints into the theory.
So these are the constraints that I put here.
So you need two constraints per the trihedron because you have four variables you are missing
two.
So you want to make sure that two of the angles are matching.
And it turns out that these constraints that you have to impose on the tetrahedra are second
class constraints.
And the implication of second class constraints is that if you go to the quantum theory, we
cannot impose the second class constraints very strongly because they introduce some
non-competitiveness in the geometry.
And if you impose them strongly, you will be breaking this non-competitiveness.
And there's a description by Dirac on how to deal with second class constraints and also
Gupta-Boila.
So yeah, so this is how maybe, but we will go to the quantum theory soon anyway.
So, but before we do that, I will introduce two features, which are somehow input from
spinforms and LQG, which then maybe to answer the past question now, here we are considering
somehow spinform variables, which we'll be using.
So one input is that in spinforms or in LQG, the area of pretest appearing, and then you
can, if you compute the eigenvalues of this area of pretest, they are discrete.
So I write here.
So maybe if you don't know LQG, you can take this with you.
You can just take my word for it.
But I think that the area are discrete.
And this is, yeah, they come in this form.
So it's proportional to some gamma times Planck length.
And these J's are spins in LQG or spinforms.
And the spins are just like you can think of them geometrically.
They are your areas of your triangles.
And the gamma time here is the Barbaro and Lezi parameter, which appears in spinforms or LQG too.
I don't spend too much time on maybe explaining this, but just take my word for it.
And sorry for interrupting again.
If we are doing it in a ADS space, let's say we take ADS and discretize it, then the eigenvalues
will depend on the ADS radius, right?
Because then we, yeah.
I mean, so what I'm saying is that we see the relevant length scale that is present in the theory.
But yes, please go on.
Yeah, I mean, yeah, I'm not sure.
Maybe you're right.
But so this is like I said, this is an input from loop continuity.
Okay, that the areas area of pretests have discrete eigenvalues.
So yeah, that's that's all I'm saying.
We look at the area operators in general card space like some DCT or anti DCT.
Then yeah, whether something like a form has already been done in the literature or.
Okay, no, sure.
Can I just.
I think I can, you know, I mean, I think this is a very general result, right?
It doesn't depend on on any background metric.
Okay, no, this is this is something.
So that's why we call it non-quadrubbit of background independent quantum gravity, right?
So now your question is obviously very relevant, right?
ADS and all that.
Deepak, Deepak, I'm very sorry to interrupt.
Let's maybe leave a cross talk for after the presentation I said,
try to have more directed questions just because of time management.
We'll have plenty of time for for discussion afterwards.
Thank you.
Yeah, thank you.
Thank you, just and also thank you, Deepak.
But yeah, it's a non-potentiality results.
That's true.
Anyway, let me just go on because I have because of time.
So, yeah, so another input, which I was going to mention is that about the constraints, you know,
the constraints came as second class constraints.
Am I right to tell you which the constraints basically that you enforce that some angles
between the shared to try to draw coming from different some places are matching.
And in spin forms, you can impose these constraints weekly using some coherent states.
So which you pick coherent states, which are variables of these spins and angles,
and you pick them to be picked on these constraints, basically.
So here we made an answer that we pick the constraints to be some Gaussian function of the constraints.
And we use that the division of this Gaussian should be determined by the unsensitive relation
coming from the second class constraints.
So somehow then we are using these second class constraints, you know, in the, yes,
in the we call them gluing constraints.
We are using this to define how to define amplitude for these to try to draw basically.
So then we are imposing this weekly.
So imposing this weekly in the sense that you see this is looks like a Gaussian.
It's not a delta function anymore.
So you allow some freedom around the peak of these Gaussians.
OK, so already I can already define what the effect is been for model looks like.
So the effect is been for model.
Then you can think of it as so if I have your just have a complex, you know,
a discretized space time, then you can define the partition function of this.
As a sum, you sum over all your discrete areas weighted by some measure of actually.
So we waited by exponential of this regi action that I described.
So SES regi action.
And then to impose the week, the second class constraints, you use these gluing
constraints that I described just right now, previously.
So which are also here.
So these are Gaussians, which are picked on some constraints.
And this is the area regi action.
And we choose the discrete, we choose the areas to be discrete.
So I introduced some gamma and then some J10 here.
OK, so this is how you define effective spin for model.
This is there.
So this is what we will want to study as an effective spin for model.
If you give me some discrete complex, I can always define this and then try
to study what it is.
OK, so, but before we are going to maybe the second part, maybe let me talk a little bit
about what the weak imposing of the constraints can do.
So if you think of, yeah, so I have here, can the weak imposition work?
So, naively, if you consider semi-class calamities, you would take H bar equal to 0.
And in this language, that would mean taking your areas or your spin going to large infinity.
And if you do that here, we say it's wouldn't work because so the partition function has
two parts, right?
It has the auxiliary parts.
So these are the red and the green lines.
And then it has a Gaussian part.
So in the large geometry, you have a lot of or highly oscillating.
So you have very high, you know, highly oscillating things.
And then you have a Gaussian.
So if your Gaussian is around very highly oscillating things, then it would watch.
It could wash away, you know, all these oscillatory things.
And then you end up not getting what you want.
So the condition that you would like to have is that, you know, that the oscillations under
this Gaussian should somehow be of, we say it's of that one, which means that you have
enough oscillations to, you know, determine the semi-class calamities.
But at the same time, and that you allow some, you know, so your Gaussian is not too
peaked, but you also allow some wiggle room.
So you allow some fuzziness to determine these semi-classic limits.
And we've done this for spin forms and then, or even for these effective spin form model.
And then you find that if you put this condition on to get a semi-classical limit, it's of
this form gamma times curvature times square roots of the area should be of other one.
So this gives you like a condition on how to achieve a semi-classical limit.
So if you do it for just a mechanical system, it always comes in this form that one of our
square roots of H by times the action should be of other one.
And this is the, yeah, so if you have a system with second class constraints, it looks like
this is the condition you need to get a proper semi-classical limit.
So already in spin forms, there was a question of, you know, that taking the large jail limit,
if you don't take it correctly, that it brings up a problem which we call the flatness problem.
The flatness problem is that your amplitude, you know, if you do the semi-classical analysis,
your amplitude are only picked on flat configuration.
So your equations, you only get your curvature always vanishes in the box, something like that.
Your equations of motion only gives flat solutions.
And this seems to be a problem because then you don't get general activity on the class
column because there is curvature in general activity.
But if you get flat, then, you know, so it was a highly debated issue.
But it seems that once you take this condition seriously, then if you want to somehow eliminate this issue.
OK, so the lessons that we've learned so far is that if you have discrete areas and then you impose
these constraints that I have described weekly, then you expect that, you know, in the H by
equal to zero large jail limit, you have to look for a regime where in spin forms, this
will be gamma, which is the barbarian residue parameter, times curvature, times square root
of the areas should be of all that one.
So this is the condition you need.
And I mean, this condition allows sufficient oscillations away from the critical point.
So if you want to allow that, then you need the gamma times J to be large and, you know,
and over the division interval, this condition should hold so that you have, yeah, you have
enough wiggle room, like, you know, you don't, it's your coverage or your constraints are
not highly picked.
OK.
And yeah, so because you're using discrete areas, so there might be some discretization
effects, but, you know, if you go to many building blocks, that might take it away.
So the question is then that there's such a regime as is if you want to study the semi
classical limits of these theories.
And this is what takes us to the second part, which I will describe about testing these
models.
OK.
So, so yeah, so as I have described, in the effect of spin form models, using the inputs
from loop and some gravity, they are basically these parameters of the model.
So there's gamma, which describe the barbarian measure parameter.
And as you saw, it showed up in the discrete areas, which therefore describe some area
gap.
And it also appears in the green constraints.
So it's also somehow described an anisotropy parameter.
There's also the parameter of the boundary scaling.
So if you have a few translation as a boundary, then the scaling of your boundary is also
another parameter.
There's also the curvature, which you can control.
You can choose them to be small, large, medium, whatever you want.
And so far, in the effected spin forms, we have tested these effected spin form models
on this kind of translation that I listed.
So there's a translation with a bulk area.
There's a translation with a bulk edge.
There's a translation with a bulk vertex.
And these test different things.
So, you know, if I have a translation with a bulk area, then I'm somehow testing curvature
because I only have one bulk area.
Like these triangulations, the reason why I say that is because in these triangulations,
there is no bulk length.
So you cannot test the classical equations of motion because there's no length variables
in the bulk.
But these triangulations, you can test the length, the classical equations because there's
a bulk variable.
And also this, because there's a vertex, you can test some diffeomorphisms also.
So but today, I will maybe tell you this one about the second one, which is also interesting.
And what we do in testing these models is we study some observables of some geometric
objects.
And how you define these observables is that you insert the observable in the partition
function and you divide by the partition function here.
It's just the usual way of defining expectation values.
So here we will study some expectation values of some maybe bulk area, or you can study
bulk length if your triangulation allow all these things.
You can study all these things in this effect, it's been from language.
So as I mentioned, I will be focusing on the bulk edge one and just show you some numerics
which we have done for these.
And just to give you an idea, so for this triangulation, there are six simplexes that
four simplexes that you glue together in some way.
And it allows you to have 21 tetrahedra, 29 triangles, 20 edges.
I mean, if they are 21, so maybe the variables we should focus on are maybe these tetrahedra
and the triangles because they appear somehow directly in the effective uniforms.
So out of these 29 triangles, five of them are in the bulk because you sum over all allowed
values of these area variables.
So here in the analysis, we choose a symmetry, we choose a special symmetry of this triangulation
so that somehow your five bulk area variables only reduces to three bulk area variables.
And also because they are 29 tetrahedra, which means that you have somehow 21 of these gaussians.
So already at this level, it's very non-trivial, you have 29 gaussians.
And with all these oscillations, somehow all mashed up together into these partition functions
and you try to study these.
And yeah, like I said, I mentioned this particular triangulation can test your discrete class
gaussians of motion, which seems important here.
OK, so there's a lot on this page, but I'll try to summarize everything.
So the top part here is the partition function of the effective uniforms.
Like in particular, it's the absolute value of the partition function.
And the bottom two graphs are some observables that I described.
So if you try the observables of some bulk area variables of your triangulation.
And here we chose a triangulation such that the curvature is small.
And then on the x-axis, you have gamma, which is a sort of a borrow and merge parameter,
which describes your area gap basically.
And already you see many interesting features here.
So there are some oscillations and what's not.
But I think the thing you should focus here is maybe on these bottom two graphs.
It's that you see I have a line here at one.
I mean, and this is because I divide the observable by the classical value.
So meaning that if the graph here lies on one, then it means it's matching the classical value somehow.
And so we see a better fit for this graph that this really.
Yeah, if you choose this triangulation and you do the simulations,
it looks like it's matching the classical value very well in this region of gamma.
OK, and like I said, there are many interesting features.
And all these features, you can study the partition function.
And there are good indicators for all these oscillations that show.
So but the long and short of the story is that a certain range of gamma,
which is the borrow and merge parameter.
So here, I would say maybe from between zero and around 0.5 or 0.6,
you get some better matching value for your classical equations of motion.
And it even gets better if the boundary scale gets larger, which is good for spin forms, actually.
Yeah. And so as I see here, there is also between 0.5 here and 1.3.
It's also matching.
So you could also accept these ranges of gamma, depending on the scale that you choose.
So yeah, there are many features of this theory that one can analyze.
I can show you another one for good, choose a different deficit angle,
which somehow medium curvature.
And already you see a lot of different descriptions of your partition function.
And yeah, all these features of the partition function can be somehow explained.
So like these peaks, we can explain them from this condition that every time you have this
condition, you get a peak.
And also because the curvature now is large, now the range of gamma,
where these are somehow the classical equations of motion are valid,
gets reduced, gets smaller and smaller.
Right. So here we would say that for gamma larger than 0.5, it's worse.
Larger J is worse than if you are below 0.2 or whatever.
So depending on the scale, also this region seems to be better.
Better.
Yeah. Describing your semi-classical analysis.
OK. So yeah, this is kind of one part of the numerous that I wanted to show you.
I have several parts, but I don't want to show.
But the long story is that so using these effective spin forms, we are able to somehow
implement the classical equations of motion for gravity.
And this resolved the flatness problem in the sense that you can choose a regime of
the gamma, where your classical equations of motions are satisfied or are good.
And so it allows curvature in this sense.
And also these models are very simple.
So one can use this to study a lot.
You can check the stability of these models.
For example, you can check if we change some details of the model.
How will it affect the model?
You can check all these things.
Also, like I described here, just from the numerics that one gets a larger acceptable
range of values for gamma, for a range of values for small gamma.
So if gamma is small, it looks to be preferred.
And this is good for the continuum limit of the theory.
Because in the continuum limit, you want to consider many built-in blocks.
And then usually this comes with small curvature.
And so it's good.
So what I have described already also gives hope to restore
some of the filmophism symmetry, also in the continuum limit and whatnot.
And so I will try and summarize.
I hope I'm in time.
Yes. So what I have introduced, I introduced these effective spin formulas.
They are very simple models based on just some discrete reaction
and somehow allowing these weak imposition of constraints.
And the way I describe them, they capture many of the features that we know from
spin forms. And actually, I use some inputs from spin forms and look on some gravity.
So and because the amplitudes are very simple, here the computations are several
quantities more efficient than the traditional spin form models as we know them.
And also this provides actually a mechanism to resolve some
problems already in the spin forms, like the flatness problem.
Like I also mentioned here, you can test some long standing open issues.
So one thing I did not maybe tell you about is these models can be described also in the
Laurentian theories, including both Laurentian.
So you can test some issues like if I sum of orientations,
if I sum of degenerate geometries, if I sum of topological changing things,
how will these affect the theory? You can test all these things.
And then as an outlook, maybe one of the most important things is to the
continue limits of these theories. And for this, we can test how these theories are,
if they are stable and that cause grinding.
And also the difumofism is invariance is more important to get maybe some
measure on these area variables that I have studied.
And already there have been some works on the continue limits for these theories and in
general for spin forms by Bianca, Johanna and Canos, Athanasius.
Also, you can use these models to already apply to cosmology.
I think we started to do this also together with Jose and Bianca.
And if you focus on the Laurentian part of these models, you can ask so many questions about
how to apply this or how to define.
These models give a word defined.
Like you said, we are a way to define the Laurentian model, but one has to
use some Picard-Lipschitz theory because if you cannot go to the Euclidean,
if you want to do the Laurentian brute force, then one can also do this.
It might take you a bit longer or more effort, but it's possible.
And in general, these models somehow, the way I presented,
it's like you use some area variables and then you impose these weak constraints.
So what are the phenomenological implications of using area variables?
So these models can be used to test some of these implications.
And area variables, as I described, appears almost everywhere.
So if you consider area variables as your fundamental degrees of freedom,
what are the phenomenological implications?
These are all questions one can ask and test using these models.
Thank you for your attention and that's the end.
Thank you very much Seth for the wonderful talk.
