Why did we learn Python Uni? Because we had to become a senior machine learning engineer before we had the time to learn programming
Before we start make sure, you know, we're talking about Python 3 not Python 2 actually a bit of Python 2.7 is also okay geared towards children and
PhDs children and PhDs Python
I know Python which means I know machine learning AI data science computer vision big data
Cara hands of flow like it learn high toward open CV deep learning NLP
Huge community of kids now. I didn't learn Python in an online course. Actually never really learned it lists
Are arrays tuples are arrays sets have no order dicts are arrays
Comprehensions are arrays numpy arrays are arrays. No more semi-colon errors only white space errors. Where is that error?
Enumerate enumerate zip OS walk tuple unpacking. It's not dynamically typed
It's strongly dynamically typed in Python. We don't do constants
We only do change who put the main function at the bottom of the file equality is not identity is not
Identity I can do in Python in five lines
Which you can do in C in 50 and it will take 10 times the time to execute. Oh, I didn't I didn't say that wrong, right?
Oh, yeah, who needs brackets anyway all these people with their illogical syntax sugar might need brackets
You can return multiple values multiple values multiple values. Are you to me?
No, I learned all of this on medium
How many libraries does it take until I can actually put Python as my status on LinkedIn like three
Numpy met plot lip and us pandas pandas pandas or maybe two, you know, because we start counting from zero
STR minus one double colon zero minus one, huh? It's that's smart engineering
Fast and that's engineer. That's smart
All the compile languages are worse because you get errors before you can even run them. It's like man
It's really, you know holding you back from innovation science
Automation progress not very child friendly if you ask me and I'm not a child
So I'm a PhD. Oh the shirt goes into the jeans in C++. Everything takes so long
You have to write into main declare variables. It's literally just the execution. That's fast. Who cares. It's about the
Scientific revolutionary data science machine learning NLP big data that you're going to do with yourself
Or you can automate your coffee machine, which does the coffee that helps you make the scientific advances in Lua ideas to code
Why can't I just run this in latex latex? Oh, this is a Python interview. All right, Python
Why am I so good at this? I've never written code before to pull open bracket. Oh, this is machine learning
Oh, this is data science a big data NLP computer vision
AI you know what that is. I can give you a quick tutorial. I just learned that are you to me on medium just an hour ago
That's a machine learning generative adversarial networks. Have you heard of them me neither? Let's check it out
Oh, it's really easy to find the documentation is just one page almost there almost there
Where's the async with?
All right, oh you want to learn Python we can do it just right now
You don't really need to learn anything or you need to learn at least three libraries Panas map plot lip and numpy
Fundamental well the good thing in Python is single and double quotes are not differentiated because you don't need to cite properly
It's not latex. Sadly. Are you convinced? Should we do a tutorial? I mean, should we read a medium write a medium block?
Let me show you a graph real quick. Let me introduce you to a graph real quick
this represents the amount of memory used by C for my program and this represents the
Amount of memory Python uses my screen is not big enough
