All right. Welcome, everyone, to the Cartesian Cafe.
Today, we're very lucky to have Ethan Siegel here with us.
Ethan is a theoretical astrophysicist and science communicator.
He received his PhD from the University of Florida
and has held academic positions at the University of Arizona, University of
Oregon, and Lewis and Clark College before moving on to become a full-time
science writer. Ethan is the author of the book Beyond
the Galaxy, which is the story of how humanity looked
beyond our Milky Way and discovered the entire universe.
He has also contributed numerous articles to science blogs, Forbes, and BigThink.
Today, Ethan is the face and personality behind Starts with a Bang,
both a website and podcast by the same name that is dedicated to explaining
and exploring the deepest mysteries of the cosmos.
Welcome, Ethan. How are you doing today?
I'm doing very well. Thanks for having me here, and I'm very excited to get the
chance to talk to everyone who's interested out there about
what's in the universe and how we know what we
think we know. That's great, Ethan. Why don't we start off by having you
tell us a little bit about your trajectory as a scientist.
From what I can tell, you began your career as a conventional
academic, as did I, and you left to become a science writer. I also left
academia, so I'm just curious to know about your trajectory and
learn more about you. Okay, well, like many people, when I was an
undergrad, I knew I liked physics, and I knew I liked astronomy, and I also
knew I liked other things, and I didn't really know what I wanted to do next.
So I graduated with multiple majors in some different things,
and my first job out of college was go and became a public high school
teacher, and it was while I was doing that that I said,
oof, this is one heck of a job, and it's not what I want to do for the rest of
my life, and that was my first time really having a professional crisis.
Where I was like, okay, I have to take stock, here's who I am and what I know,
here's what I'm doing, and I know I don't want to keep going down this path.
So what is it that I want to be doing? And I said, well,
I want to learn about something, like if I could be on the other side of the desk,
not the teaching side, but the learning side, what is it that I would want to
learn? And for me, I was like, well, I've always
really wanted to know the answer to the biggest questions in the whole universe.
What is the universe on the largest cosmic scales?
How did it grow up to be the way we see it to be today?
What was its origin? Where did it come from?
And ultimately, what is its fate going to be?
And to me, those big, big questions, I was excited to learn these were not
questions for philosophers or poets or theologians.
These were questions that starting really in the 20th century, the science of physics,
astrophysics, and in particular, the subfield of cosmology was working to address.
And I was like, oh, well, this is a thing I can study.
I could find a university that has a graduate program with a professor who specializes
in theoretical cosmology, and I could become a theoretical cosmologist
and work on these questions for myself. So that was what brought me
to grad school in the first place. I did my PhD under Jim Fry, who's fabulous,
fabulous theoretical cosmologist who taught me so much.
I'm so thankful every day that I had an advisor who was willing to put the time
and effort into me and my education to get me to the level I was.
Then after that, I tried research for a while.
After I got my PhD in graduate school, I first went to Wisconsin, and I taught at
University of Wisconsin-Madison for a year while doing research.
And then I got a postdoc at the University of Arizona at Stuart Observatory,
and I was doing postdoctoral research there. And it was while I was doing that research
that I recognized, oh, wow. So it turns out I was spoiled in grad school
because I had a really good working relationship with my advisor,
and we were exploring lots of things we were both interested in together.
And when I got to my postdoc, I discovered that my postdoctoral advisor,
and I did not have that same relationship, and that in fact, nobody in that department
was interested in the same types of questions I was interested in.
And so I found myself sort of working on my own, not getting the support or collaboration
I was hoping to get. And that was really another crisis moment for me, where I was like, okay,
well, what do you want to do? What else do you love? And I'm like, well, I know I love teaching.
I know I love education. I know I love sharing the story of what we know and how we know it
with a wide audience. So even as I was preparing to leave my postdoc and preparing to look for
professor jobs, I was also at the same time starting to do science communication. I bought
the domain name startswithabang.com, which back in 2007, 2008, when this was happening,
that was a legitimate way to like put yourself out there on the internet some 15 years ago,
as you could be like, oh, yeah, I'm just going to get a blog and start blogging. And my content's
going to be competitive with the best content out there. Boy, the media landscape has changed
since then, hasn't it? But, but yeah, that was what I did. And so after moving to Portland,
after leaving my postdoc, I got a job at the University of Portland. And then after that,
I was at Lewis and Clark College. And my last time teaching at Lewis and Clark was in 2015.
Because after that, I switched to writing startswithabang and writing and communicating
about science as my full time gig. And so, you know, first I was on Medium, then I was on Forbes,
now I'm on Big Think. And that's my primary online home these days, I also have a Patreon,
as you said, I have a podcast. And hopefully very soon, I'm going to start making videos myself.
And that'll be a lot of fun as well, because I think I think there's the whole universe out there.
And my take on it is science has brought us all the way up to the current frontiers. And if someone,
maybe it's me, I don't know, is going to do the hard work of saying, I want to know the science
accurately all the way up to the frontiers and how we got there. Why not bring that story to
everyone else who's curious about it? Even people who don't have the same knowledge and
expertise base that I do, all I have to do is pick the jargon out, translated it into plain English.
And if people can understand it, then why not bring them the full story? Why not bring them the
story of what we know and how we know it to the best level that we know it? Because this is your
universe too. And regardless of what your educational background is, I want you to understand it.
And that's the short version of how we got to the present day.
That's great, Ethan. Maybe just to dive a little deeper. I guess as someone outside of academia,
is it still easy to stay abreast of your field? I mean, papers are on the archive and I guess
science is more accessible these days. Do you find it, are you able to learn about astronomy
as easily as if you had said in the academy? Or how do you balance between science and science
writing? Well, you know, you're always limited by the amount of effort you can put into something.
So I'm aware that if I didn't do anything to keep up, my knowledge would kind of get frozen in
at the level of, oh, well, if you got your PhD in 2006, then your level gets frozen in at where you
were in 2006. And that's just kind of true. But if you make the effort to, yeah, reading papers on
the archive is a step. But no one has the time to read everything. For me, talking with other
professionals in the field, especially at meetings that are designed to facilitate large gatherings
of professionals, my favorite is the January meeting of the American Astronomical Society,
which we jokingly call the Super Bowl of Astronomy. We go to about 3,000 of us go to
that every year. And that's a fabulous chance for me to catch up on what are the things where
I knew what was going on 15, 20 years ago, but where I don't know the latest developments.
Also, one of the great things about putting yourself out there on social media is at least for me,
the community of physicists and astronomers is tremendously helpful. When I published something
that was out of date in particle physics, I had a particle physicist who was like, hey, Ethan,
I wish you knew these things. And I went and I said, hey, let's talk and we talked and now I know
those things. So that was a way to get me caught up when I learned about galaxies. And I thought,
oh, how do you make elliptical galaxies? It was, oh, well, you get a spiral galaxy and a spiral
galaxy and they merge together and you get a huge burst of star formation and they expel their gas
and the stars get randomized and you get an elliptical galaxy wrong. That was what we all
thought 15 or 20 years ago, but that is not what we think now. We think most often when you get a
gas rich spiral and a comparably sized gas rich spiral that collide together, you usually wind
up with another disk and another spiral galaxy. If you want to make an elliptical galaxy, it generally
takes many mergers and events like that. And you have to get lucky in a spiral spiral merger to
create a giant elliptical. So I used to think, oh, well, when Milky Way and Andromeda merged
together four to seven billion years from now, the giant elliptical galaxy will result and that'll
be what's left of our local group. Now we think, hmm, we'll probably get another galaxy. We can give
it the same name we would have given it before, but it's probably not going to be a giant elliptical.
It's probably still going to have gas and form new stars, probably for trillions of years into
the future. So part of it is, yeah, if you don't keep up, you're going to fall behind and you can
put effort into that. But part of that is recognizing, even if I put all my effort into trying to keep
up, astronomy is too broad. And there are too many subfields of it for me to actually be a legitimate
expert in all of them. Instead, I can have some understanding of it, maybe at my level, maybe
the equivalent of like a third or fourth year grad student in that field, but not like a PhD level
or professor level knowledge of those fields. In fact, later this month, I'm going to be meeting
with an expert in type 1a supernovae because there have been some recent advances on that front that
I'm not fully aware of and I'd like to become fully aware of them. So for me, the community
of physicists, astronomers and astrophysicists has been tremendously helpful. And if any of you who
are professional astrophysicists out there are listening to this and you say to yourself,
I've had a bone to pick with this Ethan guy for a long time. Go ahead and contact me. I would
be very open to you picking that bone with me, especially if it's because you know something
that you think I don't know. Let's bring me up to speed so I can bring everyone else up to the
correct page. That's great, Ethan. To be fair, all of us have our blind spots in our whatever
areas of expertise and we can't know everything, even the Nobel Prize winners and the great
scientists. So it's always a continual process of learning and there's no... Yeah, but you also,
you personally have to be willing to be humble enough to admit that to yourself and to want to
improve, to want to learn those things that humanity has learned since you last learned about it.
Indeed, indeed. Maybe one more question I have for you before we actually start talking about
the topic of today's episode. If someone goes to your website, starts with a bang,
they'll find a tab called costumes and there'll be a gallery of you wearing a variety of outfits
and there will be a quote that says, don't just follow your passions, fly towards them with
reckless abandon. Ethan, can you share more with these words of advice, your interests and
costumes and how that all fits together into the complex that is Ethan the scientist?
Well, first off, I want to say that we have this long-standing idea in our head of what a
scientist looks like and how a scientist behaves and I think it's very important to push back against
this monotypical picture of an old boring white guy in a lab coat because number one,
that is not who most scientists are and number two, most people regardless of what they do for a
living are fully fleshed out three-dimensional human beings. We like weird things, we enjoy
ourselves, we present ourselves to the world in the way that we feel comfortable. I have been told
all the time, you're not what a scientist looks like. I'm like, I'm not what you think a scientist
looks like but me and you and anyone else who becomes a scientist is what a scientist looks
like. If I'm someone who enjoys wearing costumes, the holiday of Halloween dressing up as you know,
whatever I want to dress up as, whether that's a character of my own gender or species or whatever,
I'm going to dress up as it and I've been doing this for a very long time. Halloween
was my favorite holiday as a kid, it was my favorite holiday as a young adult and after
getting my PhD in 2006, I started blogging in 2008 and so every year I've just said, you know what,
that's my profile, that's how I feel like this represents a part of me that I think the world
would be better if it saw. Ethan dresses up for Halloween, he makes a new Halloween costume every
year and he's proud of it and he enjoys it and he has fun doing it and why not let the world see
that? Why not let the world see that? So that's what I've been doing, so if you go to my costume
section on my webpage, you can see roughly the past 15 years of my Halloween costumes. Ever since
you know, nature decided I was going to have a bald head and I decided to grow a beard and
mustache because I didn't like having super naked faces, how I felt about it. So yeah,
so I've been doing costumes and putting them up there and you can see costumes ranging from
me as Queen Elsa from Frozen to me as the James Webb Space Telescope to me as Deku from my Hero
Academia to I believe most recently, these past two years, I was sorry, the past three years,
I was Macho King Randy Savage from the WWF, Evelyn from the Masters of the Universe. Last year was
my first time going as a character where I actually built a separate body for the character to have
four legs. So I went as Durpleton, the giraffe centaur from the cartoon Centaur World. So you know,
if you're someone who has fun putting yourself out there, put yourself out there however you feel
is comfortable and appropriate and for people who are going to say it's not appropriate for you to do
that, you know, you have to have it in your heart that that's your opinion and I'm going to listen
to the opinion of the people who are behind what I'm doing and see the joy and expression inherent
to that. So be yourself, be unapologetically yourself because if you know, hey, I'm a good person
doing a good thing, and this is also a thing I do that other people should embrace, you know,
it's sort of like the movie Office Space. If you remember that movie Office Space where they go to
the character Michael Bolton, hey, why don't you go by Mike Bolton, right? Because people will confuse
you with that singer and Michael Bolton gives what I think is an outstanding response. He said,
why should I change? He's the one who sucks. And whether you agree with that or not, that spirit
of, hey, I'm doing something that is just putting good things out into the world. If you think it's
not a thing for you, don't look at it. If you like the stuff I do, but not that stuff, don't look at
that stuff, look at the stuff I do that you like. It's not all for you, not everything is for you,
but because it's not for you, doesn't mean it isn't for anyone.
Great. Thank you so much for that, Ethan. So, Ethan, why don't we get to today's topic at hand?
We are going to talk about dark matter. I wanted to talk about dark matter for several reasons. One,
I didn't know anything about the topic prior to preparing for our podcast, but second of all,
my understanding is that understanding what dark matter is is one of the most important open
problems in theoretical physics. Is that a fair and accurate statement in your mind?
Oh, I absolutely think so. When you talk about dark matter, you're talking about, hey,
when you take a look at everything we see out there in the universe, all the stars and galaxies
and gas and dust and black holes and sources of light, sources that emit light, sources that
absorb light. As far as we understand our universe from measuring all the things in it,
that all summed together represents only 5% of what's out there in our universe. As far as the
matter goes, five times the amount of mass that's out there in all the normal stuff combined has to
be out there in some form of mass that gravitates, but that does not interact with light at all.
It's completely invisible. So that's what we call dark matter, although invisible
matter would have been a better name, because dark is like, oh, no light gets out and it absorbs
everything. Dark matter doesn't absorb anything. Dark matter doesn't interact with light at all. We
only know it's there from the astrophysical impact of its gravity. And the rest of the universe,
because that's 5% is normal matter, 25% is dark matter. The other 70% is dark energy,
is some form of energy inherent to space itself. But those are, those are two of the biggest
mysteries in the whole universe. What is dark matter? What is dark energy? Why do they exist?
What properties do they have? And can we solve these cosmic puzzles? Can we solve these cosmic
puzzles that seem to be, you know, wow, key to understanding of all the stuff that we don't
yet understand? What is it that makes up the universe? So what is it that makes up most of the
universe? Indeed, indeed. I guess it is literally the cosmic elephant in the room, because it's so
large, but we don't maybe know what it is. I'm not sure if that was the right analogy.
It's a pretty good analogy. I think about dark matter often the way you think about the parable
of the blind man and the elephant, where, you know, one blind man touches the elephant's ears and
describes what he's touching, and one man touches the elephant's trunk, and another one touches the
elephant's hoof, and another one touches the tail. You wouldn't get a picture of the elephant if all
you could do was touch the elephant's tail. And it is kind of the elephant in the room, because,
you know, it's too bad we're blind, or maybe we'd be able to say like, oh yeah, elephant looks just
like that. Why don't we go ahead and get started? Let me start writing an outline of what we're
going to talk about, and then we could dive into each point appropriately, assuming we stick to
the outline. But okay, let's write the outline out for our listeners. I think the first thing we
could start off talking about is what's the stuff of the universe? What is our universe made of?
All right, so we have things like elementary particles, radiation,
gas, dust, etc. There's sort of like a whole zoo of things, and I think it'd be good. If we're
going to talk about dark matter, we should just talk about maybe ordinary matter, first of all,
so people can get acquainted with that. Right, right. And then maybe the next thing is how matter
is organized, so that we can get familiar with the sort of taxonomy or zoology of astronomy. So
there's, you know, things like stars, galaxies, clusters, etc. Right. And then we'll set the
stage for diving into what's really the heart of the matter, which is the discrepancies
between observation and conventional physics, our modern understanding of
GR, general relativity, and quantum mechanics. And then from there, that will take us to
candidate solutions or non-solutions of these to resolve these discrepancies.
Right, so that will take us to dark matter. But there are also other proposals like modifications
to gravity. And then finally, we'll end with a discussion about what are some candidates for
dark matter? What do we think dark matter is? How does that sound like in terms of a rough
outline? Why not? Why not do that? Okay, all right. Sounds reasonable to me. Okay, all right,
let's do it. So why don't we start off with the first one then? All right, so this is our universe.
Right, and it's full of stuff. Great. And back in the past, the universe was smaller,
and it's expanded, expanded, and, you know, gets bigger. Now, here's the thing. There's stuff in
the universe, right? So I'm going to put some stuff in there, right? I put some stuff in the
universe when it was young over there. What happens as the universe expands, right? Well,
if that stuff is made out of particles, right, I have those same particles in the universe.
But as the universe expands, they get less dense, because there's the same number of things in it.
But the universe's volume is increasing. That's what expanding is. It's the same stuff in the
universe, but the volume of the universe expands. So you can say, okay, let's imagine the different
stuff we can have in the universe, right? You can imagine, okay, I have matter particles,
and that's what I drew, right? As the volume increases, the number of particles stays the same.
So the total density of stuff drops as 1 over the size of your universe cubed, right? So this,
for matter, it goes as 1 over the scale of your universe cubed. That's terrible 3, but that's a
3, I swear. Okay. All right. Then you can say, well, what if it wasn't matter? What if it's
radiation? Well, the difference in radiation is radiation has a wavelength. So as your universe
expands, your wavelength gets stretched, right? Amplitude stays the same. I don't know if I drew
that very well, but the wavelength gets stretched. So yeah, the number of particles goes down as 1
over the radius cubed, but because the wavelength of light determines your energy, as your universe
stretches, the wavelength of light stretches. So the light itself also gets less energetic.
So for radiation, your universe goes as 1 over r to the fourth, right? You actually lose energy
faster, which tells us that in the past, smaller, because it has a bigger exponent, in the past,
radiation was more important, and in the future, matter is more important.
Can you explain this art of the fourth that I don't have intuition for why?
Yeah, yeah. No, that's a good question, right? So let's say, okay, I have a sphere,
and it's full of matter particles. As the sphere grows, the number of particles stays the same,
so the density drops as 1 over r cubed. For radiation, that same thing is also true, right?
If I have five particles of radiation in my universe, and I stretch and stretch and grow the
universe, the number of particles stays the same, so it goes down as 1 over r cubed also.
But on top of that, I don't just have my energy is the mass of this particle,
like I do for matter. Radiation is massless. Radiation is like photons, no mass. The energy
of a photon is described not by its mass, but by its wavelength. So if my photon has a wavelength
that's based on the scale of the universe, and the universe doubles in size, the photon is going to
double in wavelength, which means it only has half the energy. And if I quadruple it in size,
it's only going to have one quarter of the energy. So yes, I get three factors of 1 over r, because
the volume is increasing, but I get a fourth factor of 1 over r, because the wavelength is
also stretching. So the number density goes down by 1 over r cubed, and the energy per photon
goes down by 1 over r. So I guess in terms of units, this is an energy density, I guess,
because I was thinking your energy is like h bar nu, right? Nu is frequency, and that's inversely
proportional to wavelength. And nu is the speed of light over wavelength, c over lambda. That's the
definition of frequency for a light wave. Okay, great. So it's an energy density, because the
energy will give you 1 over r, because of this frequency or inverse wavelength, and density
is 1 over r cubed. So it's 1 over r times 1 over r cubed. Is that the right way to think about it?
That's correct. That's where the 1 over r to the fourth comes from. Okay, great, great.
All right. And then you can imagine, like, oh, remember this original thing I drew,
where it's just the same everywhere? Well, that's how my universe goes, that it just stays the same
everywhere. But if I have something where like, oh, like, I have energy inherent to space,
then this is going to remain constant density, regardless of what I do. So this is going to go
as 1 over r to the zero power, right? That's that's a constant, right? Anything to the zero power is
just 1. Sorry, which quantity? Which quantity is constant? Density. Rho density. This is energy
density of empty space itself. Empty space itself, when the universe expands, you don't change the
properties of space, you just make more of it. So this is going to be what dark energy actually is.
But I see, if if we wanted to see this for ourselves, right, we could say, oh, I can derive
the equations about the expanding universe. I don't know that your viewers want to see that,
but we can do it if you want to. But yeah, we don't have to. But I guess for this, I think we're
the way I think what you're saying that this is basically a constant scalar field, right? It's
just constant wherever it is in space. Yeah. So in general, we have this set of equations
that talks about the expansion rate of the universe, right? Hubble constant squared is,
I'm going to use r, sorry, cosmology people, is the time derivative of r. That's that's my
attempt at drawing the dot r dot over r. That means the time derivative of r. So this is like,
if r is position, this is like velocity. This is the change in r over time. This is equal
to eight pi g over three times rho, where this row is all of my different energy densities.
Sorry. And this r is, say, the distance from us to a certain galaxy, say?
It's it's arbitrary. The it doesn't matter what r actually is. It could be any number. The thing
that you need to be aware of is if you look at our distance to whatever distant object you're
talking about, this r represents the scale at which the universe changes in size. We call,
normally we use a and that's the scale factor of the universe. But for us, I'm going to use r
because people understand r as a distance or a radius. If we put r out to the scale of the
observable universe, that's that's one way to think about it. Like, where's the edge of the
observable universe? So we know that embedded in this row, in this density, we have all the
radiation. We have all which goes as rho, which goes as r to the minus four. We have all of the
matter that goes as r to the minus three. And we have all of if there's dark matter, that's also
going to go as r to the minus three. And then we can have all sorts of other things. We can have
dark energy, which goes as a constant or r to the zero or r to the minus zero. We could have
spatial curvature, which goes as r to the minus two, which is pretty easy to derive. You could
have all sorts of topological defects or exotic types of matter or energy that can contribute
in any way you can imagine. But if you want things to be consistent over cosmic time,
this is what you need to consider. So we know, hey, we know how atoms work. And hey, we know how
stars work. So we can do things like we can survey the whole universe and we can measure
what's the density of normal matter in all of the forms out there, gas, dust, stars, black holes,
plasma, ionized plasma, all of these things. We can add it all up. We can say, okay, what do I
know about neutrinos and how do neutrinos behave and contribute to this? What do I know about photons
and the radiation that's from the primeval universe? Back at earliest times, what happens to all that
radiation that was around in the early stages of the Big Bang? We can add all of that together.
This, if I recall, this is coming out of the, or this is one of the Friedman equations, right?
You have a Friedman universe? I wrote for you the simple, simple version of one of the Friedman
equations. Is it F-R-I-E-D-M-A-N-N? Okay, yeah, Friedman equation, right. And the point is,
this row term is essentially a free variable in the sense that you need to go out and figure out
what is the stuff in the universe to put in that right hand side? Yeah, yeah, because H,
that Hubble constant, the Hubble expansion rate, that's the thing you can measure. But
so you go ahead and you go out, you measure that, that tells you how's the universe expanding right
now. But then when you see, oh, how did the universe expand over time, you can get all sorts of
different curves. And measuring how that expansion rate changed and continues to change over time
is what allows us to sort of say, well, that's one way I'm going to go and measure and constrain
what row is, what that density of the universe actually is. So that's a way we can tie this
theory to observations. And a lot of people, like I said, they assumed the universe was going to be
100% matter in radiation, and there wasn't going to be anything else. But that's what they assumed
it was going to be. And what we learned from observations is that is not true. It turns out
that when you add up all the different things that are in the universe, you could say, well,
what are all the things that normal matter can make? And you say, okay, normal matter can make
stars. Perfect. And how much of the normal matter that's out there is stars and get a number.
And then you say, okay, and I can measure how much of the normal matter is out there in the form
of dust, which are, you know, like micron-ish size grains and up. And you can get a number for
that. You can put planets in there if you want, but planets is negligible compared to stars.
You can put gas in there. And that's actually a big number. Specifically, when galaxies are active
and they form stars all over them, or if two galaxies collide together and they heat up,
they emit x-rays. So it's very easy in some cases to measure how much gas is in your galaxy.
And then you have things like plasma, which you can say, oh, yeah, there's also the ionized form
of matter that's out there in the universe where you have free electrons and free ions. That's a
plasma that exists both inside galaxies and in the intergalactic medium. So we can observe that
as well. And it turns out that if you do this and you say, yeah, I'm going to put black holes in
there as well, it turns out that stars, if you take all the normal matter, because we know how
these things, of all the normal matter, stars are about 2% of the normal matter. Dust, we want
dust to be important, it's not. It's less than 1%. Also black holes, we wanted them to be important,
but it's not. It's less than 1%. It's much less. It's actually less than like a thousandth of a
percent. But gas and plasma is most of it. Most of the matter within a galaxy is in the form of gas.
Gas turns out to be about 45% to 50% of the universe in terms of normal matter. And plasma
is at least half. Most of the matter in the universe, the stuff that we're made out of,
protons, neutrons, and electrons, most of protons, neutrons, and electrons are an ionized plasma
in the depths of intergalactic space. So maybe just a few questions there. First of all,
these percentages, how do the astronomers ascertain these numbers?
Well, there's a huge variety of measurements that we take, right? But it's basically,
we look over all of the things we know how to measure in a region of space,
and then we apply them to the entire sky. So there was a nice review of this in a paper from 2004
by Fukugita and Peebles. And that Fukugita-Peebles paper from 2004 is called
the Cosmic Energy Inventory. And it gets much more granular than this, but it talks about how
we identify all the different types of stuff that's out there in the universe.
I see. Yeah, I guess this is one of them. So this is a measurement-informed thing.
Yeah. I just want to say, like, you know, it's the analogy like, okay, there's a huge ocean,
you scoop up a gallon, you look at what's in that gallon and use that as a representative for the
entire ocean. Because, you know, you can't measure the entire universe, right? You take a sub-sample.
So I'm just wondering what the inferential logic is for deducing these numbers.
So for some of them, we look at as much of the sky as we can. But for others,
we look at like a pencil beam in the sky, where you say, like, okay, if I get one millionth of
the sky in my pencil beam, then that's going to take me all the way back as far as I look, right?
So I can see, oh, there's this many galaxies with this much mass in them, and this types of stars in
them, and this much dust in them, and this this much gas in them. And I can see how that evolves
over the history of the universe. The early galaxies that are far away, because their light
took a long time to get to us, the intermediate galaxies that are less far away, the relatively
nearby galaxies that are almost as old as we are. So you add all of that up and you extrapolate over
the relevant volumes where you have good data. You wouldn't want to just pick up a gallon of,
you know, ocean water from your continental shelf. But if you got a gallon of water from your
continental shelf, and you fairly sampled the other continental shelves on earth, and then you
went and got gallons from the ocean at different depths in the deep ocean, and you extrapolated
over the relevant, then you would be more confident. And that's more of like what we do in astronomy,
is not just picking a random gallon saying this is what the whole universe is like.
We're saying we're looking at the relevant places, we're looking at rich clusters of galaxies,
and we're looking at intergalactic glass cap clouds, intergalactic gas clouds, and no glass in
space, sorry. Then you look at dusty regions of galaxies, you look at dust-free regions of galaxies.
You measure all the black holes you can measure, stellar mass, supermassive, active ones, inactive
ones. You try and bring all these things together, and you look for what are the signatures of these
as far as, well, we know how matter interacts with light. So we look at how does the light get
bent by this matter? We look at how does the light interact with the matter when it passes through
it on its way to us? How is the light affected by the magnetic fields from the matter as it passes
through? Gas, dust, plasma, stars, they all have their own unique signatures. We want to be very
careful that we aren't fooling ourselves, but there is one cosmic probe that's more important
than any of these. If I look instead at, hey, sometime in the universe, if we started from this
hot big bang, where we formed protons and neutrons, and then we formed the lightest atomic nuclei,
and then we formed neutral atoms, and then we formed stars and galaxies, right? There's this
intermediate time in between when we form neutral atoms and when we form stars for the first time,
where, ooh, all that exists in the universe are those pristine atoms that were made, right,
that are based on what types of atoms are going to exist. They're only the ones that after we
formed protons and neutrons, what are those protons and neutrons combined to form in terms of atomic
nuclei? This is a science of what we call big bang nucleosynthesis, or BBN for short, big bang
nucleosynthesis. And what it basically tells us is, look, if you want to make anything heavier
than one proton or one neutron in the universe, what do you have to do? You have to say, okay,
well, I'm going to take a proton, and I'm going to take a neutron, and I'm going to add them up,
and I'm going to make a deuteron. A deuteron is one proton and one neutron. This is deuterium,
it's the second lightest isotope of hydrogen, and it is the very first step in building up
anything heavier. The problem is deuterium is fragile, it's easy to make, and it's super easy
to destroy. So in the early universe, you have protons and neutrons, and yeah, they're going
to fuse together, and then they're going to immediately get hit by a third particle or
by a photon, and it's going to split them back into a proton and neutron. So you have to wait
about, this is huge because protons and neutrons start colliding when the new universe is like a
second old or less after the Big Bang, but the universe doesn't get cool enough to make deuterium
without immediately having that deuterium blasted apart again until the universe is more than three
minutes old. So you have to wait about a factor of 200 in time between when you first start forming
deuterium, and when you can build anything heavier than deuterium. So once you finally reach that
point, you say, oh, well, deuterium can either add another proton or a neutron, and it can build up
to make helium three or tritium, and then I can put another deuteron in there, and I can build up
and make helium four, and then I can ask, what are the next steps? And it turns out, well, now you're
screwed. Sorry, universe, you're screwed. You can't make anything really heavier than that because
what are you going to do? You've got helium four, two protons, two neutrons. You have a bunch of new
protons. You want to add one to that? Nope, you can't do it. It won't be stable. There are no
mass five nuclei that are stable. They don't exist in nature. You say, well, what if I take helium
four and another helium four? Yeah, great. I make beryllium eight, which is stable on timescales
of 10 to the minus 16 seconds. That's not very stable. So I make beryllium eight, and if I could
get a third helium nucleus in there, maybe I can make carbon 12. That's how we make carbon in stars,
but the universe is over a billion times less dense than the center of a star.
By time it's three minutes old, I don't do this in any appreciable amount. All I can make that's
heavier is a tiny, tiny bit of lithium seven. So that's it. Left over from the early universe,
we have hydrogen. We have deuterium, which is hydrogen two. We have helium three. We have helium
four, and we have lithium seven. Now, what do we do? You say, okay, listen, there is a ratio
in the early universe, and I don't know what it is. There's a ratio between how many protons and
neutrons are there in my universe. Protons and neutrons combined is a thing we call baryons,
versus how many photons are there in the universe? How many particles of light are there?
It turns out that if I were to say, what are the predictions of what is my element abundances,
I can look at the most abundant one is hydrogen, just plain old hydrogen. And it turns out that
hydrogen, if the baryon to photon ratio, which we call eta, this is the baryon to photon ratio.
So you have this baryon to photon ratio. Hydrogen, if all I had were large, large, large, large,
large numbers of, let me make sure I get this right, and I'll backwards.
If I had large numbers of baryons, then these photons would be really inefficient
at breaking deuterium apart. So what I would get for very, very large values is I would get,
if I said, yeah, I've got a ton of baryons, just baryons everywhere, everywhere, everywhere.
Well, what would happen, right? I would say, oh, well, there aren't enough photons to break
all this stuff apart. So the deuterium comes in, and it all becomes helium, and there's no hydrogen
at all. Right? But what I do is try to think, let's the picture in mind you. So you have a bunch
of baryons. Okay, so you have a soup made of two things in this very simplistic picture. You have
baryons, and you have photons. And the more baryons you have, then the easier it is for the photons
to collide into a baryon and disrupt whatever structure you want it. Is it that way or is
it the other way? The more photons you have for each baryon, right? Because photons, what are
they going to do? So let me make a different graph then before we get to this. Let me make a graph
of photon energy versus the number of photons. And what I'm going to do with this is I'm going to say,
okay, there's a distribution to this. All photons follow this distribution. The y-axis is the energy
of each photons. And the y-axis is the number of photons? The x-axis is the number of photons.
Okay. The number density of whatever, number of photons is fine. Basically, you get a peak
in your energy distribution. And that's what we roughly say like, oh yeah, when we want to talk
about the temperature of the universe at the time we look at that peak. But what's really important
for blasting this deuterium apart is this part of the graph, is that tail end of the graph,
the highest energy photons. That's great at blasting the deuterium apart. So if my baryon to
photon ratio was tiny, if I had a lot of photons for every baryon that I had, right, huge, huge
number of photons, then even when the universe gets very cold, there still might be one photon
for every baryon that's out there that's capable of knocking deuterium apart. So when the baryon
to photon ratio is very low, right, when I have lots of photons for every baryon that's out there,
I'm going to have 100% hydrogen, right, because I'm never going to make deuterium stable until
the universe is too cool to fuse things together. On the other hand, if my baryon to photon ratio
is very high, well, that's great. Now there's too many baryons for these photons to blast
things apart. All of my protons and neutrons become deuterium, and all of that deuterium fuses into
helium-4, and maybe I can even go further up the chain than that because it's happening so fast.
So can we, I didn't quite understand what this graph is. So okay, so the x-axis is basically
density. This is just showing the energy distribution of photons that follow a black
body spectrum. I see. And so wait, did I draw this correctly? Maybe I didn't draw this correctly.
I didn't draw this correctly because I didn't really see there, because I've got my axes
backwards is what I did. The graph is correct, my axes are backwards. This is starting to
is the number of photons. Okay, this is starting to make a little sense now.
And this is the energy of each photon. Ethan made a mistake. Let no one ever think Ethan does not
make mistakes. That was a mistake. So this is the number of photons versus the energy of the photon.
And at very, very high baryon to photon ratios, you're still going to have energetic enough photons
to blast every nucleus of deuterium you make. But if you have few enough
photons, then the deuterium becomes stable more quickly, which means you can build up and form
those heavier elements earlier. So these are things that it's great because we can go out and
measure these things in the universe. One of the things that we go out and measure.
Just so I understand this plot, right? So if you pick the along the x axis, the
minimum energy needed to destroy a deuterium atom, right, whatever that is. So it's maybe it's
maybe it's maybe it's this energy, this critical energy there, right? So basically,
that's right, right? And then basically, if you have many, many photons, then there'll be more and
more photons available that are past that critical energy, and then you'll correspondingly
disrupt the formation of deuterium based on those number of photons, right? So let's take
a look at this graph that we've got here, the number of photons versus the energy of the photon.
This, that black line graph that we had, that's at a particular time. As the universe expands,
now we're going to test you, all right? So as the universe expands and the wavelength of each
photon gets stretched, what's going to happen to this energy distribution of photons? Is the energy
going to go up, down, or stay the same? That's going to go down, right? That's right, because as
the universe expands, not only does the density of the photons goes down, but the energy of each
photon goes down. So as more time goes by, my graph is going to look more like that. What happens is,
as you can see, as time moves forward and your universe cools, fewer and fewer photons are
above that energy threshold, or above that critical energy threshold. So we call this problem in the
early universe, the deuterium bottleneck, because that's what prevents nucleosynthesis from going
further, is that time it takes for the universe to cool enough that you can form stable deuterium.
And by the way, so I guess, right, the, this, I forget, is this, all right, this black body
distribution is a distribution that depends on a single parameter called temperature, right? And
I think what you drew here is, as the temperature decreases, those curves start shifting to the
left. That's right. That's right. Which means you have fewer and fewer photons above that threshold
needed to blast deuterium apart. So you can say, okay, we're going to graph the Baryon to photon
ratio eta versus my elements. And I'm going to write a few letters. I'm going to write the letter
Y, which I'm going to call the, we actually don't do it by number. We do it by mass. We do it by the
mass of the helium four in the universe over the mass of hydrogen in the universe. So we're going to
have a thing for Y. And we find that Y is going to look something like this. And then I can do the
same things for, okay, that's what it is for helium four. What is it if I say, what about, here, let
me, let me actually pick different colors here. So let me pick for deuterium, which is hydrogen two.
And it turns out that deuterium is a bit of a curve that looks something like this. And helium
three is a curve that looks something like that. So these are all mass ratios. Is that right? These
are all mass ratios. And then if I go way down, because, you know, it turns out that Y is about
0.24 something. Helium three and helium and deuterium, this is about 10 to the minus four,
or 10 to the minus five. They're in that range. Whereas lithium seven is weird. It kind of
oscillates. It starts, it goes up, it goes down, it goes up again. Lithium seven is complicated.
But that is down there at about 10 to the minus nine, or 10 to the minus 10. There's very little
lithium in the universe. Let me try to answer this one. So basically, this is basically saying,
okay, so if I have this soup of baryons and photons, as I alter that ratio, there's some
very non-trivial dynamics going on because certain isotopes will increase as eta increases,
but some decrease and lithium oscillates. So it's very interesting what the proportions of the
isotopes are. That's right. But this is very interesting because we have different techniques
to measure these. We can look at objects in the universe like intergalactic gas clouds.
And when light from a quasar or galaxy passes through those gas clouds, we can see, oh,
how much of the light does it absorb? Well, how much of the hydrogen light does it absorb?
And how much of the helium light does it absorb? And deuterium, because it has a heavier nucleus,
makes a separate feature from the standard hydrogen. So what's the deuterium to hydrogen ratio?
And it turns out quasar absorption lines are the best thing for measuring what the deuterium
ratio is. So we can get that ratio. It turns out that what you can do to measure the helium mass
fraction, the helium ratio, is you start looking at, okay, stars, when they live, they make heavy
elements. But as we go to objects that have fewer and fewer and fewer heavy elements,
we're looking at more and more and more pristine samples. So let's find
how that changes as we extrapolate to more pristine samples. And then when we say, okay,
and what if there were no heavy elements at all? Where would we expect helium to be? That's how we
get that y value. That's how we measure the hot helium to hydrogen ratio. And every element,
every one of these four elements, helium four, helium three, deuterium, lithium seven, they have
their own ways you measure them. Meanwhile, starting in the early 2000s, we had the WMAP spacecraft.
Sorry, I'm a little confused. How you measure this? Because eight, actually, it's back up here.
What is eta a fixed number? And that's like a parameter universe one number. It's one number.
And yeah, all four of these things that you would go out and measure depend on the same
eta. So if you can know what eta is, then you have predictions for all four of these elements
abundances that are relative that you can go measure. So these curves are theoretical predictions.
And what you'll actually measure is just one one, you know, vertical one, one slice of this,
depending on whatever the like, it's called a star, right? Is that that's, there's two things
that you're going to measure, right? And these are these are separate. And by two, I mean,
two categories of things you're going to measure. One of them is, hey, from the cosmic microwave
background from like the WMAP satellite, you can just measure eta directly. You can say, oh,
I know the number density of photons in the universe that are left over from the big bang.
I can tell you right now, there's 411 of them for every cubic centimeter in space.
That's the easy thing to measure. It's light, you count photons, boom, you got it. So you measure
what is the density of photons in the universe. And then, because of the wiggles you see in the
cosmic microwave background, those peaks and valleys that you get in those fluctuations
of the CMB graphs, those are highly sensitive to what is the baryon density of the universe.
So now you have a separate number, you know, the number density of baryons. If you know the
number density of baryons and you know the number density of photons, then you know the
baryon to photon ratio. And that dotted line you drew is an excellent representation of what we
observe, what we say, eta has to be this because we measured it from WMAP. So then what you do
is you go out and you say, well, what do my helium measurements constrain me to be? And you say, oh,
well, it tells me they have to be between this and this. So you say, okay, well, there we go.
That's what helium has to be. And it's consistent with this. And then I get values for what is my
deuterium. And I say, oh, well, deuterium has to be here. And it matches observations exquisitely.
So does helium three. Lithium seven doesn't. Lithium seven is the only one that doesn't match up.
Lithium seven is also like deuterium pretty fragile. So a lot of people argue, is this
lithium problem significant enough to say, Big Bang nucleosynthesis is all crap. And some people
say that. But most people say, well, lithium is really fragile, and we don't have a great way of
measuring it. So let's look at the other three that we're more confident of. So depending on which
camp you're in, you might say, oh, Big Bang nucleosynthesis is all crap. But if you assume it's
not all crap, this measurement, this value of, well, we measured the variant to photon ratio,
it's consistent between what we actually observe is out there in the universe and what WMAP tells
us the ratio is. This tells us of how fast the universe is expanding relative to that. If we go
back where we have that first Friedman equation, h squared is eight pi g over three row. But this row
is everything. It's your radiation density, plus your baryon density, plus if there's any dark matter,
plus if there's any dark energy, plus any other exotic thing you can imagine throwing in there.
You want one quick point of mathematical clarification? I guess
at the resolution we're working with when writing this equation,
are those numbers that you wrote there constant? Or are they a function of position? Because it
would be very, very baroque if you had to like, well, we're going to keep track of every...
They're all functions. They're all functions. But not of position. They're a function of
the age of the universe or how much the universe has expanded. Because the only parameter we
deal with is what I called r, or what I told you other people call a is, what's the distance from
here to a reference object? It doesn't matter what the reference object is.
Actually, just to clarify clarification, if I'm not mistaken, the Fridman metric has the
following shape. It looks like this and whatever signature you might be using, and it's like
a of t, r, t, and this is like the spatial part. I think, is your r what I'm writing a here?
Yes, you can do it that way. What's important though is that h is r dot over r,
or in this term, a dot over a. That should only be one dot there. I'm drawing too many.
So in some sense, r is rt, then? Or not really t, but I guess you write this row.
I don't like using x, y, z for three dimensions. I like thinking about my expanding universe in
spherical coordinates. So r for a sphere can work perfectly as a.
So that's what we want to do. I use r because r works the same way as a.
And also, I think most people are more used to seeing r as distance than they are a.
Yeah. Okay. I guess I want to distinguish between r as basically the r of polar coordinates,
and then r as the particular value of what I'm calling a here at a particular time. So in some
sense, that r is t. Well, so any particular time will always put like what time it is. r is a function
of time. Okay. Yeah. So oh, I see. I think it's r something like, okay, like if I,
like if it was, if I was looking at the distance here and another, the nearest galaxy, whatever it
is, that's a function of time, right? So that's, that's the r. Because we were closer together
in the past and we'll be farther apart in the future because the universe is expanding. And that
means all gravitationally unbiased objects like the local group and the M81 group or the local
group and the Virgo cluster or the local group and some super distant thing like the coma cluster or
that high red ship galaxy they found the other day, right? All of those things you can substitute
r in for any of them. The important thing is they all, they were smaller in the past. They're
this size now and they'll be larger in the future. But my point in writing this was to say,
from Big Bang Nucleosynthesis, we now are very certain about these two numbers. We're very certain
about the density of radiation and the density of normal matter overall regardless of how it's
distributed. And radiation is about a hundredth of a percent of the critical density of the total
density and the density of varions is only about five percent of that critical density. So it tells
us whatever the rest of the universe is, whatever the rest of the universe is, most of it is not
normal matter. Now, if I talk about that cosmic microwave background that I talked about and I
said, oh, well, there's that pattern of peaks and valleys in it. When you look at that pattern of
peaks and valleys, if there were no dark matter, there would only be about half as many peaks
and valleys. The fact that we see all of the peaks and valleys that we do, you need to have some
form of matter that doesn't do what normal matter does, which is to say, when you have, let's imagine
I have my expanding universe and I've made atoms and I've made neutral atoms, and now I've got an
over dense region, right? What's going to happen? That matter is going to start to gravitationally
collapse. But the photons in there, the radiation that's in there, as the matter starts to collapse,
the photons in there heat up, right? Because I take the mass, I make it more concentrated,
that makes it hotter. So those photons, as they heat up, they not only stream out
of this over dense region, they actually interact with the normal matter and push back against it.
But the dark matter, there's no cross section between light and dark matter, right? In theory,
at least, the light should just pass right through the dark matter. So this is why, because when you
start to gravitationally collapse something, the normal matter gets pushed back by the photons,
but the dark matter won't, and it'll keep coming in without getting pushed back. That's why you get
more peaks and valleys about twice as many, if you also have dark matter and not just normal
matter. So I could look at the cosmic microwave background alone and say, oh boy, there's no way
to have that without either dark matter or something that acts identically to dark matter.
But that isn't how we figured dark matter out. We figured dark matter out by looking at something
like the object behind me. We started by looking at a big cluster of galaxies. This actually goes
all the way back to the 1930s. An astronomer named Fritz Wickey was mapping out galaxies in
one of the big clusters I mentioned to you, the coma cluster. Coma cluster is about 300 million
light years away, and it's got about 2,000 big Milky Way size galaxies in it. It's a pretty big,
massive cluster. Now, here's the thing. You can say, oh, I can measure all the light coming from
all of the stars in these galaxies, and I know how stars work. So I'm going to get a number
for mass. How much mass is there in stars in these galaxies? And then you can say, well,
also, hang on, I also know how gravity works. So I have a big collection of galaxies. Then I know
when I'm close to the center, the galaxies could be moving this fast. But when I'm far away from
the center, the galaxies can only move this fast. So it's just like planetary motion. How far away
you are and how fast you're moving tells you how much total mass is inside. What Fritz Wickey found
is that there was a huge mismatch. If you said, well, I'm going to assume all the masses in the
form of stars. And he did with 1930s-level knowledge. And he said, I'm going to assume all
the masses in the form of stars. And I know how stars work. So here's how much stellar mass there
is in this cluster of galaxies. But also, I'm looking at how fast these galaxies are moving
relative to each other. And I can see how much gravitational mass does there have to be
to hold this object together? If there wasn't enough mass, these galaxies would go flying off
at a certain speed. When he did that, he made these two numbers, the gravity one was more massive
than the star one by a factor of 160. And people said, ah, Fritz Wickey doesn't know what he's
talking about. And they pretty much ignored him for 40 years at their own peril. Because he was
right. As it turned out, okay, look, he assumed that stars were like our sun, that our sun was a
typical star. It is not. So that already brings you a factor of three. So instead of 160 to one,
it's more like 50 to one. And then he said, okay, well, but there aren't just stars. There's also
gas and dust and plasma and all of this stuff in there. Well, anyway, long story short,
that can get us to about a factor of six to one. But no matter how you do it, there's a huge mismatch.
We know that about five sixths of the mass in a galaxy cluster has to be
something that isn't normal matter to hold it together. You can do something very similarly
on the observational side with individual galaxies. And starting in the late 1960s, early 70s,
this is what Vera Rubin and Kent Ford did is they said, oh, our instruments are finally good enough
that we can look at like one spiral galaxy and we can measure how it rotates. And if I look at the
stars inside, they're going to rotate at a specific speed farther out. There's a different speed
still farther out. There's a different speed. And just like in our solar system, you can say, oh,
well, this tells us how the mass of the galaxy is distributed. And it allows us to know how
much total mass there is in the galaxy. As it turns out, it can't all be normal matter about,
again, five sixths of it in a large galaxy like the Milky Way has to be this dark stuff. So even
though we didn't have CMB data yet, by time the 70s and 80s came around, we knew that normal
matter alone couldn't be the full story. I still wonder if we didn't ignore Fritz Wickey's observations
from the 30s for so long, could we've gotten a 30 year jump on the problem? And I think in some ways
maybe we talked about the stuff in the universe and how, okay, from a lot of different lines of
evidence, we were able to figure out what the stuff of normal matter is made out of and how
much of it there is. And we know it's only 5% of the total of what's out there. Then we talk about
how matter is organized. And yeah, you have matter all throughout the universe. It gravitates 5% of
what's out there based on what you just described in terms of Zwicky and Rubin. Or was that an
independent 5%? So this is from Big Bang Nucleosynthesis, which I assert is reliable.
We learn that only 5% of the total energy in the universe is in the form of normal matter,
of variance. And we can go back to the Friedman equation and say, oh, but the universe expands
according to the density of stuff in it. So when we say, oh, well, let's take radiation
and baryons and put them together. And what do you get? The answer is just 5% of the total that
you need. I see. So if you trust the Friedman equation, and then you can get a prediction of
the rate at which the universe is expanding based on the amount of mass on the right hand side,
the amount of mass on the right hand side gets a contribution from these curves we just drew.
But if you only have that contribution, it's only 5% of what you need to get a Friedman's
equation to work out. Is that the statement? That's right. That's right. That's fair.
And then if you look gravitationally at, okay, I know how matter works. And so when I look at
how much matter is there, how much normal matter is there in a galaxy, in clusters of galaxies,
et cetera, I can get a value for how much normal matter is in there, total. This is what you can
do from Zwicky and Rubin and those types of observations. And then I say, oh, but I know
how gravity works too. And if I compare the matter from all the different sources to the total
amount of gravitational stuff I need to reproduce what I see, that's where I mismatch by a factor
of five or six or seven or so. Okay, so this is an independent set of experiments that allude to
missing matter, right? So first there was the Friedman equation, now there's this,
you know, Newton's, Newton's gravity, well, I don't know, gravity, the way gravity works,
and it was not correct in Zwicky's and Rubin's observations if you only had normal matter. So
those are two separate. I mean, those things just don't add up, right? And then you can get into
cosmology too and say, oh, well, if I start with, you know, we talked about inflation earlier,
if I start with this seed spectrum of fluctuations, and I let them evolve according to the gravitational
laws of the universe, what type of cosmic web should I form? What type of large-scale structure
should I form? Galaxies, clusters of galaxies, filaments, and superclusters, and what should
the universe look like, right? We get predictions for that. And then you can go ahead and compare
what are the predictions we get versus what do we actually observe? And it's by looking at all of
these lines of evidence together that we get a picture of what we call our concordance cosmology,
where it's about 5% normal matter, about 25% dark matter, about 70% dark energy, and way less than
1% of everything else. You might have also heard that called lambda CDM. So concordance model is
what you just spoke of, right? And I don't know how you would write lambda CDM, maybe?
Lambda CDM, there you go. That's my pokey finger handwriting, because my
stuff doesn't want to work. Okay, okay. Sorry, can you restate? What is this stating?
So it just says that our universe is about the baryon density today is about 5%.
The dark matter density today is about 25%, and the dark energy density today is about 70%.
I see. So it's an empirical statement about the distribution of the different types of matter
or energy. Yeah, yeah. This is something that's informed by observation. We didn't predict this
from on high. We had to look to the universe at the cosmic microwave background, at large-scale
structure, at clusters of galaxies, at all these different lines of evidence in the universe,
and put them together to make this picture come out. But that's kind of the remarkable thing,
is that just by adding dark matter and dark energy, these two ingredients, you can make like
15 independent observations all line up with what you see. And that's amazing. We have a general rule
in science, I'll say in general, which is that if you want to explain one new thing that you saw
happen and you invent one new free parameter for it, you didn't do anything. You didn't do
anything useful. If you want to explain one new thing and you invent three new parameters for it,
you're doing even worse. But if you say, well, we've got one problem, what if we invent one new
thing and that one new thing solves a dozen other problems, now you've got something interesting.
And that's what each adding dark matter and dark energy to the universe, that's what they all do.
So that's why we get excited about them, because, oh, look, if I have a universe without dark matter,
I can't make these peaks and valleys that I see in the cosmic microwave background,
unless I introduced a new field that doesn't act in any discernible way from how dark matter would
act. Well, that's fine, you're just calling dark matter by a different name if you do that.
You say, okay, well, I can't make those features. Basically, if I have a galaxy
where I am, and I look 500 million light years away, I'll have a certain chance of finding a
galaxy there. But it turns out I have a better chance of finding a galaxy 500 million light years
away than I do either 400 million or 600 million light years away. Why is 500 million, why does
that scale stand out? And it's because if I said, hey, you remember that CMV, the cosmic
microwave background, where I had that first peak, that first acoustic peak, this corresponds to,
oh, I had normal matter that was collapsing. And remember how I told you earlier those photons
were going to push that matter back out? But just before that pushout happened, the universe became
neutral, and neutral atoms formed, and now those photons don't push those atoms anymore. So that's
where that feature came from. As the universe expands, you say, oh, where would that feature
be today? The one of where matter was first collapsing on that scale, how far away from a,
what does that distance scale correspond to today? It's 500 million light years. So your peak at 500
million light years is bigger than your peak at 400 or 600 million light years. And so we see that
same feature that we saw in the cosmic microwave background in the large-scale structure data
billions of years later. And it's actually kind of cool if you look at, well, how are galaxies
correlated in the distant past when the universe was smaller? It's smaller by that factor of R
that we talked about earlier. So that is a feature that we see throughout cosmic time that evolves
over time. You can't do that without dark matter. You would have a different set of features. So
we have observations like that. We have the cluster observations. We have individual galaxy
observations. We have observations of peculiar velocities of pairs of galaxies that interact.
They were like, we can go on on this, but I don't want to. Yeah. Let's just take stock of the things
we've talked about so far. So I just wanted to list the sort of experiments that necessitate the
need for the dark matter. And as their number increases, it becomes more and more impressive
that there is a unique solution to all of them, thus reinforcing the point you just made, which is
that if you can explain more things with as few adjustments as possible, that more and more
validates it, right? And the point is not to what you said. It's not that there's a unique solution.
It's that there's one solution that can explain all of these problems at once.
Sure. Sure. That's not unique. As opposed to needing a separate solution for, oh, well, we're
going to make this change. A common solution is what I meant. Yeah. A common solution. You could
always make it nonunique by adding more and more epicycles, but we're not interested in that, right?
Well, that's exactly what I want to do the opposite of, right? Yeah. Okay. Yeah. So I think, let's
just take stock. So there's the sort of CMB fluctuations. Somehow, you don't get the right
answer if you don't have dark matter. Then you talked about sort of like the galaxy distribution,
right? You know, like what 500 million light years versus other light years, there's like a peak
mode there. And then you talked about, you talked about Zwicky's clusters of galaxies, clusters
of galaxies that basically their velocity distribution, if I recall, right? Velocity
distribution. Right. It's the gravitational mass you infer must be there from their speeds
relative to each other versus the amount of normal matter that's there that you infer from
your electromagnetic observations. And then finally, there was Rubin's observation,
which is individual galaxies, right? The internal motions of individual galaxies.
Motion. Okay. Right. So we have four distinct phenomenon here that need explanation and dark
matter is a common solution to them, which is what makes it. Dark matter is a unifier. You put
dark matter in, all of these have a solution. All of these now have an explanation. And dark
matter will also go on to explain a bunch of other things. But maybe you can imagine, okay,
look, even you, you've talked only a little about modified gravity, because you've said
that the solution, the ways you'd modify gravity to account for things one and two
is indistinguishable from dark matter. And the way you'd modify gravity to account for thing number
three is different than the way you'd modify gravity to account for things one and two.
And also, if you'd want to modify gravity to explain thing four, which you can do,
and by the way, I'll admit that for thing number four and thing number four alone,
modify gravity gives slightly better results than the dark matter solution, which is great.
But if you want to modify gravity to explain thing four, the thing that explains thing four
doesn't explain one, two or three. But even better than that, there's a fifth thing that I think,
for me, and most astrophysicists, decided the matter. And I don't think we need the pad for this.
Back in 2005 or so, we discovered an object that we now know as the bullet cluster. Look,
we knew about this object before, but we didn't know it was so interesting before.
What we found were two clusters of galaxies that had very recently collided with and passed through
each other. This is a really interesting system. And at the time, it was the only known system that
was doing this. Now, we have dozens of examples of things like this. So if you're like, what have we
learned in the 21st century about physics? It's like in astrophysics, like pretty much everything.
So stay with us. We're still learning. Here's the thing. If you have all of your matter is the
normal matter, we know most of it isn't in stars. In fact, from something we call gravitational
lensing, which you can see behind me with these arcs and the multiple images of the same objects.
This is an example of gravitational lensing. When you have mass in space, it bends the starlight
from objects behind it as they go towards your eyes. So when you say, okay, I'm looking at this
big massive cluster of galaxies, I can look at the background objects behind that cluster of
galaxies. And I can see how that light is bent and magnified and distorted. And I can say, oh,
let me use that information to reconstruct what is the mass of this cluster and how is the mass of
this cluster distributed. Now, remember, we already said most of the masses in galaxies and galaxy
clusters isn't in stars. It's in gas and plasma. So what happens when these two clusters collide?
Well, the individual galaxies are going to basically act like if you had two guns and you filled them
with birdshot, you know, those little, those little like tiny little ball bearings, or just a bunch
of birdshot in there and you fired them at each other. Every once in a while, you might imagine
like two of these little pellets will collide. But most of the time, they just pass right through
each other because they're too small. So they don't often collide. This is what happens when two
galaxies collide. Their stars only very rarely collide when two clusters of galaxies collide.
Two galaxies within the clusters very rarely collide. And this is what we see the galaxies
look like they passed right through. But when we look at these clusters in x-rays, what we see is
all of that gas that was in these clusters, it interacted, it slowed down, it shocked, and it
heated up. And so all of these x-rays are coming from that space between the clusters. And when we
map that out, we say, wow, this is where most of the normal matter that was in the clusters goes to.
And then you say, oh, well, okay, now let's do that interesting thing we just talked about about
gravitational lensing. Let's use the background objects behind these colliding clusters to map
out where is the mass? Because if it's modified gravity, then the gravity should be
where the normal matter is, which is in between the clusters where you have the x-ray gas.
If it's dark matter, then the matter should have passed right through these colliding clusters.
And it should be with or even a little ahead of the galaxies themselves.
I think you have a very nice image from your book.
So yeah, what you've just pasted there is a four frame animation where blue is what the mass does
and where red is what the normal matter does. That's what the x-rays from the normal matter do.
And you can see that in frame one, before the collision, they overlap, right?
The normal matter and the total mass, they're together. As they start to collide, though,
what happens as they move towards each other, the blue, the dark matter doesn't get slowed down.
Whereas the red does get slowed down because when normal matter collides with each other,
these particles collide with each other. They heat up, they exchange energy, they slow down,
they kind of, they kind of splat together. And then afterwards, as they start to pass through
each other, you get these shock fronts in the gas, whereas the normal matter just remains in
these spheroidal configurations that pass through each other. And then when you see them moving
away from each other, you really start to see, oh, like the normal matter is lagging behind
where the dark matter is. And that's borne out very well. And what's interesting now is this
immediately disproves modified gravity. Because if it were all about where the mass is, then you
would say, oh, well, gravity is a local theory, which means the gravity is where the mass is.
If you want to make a non-local theory of gravity to say, oh, well, there's gravity where the mass
isn't, that's falsified by the fact that you have clusters that are still in phase one on that slide
that haven't yet collided, where the dark matter and the normal matter overlap and are in the same
place. And in those cases, gravity is exactly where the mass is. So for most people, right,
when this paper was published that put all this together about the bullet cluster, it was called
an empirical proof for the existence of dark matter. And in the time since, now we've got dozens of
colliding galaxy clusters in different stages of the collision and the settle down before the
collision, during the collision, aftermath of the collision. And they all show this separation
between where the normal matter is and where the gravity is. So this is, I would say, a completely
independent test of any of the things we've talked about for dark matter versus modified
gravity. And still, when you look at the things that the modified gravity community says about
this, they have no answer. There's no answer in modified gravity for this. They say things,
but those things don't address this point. I see. Okay. In our remaining time, if it's possible,
do you think we can discuss what the candidates of dark matter might be? Well, sure. So this is
kind of a problem, right? Because we can easily make candidates. We can say, oh, well, let's look
at the standard model, right? Could it be neutrinos? Neutrinos are a particle that if they have mass,
then maybe they can fall into these galactic halos and they could add to the matter. Well,
the problem with that is neutrinos because there are so many of them that were produced,
and they're very light. That means they move close to the speed of light for a long time.
Neutrinos act like radiation early on, and they only act like matter later on. If you remember
your de Broglie physics, you'll remember like, oh, yeah, matter is a wave too, right? It has a
wavelength. Well, when your particle moves really close to the speed of light, you can treat it more
like radiation than like normal matter. And this is why we don't say we live in a dark matter
universe. It's why we say we live in a cold dark matter universe, because neutrinos, because they
move close to the speed of light early on, they would have been hot dark matter. So neutrinos
don't explain the wiggles in the cosmic microwave background or the galaxy clustering you see,
and that means no good neutrinos. Then neutrinos are a non-candidate, let's say, right? So I'll
write neutrinos. Well, they're failed candidate, right? There were neutrinos, at least standard
model neutrinos or a failed candidate. There are some people who were like, well, maybe there's
extra neutrinos, maybe there's like sterile neutrinos or right-handed neutrinos or magic
they don't say magic, but it means magic, right? Like maybe there's some neutrino that I pulled out
of thin air. And here's my neutrino. And that's the dark matter. Okay. Okay, so they were trying to
neutrino dark matter. I see. So this was an attempt to make normal matter fit into whatever dark
matter needed to be and it didn't work. Yeah, this was an attempt to say, well, what if we didn't
want to introduce any new particles? It could have been the neutrino and it's not. Okay, right.
Neutrinos would have been hot dark matter. Dark matter is colder. I see. And these are not,
what about WIMPs? Is this related to that? So WIMP is a different class of particle. WIMP says
early on in the universe, right? You have this hot primordial soup of particles and antiparticles.
And when the energy drops below E equals mc squared, where you can make these copiously,
either they'll annihilate away and disappear or they'll decay away into something. And what a WIMP
says is maybe there's some beyond the standard model particle out there where you made this
unstable particle, it decayed away. But one of the things that it decayed into is stable and
not charged under electricity or color charge. And so maybe that survives and that's dark matter.
And if you make it early on and it's heavy enough, right, if it's massive enough, that's where the
particle of the WIMP comes from, the massive particle, then you can have it be cold dark
matter. And so in theories like supersymmetry or extra dimensions, you can make these WIMP particles.
Some people consider, well, what if I don't want them to interact with the standard model
particles? What if I only want them to interact with gravity and gravity alone and have them be
produced gravitationally? There's a subclass of WIMPs called WIMP zillas, which are the ultra,
ultra massive WIMPs. And when that paper was written, it said something like, forget those WIMPy
WIMPs, right, look for WIMP zillas, which would be like a billion times more massive than the
regular WIMPs. But you can also go very, very light, right? It's possible to have very light
dark matter particles. And one of the best candidates for that is the axion. We have some
symmetries in physics, charge conjugation symmetry that says exchange particles for antiparticles.
Okay, we have mirror symmetry, parity symmetry, reflect your left hand in the mirror, it becomes a
right hand. The thing is, CP symmetries, if you take particles and antiparticles and reflect them
in the mirror, that is violated in the weak interactions. It is not violated in the strong
or the electromagnetic interactions. Now, CP violation is forbidden in the standard model
in electromagnetic interactions, but there's nothing forbidding it at all in the strong
interactions. So if you make a term and you add a term to the standard model that suppresses
that strong CP violation, you call it a Pechi-Quinn term, then it turns out that when you break
that symmetry in the early universe, you get a particle out, you get a massless particle that
just comes out of the equations or a slightly massive particle that just comes out of the
equations. And that's where the idea of an axion came from. So whereas WIMP dark matter, even
low-end WIMP would be many times the masses of a proton, the axion would be something like
millions of times lighter than the electron. So huge, huge difference there. Variations of these
are what people are looking for, as well as some other exotic candidates. But the thing is,
the way we look for that is we look for how does normal matter or normal radiation
interact with or reveal any potential dark matter, right? If I'm a normal matter particle over here,
if I do have any cross-section at all with dark matter, then every once in a while,
dark matter is going to thunk me and I'll recoil. And if I recoil, then I'm going to have energy
and I'll emit a signal that I can detect if I build a clever enough detector. So all of the
different types of detectors that are built are used to constrain what are the cross-sections
of possible dark matter particles with any possible property we can imagine. So yeah,
we built them specifically to look for axions and the axions we built them to look for haven't
shown up and we built them to look for certain types of WIMPs and the WIMPs we were searching for
haven't shown up down to a certain cross-sectional threshold. But here's the thing, 100% of searches
for any effect that exists are always unsuccessful until you reach the necessary precision
to have it be a success. And with dark matter, cross-section is not something we know
from first principles. Cross-section is something that you can only figure it out by measuring it.
So I think that doing these experiments, the Xenon experiments, the Lux Zeppelin experiment,
the CDMS experiment, the ADMX experiment that looks for axions, right? All of these experiments
that we do, they help tell us, okay, you're looking for dark matter and here are some interesting
candidates, but more importantly, here's what the experiment tells you dark matter can't be
and can't do. Are we ever going to find dark matter with our experiments? I don't know,
but I do know that there are a lot of people who are in favor of giving up and not spending money
on looking for them. And I know that if we do that, we're definitely not going to find dark
matter. I'm always a fan of, and I say this as a theorist, when the technology exists to get to
that next level of experiment, you do the experiment because you do not know what you're
going to find until you look. And maybe what you'll find is just what you found already and nothing
new. But maybe you will find something new and you'll never know unless you look.
I see. I mean, I guess there's a little bit of judgment and aesthetic into all of this. I imagine
what's going on is that you have some modification to the standard model. It has some new parameters.
And as you were saying, you don't know what the values of those parameters are.
In some sense, I guess they might be determined from whatever scattering experiments you were
talking about. So you go out, you do these experiments. And what happens is if you don't
find anything, then you have a constraint on what those parameters must be because if they were
in a certain range, you would have gotten a certain result. So then the question becomes,
do you trust your model? And just hope that the parameters were different than you thought? Or
do you abandon it for a different model? Is that like a summary of what's going on? I'm just inferring
what's going on. Well, that's one of the things that's going on. But I want to make the important
point that doing the experiments are important, even in the absence of theory.
If your theory didn't know what it was doing, you'd still want to do the experiment
to learn what you can learn about the universe. The only meaningful way we can learn about it,
which is by saying, hey, universe, what are you doing and not doing? What are you interacting
with and not interacting with? What kind of limits on a cross-section can I be sensitive to?
And then I'll do the experiment and either I'll see something new or I won't.
I want to make the point that this should not be purely theoretically motivated. It doesn't
really matter what the model is. What matters is there's something out there and you don't know
what it is. And here's a way we can look at the universe like we've never looked at it before.
I don't really care what's some supersymmetry theorist or some extra dimension theorist or some
Pechy-Quain-Axeon theorist. I don't care what they say. What they say is interesting from a
theoretical point of view. But in terms of what can we say about the universe, I want to know what
the experiment says. Although maybe just as a point of clarification, I would have thought the
the way you phrase it, you sounded like there was a bit possibly of a disconnect
or a separation between experiment and theory. I would have thought that the theory tells the
experimentalist how to design the experiment or where to look. You phrased it in a way that
I'm just going to go look at stuff and it doesn't matter. I'm going to get useful information regardless
of what my theoretical priors are. But I would have thought it's the theoretical priors that tell
you what to look for. And if you're someone who is skeptical of theory, then you could throw up
your hands and say, ah, as you see, you shouldn't have gone down this theoretical, the guided rabbit
hole because then you just wasted a bunch of dollars doing the wrong experiment. Can you separate
those two extremes? There are certainly people who think, hey, theory, we know what we're doing.
And this is what this is what you should look for. But the truth is, we only know the standard
model stuff. We only know what the stuff in the standard model is doing. The stuff that's not in
the standard model, which is dark matter, dark matter is not in the standard model. We know that.
We looked at all the possible standard model candidates of dark matter and they're all no good.
So if it has to be a new particle and we don't know what that particle is and we don't know
if any of our ideas that we've theoretically explored are dark matter, why would we build
our experiments in a way that they're only useful for testing the theories that theorists give us?
Because that would be a terrible approach because what if all the theorists are wrong?
Because honestly, I think they are. I'm a theorist. I think everything we've theorized
about dark matter is unlikely to be correct. So why would I expect I know what the unknown is?
So you want to build something that can give you a spin dependent and spin independent cross-section
limit on your particle as a function of and what could that particle's mass possibly be over the
widest range possible? This is going to be an empirically driven science. This is an experimentally
driven science and those constraints or maybe someday, luckily, a detection, that's going to tell
theorists what the universe is doing. A lot of people have this picture of, oh, theories out in
front telling experimentalists what to look for. Yes, sometimes, but sometimes theorists do not
know what they're doing because they do not have sufficient clues from the experiment to really
know what the next thing needs to be. And in those cases, let experiment take the lead. Experiment
brought us a whole host of discoveries that then theorists came in afterwards and explained them
after the fact. There's very little reason to suspect that the dark matter mystery is going to
be solved by some theorist theorizing away saying, oh, yeah, and that's what dark matter has to be.
No, experiment, go out, look for it in all the places where it could be hiding and when you find
it, that will tell theorists where to go. That's a historically more successful approach and one
that I feel like would be just tremendous fools to abandon because what are theorists doing? They're
playing in the sandbox. What are experimentalists doing? They're playing with the real world.
It's kind of a no-brainer to me on, yeah, let the experimentalists experiment to the best of
their experimental abilities and the tighter the constraints get, they sort of tell theorists,
hey, stop looking under those lampposts and only look under the lampposts where you can actually,
where you're not ruled out already. I see. So just to wrap this up, so it's not the case that
there was a WIMP-specific experiment or an axion-specific experiment, there were these
general scattering experiments that you were describing and they could have found whatever
they found, but what they didn't find was confirmation of axions or WIMPs.
There's no confirmation that says like, oh, it's definitely an axion or it's definitely a WIMP.
You can say it's not this flavor of WIMP, it's not this flavor of axion, it's not this specific type.
But those are useful constraints to have because there is an interplay between
experiment and theory called phenomenology and phenomenology is really working out what should
happen at that interface and anytime you get constraints from experiment, phenomenologists
draw a whole big circle around part of parameter space and say, theorists, stop theorizing about
this crap, it's ruled out because it doesn't matter. It's not useful or relevant to our universe
and that information is useful. Stop looking at supersymmetry that has these parameters
because that's not what our universe does. We don't look for dark matter at places where
the LHC was sensitive to it and it didn't show up there because yeah, it would have seen it if
it was sensitive to it. When you make those new constraints, those tighter constraints that rule
out more and more of what things could have been, that's a way of playing whack-a-mole with your
various models but it will never rule out the models that are still below that threshold.
Keep looking as far as you can and whatever you find, that's going to be the door that opens to
the next big breakthrough in physics. Keep doing the experiments and keep investing in it.
We can still do theory work and maybe we'll find a clue of something we should really be looking at
or something that pays off but also be careful, you don't go around chasing low quality experiments,
experimental errors because there are a bunch of those too.
Okay, well great. Thank you so much for your time, Ethan. This was really fun talking about
astronomy with you and it's certainly things that I've learned a lot of new things because this
is definitely not my wheelhouse. Yeah, thank you so much for your time. Yeah, it was my pleasure.
Thanks for having me and hopefully we got some really good stuff to share with your listeners.
Okay, great. Thank you so much.
