Okay, welcome everyone to this episode of the Cartesian Cafe. Today, we're very lucky to have
John Bias with us. John Bias is a mathematical physicist. He is also a professor of mathematics
at UC Riverside and a researcher at the Center for Quantum Technologies in Singapore,
and also a researcher at the Topos Institute in Berkeley, California. John has worked on an
impressively wide range of topics, including loop quantum gravity, applications of higher
categories to physics, applied category theory, environmental issues and math related to engineering
and biology, and most recently on applying network theory to scientific software. Additionally,
John is a prolific writer and blogger. This first began with John's column this week's finds in
mathematical physics, which ran 300 issues between 1993 and 2010, which then continued in the form
of his ongoing blog, Azimuth. Last but not least, John is also a host and contributor of the popular
blog, the N Category Cafe, which to my knowledge is the original math oriented cafe that well
predates our current venue here at the Cartesian Cafe. Welcome John, how are you today?
Great, it's good to be here. It's nice to go to a different cafe.
Yeah, indeed. It's always nice to have some variety in our life. Yeah, you have a very
diverse set of interests and background, specifically your interest, say in physics.
From personal experience, it's quite rare to find a mathematician that's well versed in physics. I
think the only other person I can think of that's comparable is the great Isidor Singer, who sadly
passed away recently. You did your PhD at MIT, so you must have known IS, but maybe can you say
more about your interests in physics and how you came to become a multilingual in both math and
physics and subsequently all the other things you've become interested in? Yeah, I got interested
in physics at an early age because my uncle, who's the father of the folk singer Joan Byes,
who was a physicist, and he was actually specializing in physics education, and so he would
have all sorts of things in his suitcase when he'd come by, like lasers or diffraction
gradings and teach me physics that way, starting when I was quite young. It seemed really exciting
to me from an early stage, and then he gave me his college physics textbook when I was about
eight, and I started trying to understand it. I wasn't so interested in mathematics at that
early stage because it was all about adding and multiplying and so on. It didn't seem all that
exciting, and so at some point my parents were worried that I was so interested in physics,
but I wasn't good enough at math, and they heard that like physicists have to be good at math
to prosper, but later on I started learning that on the one hand it was really hard for me to do
experiments that were at all interesting, so I was like really frustrated reading about people
with cyclotrons and discovering fundamental particles and things like that because I couldn't
do any of that stuff, and I'm not naturally an experimentalist. Someone who's really good at
experiments would figure out something fun to do, but I realized I could do things just with pencil
and paper once I got to the point where I could like do some physics type calculations, and so
then my interest shifted more and more over towards math because that was something I could do
just sitting there, and then by the time I went to college the lab courses in physics that I
would have had to take and I would have had to take more if I majored in physics,
those were so frustrating for me because I wasn't very good at them and the equipment wouldn't work
and stuff like that, that I decided for that and other reasons that going into math would be better.
By that point I was already sort of 50-50, so I majored in math and I got a PhD in math,
but I was always wanting to do physics with them with the math, or at least certainly in that era,
and so I did my PhD with Irving Siegel, who's actually the advisor of Isidore Singer,
he was also at MIT, and he had been working on trying to make quantum field theory mathematically
rigorous since the 70s, and so I got a sort of balanced outlook on math and physics, although
I'm more comfortable when things are mathematically rigorous a little bit, not as some mathematicians
just can't stand the lack of rigor of physics, but I took enough physics classes that I sort of
got the hang of that, and now that I'm just thinking back on it all, or now that I'm not
having to decide what courses I'm going to take or anything like that, I really appreciate the
flexibility of the physicist's way of thinking, and sometimes I think mathematicians are a little
too stuffy, but sometimes I think the opposite, sometimes I think the sisters are too sloppy,
so anyway, so it's fun to bounce back and forth is what I'm trying to say,
and not manage to insult both sides equally. Nice, and then, but you've also gone on to do other
diverse things, like maybe can you say a little bit about your work and I think,
you know, environmental issues, I think maybe is it specifically carbon emissions, or is it
encompass other things? Yeah, it's it encompasses other things, so starting around,
roughly around 2008, I started getting really worried about climate change and started reading
a lot about it, and learned that it was just part of a much bigger set of issues
called the Anthropocene, where humans are really affecting the parameters of the biosphere in a
lot of ways, just like for one example, like most of the nitrogen taken out of the atmosphere
now is not taken out by plants the way it used to be, but taken out by humans in this
Haber-Bosch process for making fertilizer, and we put lots of fossil, take much more
phosphorus out of the earth than any natural process, so we're basically sort of dominating the
biosphere, and we're sort of going about it in a unthinking way, you know, locally just trying
to maximize economic production, and it's leading us into all sorts of problems of which climate
change is the sort of the most famous one, a very serious one, so I started wanting to have
something to do with that, and I floundered around, so I went to the Center for Quantum
Technologies in Singapore, and that was a really nice time from 2010 to 2012, where I was just able
to do research, and so I spent that time sort of trying to re-groove my career a little bit,
motivated by this climate change issue, but ultimately it settled out a few years later that
what I was doing was trying to get mathematicians, especially category theorists, to start applying
their talents to practical issues, like climate change, but not at all limited to that, because
I was big on this branch of math called category theory, so I had some ability to influence the
mathematicians in that branch of math, and it's famous for being an unapplied area, or at least
not, it's applied to math all the time, but you know, when people talk about applied mathematics,
they're talking about like solving quote, real world problems, and people don't, didn't, or at
least didn't, tend to associate category theory with that, but I've been trying to convince
people that it actually is good for that, and so then recently, like in the last couple of years,
a project involving epidemiology and making models of epidemics came up, not so much because of
COVID, although you might think it was that, but actually because an old college friend of mine,
Nathaniel Osgood, or a grad school friend of mine, turned out to be heading the Canada's
effort, or I don't know if he's heading it, but he's big in Canada's effort to model COVID,
and he's a computer scientist, and so he got really interested in this applied category
theory stuff, and so together with a bunch of people at the Topos Institute and his student,
Xiaoyan, we've been working on making software for, for epidemic modeling, using applied category
ideas, so that's been really exciting. Oh, wow, so, so many topics, well, and we're
really going to focus on a small slice of that today. Unfortunately, I wish we could go over to
all those interesting things. Yeah, actually, another thing I wanted to ask you about is something
you're also famous for, so I think it was 1992, so quite a while ago that you came out with your
Crackpot Index, I wanted to ask you how you came up with that, what motivated it, so I guess,
well, I guess people can kind of already maybe infer what it is, but maybe you should explain
it yourself. Sure, yeah, so what happened was in the late 80s, I started discovering the internet
along with a bunch of other people, and there were these, this is before the World Wide Web,
and there were these things called Internet, sorry, called Usenet news groups, which were a way of
communicating, chatting about subjects, and a whole bunch of physicists started chatting about
physics, and then by the early 90s, it had become well known enough that, that non-physicists started
getting in on these, on this physics discussion group, and included a bunch of people with far
out theories of physics, who previously would mainly communicate to physicists by like sending
them letters with their theories and things like that, but now they discovered that they could
just like hop onto these, it's like an old version of a chat room or something like that,
hop onto these Usenet news groups and start propounding their theories, and they came as a
big surprise to the physicists there, because all this stuff was brand new, and we were happily
discussing advanced physics, and then someone says they're like, oh, the solar system is a plutonium
atom, and you tell them, no, it's really, it's not, and they would like argue and on and on and on
and favor of their theory, and so I started learning a lot more about what I'll completely call
crackpot physicists at that, at that time, and I discovered that there were a whole bunch of sort
of standard behavior patterns among these people, which are more complicated and interesting than
just that they happen to have some wrong theories, that there's sort of like a whole etiology of
being a crackpot, and so sort of as a partially as a joke, but also to sort of note my observations,
I created this thing called the crackpot index, which lists a whole bunch of
symptoms of being a crackpot, and gives you points for different symptoms with more points for
more pronounced crackpotism, because I think there's like a progression of crackpotism,
and so like near the end, you may be fantasizing about show trials where like finally your theory
has been proved true, and you put all the physicists who didn't believe you on trial,
and forced them to like admit that they were like deliberately holding up the progress of physics
and things like that, that's like an extreme, that's like near the extreme in there.
I see, yeah, I was actually, you know, impressed by how quantitatively precise the index is,
so let me just read like a few snippets here just so people get an idea, so I'm just going to pick
two right now, so item 21 is 20 points for suggesting that you deserve a Nobel Prize,
and item 34 is 40 points for claiming that the scientific establishment is engaged in a conspiracy
to prevent your work from gaining its well-deserved fame, or such like. How did you decide on,
you know, what's 20 points, what's 40 points, did you kind of like, is there some first principles
here, or is there like maybe this person is a crackpot worth 100 points, so I have to kind of
work backwards in such a way that they get 100 points, what's the formula? It's not as
quantitative as it's made out to be, I think the most important thing is that larger numbers
indicate further progress towards a kind of extreme crackpotism, so the way it tends to work
is like first you have this idea, then you start developing it, you put more and more time in it,
first you think it's really great, and then you like start telling people about it, hoping that
like they'll say hey that's a great idea, and then you like slowly learn that like all physicists
make fun of you, or don't, or just don't ignore you, and then you start making up more and more
complicated theories for why that's going on, and so it's sort of, I mean of course people
can turn off the road at any point, and probably most people do, I mean most people if they get
negative feedback from the physics community they may like stop working on physics, but the
true crackpots of the people who are like are completely convinced they're right, and so they
have to make up more and more elaborate theories about why no one else seems to agree with them,
and so those types of items get the larger numbers. I see, yeah I think what's quite impressive
about this list is it was made back in 92, so you know three decades ago well predating any
modern or crackpot or anyone in recent memory, so it seems to have been quite a I guess maybe
robust indexed in some sense. Yeah, probably. Yeah, so I just to close the loop on this that
the reason I surfaced this crackpot index is that there seems to be actually a renaissance as of
late in terms of evaluating so-called crackpot, so last year I went on several podcasts, one of which
is called Decoding the Gurus, and there they deconstruct so-called gurus along their own
gurometer scale, and then I also went on Robert Wright's show where our episode was quite
straightforwardly titled Is Eric Weinstein a Crackpot, and just to give some context about
that, so the topics of those podcasts were about my rebuttal of an attempt at a theory of everything
called Geometric Unity, which was put forth by a Harvard Math PhD Eric Weinstein, and he introduced
this work to the world back in 2013 at Oxford through the Simone lectures. The work has been
endorsed in the academic community by Professor Brian Keating at UC San Diego who's performing
experimental tests through a scholar in residence at UCSD. Anyways, so for the people who want to
learn more about this work, they can check out those podcasts and others, but the interesting
outcome of this is that both of those podcast hosts have their own so-called
crackpot axes that they've evaluated, certain people on the Decoding the Gurus, in fact
Eric Weinstein and his brother are at the very top of their guru leaderboards. For Robert Wright's
podcast, actually his conclusion at the end after our episode and in his sub-stack article
afterwards was that Eric Weinstein was not a crackpot, but in any case, thanks to your index,
now everyone has a very precise scale by which to evaluate any proposed theory of everything,
whether it's how far it is along the crackpot spectrum. So anyway, so it's nice that you have
like a very nice formula for all this. Sometimes I get emails from people who tell me their own
crackpot score, which I find quite surprising and they say like, well, even though my score is like
a 60, I still would like to talk to you about this stuff. Wow, wow. Wow, that's, that's, that's, I guess.
It actually attracts, it actually attracts crackpots to communicate with me. Some of them are very
angry. They say like, I'm, this is like a terrible thing, this thing I did. It's like holding back
the progress of science, but others like took a more humorous attitude towards it and, and don't
seem too phased by it. But if I'd wanted to like not be dealing with crackpots, I would have taken
down the crackpot. I see, I see. I thought, you know, you might think of it like repel crackpots,
but it's not. It's like waving a red, red flag in front of a bull, basically. Oh, I see. Kind of like,
even if, even if I'm a crackpot, at least we can now openly discuss it because it's, it's, it's
now not taboo, I suppose, because you're- I don't, I don't quite get the psychology, but yeah. I see.
Great. All right. Well, thanks for entertaining me with, with, with, with this crackpot index.
Anyway, so maybe we should, we should start diving into the main focus of today's podcast. Sure,
I'll tell you my own crazy theory. Okay, that's right. Well, okay, I guess I'll guess we'll, we'll
see what that means later on. Yeah, I won't, I won't. Oh, I see. Okay. Yeah, so, so basically,
we're going to talk about aspects of the standard model. You wrote a paper with John Huerta explaining
the mathematics behind the standard model and summarized basically its properties and representation
theory and also various so-called grand unified theories, at least in, in so far as their representation
theory can, can be characterized. Do you want to say anything about that before we get started and,
and maybe why you wrote the paper and, and to what extent, how to, how to think about the math versus
whatever speculative physics is maybe left untouched by your work? Sure. Yeah, so it was meant
to do a couple of things. So it was meant to be like an introduction to a small piece of particle
physics, physics for a mathematician. So it's written in a way that would be pretty hard to
understand if you, if you hadn't studied a fair amount of math, but for mathematicians, I think
it's pretty easy to read. And it's only tackling a very limited part of, of particle physics. So
like you will not come out of that knowing how to calculate the scattering cross-section of
electron scattering. It doesn't explain quantum field theory. There's just like fundamental
to particle physics. It doesn't explain the Higgs mechanism, which is fundamental to the standard
model. There's lots of other things it doesn't explain. So it just focuses on these symmetry
group of the standard model, the so-called gauge group of the standard model, and then how the
different matter particles, primarily the so-called fermions, are acted on by these symmetries.
Because that's like a bite-sized piece of mathematics that mathematicians can get into,
and it's already pretty interesting and complicated. And then it turns out that people who are trying
to develop grand unified theories, which are like more advanced and more speculative theories that
try to unify the different forces, they need to know this stuff cold. And then they try to look
at the patterns in the standard model and sort of make up a theory that will explain those,
or neaten them up, make them more unified in some way. Because at first the standard model can look
like a big pile of, of sort of arbitrary data. And so it turns out that there's a very beautiful
pattern in the fermions or matter particles of the standard model, which is not at all obvious
and really striking. And pretty much all grand unified theories try to make use of that or take
advantage of that to, to neaten up the standard model. And so in our paper we discuss just a
little bit about three different grand unified theories that try to take the standard model
symmetry group and put it in a bigger group. And, and then using the information about how the
particles transform under the standard model symmetry group, we see how, oh, look, you can
unify those particles into fewer kinds of particles if you think of them as transforming under some
bigger symmetry group. And the math of that is all very beautiful and nice. So that's what we try
to explain. But there's like all sorts of things we don't explain about grand unified theories. So
in particular, like the stuff you'd, calculations you'd need to do to see if those grand unified
theories actually had a chance of being correct. But we don't actually get into that too much.
So it's, it's as a limited goal. If we go with the order of your paper, right, there's sort of like
the nucleons and protons, and then maybe the description of all the different parts of the
standard model and then finally the different kinds of theories. Should we go chronological or
should we actually, let me talk a little bit about what the standard model is. I'm sort of flexible.
Maybe I'll just say like a minute of stuff get oriented here. So, so once upon a time, people
thought that the fundamental particles in nature were protons, neutrons and electrons,
basically. And then they discovered photon light. And then they kept digging deeper and deeper and
deeper. And by now we have a much more elaborate theory in which electrons are still fundamental
particles and photons are still fundamental particles. But protons and neutrons we now know
are not, we know that they're made of smaller pieces called quarks, they're each made of three
quarks. So quarks are, are particles that are discussed in the standard model. And then another
thing they discovered is that when, like if you just have a neutron sitting by itself, which
doesn't happen too much in our nature, but if you do, it will actually decay, it will actually turn
into a proton and an electron. But it also, they eventually discovered, shoots out another
invisible sort of particle, very hard to detect particle called a neutrino, or it's actually
an anti-neutrino. And so, so in addition to the electrons and the various types of quarks,
neutrinos are also particles in the standard model. So it tries to explain those particles,
I mean, it tries to say what they are. So try to say what the properties are. And it tries to say
how they interact with each other. And it does a really remarkable job at terrestrial scales,
not counting cosmic observations, some of which are very mysterious. But terrestrial scales,
it seems to do a damn good job of explaining sort of all the physics we know. So there's like a
you could do it historically, like you could work your way into it, starting from the protons
and neutrons. An mathematician might want to just like see what it is right away. But there
probably are some aspects of it that are easiest to understand from a historical point of view,
because otherwise it's just like slapping a bunch of rather strange stuff on the table
without any warning. So in our paper, we took a kind of pseudo historical point of view where
we weren't trying to, actual history is always much more complicated than the pseudo history that
mathematicians and physicists like. But a sort of pseudo history leads you into the standard model
for some kind of logical development. So we tried that. So we give a little context,
just to give a little more shape before we just dive right in. So we're going to talk about the
standard model. And it's the standard model of particle physics. And well, in physics, we have
four fundamental forces, right? We have gravitation, electromagnetism, the strong and the weak. And
famously, the standard model is going to, well, only encompass these three, but it leaves out
gravitation. And of course, one of the holy grails of physics is to have a quantum theory of gravity,
and therefore incorporating gravitation into the standard model. That's a whole another subject
that we're not going to get into. We're going to focus on the standard model as it is, and maybe
some extensions of it, but not talking about gravity. But since we have these three forces,
it turns out that the type of symmetry group we need to consider, what physicists would call a gauge
group, right? That's going to be SU3 cross SU2 cross U1. And we'll explain this more in a bit. So
these are all basically what are called Lie groups. So a Lie group is basically a group
that's continuous. You can think of it as basically matrix groups. These are all just
groups of matrices. And these matrices tell you how particles transform among themselves, right?
And so I guess, so first of all, that's basically the standard model in a very quick
nutshell. You have particles, particles interact in various ways through forces,
and the symmetry groups that mediate all these elements consist of this SU3 cross SU2 cross U1,
and it looks maybe a bit funny or broke at first, but that's precisely what we're going to get into.
There are extensions or ways you can repackage the standard model, right? So there are so-called
grand unified theories or, you know, guts for short. And there you can try to look at a larger
structure, which might also explain the standard model in a consistent way. And of course, because
you've done something different, there are other consequences you might have to check. We're going
to go into one such, the mathematics behind one such extension known as the SU5,
but there are two other famous ones, which you go into your paper. We might only say
brief remarks about them, but I'll just write them here just to be consistent. There's also
the SO10, which is really spin 10, but I think it's called SO10. And then there's the so-called
Patti Salam model, which has its own group, SU2 cross SU4, if I'm not mistaken, correct?
It's SU2 times SU2 times SU4. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. So that one, you'll notice, looks more complicated.
So some people argue that that one's not really a grand unified theory because it still has these
different pieces in it, but it is a bigger, more complex, bigger theory that's trying to explain
some mysteries of the standard model. That's right. That's right. Okay. So now that we've
at least fleshed out some of the technical aspects, so I think the route we're going to take,
I guess, following your paper is that we're going to sort of motivate
how, so let's back up a bit. So in the early and middle part of the 20th century,
physicists were discovering all kinds of particles, and they were trying to find ways
to make sense of all that mess, basically. And I guess one of the first observations
was that somehow you can treat the hypothesis, was that you could treat
a proton and neutron in a unified manner, that maybe one could be transformed into another, right?
So I think that was maybe one of the beginning stories of how to use gauge theory in, say,
nuclear physics. So I guess you're going to start with that as a historical
motivating point, and then we're going to dive into the particulars of the standard model.
Is that correct? Yeah, there are lots of ways to get into this story, but that's a perfectly fine
one. So people had noticed that the atomic nucleus is made up of two kinds of particles,
protons and neutrons, and they're mysteriously similar. They don't have the
exact same mass, but they're very close masses. So the proton is 1836 times the
mass of the electron, and the neutron's just a tiny bit more heavy than that,
which is weird. They have two particles that are gigantic compared to the electron,
but almost the same mass, but not quite. The proton is positively charged. The neutron,
as you might expect, is electrically neutral, so it has charge zero. So they're very dramatically
different in terms of electric charge. But in terms of some other forces, the nuclear force that
makes them actually stick to the nucleus, which is required, because if the electric force was
the only thing around, the protons would all repel, and there's nothing negatively charged in
there, so they would just shoot apart. So they knew there had to be some force keeping them
together. They studied that, and they discovered it with respect to the nuclear force, which is
what we now call the strong nuclear force. They act almost, they act identical, let's say,
so it's a very, so it's a really interesting mystery there, sort of the same in some way,
different in other ways. And so Werner Heisenberg came up with this theory that said, I mean,
in its very simplest form, it says that the proton and the neutron are actually the same particle
if you ignore the electromagnetic force. They have to sort of make believe and say,
forget the electromagnetic, get their electric charge. They're the same as far as nuclear force
goes, but they're two different states of the same particle, two different ways that that
particle can be. And then people had developed some math already for dealing with such situations.
People had developed the mathematics of what's called spin. And for example, if you have an
electron, it actually acts like a little spinning thing, spinning dot, but it's a very quantum
mechanical spinning thing. So it's very peculiar compared to like a spinning baseball, in particular,
if you measure its, its spin along some particular axis, you always find that it's either spinning
up, that is, it's spinning like clockwise with respect to that axis, or spinning the other way,
counterclockwise, never anything in between, just always one or the other. And that's really bizarre,
because that's true no matter what axis you measured along, you always see that. So that's a
completely paradoxical from the point of view of classical mechanics. But people figured it out
first for the electron. And then they, when I could get into arbitrary amounts of detail about that,
but, but then they, but then that was well known by the time Heisenberg was trying to do his
thing. So what he said is, Hey, maybe there's like something else that's like spin.
And he called it iso spin, because they're like different isotopes of, of, of atoms. So it doesn't
matter that much, why it's called that, but it's like, it's like spin, but it's not. So he made up
a thing called iso spin. And he said that the proton and the neutron were the iso spin up and
iso spin down states of a single particle, which he called a nucleon. So let's actually unpack
that a bit since spoken for quite a while. So let's, let's backtrack. So, so we have protons
and neutrons. These are two massive particles, as you pointed out. We also have electrons,
and electrons have something called spin. Well, I guess they, they technically all have spin,
but let's just a particular electron has a spin. Now, what one interesting spin is kind of a funny
word, because when we talk about electron having spin, it's not literally what you just described
in terms of like a tabletop, you know, with this rotation. But what it actually is, is the following.
Basically, let's back up a bit. So we have a group called SU two, maybe we should finally
define what that is. So we have this group, SU two, and you can think of it as the group of all
two by two complex matrices that can be, I guess, written as the following. So
you're going to have it be
Yeah, I think that the minus sign there on that beta bar. Yeah, that's right. Yeah,
hesitating for a second there, right, where the, the norm squared and the sum
of the alpha and beta are going to be one, right. So here alpha and beta are complex numbers.
Right. So, so, so you can think of SU two as two by two matrices that can be
parametrized by alpha and beta as such. You can also describe it in terms of just saying a few
words. Basically, you need to be, you know, so it's two by two matrices. It needs to have,
it needs to be unitary, meaning that the columns form an orthonormal basis.
You're using the Hermitian inner product on, on C two. And then you also finally need
determinant one, which is how you can work your way to that formula. Basically,
I was putting bars and minus signs such that the determinant one is satisfied
once you have that constraint on the norm of alpha and beta.
I can imagine people who think that the first description is much more complicated and I can
think of people who say that second one is much more complicated. Sure, depends on whether you're
symbolic or verbal. I don't know, but I think it's good to have both. Yeah, exactly. So anyways,
so the point is that SU two being a group of two by two matrices, it acts on the vector space C two.
So this on C two, it just means that given an element of SU two, I know how to multiply it
against a vector in C two, which is the usual multiplication, right? If I have a two by two
matrix, and I have a vector in C two, I just multiply a matrix and the vector in the usual
way, right? So just explicitly, if I have a G and SU two, and a V and C two, then I conform
G dot V, which is also in C two, just the usual matrix multiplication. Okay, and what's been up
and spin down, what they mean is that there's a basis for C two. And one basis vector is the
up basis vector and one basis vector is the down basis vector. So you can think of,
you could think of a span of, let's just say, okay, one zero, zero one, because this is the
up direction and that's the down direction, right? So that's the mathematical sense in which we have
spin. And basically, now what we're saying is that, well, protons and neutrons, so let's go back to
your thing about iso spin, right? So why is it like spin, but not quite spin? And we gave it a
different name. Well, so spin involves two degrees of freedom up and down. Protons and neutrons,
you could also think of as two degrees of freedom by virtue of the fact that there are two particles.
And if you think of those two particles as spanning a two dimensional vector space,
they could have other degrees of freedom too, but we're just specifically focusing on the proton
and neutron themselves as two states. Though by analogy, we could also think of
there being an SU two, a different SU two, not spin SU two, but iso spin SU two, that transforms proton
and neutron between each other, right? So there's like a proton basis vector, a neutron basis
vector, and then there's an SU two that acts on both. Well, there's always a convention about
what's up and what's down. I guess there's somewhat arbitrary because there's really no universal
upward or down. I mean, I guess there is a notion of what is right and left, but maybe we don't have
time to get into that. But at least for now, up and down are a bit arbitrary. But by convention,
proton is going to be the up direction for iso spin and neutron is going to be the down direction,
is that correct? Yeah, that was just an arbitrary decision in a way.
I guess one reason why it's mildly memorable is, I don't know if it is memorable, but it's people
who are used to it by now, is that protons have charge one, they're positively charged and we
say their charge is one, and neutrons have electric charge zero. And this is like the beginning of
something that people, of a pattern that people regularly see. And so it's, as you say, it's to
some extent an arbitrary convention, but we say like the up things have more charge than the down
things. So it's just easy to remember. That makes sense. Okay, so just to explain a bit of spin,
very, very quickly. So spin ultimately has its origins in rotations. So we're in four dimensions
here. So there's the four dimensional rotation group, SO4. So you can think of this as the
group of four dimensional rotations, or if you want to think about it in terms of a more precise
algebraic description, it's the set of matrices in, let's say, four by four real matrices, such that
A transpose A is the identity matrix. So basically all the columns are, the columns form an
orthonormal basis. So that's what SO4 is. Now, by the way, let's just worry about Euclidean
signature, it's not going to really make a big difference. Okay, so there's this group and how
does spin enter into it? Well, for somewhat technical reasons, we want to work with something
that's not quite SO4, but it's more simple topologically. It's what's called simply connected.
There's a group called spin four, right, which is a bit bigger than SO4 in the following sense.
It's what's called a double cover of SO4. So double cover just means there's a two to one map,
which is with some nice properties. Just to give an analogy of what a two to one map looks like,
for example, you can have, say, the two sphere inside R3, and then you also have the set of lines
through the origin. Okay, the set of lines through the origin R3. This also has another name. This
is called RP2, a real projective plane, and there is a straightforward two to one map from S2 to RP2,
right? So this is also a double cover. What is that? Well, here's this two sphere that I just drew,
and then there's all these lines that go through the origin, and each line's going to intersect
the sphere twice, right? One at some point x, and then one at its antipodal corresponding
antipodal point minus x, right? So each point on this sphere maps to a unique line
through the origin, and there are two points corresponding to every line, right? So that's
an example of a two to one map, and spin four is basically the analog of that, except that
instead of mapping into RP2, you map into SO4, okay? So that's what a double cover is. Now this
looks a bit strange, but this is sort of what you have to do in order to define spin for topological
reasons. So once you accept that there's a group called spin four, which is the double cover of
SO4, the next fact that you need to know is that it turns out somewhat, I guess, I don't know,
I don't know miraculously is the right word, but it is a fact that spin four turns out to be the
group SU2 cross SU2, right? So two copies of SU2, we already defined what SU2 is, but you get two
copies of SU2, and this is how you define left and right, because we defined the spin of a particle
to be a, spin is basically going to be a representation of spin four, well one of the
representations of spin four, well it's going to be C2 direct sum with C2, because there's one copy
of each SU2, and one copy is the left, and one copy is the right, okay? So let's say left and right,
so here's left and right. So long story short, when we talk about particles having spin, right,
in general, if there's both left and right involved, you're going to have a four-dimensional vector,
that this four-dimensional degrees of freedom that it has, if you talk about left or right,
then you restrict either the left part or the right part, one of these factors of C2,
and that basically goes along for the right. So in other words, later when we talk about the
standard model, we're going to have all these particles, quarks, neutrinos and whatnot, and
the notation won't be explicit, but in the background there's always this C4, this C2,
depending on whether you're talking about all the spins, or just one of the spins,
that's always floating around in the background. So the mathematical terminology would be that
you're always tensoring with some representation of spin in the background, basically.
One thing I'd like to add is that I will be referring to right-handed and left-handed
particles quite a lot, so this was useful. So I think what I want to start doing at some point,
maybe soon, is start making a kind of list of the matter particles or fermions in the standard model
and sort of slowly go through it and talk about some of their properties, but one of the
properties is that each one of them is going to either be right-handed or left-handed, so
that's what I'd like to get into. We're jumping all over the place, but I think it's fine. One of
the fascinating things about particle physics is that there's a parity symmetry violation in the
sense that, as we'll see, the weak force only interacts with left-handed particles, not with
right-handed particles, so nature does make a distinction between left and right, and at the
level of mathematics it means that the particles that have this representation tensored with them
interact with the weak force, but the other ones on this right one do not, so that's the main thing
to keep in mind. We'll definitely be seeing that a huge amount, and part of the math of what you
just said is that the left-hand with ones will often come in pairs called isospin up and isospin
because it turns out that this isospin, which was first introduced by Heisenberg for practical
reasons, is actually crucially related to the weak force, the force that does things like
causes nuclear decay, and so those guys that come in isospin up and isospin down pairs,
they will interact with the weak force, and they're the left-handed ones, but then we'll also see a
bunch of right-handed particles, and those will transform in a different way under this isospin
SU2, namely they will transform in a one-dimensional representation of SU2, where SU2 doesn't do
anything at all to them, so that they're called, it's called the trivial representation of SU2,
and so there's this dramatic difference in behavior between the left-handed particles
and the right-handed particles. Just to clarify, we have all this stuff here, so what you just
referred to, so let's do a little review here, so we said that the gauge group of the standard
model was SU3, SU2, U1, so what you just referred to in terms of isospin, it's a little confusing
as you also pointed in your paper, this SU2 is corresponding to the weak force, and there's
so weak isospin, but this is different from the isospin we talked about earlier with nucleons,
but it's about all say that it's only slightly different, and there's actually a correlation
between the two, so it's not worth worrying about. That's right, yeah, but some people will call it
weak, but for our purposes, we'll just call it isospin thereafter, yeah, just so people aren't
confused with the proton-neutron story, but anyways, so the isospin always refers to some SU2
that's not corresponding to the rotational spin, that's what isospin always means, but this SU2
can act in different ways, and what John, you just said, is that SU2 acts in the standard
representation for the left copy, so this is now the standard representation, and this is the
trivial representation for the right-handed copy, where trivial means that it doesn't do anything,
every element acts as the identity for right-handed particles, yeah, great, okay, so that's,
I think it was worth, yeah, going into this excursion about spin, just so we have something a
little bit more concrete with which to understand what these groups are doing, so John, did you
want to like maybe now go into the the zoology of the standard model essentially?
So let me try to start out with more familiar particles, and then maybe talk about some less
familiar particles, so electrons are called by physicists E- because they're negatively charged,
and because we will have to get into it, they have an antiparticle, which is called a positron,
it's like the antiparticle of an electron, and it's positively charged, but we'll get to that when
we do, but as we've already, as I've already suggested, we've already discussed, there's
going to be like a left-handed electron, then also there's like a right-handed electron, and
they are very different in the following sense, I mean you can't, they don't look different electrically,
but they look very different with respect to the weak force, and because the right-handed one
transforms trivially under isospin SU2, whereas this one is transforming non-trivially,
but it transforms in an interesting way, because it, so this would be like the,
this is like one of the, one of two, one basis vector of a two-dimensional basis,
of a two-dimensional vector space, which is the one that Tim was just, was just drawing, but what's
the other basis vector, well the other basis vector is actually for a neutrino, it's for a
particle called the electron neutrino, so these two together are lumped together in the standard
model as an isospin up and an isospin down state in a, or basis vector in a certain two-dimensional
vector space, now which one is isospin up and which one is isospin down, well I wasn't so organized
just to make the one on top be the one that's the isospin up, the, it's good to stick to a convention
where the, where the electric charge is bigger for the isospin up one, so q for some mysterious reason
means charge in physics, so the neutrino is an electrically neutral particle, so it has charge
zero, whereas the electron is a negatively charged particle, so it has charge negative one, so we see
here that the one with the bigger electric charge is the, is the neutrino, so this would be the one
we would call isospin up, and this is the one we'd call isospin down, now there's just like,
just like with the proton, the proton had positive one, which is a charge which is greater than the
neutron, so it had its isospin being up and the neutron being down, it's exactly similar.
Yeah so we're going to keep seeing that type of pattern over and over again for these pairs that
that are two basis vectors in this copy of c2 that is a representation of isospin, this guy's sort of
all, all by its lonesome, it's not, it's transforming trivially under, under isospin, but it still has
electric charge negative one, just like any other electron, and there's, then there, then you might
say okay that's the left-handed e-minus and neutrino, here's the right-handed e-minus, what about the
right-handed neutrino? Yeah so no one knows if right-handed neutrinos exist, they haven't been
detected, but they're also, would be very elusive if they did exist, because they're, well what is it,
first even be a neutrino, we would say that its electric charge was zero, so I'm going to write
a zero there even though this is a particle we haven't seen, and, and the pattern that we
observe elsewhere is that the right-handed particles aren't transformed in a trivial way under su2,
so it would not be feeling the weak force either, and I haven't even gotten to the strong force,
but it wouldn't be feeling the strong force either, so it just would not interact in any way
if it existed and fit the pattern as in the simplest way you'd expect, so that's why
we're not shocked that we haven't seen it, it might exist and be, be very hard to detect, so I'm
going to put it in there because it's going to come in handy to, to have it there. Actually two
questions really quick while we're lingering on this, one you mentioned the thing about charge,
does it have to have charge zero, or is that, is that speculation?
It's speculation, if it didn't have charge zero, it, it, it wouldn't, well we, it wouldn't be a
neutrino of the sort, of any sort that we've seen, so it's, it, so I'm, yeah, so you could say it's
a speculation, we could discover some light, sure, particle that was like a neutrino that had charge
three, or one, and we'd be all very excited and shocked. Yeah, and then the other question is,
so the way you phrased it with this right hand stuff, you could ask the same thing about, okay,
well, like, what's special about being right-handed, because we know we have right-handed electrons,
and I think the answer is that, well, electrons have mass, and so in the, for those who, who know
more, right, if you have a massive Dirac operator, so the Dirac operator is what occurs in the standard
model, then the left-handed and right-handed particles are going to interact, but I guess
I think the point is that since neutrinos are believed to not have mass, then you could have
this right-handed particle doing its own thing, essentially, but I think there's now some conjecture
that they might have mass, so wouldn't that make it easier to detect the right-handed neutrino?
Yeah, that's, that's correct. Yeah, at least some neutrinos we believe need to have mass to fit
the experiments we have. There could be one massless one, but I think we know that there have to be
two massive ones. I've only talked about one so far, so it's not quite clear what I'm talking
about yet, but anyway, but, but yeah, so there could be, like, indirect ways that we would
detect this right-handed neutrino if it existed. People are busy doing experiments with neutrinos
to try to get to the bottom of such questions, but they're very difficult experiments to do,
so it's, the jury is still out on that, I'd say. Is that, like, if you were to rank it alongside,
like, say, okay, so, you know, the LAC was built, I guess, one of the, one of the main reasons it
was built was to discover the Higgs boson, and it was, of course, a huge success that it was
discovered. Is that also the same scale at which people are going to try to detect neutrinos,
or is that just completely different territory? Well, you use completely different technology
to detect them. You don't build enormous particle accelerators, so even the biggest
neutrino detectors are much cheaper than the LHC, but what you basically do is you build
enormous tanks of things like liquid, argon, or other substances that are transparent,
that if a neutrino interacted with it, it would make like a flicker of light, and people either
let, let neutrinos from the sun and other sources be detected by those tanks, or,
or actually create particle beams by smashing particles against each other, including at the
LHC, and then try to detect neutrinos that are shot off by means of these, these tanks, and,
and that's, so it's not as expensive, but it's a big, but it's still a big deal in particle physics.
Yeah. So this is like low energy particle physics in the particle accelerators, you're trying to
make your super heavy particles, but neutrinos are super light, but you still need really
extensive equipment to, to catch them because they interact only with a weak force at most,
and this kind would be like interacting like only, not even with that, only detectable through
changes in behavior of other neutrinos that do interact with the weak force.
So yeah, it's a really interesting story. Okay, great. So I'm gonna march on, and I'm gonna bring
in the quarks. And so the, the deal with the quarks, let me just sort of motivate why we started
believing in quarks just a tiny bit. So, so I said that like the proton and the neutron are now known
to not be fundamental particles that consist of more basic constituents. And without getting into
too much detail about how we, how we do know that they're, they're both made of three particles.
And it's known now that the proton is made of two quarks called up quarks and one called a down
quark, whereas the neutron is made of one up quark and two down quarks. So I'm not going to try to
prove to people that that has to be the case, but what, but what you can, but if you believe this,
you can see a bunch of things already, namely, for example, so the proton has charge equal, equal one.
The, the neutron is neutral and has charge zero. So you can just figure out what the charges of
these U's and D's would have to be to make their charges add up to, to the correct number. So that's
a little bit of, of algebra. Well, let's, let's not shirk a little algebra, I guess. It's like,
it's like the easiest piece of math in the whole story here. So, you know, the two U plus D is one,
but U plus two D has got to be zero. The results of this algebra was pretty, pretty interesting.
Did I say that right yet? I said that right. So if I, well, I want to like cancel
one of them out or something. Well, let's see, one thing we can do that's just very tempting
is to subtract the bottom equation from the top equation. So that doesn't like solve for
anyone, but it says something pretty interesting. So it says U minus D equals one. So the charge of
the up quark has to be one more than the charge of the down part. Now you may have noticed, I've
repeatedly said that like when you have these iso spin up and iso spin down pairs, the, the one
with the bigger charge, we call up. And so this is fitting into this pattern and that's sort of
why it's called up. But what are these numbers? Well, I guess I'm trying to find, let's see,
I'm trying to like avoid doing the algebra in some brutal manner, try to do it in some fun manner.
But the, I mean, one thing you can see right away is that it's not going to work to have the UNDB
integers. And this was like a huge shock because until quarks came along, people thought all
particles had integer charge. But I guess what we could do, yeah, maybe I just do this, I feel
like adding the top and bottom equation. And we see that like three times the
up charge plus three times the down charge has got to be one. That's,
so what's the best, you why would I not give it over to you? What's the best way to, what's the,
like, I mean, I can solve it, but what's like the nicest way to solve this thing?
The way I would have done it is I just multiply, take a linear combination such that one of the
variables is eliminated, right? Yeah, but that's like so gross. Yeah, I know, of course, I know
how to do that. But okay, what the hell still like I'll multiply this. I want to say I want to figure
out what the charge of the up quark is. So I'll like multiply this top equation by two. So I'll
get like, sorry, and I'll do it in this disgusting way for you plus 2d equals two. And then I'll
like subtract this bottom one from this top one. And so then I get three u and these cancel equals
two. That wasn't too terrible, I guess. It just seems like unmotivated to me physically, but okay.
So we're seeing that u is two thirds, which is, and then d is one less than that. So d has got to be
one third. So we're, and this has actually been like shown experimentally. Sorry, d has got to be,
did I say it correctly, d has got to be negative one third. And then you can just check that like
two thirds plus two thirds minus third works, it's one, and then two thirds minus one third minus
one third is zero. So we're getting these interesting charge charges for the up and down quarks.
It really came as like a big shock to people because they had never known about fractional
charges for them. There's more to say about that, but let me just start getting them onto the
picture here. So I'm going to have my u and d and I'm going to, and it turns out it works like
like the other ones in the sense that like there's two that are sort of joined at the hip,
which are the left ones. And then there are two that are the right-handed ones that are,
that do not feel the weak force and they're like separate from each other. And so we know the charges
of them now. There's like two thirds and negative one third. And the charge doesn't care about all
this left-right. Yeah, just to remind people, as I said earlier, when you see right and left,
there's secretly a copy of C2 living, you know, being carried around. So it's just it's just
tensored with everything else that's going on. So these particles might, as we'll see later,
some of them might have other degrees of freedom. But what's being suppressed here is the C2 that's
coming from the left and the right. Yeah, it's sort of lurking in the in the background. Yeah. So
so this is so this is these are the particles of what's called the first generation of the
standard model. It was they were the first to be discovered. But what's interesting is that later
on people discovered more particles called the second and the third generation. But we're not
going to I'm not going to talk about them a whole lot. And the reason why is because they are like
carbon copies of what I've just written down here, except that they're much heavier. They're
well, they're heavier for the second generation, they're even heavier for the third generation.
So like in addition to the electron, there's a particle that's has all the same data that I
be writing down here called the muon, which is like 207 times heavier than the electron.
And when it was discovered, as I said, who ordered that, because there's like no reason
they knew why it should exist. And in fact, there's still no reason no why it should exist.
And then there's like an even heavier one called the tau particle. And then it was later discovered
that each one of those has its own neutrino. And it was discovered that like these, in addition
to these quarks, there are quarks in the second generation and quarks in the third generation.
But but for all the data that I'm going to be writing down, which is not including the masses
of these particles, for example, they will have the exact same data as what I've written down here.
So I'm not going to talk about them, I'm going to talk about just the fermions in the in one
generation. So there's a lot more complexity, which I'm suppressing here. Sure, sure. Yes,
the Higgs boson. So so so when we wrote down the gauge group SU three SU two cross one,
that neglected the Higgs boson at the level of of the gauge group, these generations don't interact,
right, because the representation split into three copies of that. But it's only so it is
only to the Higgs boson that actually the three generations interact from this term in the Lagrangian.
Yeah, that's right. So if you can imagine, so you could imagine it this way that like I'm
imagining telling you a story where I've like eliminated the Higgs boson. And if I eliminate
the Higgs boson, what would happen would be that actually that all these particles would be massless.
And the three generations would not interact with each other at all.
And so that's like a simpler story to tell, which will already will already see like plenty
of complexity and then enough to keep us happy for a couple of hours. Sure, sure. Okay, anyway,
then, okay, it's good to admit it's important that this is like being sloughed over. Yeah,
yeah, I think it's good to always know what's what's what's being screwed it over.
Yeah, so anyways, yeah, please continue. What's what's next? Well, I'll just briefly say that
actually each of these quirks comes in like three kinds called red, green and blue, quite arbitrarily.
And that has a lot to do with this Su three group that you mentioned, which is connected to the
strong force. So, so that that will enter at some point. But, but I think what I mainly want to
do right now is continue on with this little story about the week the week force and iso spin.
And so the name that people use for iso spin is I three, it's like this iso spin in the third axis,
like the z axis, if we were thinking physically. But, but, but let me just let me just indicate
what that is. So, a bunch of these guys are coming in pairs, the left ones are coming in pairs,
where one of them is iso spin up, and the other one is iso spin down. And, and it's just a habit of
physicists to, to use for up they use one half as the value of iso spin and, and for down negative
one half. If mathematicians had been in charge from the very start, they may have used one and
negative one here. But there are good, not completely stupid reasons to, to, to use these values.
So I'll do that. I don't want to deviate from tradition there. These guys have no iso spin,
so that they're not interacting with the weak force. These guys are coming in pairs, but here
this one has the bigger charge, so it has the bigger iso spin. So it's like one half and negative one
half. And then this is one half. And this is negative one half. Wait, sorry, I'm sorry.
Those got, sorry. That's not true. These guys are the right handed ones have, have no iso spin.
They're not, not interacting with the weak force, so they have no iso spin. So,
so the, the guys that go like one half and negative one half, these, these, these ones that
sort of are coming in, in pairs or physicists will sometimes call them doublets. You could,
that should be reminding you of the stuff that I was saying about how
we have this iso spin up vector in C2.
And this iso spin down vector in C2. Actually, Tim was saying this. And, and so I'm just, so
physics jargon is that like this one has i3 equals one half. It's just
right. So, so another way of saying this in representation theoretic language, you have
a representation of SU2 and therefore a representation of its Lie algebra, which would be
traceless skew Hermitian matrices. i3 is a generator and you look at
these up and down or basis vectors, and then you look at the eigenvalues of the i3 operator
in that basis. And then this is just saying that in the two dimensional representation,
the way we've normalized things is such that i3 will have eigenvalue positive half for the,
for the one zero vector negative half of the zero one. And then in the trivial representation,
well, it's i3 maps to the zero vector, like, like everything else. And so, so,
yeah, you only get zero iso spin. Yeah, that's right. So, so you can,
you can make up a two by two matrix, which might also be called i3 better put a hat on it,
because it's not these numbers. And this matrix, when you apply it to this vector,
it multiplies it by one half. So that's an eigenvector. And I want to apply it to this
vector multiplied by negative one half. So that's also an eigenvector. And then their eigenvalues
are these are these numbers here, which perhaps confusingly are also called i3. But
sure, sure. Yeah, this is where physicists are sloppy, where they confuse operators,
eigenvalues. And then there's also, you know, this thing about multiplying by i and minus i,
because right, because the Lie algebra actually skew her mission. But if you want
real valued eigenvalues, then you need to also divide by essentially. So anyways,
those are details were also sweeping under the road. But the other day, you have an eigenvalues
when you normalize things so that they're real. And in this case, half integer, then this is what
you're going to get. Yeah. So, so that's, that's a little bit more of a story about what's,
what's going on in this column of the chart. Now, what people did at some point was they
they decided to look at the
difference of the charge minus i3, because we've noticed there's this kind of
correlation that things that have bigger i3 have bigger charge, the isospin up things have
bigger charge than isospin down things. And so it's very natural to think about like, why,
why isn't the charge just the same as i3, right? Well, they're not the same, but but they both
get bigger sort of hand in hand. So it's very natural to like ponder the difference between them.
And, and so this winds up turning out to be like a very important quantity in physics. So we can
just like, we can just like work it out. So we see that like here, the charge is I guess,
a one half less than the, than the, than the i3. This is also one half less.
This is one less. This is the same. These to get a little hairier. So two thirds minus a half is a sixth.
This is also a sixth.
This is two thirds.
And this is negative one third. Now this looks pretty hairy, right? And it doesn't look like
there's much of a pattern here. The only pattern is that the the fellows that are isospin doublets,
the ones that are like in the same ones that I'm putting brackets around, they all have to have
the same value of this quantity because we, we, we, well, because we've, well, they don't have to,
but we've noticed that, that like when the isospin goes up one, the charge also goes up one in these
cases. So just one thing you said, which I was thinking in the background while you were doing
this, but I think I know the answer now you were saying, Oh, why, why is this, this relationship
between charge and isospin? On the one hand, you said earlier that the convention was to have
the higher isospin correspond to the higher charge. So in some sense, you define it that way. But I
think what the real mystery though is that you can, because i3 is shared among all the particles,
you could set that arbitrarily, which, which particle gets the higher i3 for, for one of these
doublets, but then because i3 is shared among all the particles, then you're sort of stuck with that
elsewhere. So there is a constraint, you can't independently choose the higher i3 for all these
guys. There actually is a constraint. So that's the answer to, to, to the, to the,
to why I was a little bit confused when you first saw why is there's this relationship between q
and i3. When at first you said, Oh, we just kind of made a convention. But, but of course, the answer,
as I just said, is that because you're sharing the i3? Yeah, that's right. Yeah. So, so now some
quantity along the lines of this, it's actually some quantity proportional to this, got the name
hypercharge as a, because it's like connected to charge, but it's like more, more mysterious.
Now, charge. Well, okay, so what about plain old charge? So charge
before quarks got into, onto the scene, we thought we understood charge, we charge was an integer.
And, and back in those days, the way we would say it is that charge is coming from representations
of the group you won. So we didn't talk too much about this group yet. This is like the simplest
of these various, of these various groups we've been talking about. This is just the group of
one by one unitary matrices. But, or if you prefer, and most people really do, it's like all the
numbers, either the i theta, or it's like theta is a real number. Or it's in other words, unit complex
numbers, I mean, there are like a lot of tons of ways to, to say it, but it's the unit circle
in the, in the complex plane. And if you take two numbers in the unit circle,
and you multiply and it stays in the unit circle. And this is a very nice
group. It's a billion unlike the other ones we've been talking about. And, and it has a lot of
representations that it has a lot of different representations on just that are one dimensional,
so that you can think of them as representations on the complex numbers. You can, it has different
representations, let me call them like representations rho sub n, where n is some integer.
So it has one representation on c for each integer. And the way it works is that
you, you take your unit complex number, and you want to let it act by this operation.
On some vector, but this is just a vector in the complex, in the complex numbers.
And the way it works is you just multiply by z to the n.
Multiply that vector by z to the n. So, so in other words, you can just multiply by z,
and that's called a particle of, oh, sorry, sorry, I didn't, I should say this, this n winds up being
called the charge of the representation. And so, so if you have a particle of charge one
in the old days, what we would say is that it's a particle in which this symmetry of,
of u one, just a certain kind of rotation, circular, circular type of, of symmetry. I mean,
when I'm writing this stuff, it is supposed to be having this kind of a picture in your mind.
That's what u one looks like. That kind of way of turning a particle around can act
on your particle. And if, and if you just multiply by the complex number itself,
you got a particle charge one. If you multiply by z inverse, it's called a particle charge negative one.
If you don't do anything n equals zero, you're multiplying by one, you're not doing anything,
that's called a particle charge zero. Right. And maybe, maybe to make it a little more intuitive,
when you raise to the nth power, it becomes e to the i n theta. And you could think of that n
as essentially a coupling constant. Right. So it's saying that the, the coupling of this,
this theta, this le algebra generators is, you know, n times stronger. And that's,
you can think of that as a measure of charge as well.
Yeah, we haven't really gotten to enough to say too much about that, but that's a good
way to get started. So the, the, the fact that this is like, has a more dramatic effect
when n is bigger winds up, meaning that the particles with bigger electric charge get
more strongly affected by the electromagnetic force through a long chain of reason.
But, but that's, but that's definitely right. So now when people,
when people discovered particle, so this looks like a wonderful story. And this story,
if you're a mathematician might easily convince you that it was like impossible
to have particles of fractional charge. And the fact that nobody had seen any particles
of fractional charge and made it all the more plausible until, until quarks were discovered
and had these fractional charges that we've discovered. So like how in the world do you,
do you get out of that, out of that mess? Well, it turns out that,
that first of all, you could have, one way you could have gotten out of that mess that's fairly,
sorry, I'm looking for where I was here, but one way that you could get out of that mess is you
could, which is not, which is like oversimplified, but it gives you an idea of how we can escape this
kind of dilemma is you could say like, oh, we're suddenly discovering a particle of charge
two thirds or like, let's say negative one third. Well, actually, we just were wrong all the time
about what, when we said a particle had charge one, those things that we thought were charged one,
they actually had charge three. So, so we just like hadn't ever found a particle of any smaller
charge. So we called it charge one, but we were like, we didn't know what was going on.
And so this, so when you see like a particle of charge negative one third, then you sort of like,
oh, we should like just redo our math and get things straight. And now we'll say that that
particle has charged negative one, assuming of course, we don't discover any more particles
with even smaller charge. So, so that's certainly, that's certainly possible to do. And that's
basically what what what people were forced to do when they discovered that particles have
can have fractional charge. I see. So actually,
yeah, I was going to say in terms of fraction, like,
if you wanted, in mathematical terms, if you want a representation of the league group,
which is stronger than a representation of the league algebra, that you need this
integrality condition in order for the representation to make sense of the league groups.
And you're saying that from that perspective, you know that you can't put a one third there
because you wouldn't have a representation. But there I guess there is some some actual
pre multiplier constant that sort of that maps things such that really in other words, the circle
is like three times bigger than you thought it was, right? So it's like really three n. Is that
is that basically what you're saying? Yeah, that's basically right. So you can say like,
you thought you knew what the physically relevant circle group was. But actually, the really
important circle group is this one here that has a three to one cover. And so okay. And so
yeah, so so that what do you thought you were like, turning something around once down here,
in the new picture, it's going around three times. And so you thought
an electron had charge or proton charge one, but like in this new story, this new mathematical
story, it has charge three. Yeah, so it's actually not unlike this double cover stuff that you were
talking about, you can get you can get symmetry groups wrong, or slightly wrong, and then say,
whoops, I should have been using some other group that was a covering group of that. Sure. But the
particular especially weird thing about the circle, as opposed to something like the SO3 that you
mentioned, is that you can keep on doing this arbitrarily, you can keep on changing your mind
and saying, oh, I want to use a cover of that, because it has it, well, the universal cover is
it's called as the whole real line. And you can wrap that in lots of different ways around the
circle, probably speaking. Yeah, yeah, I was going to say also, I don't know this, this might,
yeah, maybe just say a few words about it. But you know, one of the famous properties of quarks
that they're not observed in isolation, they're, and so I'm wondering to what extent quarks were
discovered, what does that even mean? Nevertheless, because of the way they mathematically occur in
the center model, you know, that they still have to have a well defined representation. So that sort
of necessitates this story. But in terms of like, discovering them or that they exist, so to speak.
Okay, can you just say maybe a little bit about that? Yeah, well, for a long time, people were
suspicious of quarks, for all sorts of obvious reasons, one being that we didn't actually
directly see them, we are theories of the nucleus worked very well, if we assume that protons and
neutrons were made of quarks. But by now, we're actually getting, we're getting better at doing
experiments. So for example, now we are able to do do collisions of atomic nuclei at such
high energies, that for a short while, they become so hot, and they collide so energetically,
that the quarks freely roam around, you know, in a little blob of stuff called a quark blue on plasma.
And so it's true that it's like after, you know, much less than a microsecond, that blob cools down,
and then it turns the protons and neutrons, and you don't, there are reasons we know why you're
never left with a lone quark when it's done. But we can actually do experiments that under
these extreme conditions, quarks act as if they are able to, I mean, they can freely roam around
under these extremely hot conditions. And there are others, not quite so intense experiments where
you can shoot an electron and a proton, and see that it's bouncing off of components inside the
proton, and it's bouncing off as if those components have charges, two thirds and negative one third,
you can bite by how strongly it interacts with them. So it's not just a metaphysical sort of
thing that you can never really see, it's hard to see the quarks, but you can definitely,
there's definitely tons of evidence that they're there and that they have these charges, yeah.
Okay, great, great. So, right, so here I was telling this story to say like,
first of all, you might think charges had to be integers, but then if it turned out,
you get things of charge like one third or two third, you could just change your conventions
and say, oh, what we thought was charge one third, we're going to call that charge one now.
And everything will work out, you just multiply by that, multiply your definition of charge by
that integer. And so that's basically what goes on here, except it turns out that like the really
good context in which to do that is not for charge, but this thing, this is called the hypercharge.
So it turns out that in the standard model, we've mentioned this group, SU three times
SU two times U one. And we've talked the most about the SU two, interestingly, which is the
this iso spin for the weak force, this iso spin SU two. We haven't talked at all about this SU three
yet. And I'm starting to talk about U one. And I sort of said, oh, you one can be used as a three
of charge. But actually, in the standard model, this U one here is not for charge, it's for this
other quantity called hypercharge, which is connected to charge, but it's not the same as charge.
And this U one here is connected to this thing here. However, you'll notice these things aren't
integers, these numbers here aren't integers. So what I'm going to do is I'm going to not work with
this quantity, I'm going to work with six times this quantity, which will be, which will be enough to
multiplying it by that is enough to get all these guys to be integers.
Now, I'll just mention that historically, people did not, we're not quite smart enough to multiply
it by six and call that the hypercharge. For some weird reason, they multiply it by two
and call that the hypercharge.
And so they still were left with some fractions running around. But the whole story is
clearer and more logical if you work with hypercharging an integer. So why is, for some
reason, the typical symbol for hypercharge? And I'm just putting this told over it to
reassure experts that I actually know what I'm doing here, that I'm not doing the usual way of
doing things, I'm doing like the way that it should have been done, which is to multiply it by six.
So we get, so I'll start calling this thing hypercharge, even though it's like off by a factor
of three compared to standard conventions, but this is enough to make it an integer. So we get
these hypercharges. And they're still weird, of course, right? So let's see what they are.
Negative three, you'd catch me if I screw up. I'm just multiplying these things by six. Negative
six, zero, one, one, four, negative two. So they're still extremely strange set of numbers.
But the interesting thing is that in the math that I hope we have time to get to about
connected to grand unified theories, we will see that we can explain all these numbers
in a really nice way in terms of, well, one way to think about it is in terms of this group SU5
that we alluded to at the beginning, take the standard model gauge group
and put it in a bigger group called SU5, that a bunch of these different
particles fit into vector spaces that are on which the group SU5 acts. And that group SU5 has
sitting inside it a copy of the group U1 called the hypercharge U1. And then if you just like work out
what kind of representation of U1 you get, you get these numbers in it. And it's in a non very
in a very elegant way, in fact. Yeah, so okay, this might be jumping the gun because we should
probably finish up the story with SU3 first. But can you repeat again how you can already see SU5
or get motivated to think about SU5 from this story? Can you just repeat that?
I don't think we can see it from just anything on this chart. We do need to get the SU3 in the game.
But it's sort of more like a preview of coming attractions that I'm saying that
when we get into the SU5 story, and it's not too hard to do, then these numbers will be explained
by that. Oh, I see, I see. Okay, great, great. Okay, that's great. So I think I should bring in,
I just think I should bring SU3 into the game. Yeah, sure, sure, let's do that. And so the
so I mean quarks are
funny things. And so a proton is made of three quarks. It's a very, very crudely,
you can think of like a kind of bag with these three things in it. But there has to be some
reason why they stay in this bag and don't just like shoot off separately, because we never really
see a quark by itself, except under extraordinarily high temperatures situations. So people posited
a force that holds these quarks together. And it's called the strong force, because it needs to be
incredibly strong, because these, there's like these two will have the same charge and they would
like to repel otherwise. And it turns out that that theory works out quite well. And it also
winds up explaining why the protons and neutrons attract each other. So like if you have like a
molecule of heavy water, it has like a heavy, heavy hydrogen in it, heavy hydrogen has a proton
and a neutron in its nucleus. So it would be a thing like this. And these two guys sort of
like to stick together. So the bags don't completely form into a single bag, but they like to stick
stick together with some kind of residual bits of, bits of force that are, that's the same kind
of force that's, that's holding these together. And it's a long, long story, probably too long
for us here to do in much detail. But it turns out that this theory of the strong force
relies heavily on the fact that these quarks can come in, each one, the quark and the down quark,
can itself come into several states. I mean, we keep seeing this that like, when you thought
there was like one particle, it turns out like there's actually different ways it can, can be,
like it could be ice has been up in ice. Here, it turns out that we need these guys to be able to
come in three kinds. So what we thought was the up quark can actually really have three states
called, well, you needed names for three things. And so people just decided what the heck we'll
call them red, green, and blue. And there's nothing at all to do with, with actual colors.
But it's actually turns out to be a very nice metaphor.
Yeah, just just like up and down, we're just two distinct words to label two basis vectors,
red, green, and blue are just three distinct words to label three different basis vectors.
That's all it is. Yeah. So, so what these guys are more really is that they're vectors in a three
dimensional vector space. And so they're just names for, for three basis vectors. So for example,
red is just a shorthand name for this. I guess red comes first, for some reason.
Green is this, and blue is this. It's an electromagnetic spectrum ordering.
Yeah, something. Yeah, that's right. Everyone always says RGB. Everyone, like in color theory
and TV screens and stuff. It's probably the same reason. But also we should say, yeah, SU3 is the,
well, three dimensional version of SU2. And this is where the verbal description of SU3 is better
now than the defining equations, because it's three by three, right, matrices that have
whose columns are an orthonormal basis vector, and the determinants one, right? And you could,
of course, write that out in terms of actual parameters, but it's, it's, it's going to get
a kind of more ugly, yeah, SU2. Yeah, it's more, it's definitely more complicated.
Murray Gell-Mann came up with this stuff.
So that was like orthonormal rows or orthonormal columns. I forget what you said, but either one
implies the other. And, and the determinant is one. So the S there, in case anyone is wondering,
means special. And, and special is some strange name for the determinant of the matrix is equal to
one, whereas you, which is the stuff about the orthonormal columns. So once you're in,
once you've been indoctrinated in the code, all these letters actually mean things to you.
Yeah. And of course, the three just means three by three. So and SUN is just n by n. And it just,
yeah, yeah. So we may bump into SU5 pretty soon. And so that would be just like this,
but with five by five. Exactly. Yeah. And so, so what's, yeah, so in terms of the,
the story of like, what are all the particles? There are more particles than it looked like here,
because actually these, each time I write up or down, they really come in, they really come in
three different kinds. Maybe I won't bother to try to cram it into the chart, but so, but there's
like an upright, sorry, sorry, sorry, an up red, up green, up blue, same here, same here, same here.
So this, so those things are actually six dimensional vectors three times two, because
there's three degrees coming from the color, red, green, blue, there's two coming from the,
well, if it's left or right, then there's two, right. So, and if you consider both,
and there's four. So anyways, there's sort of like, for people who know tensors, it's really a tensor
with different, different components of the tensor corresponding to the different degrees of freedom,
either the SU3 or the SU2. Yeah. So, so it's very fun to count the number of these particles.
When you're trying to figure out this particle physics stuff, or when the good old, when the,
when my heroes were trying to figure it out, they, they had to use every possible
clue they could get. So you have to even do things that seem so simple-minded as like counting them
and seeing if you learn anything. So let's might as well do it. So one, two, three, four. Now,
five, six, seven, that's really three, eight, nine, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. And so there are 16,
I mean, you might not want to call them all different particles. It's sort of, you know,
sometimes you go think of like the red, green and blue is like three different states of the same
particle, but, but I will just like say that there are like 16 particles,
16 particles in this, in this generation of the standard model.
What do you notice about the number 16, Tim? It's a power of two. It's a power of two. Yes.
And then you should not laugh at these clues that nature is providing. Now, also,
I haven't gone into it much, but all of these particles have antiparticles. Each one of them
has its own antiparticle. And we really need to explain them to, so I hadn't been talking about
them because they sort of just go along, sort of, you know, they sort of, they're very parallel,
but they're, but they're there too. Sorry, this is not working so well.
Sure. So, so really, if you count particles in the particles, there's, there's 32 of them.
And that's probably the right, right way to think about all this. Well, that's also a power of two,
unsurprisingly. Maybe we should just say really quick and anti, you can think of an antiparticle
in representation, theoretic terms, it's just the, the complex conjugate representation
corresponding to the particle, right? So in general, just a particle is something that
lives in a representation of some group. And then these are all complex representations. And then
you can consider the representation where you just complex conjugate everything. And then that's
the antiparticle. Yeah, that's the amazing, that's the amazing thing. And if you know a bit of math
and you thought about our description of how charge works, you would, in terms of U1, you might
notice or be able to guess that when that would take a complex conjugate, you're sticking a minus
sign here and how things rotate. So, so that, that would, that winds up being the reason why
antiparticles have the opposite charge of particles. So it all, it all works out very nicely that way.
So now 32 is two to the what, Tim? Two to the five. Two to the five. It turns out that's connected to
this SU five that's going to come and save the day, believe it or not, amazingly. So,
so, I mean, that's like the first clue about SU five, but it's a very feeble clue. I mean, you
wouldn't, you wouldn't, it doesn't get us that far. So, okay, so what I want to do now is try to
start talking about how you could organize this sort of bit of a mess using, using SU five.
Um, so I'll need, I'll need more room here. Athleticians always, which there is like an
infinitely large blackboard. That's right. So, uh, so let's just, let's just take stock of what we
did. So we, so we've described, you take stock while I like, yeah, sure. Yeah. So, so we've basically
described the representation theory of the standard model as it is. You wrote one generation,
there's actually three. So basically, as you said, there's just two, two more copies. The way you
would say it is that there's just three identical copies of this representation of the standard
model gauge group, this SU three, cross SU two, cross U one, we're going to ignore the Higgs.
So, so there's three copies of that. Within one generation, what you just enumerated with some,
some numerology that suggests that there's something, well, there's, there's a two to the fifth
line around. It's pretty weak. Yeah, yeah, yeah. So I think what you're going to do now is, is going
to, uh, um, uh, talk about more evidence or, or motivations for why there should be an SU five,
but then finally explain how SU five, uh, can be, uh, manifested as some, some mathematical
structure that, that realizes this, and as a bonus, I guess, uh, um, makes hypercharge more
natural. I think that's one of the features you, you mentioned, right? Yeah. The, the, the hypercharge
is clearly like the most chaotic. I mean, it's all sort of chaotic, I guess, but this is like the
most chaotic bunch of numbers you've ever seen. And so, so like the first selling point of the SU
five theory that's like the easiest to explain is that, is that it makes that not seem like a mess,
and it makes it seem like, oh, wow, it had to be exactly that SU five to work. Um,
so, um, so the trick to SU five is, is this, so we've got, we've got SU three, and we've got SU two,
and we've got U one describing the strong, the weak force and sort of hypercharge force,
uh, and there's a way to map this group into SU five. It's quite, quite pretty,
and it's, and it's quite, there's something tricky about it and interesting about it. So,
so here's a group element in SU three, three by three matrix. Here's a group element in SU two,
so that's a two by two matrix. Here's a group element in U one. That's just a complex
numbers. I mean, if you think of it as a one by one matrix, I'll write it like alpha for some
stupid reason, then I think of it as like more like a good name for a number. Um, and so,
well three plus two is five, so it's sort of easy to see how to get a three by three matrix and a
two by two matrix to sit together inside a, inside a five by five matrix. So we can just like
go ahead and do that. So, so we'll put this matrix G into the, so I'm drawing like a five by five
matrix, but I'm not really drawing, I'm not drawing it in detail. I'm drawing this like
the first three columns and the second and the next two columns and the first three rows and the
next two rows. And so, so this is a three by three block. I'll stick a G in there and I'll stick H
in there. So that would be fine and dandy, but what about this alpha? Well, see that this is sort
of where the hyper charge is like found to be, found to be sneaky. You could like try to just like
stick the alpha in here, just multiply G by alpha, but then this resulting five by five matrix
wouldn't have determinant one anymore. G and H have determinant one. So if you stick them in blocks
like this, this, this matrix so far has determinant one, but we've got to somehow stick the alpha in
there without ruining that determinant one property. So like, if I just stick an alpha here,
I hope you don't mind quiz questions, Tim, but you can, you can like delete.
Okay. No, no, no, I like it. This is, this is a, this is a Socratic dialogue.
Yeah. Okay, good. Okay. Some people like it. Some people really hate it. So like if I, so suppose
like I just said, okay, I'm going to try to get this alpha into the game. I'll just stick it over
here. Sure. So what would the determinant of this resulting matrix be now? Right. Well,
because G is a three by three matrix, right? Each row, there's three rows and each row or column,
or actually every entry really got multiplied by alpha. But when you look at, at the determinant,
it's, it's, it's, um, bilinear in every row or column. And because there's three of them.
Multilinear, I guess. I meant multilinear. Yeah. Multilinear in each row or column. And since
there's three of them, then the total weight that alpha is going to get is, is, is weight three.
Or in other words, the power that you get when you compute the determinant, it's going to be an alpha
cubed because each row or column, it's going to contribute an alpha and there's, there's three of
them. So it's alpha cubed. Yeah. Yeah. So that would definitely not work. We'd get the determinant
being alpha cubed instead of, instead of one, which is what you want if we're trying to use SU5.
Uh, and similarly, if you put it down here, just, I mean, if we not put it there, but only put it
down here, we'd get an alpha squared, uh, mess up. And so what we, we want to somehow
do things in such a way that, uh, the determinant stays equal to one.
Um, I, so, so we could like put some power of alpha in here and some other power of alpha
in here. We have like potentially various options for doing it. There might even be different,
there probably are actually different, they might, they might work. I'll stick an alpha in here,
but I mean alpha to some power here. That's right. Maybe we should just emphasize because it wasn't
clear the, the, the off diagonal terms are zero. So it's, yeah, yeah. Sorry. Yeah. That's right.
So we're not, yeah. So I mean, we're like not exploiting anything about that. You could try to
exploit that somehow, but I'm not going to try. Yeah. Um, yeah. So well, okay, this is like a
tougher quiz question. We want to do this the simplest way. So we don't need to like think
about like all possible ways, but like what kind of power of alpha could we put here and what kind
of power of alpha could we put here that makes it all, uh, makes it a determinant of the whole
matrix, right? Stay one. Yeah. Basically you, you, uh, you put the power such that they, they
were going to, they're going to cancel because I mean, one fact that we're using it, that the
determinant of a block diagonal matrix is the product of the determinants, right? And so
when we look at the product of the determinants, we're going to get, uh, alpha to the alpha to
the sum power times three times alpha to some power. Yeah. Two. So if we choose those powers
such that they, the total sum is zero, then we're in business. And so, uh, it's not too hard to kind
of see from this numerology that if you put say alpha squared at the top and alpha minus
to the minus three at the bottom, then you're in business because then you're going to get a
two times three and then a minus three times two. Yeah. Great. So, so yeah. So the turn with the
G and the H aren't really doing anything in this game. We can take them to be the identity. And so
you get, this means this time is the identity matrix here. So you'd get, you'd get this. Yeah.
And so, so what you got, what you said is that this three J plus two K has got to be, we want,
we want to try to take that to be zero. Right. And we want to sort of not try to make life
any more complicated than, than, than necessary. So we could take like, uh, let's see, I can say
like two equally good choices, but because, uh, but what did you just say again? I figure which
one two and minus three. Yeah. So, so something like two and negative three would work. Right.
Would work great. Yeah. That's right. Um, or minus two and three as well. Yeah. So that would
also work. And I'm like busily scrambling, trying to figure out like which one, which one that I,
I did, uh, I stuck with the pot positive first. So just to be consistent. Yeah. Um, it probably,
well, well, it doesn't ultimately matter what the, what the, what this choice matter, what,
how does this choice affect that you did like two, negative three versus doing negative two,
three? It'll turn out that it will just affect our choice of conventions about what is hypercharge,
which is this you one thing. So then, so that if we change our minds about this convention,
that would go along with changing our minds about the definition of, of hypercharge.
So I don't want to go back and change this whole table here. So I'm going to try to make it come
out so that it, uh, that our convention here is going to get along with that. Um, but I will,
but since I don't remember ahead of time what I'm, what's going to work, I'll just like go ahead
and then I may see like, Oh no, we got to change it. Okay. Well, let's see. Let's see. Yeah. I mean,
that's, and that's, well, that's supposed to be pedagogically interesting. I mean, that's supposed
to, that's how people actually did. All right. Let's see how we're going to see the
relearning process happen in real time. Exactly. So, um, well, let's see. There's a little bit of,
a little bit of shenanigans required here. So I was writing this unit complex number as, as
alpha, but we could, if we imagined to want to write it as e to the i theta, that's like a common,
common way, which you've already seen to write unit complex numbers. So you could write it, you
could, uh, oh, but I'm going to, I'm going to try to, so we get this, uh, well, and now I'm afraid
I'm going to have to like mutter some words about the algebras, which, which, which luckily Tim already
sort of muttered, which is that we can think of this as the exponential of some, some matrix
and physicists always like do e to the i times that matrix. So I'm saying that this matrix here is
going to be like e to the, we're going to call it e to the i times this matrix, which I'll call y
hat, hat because it's a matrix, but why? Because it's this hypercharged business that we're
talking about here. And so then what is this, what is this matrix?
Well, it's just the, you can, it's just going to be a diagonal matrix that's going to have these
numbers in it two, two, two, negative three, negative three. So, so in other words, if we
include U1 and SU5 this way and think of the elements of U1 as the exponential of some
self-adjoint matrix, self-adjoint here, meaning that has like real eigenvalues,
then these eigenvalues we will call hypercharge. And then we hypercharges of five different
hypercharge states. So let me sort of like as if they're, I mean, if, if that is, sorry, I
shouldn't be a little clear. If this five by five matrix is acting on C5 by multiplication,
matrix multiplication in the usual way, then, then some basis vectors, some of the obvious basis
vectors in C5 are going to get multiplied by two. So what I'm trying to sloppily argue for is that we
should be like, if we have SU5 running around acting on the vector space C5, we should expect to be
seeing some particles or states of particles that have hypercharge two and some that have
hypercharge negative three. So now let's go back and look. So, so we do have some negative threes
and there are indeed two of them, which is, that is the, the, the electron and the neutrino, that,
those are the two of them. So, so that's good. We want it to, we want it to be two with negative
three. We want it to have three kinds of particles with hypercharge two. Oh no, there aren't any.
But can you weasel out of it, Tim?
I suppose you could say that maybe the left and right particles there that you have, sorry,
right, the left quarks and the right-handed electron, maybe they're actually, they decompose
into more fundamental particles that have hypercharge two, because if you have two of them,
you could get a four and if you have three of them, you can get a, you know, a six in absolute value.
And so, so that, that's I think a way you could, you could try to force this numerology to work.
That's, that's one type of way that people sometimes try to get these games to work out.
They try to assume that the particles where you're seeing are actually made up out of
subparticles. Those are called prion theories. But we're not going to actually need to do anything
so radical is that we're going to, we're going to get this to work. There's another way you could
say, well, if you combine, you could, if you tensor the, the E minus right with one of the left,
still, still too fancy. Sorry. I'm shooting down your theories faster and faster.
Okay. So tell me what you had in mind that, because those are, those are the two things
I was thinking. Okay. Well, well, what we're looking for things of hypercharge two, right,
and we're not seeing them, but what's the closest thing in this chart to that?
Sorry. That's supposed to be like a leading question, but it may not. I mean, I'll be glad
to tell you like what's going on if you get too baffled.
Yeah. I'm not sure where this is. I'll give you another clue. Okay.
I listed the 16 particles, but I didn't actually list all the 16 anti-particles.
Oh, I see. I just sort of said, oh yeah, and there are going to be 16 anti-particles as well.
I see. Well, then, well, you have a minus two from a particle, then you're going to have,
I guess, maybe a plus two from one of the anti-particles, right?
Yeah, exactly. Because, because this hypercharge thing, this is like a connected to representations
of U1, and we've mentioned that like when you take the conjugate representation of a
representation of U1, you get a different representation where the charge is negative,
or in this case, hypercharge is negative what it had. Right.
So this guy is our only, is our only hope, this guy at the bottom of the chart,
and does it, how many particles are anti-particles?
Yeah, because we have a minus two and then an anti-particle two, but we wanted three things
that have a two, right? So I'm not sure we're going to get our third one right now.
Wait, how did you get, which ones are you talking about? I just see this one here.
Yeah, yeah, but I meant, you know, in our, in our matrix on the other slide, there were three copies
of a two, right? Yeah, yeah, we want, yeah, right. So we want to get three particles,
or anti-particles, of hypercharge two. Right. And I think what you're saying is it looks like
there's just one of them. Yeah, because you took the, you hit the anti-particle at the last guy.
Right, but I also said something else, okay, I'm quizzing you all over the place. So
I'll give it away. Remember, I said that actually there are three
corks, they come in three colors. So I should have been nicer and like drawn a full-fledged
chart where I drew down red, down blue. You're right, you're right. Sorry, it's actually,
this chart is actually the, the, the, so there's three groups here, the first
doublet, the second doublet, or I guess, sorry, and then the corks, that's what I'm calling the
three groups. They, the, the, the, the leptons, the E minuses and the neutrinos,
those all get counted once because they're colorless, right? The other ones have weight
three each. So 16 is really four plus three times four, right? Four plus 12. And so there's,
because again, there's a three, there's three colors that we suppress in the notation. So that's
the three, the three colors of the anti-particle is the three multiplicities of two that we're
looking for, right? Right, yeah, that's right. With regards to how do we get three particles
of hypercharge two, now that we have all the colors written out, and now we see explicitly
all 16 particles, four at the top and 12 in the bottom half, we see that when we take the
anti-particle version of what we have here, the hypercharge minus two becomes plus two,
and then we have the necessary three colors to go along with that, right? The RGB of the down,
right? So the anti-down will give us three particles of hypercharge two. So, so that explains
the, the Y hat matrix you have on the other slide. Right, yeah, so, so we get this
matrix acting here on, acting on C five, and we can think of it like this, like
C five, and we can break it up into C three, which is on which that's acting, and, and C
two, on which this block is acting, and just, it's actually sort of convenient to sort of label
the eigen, label these vector spaces by their eigenvalues, so I'm going to write like a little
two down here to indicate that these are hypercharge two and then negative three here, and so,
so what we saw is that this is like consistent with these three guys, sorry, the anti-particles of
these three guys being in the, being in here, so it's a little bit long-winded to say all this
stuff because, so these are the anti-particles of these three guys, but also we, we should like
remember that, or we should, we should remember that these are the right-handed
down quarks, there are also these left-handed down ones, and so, maybe we should, like the
subscript L's and subscript R's, I mean, yeah, I think that's a, I think that's a great idea, so,
so it can be confusing because, because there's also like, maybe capital, okay, maybe I'll
indicate it like that, yeah, so there we go, so I don't want to mix up red and, and right, so, exactly,
so, so we have, we've got those three guys in there, and then here we have the,
here we have these two guys, maybe it's just polite to like list up isospin up one first,
and the isospin down one second, I don't know if we're gonna need to know that, but anyway, that's,
that's, that's what we've got here, and these are, oh, and these are left-handed guys, we should
indicate here, and I guess for the C3 too, we should have bars to, oh yeah, right, sorry, yeah,
yeah, so it's really complicated, it's okay, it's ornate, but it's, at least it's, it's ornate,
but the notation is, is, is exactly what you, it's, it's, it's not ambiguous, right, it's ornate,
but you can like read everything off, right, from the, from the notation, okay, so, so this
accounts for five of our third, 32 particles and anti-particles, and maybe if I wanted to,
I could sort of like check them off or something like that, or like getting those guys there,
but there's, well, maybe that's confusing to you though, because we like, there's the particles
and the anti-particles, so maybe that's like a bad idea, but we'll maybe do it for now,
just to realize that like these are the ones that we like have no clue about yet, so there's this
amazing construction from a, that you can do to a vector space like C5, which is called taking the
exterior algebra of that vector space, and, and if you do it,
what you get is a new vector space, and if your original vector space had some dimension,
like five, then this new vector space happens to have dimension two to the old dimension,
that happens to have dimension two to the five, which is just exactly what we want,
because we want it to be 32. Yeah, maybe just say a little more.
I'm definitely planning to say more. Yeah, okay. We're gonna need to say a lot more.
So the exterior algebra can take quite a while to describe, if you were going to describe it
properly, but I think for our purposes, all you need to know is the following,
well, two to the five, what is, what's one way in two to the five can actually occur,
if you have a set of five elements, then the power set, that is the set of all possible subsets
of that five element set, has size two to the five. In general, if you have an n element set,
then the set of all possible subsets is two to the n, because for each element you decide whether
it's in a set or not, right? And so you could think of the exterior algebra as just the vector
space that's generated by elements representing some subset of the basis elements. I think that
should be enough for our purpose. I don't think we need the skew symmetry. Yeah, no, we don't really
need anything much more than what you said, I think. We will need to know a few properties of
it, but I think they all sort of follow from what you said. Yeah, actually, I have my own lecture
video about exterior algebra, so I can refer people to that. Okay, so then you can refer people to
that for more details. That's right. So here we have five things, forming a basis of this
five dimensional vector space, and then any subset of this five element set of things will be a basis
vector for this 32 dimensional vector space. And it's a little bit sad that the five things that
we're looking at subsets that have such ridiculously complicated names, we could attempt to make
shorter names for them so that we could make up more names for the set of like this one,
this one, this one, and this one that wasn't like such a jaw-breakingly long expression.
And we should probably do that. But before I, while I'm busy scratching my head thinking about
exactly what way I want to go there, I'll say there's like a thing that people often do,
which follows from what Tim described, is that you can take this exterior algebra. So we'll think
of the, we'll mainly focus on the basis of this algebra, which are all the subsets of these things.
And when you look at all the subsets of these things, there'll be some subsets, namely one,
that has just zero elements. So the zero element subset, the empty set.
And that will be the basis for a certain vector space, which just has one basis element of the
empty set. And then the one element subsets will give you some more basis vectors that those will
be just these ones, we can think of these guys here as one element sets. So then this lambda one
of C5, or at least just the same as C5. And then it goes on, luckily not for too long.
And so the part, if we're going to get this business to work,
or maybe long enough to like run off the edge of the page though,
you got to be careful. So they really should like make infinite leaks and the low
boards. There's no reason why you can't do it on a computer. Okay, so
yeah, so, so we would, so this is a good way to organize what's going on.
The way, right, this is a good way to organize what's going on. Let me focus on,
well, let me focus on, on lambda zero, lambda one, and lambda two. So one interesting,
why am I focusing on those three? It's because when you have any subset of your five element set,
its complement is another subset. And if you like take a complement of a two-element subset of a
five-element set, it'll be a three-element subset. So there's this operation that maps
lambda's complementation, that maps basis vectors of here to basis vectors of here,
here to here, and here to here. And, and it turns out that that operation is very
beautiful and sort of helps, means that if we understand what's going on for the first three
guys, we can sort of like figure out what's going on with the other three guys. And I guess I'll
just, are you about to say something? No, I just, yeah, I mean, we might as well just write down
the names just because there are people who will be familiar with it. It's just the hot, the hot star
operator from, from Geometry. Yeah, so it's, it's written with a star and it's called the hot star
operator. And it works not just for five, but for anything that I'm just going to focus on the
case that we care about. And it has the property that if you do it twice, you almost get back to
where you started from. I guess you might get back to plus or minus where you started from in, in
general, because, well, because of some things we haven't talked about. I shouldn't have even said
that. Yeah, it's okay. But, but I'll just give it away that in our, in our particular application
of this idea, it would be fun to like, we could like deduce this, but I'll just speed things up
by just saying that it will correspond to some famous operation that you can do to a particle
to get some other kind of particle that's sort of like the complement. And that's taking the
antiparticle. And if you do, if you take the antiparticle, you more or less get back where you
started from. So actually, sorry, let me pause it because there's, there's two kinds of
involutive or almost involutive operators. There's complex conjugation. That's
involutive, because if you conjugate twice, you get back the same thing. The hot star is
involutive up to a minus sign, which we're not going to go over. Can you repeat again what the,
you said that you were alluding that there's maybe a relationship between the two?
I'm not talking at all about complex conjugation. I wasn't trying to, but you're right there. There
is that issue. But here, we are going to have, oh, well, yeah, you're making me actually think
this is actually confusing. But, but, but here we're good. There's a, there is a linear
operation. Oh, I see. I get it. So, so the point is that you may be like more, and I, apparently,
are more used to hot star operators on real vector spaces, which is defined using a real
inner product on that vector space. And those are linear. But here, you define this hot star
operator using a complex inner product, which is linear in one slot and conjugate linear in the
other slot. That winds up making this be a conjugate linear operation. I suspected something
like that was going to go on. And this is where, like, like, Taylor geometers do, do things this
way, I believe, right? And, and I, yeah, that's, yeah, that's right. Yeah. Yeah. So, so I, so if you
did, yeah, so, so we didn't need to get into this, but anyway, we thought that antiparticles have
something to do with complex conjugation. You're right. And this operator is not linear. It's
conjugate linear. But we're just going to mainly focus on what it does to these basis
vectors here. So we won't really be seeing much about that, but it's really beautiful how it all
works out. Okay. So we're mainly going to be using it for us to like save time and just think of
these, these first two guys and then say, like, oh, the other ones are just going to,
are going to be the other particles that we haven't covered yet, that we haven't gotten to yet,
and hope that they're like, those are like antiparticles of ones that we already have
gotten to that get all matches. So for example, like, I mean, I wrote down 16 things here,
and they will have various hypercharges, and they will all have antiparticles. So there'll be 16 more,
and we've actually already started using the antiparticles in this last row here, and they will
have the opposite hypercharges. And because I mean, it's known that the antiparticles have the
opposite anticharge hypercharges, but it will also work out from the math here that it's going to
all work out. So okay, let me, I was supposed to be trying to save time. So I'll proceed. And I'll
think mainly about this lambda two and C five, which is like the biggest, most exciting thing here.
So, so let's think about this thing. So, sorry, so just, just to wrap up this, this conjugation
business, is it, is it the case that what, like, what, in degrees zero, one, two, or some other
subset, you have the particles, and then the hodge star will map the particles to the antiparticles?
That's a really interesting, mysterious question, because we've all, because we've already seen
something funny, which is that these electron and neutrino that are conventionally called particles
are getting combined with the antiparticles of this, of this quark into the same five-dimensional
vector space. So, so the answer basically is no, the answer is that like this thing,
that's where it contains a mix of what we normally call particles and antiparticles.
That's right. So, the exterior algebra is not graded, or the grading doesn't respect
particle or antiparticle, because the vector space itself is, is not homogeneous with respect to
particle or antiparticle. Yeah, so you can take this space and you could chop it up into two
subspaces, which are the particle part and the antiparticle part, but that sort of lies a skew
or a fork to this decomposition, which is in a pretty interesting way.
So, what I'm trying to do here is to look at C5 and look at its second exterior power, but
analyze it by using the fact that we're thinking of C5 as chopped up into these two pieces, which
I'm attempting to write down here, and I keep forgetting what I'm trying to write down, trying
to write the hypercharge subscripts here. So, that's what I want to look at, and I'm going to
use a fact that we can actually understand pretty clearly, which is that the exterior,
the second exterior power of a direct sum of things, there's a nice little formula for it,
which I'll write, and then maybe Tim or I can like say why it works that way. It's sort of like the,
sort of like the old formula for A plus B squared that you learned in high school.
It's a lot like that, actually. Yeah. Well, it's also. Well, yeah. It's kind of more
combinatorial, because basically the left-hand side is saying choose all possible two element
subsets of this direct sum, and basically you can either choose two from V, two from W, or one from
either, and that corresponds to that decomposition there. Yeah, that's right. So, here in our
particular case, we're choosing a two-element subset of either of a three-element subset,
union a two-element subset, and so let's just write it down and see what happens here. So,
here we're getting lambda two of C3. Now, how does the, I could put the two here, but I'd
rather say like how this whole subs, how this whole space here is a representation of the,
of the hypercharge U1. And so, I want to write down a number here that says like what the hypercharge
of the guys in here are. Do I dare ask you what it is? So, what I'm asking you mathematically is
like if I have a vector space and U1 is acting on it by like multiplication by like either the
two i theta, and then I take its, well, second exterior power, then like how are those numbers
going to act on those? So, in general, right, the power of the, of the exterior algebra will be
the weight that you assign to that space will be the product of the exterior algebra power
and the original power of the vector space. So, in this case, it's two from the exterior
algebra two times two from the C3 two to get four. Yeah, that's right. Another way to think about it,
it's like a more of a physicsy way to think about it, is that like we have these kind of
particles of hypercharge two here, and whether you can think of these as like combinations of
two different particles of that kind, two of like two elements. And so if you have like two,
so very intuitively a physicist would say like, if you've got two particles of hypercharge two,
stick them together, you get a particle of hypercharge. This is also clear from the
representation through a picture. You have two things and you have something of one weight and
something of another weight, then when you multiply those exponentials, the weights add,
because that's the way how you multiply exponentials. It's the exact same thing.
Yeah. So, here we're going to tensor these vector spaces following this rule here,
but then I just want to like stick a little subscript down here to say what the hypercharge
of this, how this guy is a representation of the hypercharge you are. So, tell me what
number. So, now it's what I just said, there's an e to the, you know, two i theta and an e to the
minus three i theta, and then you combine that, you get an e to the minus one i theta, so it's
minus one. Yeah, so you get negative one here. So, I mean, so far it's not obvious that anything
is working unless you're like, I got a really good memory, but at the very least you can see
that like we're getting all sorts of wacky looking numbers from a systematic principle,
which is cool in itself. So, I mean, whether or not it works,
or at least like not making a bunch of stuff up. Right. This is all just from the representation
theory of how do you map SU3, SU2, U1 into SU5. Yeah, these numbers may look sort of wacky themselves,
but if you remember the whole conversation, we are more or less forced into this. That's right.
To the line. Yeah, that's right. That's right. So, it's because that's the beauty of this stuff.
Yeah. What about this guy here? Yeah, and now you get two times minus three, which is minus six.
Yeah, so you get negative six. So, okay. Great. Okay. Well, I can't resist. So, let's see. Let me
see if I can remember four, negative one and negative six. So, let's see if we see those guys
running around. Let's see. This is. Yeah, indeed. Wow. Okay. So, like here's a four,
and there are three different particles of hypercharge four. Right. And that's the same
dimension as lambda two of C2. Great. Sorry, lambda two of C3. Sorry. Yeah. Yeah. Why is that?
Why does that have dimension three? You get to say, I think you can say it in terms of our
subset. Yeah. How many two-element subsets are there of three elements? Right. So,
you pick the first one. There's three. You pick the second one. There's two. That's three times
two. But the order doesn't matter. So, it's three times two divided by two. Otherwise known as three
choose two, which is indeed is three. Right. So, those are our, so that's working out great.
That's a three-dimensional vector space. And we see that it has a good candidate basis,
which are these, these guys here, which have these horribly long names. So, they're the
right-handed up quarks. And they come in three colors. So, those are working out.
Okay. Now, this, this guy, we're looking for things of hypercharge negative one.
So, what's your, so there's a worry about this. Let's see. Oh, wait. Oh, so, ah, right. So,
it's the antiparticles of these left-handed quarks, right? Because there's six of these guys,
and then the antiparticles will give you six minus ones. Yeah. So, there's six particles of
hypercharge one, but there's antiparticles. We'll get six particles of hypercharge negative ones.
So, we're definitely finding lots of negative ones. And then the beauty is that when you take the
tensor product of two vector spaces, the dimensions multiply. So, this is a six-dimensional space.
In other words, what we're doing in these guys is we're picking, we're picking two element sets
out of a five-element set. And in this particular conversation, pick one out of this three-element
set and one out of this two-element set. So, you get three times two choices there. Yeah. And so,
those are, I can't, my memory has gone to hell in my old age here. So, these are the left-handed
ups and downs. Yeah. So, great. So, now, hypercharge negative six.
Only one particle. Yeah. Fine. There it is, standing out. I'll just, yeah. I will just,
let's see, I will, I'll sort of keep checking things off. That's right. We have to sort of,
maybe I'll like make some kind of weird check for this one, because we like use the antiparticle
of that one. Okay. So far, we get to do that one. We have to, but we only have to do it like once.
Yeah. So far. Right. The right-handed electron, this crazy loner, hypercharge negative six. So,
there it is, the right-handed electron. So, it's really working out, picking out quite nicely.
Right. And I, right, and then we already did, right, lambda one we already did, because, and then,
ah. Right. Yeah. So, this, yeah. Yeah. You're right. You go on. I'm, keep talking. I'm just going to say it.
And then, lambda zero. Right. Now, lambda zero is very interesting. It's, it sounds,
it's sort of boring, but it's sort of interesting. So, lambda zero of any vector space is just one
dimensional, because you're picking out. Well, if you think of, if you have like us,
doing it in terms of bases here, the basis of this would be the, the zero element subsets of
our five elements. Yeah. The empty set. Yeah. The empty set is, is, is represents a vector,
and it's, and therefore it's a one-dimensional space. Yeah. So, don't tell any undergraduates
in a sentence like that, or they'll like, freak out. Then if you, they'll freak out even more,
if we figure out what particle this is, right. All right. Seems like we're making category
errors all over the place, if you're saying that the empty set is a vector, which is a particle,
but that's, that's the joy of physics. Yeah. So, so let's see. What, so it's a, it's a one-dimensional
vector space. So, it's like isomorphic just as, as a vector space, just to the complex numbers.
But, but what's the hypercharge for this thing? We need to know that, that was like a key to like
matching this data to our chart. So, can you tell me for that one?
Yeah. I mean, it basically has to be zero, right? There, I don't think there's any other
choice. I'm trying to think because. It is zero. Yeah. Yeah. I don't think, because I, I think,
how do I say, if I think, yeah. Okay. Actually, you could probably say this better than me. If you
want things to be somehow natural or functorial, there's no other natural choice you can choose.
I mean, you know, lambda zero is disconnected from lambda two. You could, you could actually assign
it in this one particular case, something random, but that's not going to be, I think, natural.
Is that correct? Right. But yeah, another way to think about it is that the way we got these
hypercharges in the various exterior powers is by adding up hypercharges of the, of the sort of
basic building blocks here. And so like here we're adding pairs. So, so what we're doing in the case
of lambda zero is we're adding up nothing. That's right. So we have to get zero. Yeah. I think,
actually, I think I like this one better. If we, if we stick with our principles here. Yeah.
Another way of saying is that like, you could, you should really think of let omega zero,
if you think of, if you think of the exterior algebra as an actual algebra, which we glossed
over, then lambda zero of C five should really be the ground scalars, which it always is. And
therefore it, it, it can't really have any possible weight. Yeah. Think about it. Yeah. Yeah.
That's right. Yeah. So, so it's a charge of this mysterious entity here. Yeah. It's got to be zero
mathematically. And so now we look at our chart and look, the right handed neutrino, the mystery
man, the particle that no one has seen. I will say, however, that there is another choice for what
this, there's, that's the obvious choice that's stirring us in the face. What's the other choice
we could pick? It sounds like the anti right neutrino. Yeah. The anti particle of the right
handed neutrino, which are either left handed, turns out to work. The anti particle of a right
handed thing turns out to be, let's not worry about it, but the anti particle of the right
handed neutrino is this other one. Yeah. So they're actually from the point, from the,
this is the first case and only case really that we've met where we, where we have a,
a choice of what, about what we, what would we pick to deal with this thing.
Yeah. Right. Because, because only zero, zero is the only number which is equal to its own
negative. Right. And, and, or, and also sort of zero.
Yeah. I mean, I mean, if the, if the same number had shown up like a bunch of
times, we could have like more flexibility. I mean, it did show up sometimes more than once,
but just like just enough to be, to fill our needs, not more than what we needed. So,
so this is like the first time we really had some, some wiggle room.
I'm busy trying to think about this six. Okay. Oh, negative six. Okay. Oh, right hand.
Did I get something wrong? Yeah. Negative six. Okay. We did that. So that was,
yeah. So that one's nailed down. Right. So here we have like two choices.
And yeah, it turns out that there's like a, there is sort of a favorite choice,
but, but I don't think I want to get into that because I'd rather just like stick with the logic
of, that we have here. So it's, it's sort of interesting that we could, we could use the
right handed neutrino or we could use its antiparticle here. But, but, but then you see we are
done in the sense that, so we could like, we could do this one or we could use the antiparticle
for this one here. But now everything is sort of filled up. But remember, we've, we've only
just like, like this, this and this, we have an equals, this is, yeah, we've only used up sort of
half of our exterior algebra. This has the same dimension as the half that we've handled.
And so basically these are just enough to handle all the antiparticles of the ones we've
covered or in this case, like we covered an antiparticle, but we haven't covered the particle. So,
so it will be just enough right to cover the rest. That's right. And then if you buy my
story that the hodge star operators connected to taking antiparticles, then it's, it really
works out quite nicely. I see, I see, because, because it's, you said it was anti-linear, then,
then the hypercharge is reversed. And that guarantees that you're going to get those antiparticles,
right? Yeah, yeah. But, and also it's good to notice, though, that you don't have to like,
believe me on that. So like, another thing that we could do, but I just don't think we want to
do because it takes a little longer, is to like, look at all the three elements. Sure. And you
could work out the possible hypercharges. So, you know, like, so like, you could, so like, you could
take like a three-element subset, it could be like two of this kind and one of that kind. Sure, sure,
sure. Yeah. Yeah. Let me just do a little bit. It's like two plus two plus negative three. That
would be like an option. Right. And so that would be one. So that would be like one thing you'd get
here. But then if you look back here, wait a minute. Did I do it? Oh, I said it.
Yeah, I think that's right. No, wait a minute. But we already did
negative one. Oh, I see. I made a mistake here. I think your check mark should have been a,
this is, yeah. So I screwed up. Okay. So these are, these are, we actually, you needed the
antiparticles to get negative one. Yeah. So there's some, there's some little typos here. So all
these actually, we have the antiparticles. So that's all screwed up there, but not in any sort
of fatal way. So anyway, we get a one, hypercharge one particle in here. And that's just sort of,
that's good because we haven't actually gotten to those yet. So you could go on and you could,
it's nice. It just like all fits in, you know, all fits together perfectly.
In a way, I think this is like a pretty good place to stop. Maybe we could like do the rest
of the time, just like talking a bit about it instead of like charging on with more,
yeah, more math. There's more math you could do, but this is like a pretty good place.
I think this is beautiful. Yeah. So this, I think what I like about this, and maybe you can just
say just qualitatively in words, because how do I say, so I think this gives a very good sense in
which a grand unified theory tries to unify things at least at the level of representations. We're
not talking about all the other things, at least at this stage yet, but sort of there, it comes
down to a representation theoretic game in some sense in which you try to embed your
gauge, your original gauge group, SU3 cross SU2 cross U1, it is something larger. And then
that structure, we worked out the consequences and it led to this pretty math. So maybe two things
you could say, we mentioned earlier that there's this SO10 and Pati Salam, I think qualitatively,
superficially, it's going to be something quite similar, right, where you have another group,
you have some kind of factoring of representations essentially. And then when you look at now the
representation of this other group, SO10 or SU2 cross SU2 cross SU4, you have some other
structures that are foisted upon you, but fortunately, you can map them in a way to the other
particles. Is it a very similar story? It's just the particular details differ, but it's going to be
qualitatively similar to this SU5. Is that fair? Yeah, that's fair. I'll say a little bit about it.
So let me just say a few things. There's like a little tiny little mistake you made that,
not a big deal, but it sort of plays into these other things, so I'll just mention it. So
it's not exactly a mistake you made, but if someone like was hung on your words too carefully,
they get confused. I'm here to be corrected too. It's not a big deal, but it's actually a very
interesting deal, which is discussed a lot in this paper by John Perdan. So we came up, you and I,
we described this map from here to here, and it's not an embedding, it's not one-to-one. We
described it, but we didn't carefully check to see that it was one-to-one, and it turns out like
it's almost one-to-one, but it's actually six-to-one. Okay. And so that's actually pretty interesting
in itself, because what it means is that certain non-identity elements here are getting sent to
here, and so if you describe particles using representations of this group,
then certain non-trivial elements of this group must act trivially on those particles,
because SU5 is acting trivially on those elements of SU5 are acting trivially.
So one thing that John Verden and I do, when we do it like all more slowly and carefully, is that
we start by checking the conditions required to show that the six elements of here that are
getting back to the identity here are acting trivially on all of the particles in this chart.
And so that's like another kind of consistency check. It might in fact somehow follow from
the stuff we've done, but it has a different flavor to it, because it's about finite subgroups,
and sort of covering group-type issues that are sort of subtle that you couldn't see from the
algebra. So that works out. Yeah, can you actually, it's pretty much an exercise, and it's definitely
in your paper, but in terms of a statement, in terms of, okay, so SU3 cross SU2 cross U1 acts on,
let's see, which vector space in this exterior algebra, and then it extends to the exterior
algebra, and then now the result is that there's a lifting, essentially. I'm a little confused
because the particles are kind of the native, see, the particles are living in some way inside
the full exterior algebra that's a little... Are you worrying about this six-to-one thing,
or are you worried about, I forget exactly what you're talking about? Here's what I'm trying to say.
If you just forget SU5 for a second, how do you define the representation of SU3 cross SU2 cross
U1 on the full exterior algebra or some subset of it? It's pretty lengthy to say how you do that,
because this is such a complicated group. So the quick way to say it is that SU5 acts on,
it's to use SU5, actually. So SU5 acts on C5 in this sort of obvious way, and then
this is where the word functoriality comes in. Therefore, it winds up acting on the
exterior algebra. Oh, I see. You're saying that... Okay, so then I think... Then there isn't a nice
intrinsic description of the standard model group itself, but the point is you just check
that it actually factors through the SU5 representation, right? Yeah, that's right. So we
had this little thing that I written down a while ago where we said,
G, H, alpha is getting mapped to this thing that we worked out, which I'm probably already
going to start forgetting that we had like a G and an H here, and then let's see if this is
like, am I going to get it right, alpha squared? I'll hold it in the negative three, or is it
the other way around? Yeah, that's right. Yeah, the positive was the one first. Okay, yeah. So the
theorem is that if you do that mapping and then apply the SU5 canonical mapping, that is the same
as the standard model representation. Yeah, yeah. And so like one little
cute trick is you can see that like, if you work it out, you can see that like sometimes this will
actually be the identity, even when not all three of these are the identity, because sometimes G
will be a scalar, it'll be like a multiple of the identity. That's right. And sometimes H will be,
and you can like work out when can this possibly be the identity. We do it in our papers, I don't
want to get into it, but you see that there's just like six possibilities. And so anyway, but
yes, and you can also do the other stuff you said, which is to check that the representation of SU5
on the exterior algebra, when you compose it with this map gives you this, the known standard
model representation. So I think maybe the thing you were nitpicking with this covering thing,
although I don't think that makes a big deal, at least at the level of what we're talking about,
right? So I think what I was trying to say is that if you have spin 10, okay, if you have spin 10,
or SU2 cross, SU2 cross, SU4, you have a similar story. The right hand group has some kind of canonical
or more obvious representation. And it turns out that the composition of this horizontal map with
that more kind of obvious representation reproduces the standard model representation, right? Yeah.
Yeah. It's just, your only sin was saying the word embedded. And most, most physicists would
actually not worry about calling that because they're like working with the algebras.
That's right. The algebra would be an embedding if it's, but it's actually sort of cool that
so what I emphasize in our papers that it's not people say this is the group of the standard
model, but it has these six elements that act trivially on everything in the standard model.
So it's really this modulo, this kernel, which is like what we call the true gauge group of the
standard model. Now that's a subtle thing. Now, the SO10 or I will call it spin 10 model is very
nice because there's a general fact that you can always map, which I don't want to get into
any more than necessary, that you can always map SUn into spin 2n. There's a standard
procedure for doing this. That makes sense. Yeah. For the experts in the room, basically,
wait, so spin whatever is the double cover of the corresponding SO whatever. So spin 2n is
the double cover SO2n. And of course, by just identifying a complex vector space,
forgetting the complex structure, you get a real vector space of twice the dimensions.
So of course, you can map SUn to SO2n. And then by algebraic topological reasons SUn
simply connected. You're good. You're good. You're doing it on the fly. Okay. That's great. Yeah,
that's exactly right. And then there's this beautiful fact, which is like a slightly
further fact, which is, so SUn is always acting on Cn. And it also therefore is acting on this
exterior algebra, lambda of Cn. And that we've done the case where n equals 5, because we're
mathematicians, suddenly deciding to let's do it for any old n. And we've seen in our example
that as a representation of SUn, this breaks up into a bunch of pieces. Actually, these
pieces actually turn out to be like irreducible representations of SU5 for what it's worth. Not
that that matters, but it breaks up into these pieces. But the cool part is that when you
look at how the cool part is that SUn also acts on lambda, C to the n. So this is getting a little
less obvious, because this is some bigger group that's including the group that we had. And it's
not so obvious how this is acting here, but it does act on it and it acts on it in an irreducible
way. It acts on it, let's see, is that true? Almost an irreducible way. It actually acts on it in a
way that where it breaks up into just two pieces. And those two pieces in our case, what they are,
is the particles and the antiparticles. So what I'm saying is one of these 16-dimensional spaces
becomes completely unified as a single irreducible, unbreakable representation of
spin 10. And then there is its conjugate representation, which is the antiparticles.
And mathematically, that's coming from the fact that spin 2n has a representation on this that
just breaks up into two pieces that are switched by this Hodge star operator. So it's like this is
like an incredibly unified story, whereas SU5 was less unified. So a lot of people, after they learned
about the SU5 model, they started getting interested in the spin 10 model. In our story so far,
you could say like, oh, there's no, in the SU5 story, you could say, oh, there's no right
endonutrients. So we'll just like leave this out and also leave this one out. That would be like
incredibly irritating that you have like this beautiful structure and like you leave out
these two pieces, but it would be a mathematically consistent thing. It would still be a representation
of SU5. But when you go to spin 10, you just cannot do that. You cannot leave them out. So this
10 theory, in other words, predicts the existence of the right-handed antineutrinos. And so a lot
of people actually believe that it exists and they've like done other physicsy things to
calculations to try to like see if they can like explain other things with it. And there's a quite
a nice story about how it could like solve some other mysteries. The Padi-Salaam model is not,
it's not really quite so elegant and nice in some ways. But I'll say one thing about it,
which is interesting, which is, so the Padi-Salaam group, which you could think of as like
SU2 times SU2 times SU4,
I mean, that's what it is. I was just like debating which order to write, to write
the 2s and the 4s. That's, I mean, Kenny. So it's a, it's a subgroup of spin 10
as is SU5. And it turns out that there is a map from the standard model group into this group
as well. And don't ask me what the kernel is because I forget, but it's, but it's finite
to one. There may be a little business like this going on, but it makes this diagram commute.
So if I've been really organized, I would have drawn this as a commutative square where the,
the standard model group is mapped to both the SU5 and the Padi-Salaam. And then they're both mapped
into the spin 10. Yeah, I should say this is, this is super beautiful in the sense that,
you know, prior to this, I've never thought about grand unified theories. It turns out there are
three well-known proposals. We just presented them right here. And I don't think it's well
known at all that the three fit into this nice commutative diagram. I guess maybe I was talking
to you before the recording that I guess maybe some, some experts might know it, but, but physicists
don't think in terms of this clean language. So I think this is a genuinely nice result, not only to,
to prove, but to, to make more well known. Is that right? Yeah, thanks. So, yeah. So we thought,
John Ward and I thought that as a kind of payoff for mathematicians to learning about the grand
unified theories from our expository paper, we should like do something that's not so well known
and lead up to a commutative square of, of physical theories, which is the type of thing that
physicists don't tend to talk about as much. They are not so, I mean, they're, they're getting
to be keen on it, but they don't just naturally talk about commutative diagrams of physical
theories. And so it's really beautiful. Yeah, that, that these proposals, which were not,
I mean, I think it was known, it's been 10 included SU five, and I was probably known
that it's included spin 10, but they didn't, people didn't generally tend to think of it as
in these terms. And we, we state some things about this commutative square that sort of show
likewise, why it's interesting in a number of ways. Yeah, this is beautiful. I think this is
maybe a great place to stop. Maybe just one more question. I can't help myself, but
sure. You know, one of, one of the reasons why
this is maybe for you a speculative topic that you're not maybe too comfortable talking about
is that we've only limited ourselves to the representation theory aspects of these grand
unified theories. We basically said nothing about the physics. Can you say at least at a high level
what those degrees looks like? I know one aspect that you mentioned is this issue of
spontaneous symmetry breaking, because if you have these larger groups, for example,
somehow they would have their attendant predictions, but we don't see them at the
lower energy scales that we bumped into. We see SU three cross SU two cross U one that has to do
with this symmetry breaking. So you have to somehow go to higher energy, say at the LHC or
well beyond to sort of see these grand unified structures. That's why they're very speculative,
because we haven't gotten to those energies. Can you say anything about the physics? This is what
I don't understand. Why is it the case that only at high energies do you kind of see unification
versus that lower energies, right? Like maybe the analogy is, you know, you have these like
whatever Mexican hat potential and you're just like this little corner and somehow you kind of like,
you know, naively think that everything's disjoint, whereas they're actually unified,
if you could zoom out more, but that seems a little bit too much of a cartoon for me. But like,
really, can you can you say a little bit more about what's going on? Sure. Yeah, sure. So one thing
is to notice that I mean, you probably know what our listeners should know is that when you actually
look at really low energies, like ordinary household energies, this SU two times U one
group is not noticeable at all. What you notice is not this mysterious hypercharged thing and
isospin stuff. What you notice is ordinary electric charge. And I sort of started out talking about
electric charge and went away from it. Electric charge is actually can be described by some other
U one subgroup sitting inside this group, but not the not this U one, but some funny U one that
sort of spirals around both of these. And so, so we're all so already in that case, we have the
situation where we have this larger group, but in low temperatures or low energies, we don't see
that group in play directly. What we see is the SU three and the charge you want. And the beauty of
the standard model is that it reconciles that apparent conflict by positing this particle
called the Higgs boson. And the Higgs boson interacts with the SU two and the U one force
in such a way that at low energies, it makes the it makes the different directions in the SU
two, the algebra act very different from each other, because the Higgs boson is like settled
it down to some particular state, which is particular picking out a particular vector
in a representation of this group here. And because it's picked out that particular direction,
just by minimizing energy, it, it, it means that that direction is not symmetrical under
this whole group, it's only symmetrical under this U one charge subgroup. So that is a very
long story, but, but, but it's a, that's like the most interesting aspect of the standard model.
And that's why everyone was so eager to actually make sure 100% sure that the Higgs boson really
existed and to check that it was working as advertised. And, but even before people knew
for sure that the, that Higgs was working that pattern of doing physics became popular. And
so when people began positing larger groups, the way they would sort of have their cake and eat it
too, to have this larger symmetry group, but have it not be visible at low energies is by
positing extra kinds of Higgs bosons, different, completely different other kinds of Higgs bosons
that, but they're still called Higgs bosons because it's the same mechanism, whereby they
at low energies would, would, would pick out certain directions in these, in the Lie Algebras
of these groups as special and, and thus break, they say, break the symmetry down to a smaller
group. So when you make, so when you make up this SU five theory, we've been like doing all the easy
part of like saying like, Hey, the particle hyper hypercharges seem to match and so on.
But then the hard part, the real work of doing the physical theory is positing the correct type of
Higgs bosons and the correct type of interactions of the Higgs bosons with the SU five forces,
such that at low energies, all you see is this subgroup that is the vector that the Higgs picks
out is only invariant under this subgroup. And it turns out that, and that story goes on with
these larger groups. So, so the bigger group you get, the more Higgs bosons you need to,
to get, to pause it, to break it down the symmetry to what we see at low energies.
And it turns out that like when you get to a fairly large group like spin 10,
there are various choices you could make for how those Higgs bosons,
what those Higgs bosons could be. And then those different, so you really have different theories,
because they're different choices of how the Higgs's work.
Just to clarify what you just said, so going back to the, the center mall itself,
right, at low energies, basically, so you have this group, the Higgs is such that the stabilizer
of that corresponds to the photon, which is why it's massless. And you get a quotient space,
which, which doesn't stabilize the Higgs. And that's what you get these massive particles,
right? And you're saying, I think, yeah, so the W and Z particles are, so this is like a three
dimensional realgebra, one basis vector in it is called the photon and it is massless. But the other
two are, sorry, there's four, sorry, the others three are called the, the W plus the W minus and the
Z. And, and, and those are very massive, they have masses sort of roughly in the neighborhood of
the Higgs, although lighter, and, and they were actually discovered fairly late, but before the
Higgs. And once, once we discovered those, and like everyone with any optimism knew that the
thing was working. Yeah, I see. So for all these other grand unified theories, would you basically
have a zoo of massless particles, because they would have a huge stabilizer. And then,
and then you're, you're, what you need to show is that that's when you, when you take this larger
gauge group and mod by the stabilizer, you get back sort of the usual massive particles at low
energy. That's right. And you would end the, and all the, so we haven't really been talking about
the force particles for most of our talk. Now all of a sudden we are starting to talk about things
like the photon and the W and the Z. So when you get to a leak group like this, this is 10 times
nine over two dimensional, so it's 45 dimensional group. So it has 45 gauge bosons, 45 force carrying
particles, some of which will be the ones that we've actually seen so far, which are the ones that
live in this, the le algebra of this subgroup, but there'll be like wads of other ones. And those
other ones, well, to explain the fact that we haven't seen them, they'd better be massive.
And the way we do that is we make them interact with extra Higgs bosons, just like we made
the W and the Z massive in this, in this story. And so, yeah, so there are sort of representation
theoretic choices about how your Higgs bosons should transform as a representation of spin 10.
So those are sort of like discrete or algebraic choices you have to make about the story.
But then there are also choices of coupling constants, actual numbers,
which you want to make to make sure that all the numbers work out like that the masses of these
extra gauge bosons are high enough that we haven't seen them yet, but that the masses of the gauge
bosons we have seen are what we observe them to be. I think I said something a little bit
opposite, which is that I originally said, oh, I want a large stabilizer. I want all these
masses particles. You're saying, no, actually, you want a bunch of massive particles that are so
massive. That's why you haven't seen it. But basically, everything else is kind of the same.
You have some Higgs that breaks symmetry. And then the issue is that the way in which it breaks
the symmetry is such that you need to have very massive particles for the ones that need to exist,
but you haven't seen and then also reproduce the massive particles that you have seen. So that's
like that's like the hard part. Yeah, that's the hard part. Yeah, until you introduce the Higgs's,
all the gauge bosons are are massless. So we can have like wads of photon like, well,
or photon or glue on like things. And so we need the Higgs to just to make them go away,
sweep them under the rug, but also more importantly in a way or also just as importantly to
to break the symmetry group down to the smaller one that we actually see.
Great. All right, thank you. That was that was very, very enlightening. Yeah, it's so great to
have this talk. We definitely covered a lot. And I certainly learned a lot. And thank you so much.
Yeah, for your time and enthusiasm. Yeah, that was a lot of fun. Thanks a lot.
Yeah, great. All right. Well, thank you, everyone. And yeah, have a good one.
