What's up, ladies and gentlemen, boys and girls around the world?
I would like to welcome you back to the Real Talk with Zuby Podcast.
If you are watching this video, then you will see that I am in a special secret location,
not so secret.
I'm at the Lotus Eater's studio here in the UK, and I'm about to have a conversation
with the one and only, Carl Benjamin.
Welcome back to the show.
Thanks for having me back.
This is great.
Oh, down, man.
Thanks for letting me use the studio.
This place is awesome.
Anytime.
Thanks a lot, man.
Appreciate it.
Well, I've done a brief intro there, Carl.
Yep.
We'll know you already.
But for those who don't, please introduce yourself.
I am someone who rose to prominence on YouTube.
I just started putting up videos about things that really annoyed me, and they happened
to be political in nature.
And then a few years ago, it became apparent that actually YouTube isn't a safe space for
political discussion.
It's quite easy to get your channel taken down if a large enough mob of activists take
exception to your political opinions.
And so I decided to start Lotuses.com to make sure that we had something that was outside
of their control, because they are the ones who have the executive decision on who isn't
on my platform, and it could be at any day that they decide, you know what, we've had
enough of you today, and you're gone, and that would have been really bad.
So set up Lotuses.com, and we've done really well, and we've ended up with a great team,
great studio, and we can produce the content we want to produce without the sort of fear
of deplatforming that I lived under when I was just my own, just a single YouTube channel
on my own.
Well, firstly, I want to say that this is awesome.
Thank you.
I stepped in here and I was, I've been in the studio a few times, but you've moved into
the bigger spot.
The old studio, yeah.
Exactly, and I was just like, man, this is genuinely inspiring.
We talk a lot about the independent creator economy, and hey, go build your own platform
and that type of thing.
But most people would rather just kind of rage and complain and not do it.
And I love the fact that you've just done it and shown that it can be done and it can
be profitable and it can be successful.
And yeah, so...
It's been great, man.
It's all thanks to the people who subscribe to the channel and the platform and support
us.
If it wasn't for them, we wouldn't have anything.
Was there a particular moment when you were like, I need to make that move?
Was there something that happened on YouTube?
Yeah, they demonetized my channel because I made a joke about a politician.
Oh, really?
Yeah.
It was a rude joke, don't get me wrong.
I wouldn't make it twice.
But still, you would think that a politician would be fair game.
But of course, it turns out that actually power dynamics have been kind of upended these
days.
If you're a man, you're considered to be the oppressor of women generally, even if
they actually have office and actually have power.
So it was under those sort of social dynamics that these things were considered.
And so certainly me just being a commentator and making jokes on a YouTube channel was
worthy of being attacked in defense of a politician.
So it was very apparent at that point, it's like, okay, I have to make sure that this
can't just be their choice.
No doubt.
Carl, you were born and raised in the UK, correct?
Well, I was born in the UK, but my father was in the Royal Air Force.
And so for about eight years, I grew up in Germany, and it was on a British base in Germany.
So it's not German, frankly, it was very clearly a British colony in Germany.
But obviously, the base isn't very big, and so you could easily go out and go into the
area around and then go back and so it and then when I was 16, 17, we moved back and
I've been here since.
Okay.
That's interesting.
Echo is a little bit my growing up in Saudi Arabia, in the sort of like international
bubble within the wider place.
You talk a lot about the changes that are going on and the changes that you see in the
UK.
You strike me as someone who is inherently somewhat of a traditionalist, a patriot, someone
who loves the UK and has a genuine and honest concern about the direction that it's heading
in.
What if people have this concern, not just here in the UK, but I notice whatever country
I go to, I was in South Africa a couple weeks ago, people were talking the same way when
I go to the US.
A lot of people are concerned about the way the US is going, people in Europe, all over.
There seem to be many places in the world where I guess people feel like it's not as
good as it used to be in that it's trending in a concerning direction.
Firstly, what are those changes that you are primarily seeing that are concerning you?
I don't want to just jump to questions of demographic change and things like that because
there are lots of other changes that are happening that are genuinely negative.
But a lot of them are to do with the political class's response to the birth rate crisis.
It's not a secret that the West in particular, but also other areas like South Korea, Japan
have got massively reduced birth rates.
This is bad because our social welfare systems are essentially a pyramid scheme, especially
pensions which are predicated on the idea of eternal population growth.
Our politicians are unable to square the circle.
They either have to do the hard thing and say, look, you're just going to have to go
without pensions or we're going to bring in foreign people from around the world to do
work in lieu of the population growth that should have been native and indigenous.
So they have taken the easy route, which is import millions of foreign people.
Now that isn't such a problem if it's managed in a more regimented way.
I'm sure you're familiar with countries who are very strict and impose their way of life
on the people who have arrived, understanding that if they don't do that, they are obviously
just going to lose the culture in their country itself.
And in the West, we obviously don't have the will power to do that.
And so we've brought in millions of people and given them no incentive to integrate or
even really respect our way of life.
And so now we're seeing the advantage being taken.
I mean, there was a statistic that was revealed to us from the 2021 census that showed that
half of the people who get government housing in London were born overseas.
And it's like, that's crazy.
So the British taxpayer is paying for just foreign born people just come and live in London,
whereas London is mostly non English and non British at this point.
So we're just paying for a bunch of people just come and live in our capital city at our expense
for some reason.
And so it's just like, right, this is not only bonkers, but it's destroyed the indigenous
culture in London.
I mean, when I was young, you go to London and you would expect certain kinds of Londoners
to exist, like the Cockneys don't really live in London anymore.
They've been essentially exiled to Essex because of mass immigration.
And that's an ancient culture that the Cockneys are mentioned 800 years ago
in English English history.
And so it's just why have we allowed that to happen?
And it's all to try and keep up with a series of economic promises that were made
in the middle of the 20th century that actually aren't being upheld by our own behaviors.
And so it's a totally untenable situation we're in.
And it's actively destroying the country around us.
I mean, and everything is really connected to this issue.
Like, for example, you always say, well, what about the NHS waiting times?
Well, we're running an international health service at this point.
You know, the national health service, I think is a good idea in principle.
It's just we've opened it up to literally anyone who arrives here.
And so when a million plus people come here every year,
well, that's a huge burden on the British taxpayer and on the system itself.
And then you've got housing costs and you've got like the welfare state.
And then you've just got competition for jobs.
You make it more difficult for young British people to get ahead in life
because you're bringing in tons of competition for those very same jobs.
And then and that's not even to speak of like the cultural degradation.
Like if you go around the town centre of Swindon, it used to be quite normal.
It used to be just a regular English town.
Yeah. And you just walk through it and it'd be normal.
And then, you know, have English shops and as you see,
unexceptional in every way, but that's what I liked about it.
You know, it was a small place or it felt like a small place.
But now it feels like I've gone to like the Bazaar of Baghdad or something.
You get all sorts of cultures, all sorts of languages,
all sorts of people just milling around in Swindon town centre,
being subsidised by the taxpayer.
This this is wild and it's
totally unfair to the people who have to pay for it, me being one of them.
Our podcast today is sponsored by the Wellness Company.
Did you know that nearly 90 percent of pharmaceuticals in the US
are produced overseas? That's an alarming statistic.
If you don't have an emergency kit on hand, it's time to get prepared.
The Wellness Company's medical emergency kit contains eight potentially
life-saving medications that every single American should keep in stock.
It comes with a twenty two page instruction guide on safe medical use
for everything from snake bites to covid to bio terror events.
Another stellar product from the Wellness Company is spike support.
Whether you got vaxxed or not, the virus is still among us in some capacity,
as well as the related spike protein.
Spike protein can cause brain fog, tissue damage, blood clots and more.
Spike support is a detoxification powerhouse
that aims to strengthen the body's natural immunity and flush out spike protein
so you can get back to that pre covid feeling.
Get both of these products by going to TWC.Health forward slash Zuby
and get 15 percent off with a discount code ZUBY.
That's TWC.Health forward slash Zuby
and use discount code ZUBY to get 15 percent off.
Disclosure, the medical emergency kit is only available to US residents.
Why do you think there is that lack of willpower?
I have my own ideas and theories on this, but you use the word willpower.
So why do you think there is not that cultural, social, political,
whatever it is, willingness for people who do have power influence
or perhaps even some who don't to take any kind of stand on this?
It seems like it's one of these issues where I think a big mistake
that I would say that I think both sane conservatives and sane liberals
have been making for decades is only allowing, avoiding this conversation
to the point that you the only people who do talk about it
may be on the more actually unsavory far right white nationalist type
and who totally conflate race and culture.
And they end up dominating the conversation to an extent.
And then I think as a result, people continue to shy away from it even more
because they don't want to be associated with that.
That's kind of what I've seen played out because I mean, I I've I've lived
in the UK on and off from the age of 11.
I went to boarding school here from the age of 11.
So I've spent a lot of time here over the past 25 plus years.
And even though I wasn't politically engaged per se way back then,
this is kind of the trajectory that I've seen over the past couple of decades.
And maybe now people are a bit more willing to talk about it.
But I still don't really know if they are. I don't know.
Well, in Britain, it's become pretty much the number one issue
because it's just so prevalent.
I mean, we're getting the sort of levels of immigration that America gets
and we're like a fifth of the size.
And so it's just really noticeable that things have changed and not for the better.
I do I do totally agree with you about the the point of not
shying away from the conversation, though.
That's the the worst thing I think you can do is to
say, well, this is off off limits because then you do get people with a particular agenda
who can't recognize that they just collapse any detail of the conversation down.
Exactly. And it doesn't help anyone because there are manifest
unfairnesses that have taken place that are being shouldered on the native people of Britain.
But if your solution is something very terrible and extreme,
they can't be addressed and that stigmatized the entire realm
of what is otherwise just political action.
I think it's a consequence of many different layers.
So first, I think you've got a political class who.
Are invested in multiple ways in making sure that things carry on
because, of course, this is what created them
because this is a problem that we've had going on for 25 years now, if not longer.
And so the people in charge are a product of this system.
And so they think, well, if things change, then I lose what I have.
That's OK. Well, things are changing.
In the degrading, which is probably going to mean you're going to end up losing
what you have anyway to someone who's a lot more hard line and is not going to take this.
And that leads us to places we don't want to go to.
But they, well, you know, they think, well, if I change things,
there's a famous question time quote from one of the audience members
who's like, well, who's going to sell our coffee in Pret?
So I think I remember that.
That really summarizes the issue.
The answer that should be teenagers, the answer that should be summer jobs
or part-time jobs for kids who are, you know, getting through college
on university and making their way through life.
You know, like I did when I was young, I had, you know,
rubbish part-time jobs or summer jobs doing things like that.
But they they view that to be the domain of some immigrant now.
So OK, that's a really weird thing, right?
And so they've got a kind of luxury that the people in charge are accustomed to.
And they're worried about losing that they're worried about losing political power.
But also, I think there's a question of liberal philosophy
that underpins all of this, that has essentially removed their ability
to speak on behalf of the majority population.
I don't know whether you've noticed, and I'm sure you have,
but our politics across the West is just dominated by minoritarian concerns.
Yes. What's the most important minority today?
Yes, even if the minority is under one percent of the population.
In fact, that makes them more privileged, right?
That makes them more important to talk about.
We need to talk about the trans question.
It's like, do we, though?
I actually don't see many people struggling with that.
I see many people struggling with their grocery bills.
You know, I see many people worried about the cost of electricity
and things like that, because, you know, whatever.
The point being, though, the majority population concern is never represented.
And I think that's due to this kind of overemphasis on liberal ideology,
where they have a way of constructing the world that frankly isn't true
and leads us to strange and undesirable places.
And if we try to step out of that,
that is instantly stigmatized as being, quote, unquote, far right.
Yeah, I don't know what far right is even supposed to mean.
Or I've spent a lot of time thinking about this as well.
And it seems the term far right, they don't mean fascist or Nazi.
Because if they meant fascist or Nazi, they just call you it.
They're not shy about calling your names.
And, you know, I'm sure you've been called a Nazi more than in our times, right?
Haven't we all? Yeah.
But when they call you far right, I always find this really interesting
because, A, that's a relative point, right?
Being a fascist or a Nazi or a communist, these are absolute points.
These are absolute ideologies.
They've got a construction that happens in the abstract.
And so it is essentially eternal.
You know, you always, in every time and every place, know what the opinions
of a fascist, a Nazi or a communist are or a liberal, really, they should be.
But when they say far right, they can never define what the precepts of being far right are.
And so I think what they use far right to mean is the kind of pre-political
social awareness of a native population group.
So you'll see the Irish patriots now being called far right.
So, OK, but the English patriots were also far right.
So the Irish and the English patriots, the same, are they all in the same team?
I mean, not normally the Irish and the English aren't considered to be on the same team.
And they've got the far right in France, who definitely aren't on the same team
as the English or, you know, OK, and now the Germans have got a far right.
And so what I think this means is just the the tribe that underpins the nation
as in in every in every European country.
And every old world country is based on tribal loyalty, a tribal understanding
of what we would in previous times call a people as in the English people,
the Irish people, the Scottish people, well, their representation,
their political interests, that's, I think, what the far right is.
And so and this is very human.
You know, there's a very this is a very sort of pre theoretical
understanding of what it is to live.
And so you get just regular people who are just well, things have changed.
I don't like what's happened.
But you know, when you talk to these people, they're not going to give you
a lecture on political philosophy.
They don't know anything about theory.
They belong to a group and they feel a kinship and they're attuned
to their own social group.
This this is based on an area and it's built out into the nation state itself.
And they're concerned about that being eroded.
And they're not concerned about an abstract political ideal
that's trying to manifest itself into reality.
And so those people, the regular people who are just not really political
until it affects them, they're the far right, I think.
And it's fear of this non-rational political position
that I think prevents any kind of actual movement in the direction
of improving things, because the liberal position is rationalistic.
It's it's theorized into existence.
And the theory it's built built on is actually just wrong.
It has a wrong conception of humanity, because the liberals believed
that liberalism begins a thought experiment where they say, well, look,
what was man like before he was in society?
And they've got answers to this, but any normal person will be like, well,
there's never been a time when man has not been in society.
Even chimpanzees are in societies like the chimps aren't just wandering
in the woods on their own, like every monkeys are all.
So before human beings were in existence,
we can go back and go through the archaeological record and find,
you know, like Homo habilis and what was it, Lucy?
I can't remember the names of the scientific names of these things.
But they they they even then they're not on their own.
They're in groups.
And so, you know, Homo sapiens has always been a social animal.
But the liberal thought experiment begins with him
being an individual wandering around the woods.
It's like, OK, what are the rights of an individual on their own?
And these are human rights.
These are the abstract liberal rights that can categorize itself as having.
And then it perceives that men will they must have come together
to form a civilization at some point.
And from the forming of this civilization, then becomes institutes of government.
Now, this isn't correct, but you can see why they would think this,
say, 300 years ago under the alternate theory of absolute monarchies
and God put the king in charge and therefore you have no rights before the king.
And therefore, you're going to essentially be at the king's pleasure.
The king's arbitrary will forever.
And you can see why that would have been appealing,
a different theory of how society came together and became what it is
that justified actually resisting the absolute power of a king.
This is the paradigm that essentially we're still living in now.
And so the liberal paradigm renders each individual person
as being totally interchangeable, right?
It comes to the original human.
What does an individual on their own?
Well, when Sean of all of society's characteristics,
you realize that you could hypothesize
what a pre-social man would look like.
He wouldn't have a language.
He wouldn't have customs.
He wouldn't have an education.
He wouldn't have anything really other than what it is
that all human beings would share.
But actually, when you think about it, that's not very much, actually.
OK, he sleeps, he eats, he breeds, he does basic animal stuff, basic animal things.
But everything else is a product of him living in civilization.
You know, the way you think, the kind of things you do,
the morality that you have, all of these things are actually not universal.
They're really particular and actually they're not interchangeable.
And so the liberal theory breaks down really, really quickly
when you actually try and apply it to any individual person who lives in the world.
Because no one's a product of this abstract chain of thought.
And so this is, I think this explains
why our political class were deeply liberal.
Think, well, we'll just we'll just bring in five thousand or ten thousand
or a hundred thousand or a million new people
to do the work that these British people aren't doing
because they're just all people.
It's like, OK, in a way, yes, they're all just people.
But in another way, no, there's massive differences.
And then you see these conflicts between the natives and the new people
or between the different groups of new people who bring with them
their cultural baggage and can't get rid of it.
That's another thing.
These things are, they are literally embedded into you
in the way that you're born and raised.
And you don't even think about how it happens.
You can't just consciously try and stop doing it.
This is a part of your very thought process.
And so we arrive at a point where the liberal
the liberal people in charge know that there's a problem.
They have one tool to solve the problem
and are afraid to step out of that because that has been
explicitly carved out as being a realm of bigotry or racism or something like this.
And yet they've got to deal with the fact that in Leicester, for instance,
earlier this year, there's a huge riot between Hindus and Muslims.
Yeah. Can you imagine being an English person in Leicester on that day?
Like the Muslims and the Hindus are rioting and fighting.
So yeah, I don't know what this is about.
I don't even understand the languages they use and communicate.
And but this is what the liberal world order can't help but build
because it can't recognize the differences.
It's really fascinating.
Man, you've said a lot of interesting stuff.
Yes. Sorry, I know I know it's totally fine.
I was like, let him cook, man, let him cook.
I had a post I put up not long ago
and I'd been in Dubai for like about a month at the time.
And Dubai is one of the most multicultural
and multi ethnic cities in the entire world.
It's also one of the safest cities in the entire world.
It's also one of the cleanest cities in the entire world.
The crime rate is as close to zero as you're going to get.
And this is a city of three million people.
It's not some tiny place.
Yeah.
People are just there with their families, they're working and so on.
And so when I see a lot of American, British, European and so on commentators,
especially more on the conservative right wing side,
a thing I hear a lot is that multiculturalism doesn't work.
Multiculturalism has failed.
And I know what people mean when they say that.
But I don't think they've actually quite diagnosed it correctly.
I don't think it's the having a lot of people of different cultures,
let alone ethnicities, racial groups or whatever together in one place that is the is the problem,
which is most people stop there.
They're like, oh, that's it.
It doesn't work.
Yeah.
Right.
I think the the problem is the place they're in, not knowing what the boundaries and rules
of law, respect, tolerance, human dignity and so on are and should be.
So when I'm in a place like Dubai, you could say Abu Dhabi, you could say Doha.
The reason why it works is because the rule of law is very strong.
As long as you are not hurting, robbing, stealing, stabbing, shooting, you're not you're not hurting anyone.
You're not taking anybody's stuff.
You're not being disrespectful, shouting and screaming at people in public.
I don't know, getting naked in public, doing any of this weird, crazy stuff that for whatever
reason in the UK sometimes, certainly in the US, like people kind of just like tolerate and shrug
and they're like, oh, yeah, oh, that guy's shoplifting.
OK, whatever.
Right.
Like they don't they don't tolerate that.
So there are some very hard lines.
And then within that site, cool, you can practice your faith.
You can go to church.
You can go to mosque.
You can go to synagogue.
When I was there, I saw like a Jewish guy with like the sit, sit and the kippah and full on
everything, just like, you know, walking around the city.
And I was actually really interesting next, you know, walking past guys who are wearing
throbs and cafes.
And then there's another, you know, Russian Russian family there and they've got
there like Orthodox crosses and actually no one, no one bothers anyone.
No one has beef with anyone.
People just get on.
So it's actually very multicultural and even multi religious, despite the fact
that it's in an Islamic country, but it just works because people agree on those things.
And it seems like what's what's happening here is you you you're not having the
assimilation and the respect of the local culture and you're not having the respect
and enforcement of like the ground rules.
If it's just like, OK, you can come here and you can take stuff and you can harm
people and you can talk to people however you want.
And you can just you can just do whatever you want.
Then I think that's where it really, really decays.
I don't think it's, you know, I'm my family's from Nigeria.
Yeah. Right.
Like we are clearly different ethnic background, right?
I'm, you know, people from all over.
Yeah. And cool.
You can clearly see different ethnic backgrounds or whatever.
But every it's it's fine, right?
It all works because we all have plenty of lines of agreement where, yeah,
we're not going to take from each other or harm each other.
And we're and we're also going to respect one another.
Right.
There's a respect for differences.
Yeah. Right.
This this is the thing that the Liberals can't do it because they they're like, OK,
no, everyone's the same.
It's like, no, they're not the same.
And Dubai is a great example.
No, no, no, no, because I'm going to I've never been to Dubai,
but I'm going to go out of limb, but it's not a Western liberal government.
But it works a lot better than us because in in a non-liberal state,
you would recognise the group as having an integrity as the group.
Yes. Right.
But the Western liberal state can't do that with the indigenous group
because then you've got the intersectional power calculus to say, well, hang on a second.
The dominant group of Ireland is the Irish,
well, they must be oppressing the minorities.
It's like here's a question.
Why do you think that they don't apply their same logic to other countries, though?
No one has a problem.
Not these same liberals, they don't have a problem with Japan.
They don't really have a problem with Saudi.
They don't have a problem with Nigeria, mostly being Nigerian.
They don't.
So they don't apply the same logic to other nations.
In fact, if someone were to say, you know what, like, let's
let's have a million immigrants from Europe a year to Ghana.
They wouldn't say Galinese diversity.
Yeah, they'd probably oppose it.
They'd probably say, oh, this is some type of colonialism or gentrification
or whatever it is, right?
You'll say, hey, you're but they don't apply any of that to their own nation.
So sometimes I struggle to understand the mentality because I'm like,
again, same people. I'll see them even on Twitter and stuff.
They'll be like praising Japan or they'll be like, oh, look,
it's out clean and safe. It is. And I'm like, but it's a bunch of us.
Yeah, but I'm like, OK, I thought you're the open borders person.
Like even in Japan, as far as I understand,
you can be a non Japanese ethnic person and you can say you say you're born
there, you're raised there or whatever.
You can even you can even become a Japanese citizen.
But even in their perspective, you aren't really Japanese in the truest sense.
Even the way when when someone says a Japanese person,
you think of a Japanese ethnic person, right?
When someone says American or British or whatever, right?
It's more French. It's more you don't know what that person may look like.
But then again, if someone were to say English, you've got I think people people
recognize, OK, like in in English, I know what in English ethnic person is.
So I just don't quite get the and look, I'm not expecting sort of logical
consistency from these people.
No, no, I think there is a logical consistency.
OK, I have come to the conclusion that I think
they think that white people are better than other people.
Yeah, I mean, I think that what it is is the fact that the last
300 years of history have been maybe more for 500 have been the European
colonial and imperial domination of the world.
And that's not always been the case, actually.
For most of history before about 1450,
the Europeans are actually not terribly impressive people,
not terribly different to anyone else.
And if you were to just examine the average
empire throughout human history, the average conqueror would have
a kind of olive, maybe slightly darker skin skin tone.
And he'd come from Asia somewhere because Asia is the heartland of empires.
But because of the historical circumstance that we're in,
the Europeans happened to be in a place and in a time
and at a certain level of technological development with a certain set of ideas
that allowed for the industrial development of Europe
and the scientific development of Europe above their contemporaries.
This is not normal and it won't be like this forever, you know,
and it certainly won't be.
But the way that the Western left winger thinks is that historical
there's no historical contingency.
It's kind of historical inevitability.
And so this is now a question of how do we arrive at parity
between Europe and the rest of the world?
And so all their entire thought process is how can Europe or I'm going to say
white people, but what I mean is European European people.
European founded nations like America, Canada, Australia.
How can these be emissary?
And how can the rest of the world be justly raised up so there is an equality?
But of course, this is based on a false premise as well.
That Europe has always been superior, which it hasn't.
And it's definitely going downhill now.
So it's definitely not going to be superior forever.
But also as if there's ever been an equality or could be an equality
while there are differences, you know, if you want a particular, you know,
if you if you do actually respect African cultures or whatever,
then you can't expect them to be the same or equal with any other culture.
But then that's never been on the cards, right?
It's never been something's ever thought about because you want to be particular
rather than have a universal equality, because that can only be found in homogeneity.
And so this is why you get the kind of McDonald's
of vacation of the entire world under the liberal order.
They're like, no, no, no, everything has to be equal.
And anything that's not equal essentially has to be
attacked and brought down into line or raised up artificially.
And so I think that's really what their mindset is,
although they can't really bring themselves to admit it.
But if you look at everything that they say, it's all predicated on that.
Yes. So predicated on the idea that white people are somehow.
And the terminology they use.
Yeah, white supremacy. I mean, I never.
That's not even what I'm thinking.
Well, I would never say that.
Yeah. Yeah.
But the fact that they throw that around all the time, right?
As if like they actually believe that ideology.
They want you to think, well, white people are supremacists.
I don't think that. I just think we're normal.
I even think, you know,
quote unquote, politically correct terms like person of color, people of color.
Because what that is saying is all that means is non-white.
Yeah. So the reason that term bothers me
is because it's it's simultaneously.
Way too broad and way too specific.
So there's no term for non-black person.
Yeah. Right. There's not a term of like everyone who's not black.
Why would that be?
Yes. Yes.
But there's a term for everyone who's not white.
Yeah. Right.
Whether you are whether you are you could be you could be Arab.
You could be Latino. You could be mixed.
You could be Asian, all sorts of Asian.
You could be Indian.
You could be Pakistani.
You could be African. You could be Caribbean.
What you all fall into that people of color basket.
Yeah. Which to me, I'm like, OK, so you're saying it's like it's like white people.
Yeah. And everybody else.
I mean, I don't know globally what percentage of the population, quote unquote,
white people are about 13 percent, 13 percent.
I was going to say probably under 15 percent globally.
So the vast majority of the world, according to this label,
and there is people of color, but at the same time, you then and then you're
it's also way too broad because then you're also lumping in
all of these completely disparate groups.
Often hate each other that you really don't like each other.
They don't have anything.
There's no sort of through line between Indians and Nigerians and Pakistanis
and Iraqis and Koreans and Colombians.
I'm like, what is this term?
Right? Like people of color.
And they say it as if it's just this sort of this block.
The sort of block.
And I'm like, what does that even mean?
But that's that's the thing.
You can see what they're trying to bring into coalition, non white people.
Yeah. Against white people.
I mean, why would you?
And like you said, that absolutely puts the idea of white people on a pedestal.
So no, no, we've got to bring the entire rest of the world into agreement against you.
It's like, that's wild.
Like, why would why would that be the way you think?
But it has to be predicated on the idea that they think the white people
have some sort of special superior place in the world.
And that's just not true.
Yeah. Well, they say it.
I mean, they use the term white supremacy more than anybody.
It's also strange because prior to about seven or eight years ago,
I want to say there was like a at least a decade period of my life
where like I almost never heard the term white supremacy.
And then it sort of came back into the lingo in mid 2010s
and they started using it in this new way, which simply means it.
Well, it can literally mean sometimes they use it to mean anything that's good.
Sometimes they're literally like, you know, here are examples of white supremacy.
Being on time, I know hard work, hard work ethic.
I'm like, wait, hang on here.
Are these not just things that make an individual or a community
more likely to be successful?
Yeah. And they're calling that white supremacy or it's just a room of people
and it's predominantly white and that might be in Ireland or England or Sweden.
And it's suddenly like, oh, this is white supremacy.
I'm like, no, no more than if you took a photo of a boardroom in Nigeria
and no more than that photo is black supremacy.
No one would look at that or oh, look, here's the here are MPs in China.
No one would look at that. Oh, my gosh, look at this Asian supremacy.
Right. Where's the diversity?
Where does it make any sense?
It doesn't make sense.
But then when it comes to European nations or, you know, white, white,
predominantly white countries, there's this weird.
And what's even weirder about it is, I must say, it mostly comes from white people.
Oh, yeah.
I it's because they're guilty.
They feel guilty.
It's very odd. I'll be there.
And I'm I'm just there like, OK, like, I'll see some outcry.
Yeah. I remember it was this year, wasn't it, where they had the royal family?
That was that balcony photo of the royal family.
Yeah. Yeah.
And someone, some predominant, somewhat predominant person made a comment
about the lack of the lack of diversity or how how white the British royal family.
What and I'm I'm genuinely just like, what on earth are you?
What are you talking about?
What I love about this is that that's it's that point that you're like,
oh, the exclusivity of the royal family has gone too far.
It's like, no, no, no, bro, you don't understand how exclusive this family is.
Like to get into the royal family, you have to marry into it.
You know, there's there's no diversity hiring in the royal family.
You know what I mean?
But you can't apply to join it. I can't join it.
You'll forever exclude me.
And, you know, that's fine.
Yeah, it's not about the color, but I mean, it is for these people.
But the thing, the thing about this is that you the alternative.
So, you notice that what what we're using here are categories.
But like I said, that one's insanely specific, but also ridiculously broad.
So they reference something that's a really, really shallow description
of a person, but also includes literally everyone on LGBTQIA2SP++++.
Yeah, exactly.
And so it's like a really broad, thin puddle, you know, that's really, really shallow.
But again, but this is this is what we call like a rational term.
It's an abstract term.
So say there's something's white.
I mean, this table is white.
Is this part of the white supremacy?
Because, you know, it's like, OK, so a color is actually something
that is not unique to any one particular people.
It's not unique to human beings.
It's not very descriptive either, actually.
You know, I mean, when you say white, do you know it is accurate,
but it's not very informative, you know, it is technically true
that say, you know, both the Irish and the Germans are both whites.
But you can. Sorry.
When I said it's not accurate, what I mean is like no one is actually white or black.
Oh, yeah.
But yeah, in terms of like what colors actually mean.
But if you say, look, these people share a skin tone and so do these people.
And it's like, yeah, OK, that's true.
But it doesn't tell us anything about the civilization themselves.
You know, like there's a world of difference between, you know,
the German work ethic and the Italian work ethic, you know,
and yet they're really close together on the map.
They're, you know, they're close together in skin tones.
They've got a shared history to a weight.
And yet they're very different people.
And so saying, well, white people are all the same.
No, but neither are black people or brown people or Chinese people or whatever it is.
You know, the question isn't about this thin, rationalistic construct.
The question is about the sort of deep and rich continuum of a civilization.
Yes.
So the reason I think that Dubai works is because
fundamentally you're going to have, I mean, I guess what's called Arab civilization in Dubai.
That's the continuum of civilization that has always been the case in Dubai.
And so if you're a foreigner coming from, say, you know, Israel
or coming from Russian Orthodox areas, something like that,
you are the bearer of a civilization as well.
And that civilization is very evident on you.
You know, you've got whatever signifies around whatever language you speak,
but you've come to a place that is conscious of its own civilization as well and says,
right, OK, this means that differences can actually be respected.
Yes.
As in there is presupposed that everyone's different,
but it's also presupposed that there's a position of pride or privilege
that is just for the host civilization.
Yes. Right.
And that's what the left and liberalism can't accept.
And do you know what's particularly interesting
about a place like the UAE or the same applies to Qatar?
Is that the local Emirati or
respectively, Qatari populations are only about 10 to 15 percent.
Small of the total population.
So actually, foreigners is the vast majority of the population.
However, they still maintain you still.
You're still in their country.
So that they managed to maintain a sort of situation
that is very beneficial to everybody.
So whether you're someone like myself, who wants to go and set up a company
in Dubai and become a resident and live their work there, raise my future family,
that whatever, they set it up so that it's very, very favorable for me.
And they also set it up so that it's favorable for their local.
It's actually been a city citizen.
So there's this mutually beneficial thing.
And what that also does is it doesn't create the same problems
that mass migration does say in America or the UK or whatever,
because there isn't this there isn't this resentment.
Like I said, there's no welfare state.
So there's not, oh, my gosh, these people are just coming in
and they're leaching off our thing or they're coming in and they're misbehaving
and they're running gangs and they're committing crime and they're harming.
So so all of that stuff that people take massive, massive issue with,
rightly so, it's all just it's all just nipped in the butt.
I don't know how it might be the case that this is not completely scalable.
It might be the fact, OK, this is a city, this is a country of 10 million people.
And this might not work exactly in a country of 60 million
or a country of three hundred and forty million taking the USA.
But then I don't know because I look at places like Sweden and Austria and so on.
And there's still there's no attempt to even enforce the rules.
I mean, America had this problem not long after its founding, actually, right?
Because the there was there was a lot of German immigration into America.
Yes. And in the eighties and nineties, early nineteenth century,
they were very concerned.
They were like, oh, hang on a second.
What if this starts becoming like a Germanized country
rather than being an English speaking country?
And so they asserted the English culture of America over the German culture.
And you can do this. It's not you don't have to be aggressive.
You don't have to hurt anyone like that.
You say, no, you are going to learn English in school.
You are going to have to read signs in English.
It's going to be that this is the dominant culture
because this is what you have moved from where you've come from to to be a part of.
And that's totally understandable.
So it's a kind of recognition of difference and respect of difference.
And just to say, no, these are our lines, as you were saying,
like the hard lines, this is just going to be the hard line.
And you just you know that coming in.
And so your expectations are tempered when you arrive.
So, yes, if we move to America, we're going to have to learn English.
And this is you hit you constantly can read accounts of immigrants
who came from, let's say, Russia in the beginning of the 20th century.
And they would say, oh, my parents would make sure we only spoke English at home.
Yes.
I said, well, that's because they wanted you to follow the rules.
They wanted you to integrate.
They wanted you to become an American,
which is why they'd come in the first place.
And when that is the expectation of the people coming there,
it turns out that immigration can work just fine
because that integration just happens as a matter of course.
When you have now what we would call multiculturalism,
where we've got absolutely no expectations on the people coming here.
It's more like it's more like non-culturalism.
Yeah, it's almost like it's just like there's no culture.
But that's the point, isn't it?
That's why the that's why they have to constantly attack the native cultures.
Oh, no, no, you're imposing yourself on this.
So what they what they're suggesting is that anyone can come across
and set up a little colony of their former homeland in wherever they've come to.
And that's totally fine.
It's like, no, that's destructive.
And what you would call colonialism in any other context,
it's unfair to the people who are having that done to them.
That shouldn't be the case.
What do you think that British culture is?
Well, British is a pretty broad term.
Yeah, because it encompasses a an empire
and the began as an empire that came to encompass literally every corner of the globe.
Quote unquote.
Obviously,
but the the underlying culture that really informed and formed
the British Empire was the culture of England.
Because Britain formed as a union of crowns between England and Scotland
after Scotland had bankrupted itself, trying to set up its own colonial empire.
And they wanted access to English markets.
England had a successful colonial empire.
So Britain itself began as an imperial project.
But underneath is the culture of England.
And so you're always put in a position where you say, well, what's the culture of this place?
And there are many ways to describe it.
So you can describe the characteristics of the culture, the sort of
things that an outsider will notice.
So a lot of people say, well, English people drink a lot of tea
and they apologize or they're polite.
Right. And this is true.
This is this is totally true.
Right. And so you've got this kind of culture of interpersonal respect.
But that's that they're the sort of outer layers.
And then when you start sort of peeling away the inner layers,
you find that the culture of England is a lot more like
as represented in Lord of the Rings in the Shire.
So it's homely and small and a place where people belong.
And that's really, I think, what the culture of England is fundamentally,
the sort of generative engine of it is a place where the English can feel safe,
secure and at peace with one another.
Yeah. You know, the reason I ask the question is because
I think that I spent a lot of time in the UK and I spent a lot of time in the USA.
And it seems that both countries, there's been
it's best way to put it.
I think it's scale in the political class, in the media, amongst the general population.
I just think there's been I'm not sure what I'm not sure
that people have a firm idea of what their own culture is anymore.
And I think that's part of the problem.
Right. What does it mean to be an American?
What does that what does that mean?
Right. Because because America is very extraordinarily diverse.
People from all nationalities, so it's not OK.
It's someone from this ethnic group.
It's like, no, well, it's certainly not that.
So what is it that you all have in common, whether you're you're black,
you're white, you're Asian, you're Hispanic, you're a Democrat,
you're a Republican, you're a libertarian?
What what are those fundamental core values that everyone,
at least 90 percent of you all agree on?
See, this this is an interesting framing because you framed it around a question of values.
Whereas that and that that's very new world framing.
OK. So what you've got is the the idea of a propositional nation.
So anyone explain what you mean by that.
So America is the conceit of America is that it's a propositional nation.
So it believes in the proposed values of the Declaration of Independence
and the Constitution.
But the thing is that kind of implies that well,
anyone who doesn't agree with those isn't an American then.
So the Democrat Party are not Americans, right?
If you have to consent to the proposition to be an American.
And so either it's that's the case and, you know,
half the Democrats are not Americans and should be ejected for being an American.
Or it's not really true that they're a propositional nation
and they are something else.
Because the way the thing about an ethnic nation is that it just is, right?
You are an Englishman, whether you like it or not.
And actually, that wasn't a choice of yours and you can't change it.
And so the the the the the substance of the nation is made up in
the people that are and their relationships to one another.
And again, your relationships after you don't get to choose,
you know, you're born in a place.
And so you're related to the town in which you grow up, whether you like it or not.
You're related to the people around you who are also born in this town,
whether you like it or not.
You're related to your parents, your siblings, your the the schools you go to,
the jobs you have, you know, eventually, you know, presumably the place you
make your die, you're related to all of those things, whether you like it or not.
There's no proposition you can buy into.
There's no choice that's made there.
But this and and so to say, well, what, what, you know,
it doesn't matter what the values of the thing are, the thing is the thing,
whether you like it or not.
And you can, you know, there are going to be values there, but they aren't
necessarily things you can choose and change because a lot of the time
they won't be expressed because I mean, you know, what's it mean to be English?
It's like, well, I don't know, I just am like there isn't a doctrine
that you have to follow and you are whether you like it or not.
Whereas in America, there is at least a doctrine, you know,
you know, you might not have to agree with it.
A lot of Americans these days don't agree with it, but at least there is
something you can say, well, I can articulate what it is to be an American.
I believe in freedom and the Constitution and the First Amendment and things like that.
But the old world doesn't have that and it's never needed that, you know,
because it's never been under attack in that way.
And so you just were.
And so like when you go somewhere like Dubai, you don't need to know what
it means to be Dubai and ease or whatever, you know, you just are that thing.
And you've always been that thing.
It's your relations and how you're situated.
What this does is create what I guess we could just call belonging.
Yes.
You belong to that thing.
You know, this is why I was using the example of like Tolkien's Shire.
You know, the Hobbits belong in the Shire, you know, you don't need to question that.
You don't need to, you know, a rational examination of that.
And it just is, you know.
And so when you take the Hobbits out of the Shire,
you can still see they're related to the Shire.
They still, you know, the sort of elasticity of it pulls them back there,
whether they like it or not.
And that's really what it means to be part of these old world nations.
Unlike the sort of modern propositional nations where it's a social contract
that you agree to, and then you can just leave if you disagree with it.
Yeah, that's that's an interesting point.
I guess part of why I ask is because you'll hear people say things like we're
Yeah, and people say things like, you know, we're we're losing our culture.
You know, British British culture is declining or British culture is being replaced
or something like that. And I think it's an important question is, OK, well,
what is what is British culture?
If you do when you're saying that is that is that code for
English people, like just as a demographic or is that a set of values
or beliefs or behaviors or what is it?
Because I don't know.
It's I just think it's it's good for people to think through what they mean
when they say things, because if you want to protect something,
if you want to protect British culture, it's probably quite handy to know what
British culture is.
I would like to think and understand it's not as simple as being white
and ethnically English or Scottish or Northern Irish or Welsh.
Right. It's beyond that.
I'm sure we we both know people who are not in that demographic
and they're very, very, very British or people who are in that demographic
and hate Britain, yes, and there's people in England, exactly.
And then there are people who, yeah, they fall into that camp, but they're really not.
They're not there.
They themselves, you know, they're the type of people who take offense
to even seeing a Union Jack. Oh, yeah. Right.
I love seeing a Union Jack.
Yeah, my ethnic background is from Nigeria, but like I'll wave a Union Jack.
I'm like, it represents a lot of good things in your mind.
But like in their mind, they would rather George Orwell has got a great quote on this.
It's something like the average British liberal would rather steal
from the church, poor box than waving Union Jack.
You know, they'd be less ashamed of stealing from the poor box
than standing for the king or something like that.
And it's just that that's so totally true.
And that's so totally how they are now.
They are genuinely ashamed and they hate our own country.
And so it's a genuine question.
You know, it's like, OK, what does it mean?
It's like, well, there's no easy answer, actually, you know, but.
It's a it's a combination of all of these things.
So there there are there is a set of values and there are customs and habits.
Yeah. And there are political assumptions that are made under this.
And then that is connected to an ethnic group.
And the thing I think is the real sticking point for most people
is when you say, well, that is connected to an ethnic group, because they go,
well, well, that means there's a lack of choice involved.
And in the modern liberal mind, everything is choice.
You know, if you didn't consent to it, then it's bad.
But conversely, if you did consent to it, then it's good and say,
hang on a second, there are things people consent to that I don't think are good.
Yes, you know. And so actually, that's not the only standard of morality,
but also things that you didn't consent to aren't necessarily harmful.
For example, your relationship with your parents is not something you consented to.
Yes, it's definitely a good thing, you know.
And if it's not a good thing, you should be working to make it a good thing.
So it actually morality is a lot more fuzzy.
But the the way I've come to think of it is because when we sit,
when we think in these sort of categorical terms, the categories seem impermeable.
Right. And so you go, oh, well, if it's based on an ethnicity,
you're not that ethnicity, and therefore, Zuby, you've got to go home.
It's like nobody thinks that nobody thinks, oh, no, no, Zuby has to be deported.
You know, we're going to keep every single white leftist, but Zuby has to be deported.
No, no, no, no, there must be a better way of thinking about this
when we get rid of the white leftist and you can stay, you know what I mean, right?
There has to be a better way of thinking about this.
And so one thing I did a lot of studying on critical race theory.
OK. And one thing that they had is a particular essay called
Translating Yonan Dio, I think it's pronounced.
And it's talking about how the tribal politics of a Native American tribe
are actually being destroyed by the liberal apparatus of the US government
in the 19th century, because it didn't understand,
it didn't speak the language of how the tribe related to itself
because the way you joined the tribe was purely by consent of the people in the tribe.
So it's about their relationship with you, your relationship with them
and how this formed a bond that like brought you into the thing.
So there was there was no like abstract set of boxes you could tick to become a part of the tribe.
You had to actually go and live in the tribe and they had to be,
they had to agree that you were with them and you had to agree that you were with them.
And that's kind of how it was.
And I think that actually, if you think about it, a lot of people are actually like that everywhere else.
It's just that we don't think about it, right?
Like, for example, there's there's a cafe in Swindon that's run by this Iranian guy
who's been here for like 40 years and he is the only cafe in Britain
that will put up English flag bunting on St. George's Day.
It's the only cafe in this in this entire town, you know, and it's not run by an Englishman.
But all the other ones that run by English people don't put it up.
And it's like, that's what I mean, right?
Like this and and all the English people go to his cafe.
Yeah, like his cafe is full of like English boomers.
Yeah, you know, and and they they in no point are like, but he's from Iran.
They don't think like that at all.
That's I can't remember the guy's name, but that's so and so who's been here forever
and just, you know, has a has a really nice little cafe makes great food.
So I come here because it's comfortable and it's what I know and it's what I'm familiar with.
And what, you know, I've got an attachment to that place.
And that's how actually these things can be the square, the circle can be squared.
Like it's a we've got to stop thinking in these just absolute categories.
But like, no, that's a named person who comes here because of a good reason.
And I have a good relationship with him.
And so now he's one of us on that base on a tribal basis rather than on a categorical basis.
Because as soon as we start categorizing, sorry, Zuby, we can't be friends.
We've got different skin cuts.
So that's just not how I feel.
And that's how nobody feels.
You know, and that's not how anyone really wants to divide the world either.
We've tried that.
It wasn't great.
But that's what the left is currently doing right now, right?
They'll they'll literally divide you up by skin color, sexuality.
It's like, yeah, but all of all of the good of human existence is in that space
between the two people, where the relationship lies, you know,
and the quality of that and the strength of that is what the good part is
that brings people together.
And so that's how we should be thinking about these things.
And so you get the people who have just arrived and are now claiming a council
house and are, you know, claiming benefits and don't work and are
planning to be here for the next 30 years, sponging benefits.
That's not a friend, you know, that's an exploiter.
That's someone who's come for bad reasons.
They can go.
But those people have come over and set up businesses and, you know,
do local charity work and stuff like that.
Well, they can stay, you know, it's about it's the test of friendship.
I think what's really hard with this whole conversation and has been for some time
is that I think due to both ignorance, perhaps a combination of ignorance,
stupidity and dishonesty, sometimes altogether, but for different individuals,
different ones, I think people don't thread this needle correctly.
People on I see it can happen on the left.
It can happen on the right where people fall victim or they intentionally
miss the point.
Yeah, right.
You say something that, you know, everything you've been saying to me,
this whole conversation has made sense.
But if I were a woke lefty, 100 percent sure, at some point, I would have
accused you of racism by now, right?
I would have just jumped down and been like, nope, you're just you're just
racist and you just say that you haven't said anything that remotely insinuates
that you're just speaking honestly, expressing the way like most people
actually understand the world and so on.
So there's that.
I think there's that level of dishonesty.
I do also think that some of it is, I think some of it is ignorance, right?
Or naivete, and I think it comes from a.
This this might even sound kind of woke.
I think it comes from like an overly western centric worldview.
Oh, yeah.
Where people do see I see this more in the US than I do in the UK, actually,
where people do simply see it as black and white, right?
When they say like, and I see some there's conservatives who do this, too.
And they'll just say like, they'll be talking about, let's say they're
they're specifically referring to like inner city, ghetto, criminal, thug culture.
And they'll just call it black culture.
Yeah. Yeah.
And I'm like, hang on, right?
Like, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, like what?
Or they'll just be, oh, this is just like how, you know, black people behave or whatever.
I'm like, what do you you kind of see what I mean?
You can see how the white supremacists get created through that framework.
Yeah, exactly.
And so so so there's this thing or just, oh, you know, white people doing
actually like I'm like, firstly, 95 percent of black people are not American.
Yeah. To begin with, right, to begin with.
And outside of that, like my background is Nigerian.
Just in Nigeria, you have over 400 different ethnic groups and languages
in that one country.
So to so to someone from England or someone from America, you might look
and just be like, oh, it's black people or Nigerians, a bit more specific.
But it's like, no, actually, like there's all these different tribes and groups.
And some of the intertribal hostility that exists in Nigeria
and in some other African countries, Rwandan Genocide 1994 for a super obvious
example is infinitely more than any type of quote unquote racism in the West.
So people are not even sort of viewing it through the same lens.
They're just there saying like, oh, you know, there's this is racism.
This is racism. This is racism.
Sometimes they're talking about classism.
Sometimes they're talking about tribalism.
Sometimes they're just talking about someone being an idiot and, you know,
someone and they kind of just like lump it all together.
So the conversations become really difficult because there's no there's no nuance.
It just ends up being, you know, white people, this black people, that Asian people.
You can see, I think you did a great job of really just highlighting the problem there.
Right. Because I mean, like you said,
black is an abstract term for a universal phenomenon.
Whereas as soon as you, you were like, well, hang on a second.
This localized urban ghetto, particular kind of culture and, you know,
I guess you call it black, but like, you know, I don't even think it's exclusively black.
No, no, no, it's not.
So, you know, but what you've done is you've taken it from the abstract
and put it in a place and a time and you've connected it to specific people
who live in this area, who know each other, who are all related in some way,
whether they're friends or enemies or whatever it is.
Yeah. They've got a relationship to it.
And suddenly that represents that much more accurately.
What you've crafted is a map that actually maps on to the world
a lot more accurately and saying black. Exactly.
And it's just and it's insufferable that we are trapped in this abstract thinking.
Yeah. And it gets frustrating because I'm not even a black American.
And sometimes someone will put someone to point to like the worst example
of like this type of thing I'm talking about and they'll say, this is black American culture.
Yeah. And I'm like, this is a this is a pocket
of black Americans as in there are there are that culture does exist
within this demographic of 40 million people.
But to take the worst element of it from the worst people
and then allow that to represent this very large group of people,
let alone a larger group of maybe around a billion black people in the world
is completely goofed.
But people do that all day, every day.
Yeah. Right. And they just say, oh, like it's and I'm just like, man, I wish.
But also it doesn't represent anything.
So I mean, I can't I can't imagine your average Nigerian family
is actually much like your average inner city single mother.
Right. No, no.
And there's generally not a lot of exactly love.
And yeah, what's the word I'm looking for?
I don't know. Respect, appreciation,
understanding necessarily between those those groups either.
Because it that's the point, isn't it?
But in the abstract black, well, I'm sorry, you're all in that together now.
But if you think about it in the civilizational terms,
well, yeah, Nigerian civilization is this column here that goes on.
And that's something else so so totally unrelated
that they wouldn't recognize each other and barely understand each other's language.
No, just like it.
Look, I think and I think we can probably fairly say in any
in any racial group or ethnic group, you can find pockets of weird culture
and bad bad bad behavior and high rates of crime, high rates of single mother,
whatever the case may be.
But it would I think most people people would recognize
that it would be crazy to take that. I don't know.
I don't even I don't like I don't like the term quote unquote, you know, white trash.
Yeah, I don't like that term.
But if someone were to take whatever someone calls that sort of subculture.
Yeah. And then say that's white culture.
I see people be like what are you talking about?
Firstly, white culture is we are French, Polish.
Yeah, exactly.
And I think the more worldly you are and the more you kind of understand
that the world is much more nuanced than sort of having.
But this this comes to me to the point where this brings me to the point where
I've just got to the point where I'm like, look, actually,
civilizations are different and they don't really understand each other.
And it's only when you start getting the sort of respect for civilizational
difference that you end up with a situation like Dubai, where you can have
a kind of tete tete or a sort of cultural understanding where it's like, no,
no, you are someone from a foreign civilization have come to this civilization
and you will respect the rules.
But then everything is like greasing the wheels.
You know, everything then can actually work.
But if you try and grind that to a halt, like liberalism wants us to do.
Oh, no, you've got to respect every instance of his Russian orthodoxy in Dubai.
Then and then that grinds the machine to a halt.
And now there's all these other problems that have been created
that didn't have to exist.
The one really expected by the people who are coming and can't really be resolved
without totally reformatting the culture in which they've arrived.
And that's what they're trying to do in in Britain and Europe and in America
at the moment. And it's just not fair. Yeah, it's crazy.
Yeah, the reason why it works in those Gulf countries, in my opinion,
and experience and I've spent a lot of time over in that part of the world
is that in my view, look, some things can go too far.
I'm not taking this as like I'm not I'm not trying to I'm not trying.
I don't want anyone listening to me.
Oh, Zuby thinks that, you know, Saudi Arabia or Qatar or Dubai is like perfect
or has no problems or whatever.
But for the most part, at least in their in their modern versions,
I simply say that they are they're conservative in the right way
and liberal in the right way.
Like I said, they have certain hard bounds.
Rule of law is very strong.
They uphold they uphold that and whatever.
And then within that, you can largely you can you can you can largely you can
largely do what you want. And one and one thing you can't do.
Yeah, because I actually get asked a lot about I'm a Christian and I get asked a lot.
Oh, you know, what's it like being a Christian over there?
I bet it's OK. It's totally fine.
What you what you there's the church I go to, there's seven services every every
Sunday. It's so oversubscribed.
They're actually trying to find a third building.
It's across two buildings.
They're trying to find a third building.
I'm glad he's doing so well.
So yeah, it's it's actually quite it's actually quite fascinating.
I was just there and I was amazed by the amount of like Christmas displays
and the music playing in restaurants and in hotels.
And it wasn't just secular Christmas music.
This is Jesus in a manger music.
And I was I was surprised.
I was like, OK, this is interesting.
Like, they're not shy about this.
What you can't you you can't proselytize to locals.
Fair enough. Right.
So you you can you can have a Bible.
You can go to church.
You can you can believe what you believe you can practice.
You can wear a cross in public.
But if you started going to the local Muslim population and proselytizing
and whatever, that's when you cross that's when you cross their line.
OK. Right.
So that's what I mean.
And so there might be someone who hears that and is like, I don't like that.
You should be able to, you know, go out there and spread the gospel.
And so on. I understand that perspective.
I also understand from their perspective, they're like, hey,
we're very welcoming to foreigners, but we are still in Islamic country.
And we're only 10 percent of the population.
So here's the here's the agreement.
Right.
It's totally respectful.
Why wouldn't you respect that?
But like, you're just not allowed to proselytize a foreign religion to the natives.
OK, fine. What's the argument?
You know, no, we have a right to impose this on you.
No, of course not. Of course, you don't have a right.
You don't have a right to bloody be here, you know, like, you know,
you'll hear our pleasure.
And so like, but this is the point.
This understanding of themselves as a civilization
breeds respect and tolerance in a wholesome way as in you can have
your your Christian church, because it's understood that, you know,
where the boundaries are and we know what the boundaries are.
And so now we can have a handshake, you know, we can actually get along
rather than everyone being like, oh, God, have I said something Islamophobic?
Oh, God, have I been Christian phobic or whatever?
You know, there's all of this just falls away
because everyone knows what the rules and the boundaries are.
And they're constantly enforced, unlike here, obviously.
Yeah, I think I think what the West is suffering from.
I mean, you've touched on it so many times is this.
It's the sort of soft underbelly of liberalism.
Yeah, it's liberalism to the point of there's.
We all agree that there are fantastic liberal values and ideas,
whether this is free markets, this is individual rights, this is freedom of speech,
things that we vehemently defend and don't want to give up exactly.
But liberalism, I in my mind, shouldn't mean no boundaries, lines, barriers,
whatever, just everyone just do do whatever you want to do.
And it doesn't matter if you're in the Senate building and you're.
Yeah, I mean, it's just like, look, there have to be some type of boundaries.
And I'll tell you the other thing that I'm seeing, man,
there's a lot of stuff that I'm I don't know if it's just the fact
that I've been in the Middle East for like the past five weeks.
Yeah.
So the certain things in the West just hit me even harder than they previously do.
But like I've seen it again in the past couple of weeks, several high profile things
of like just gay couples just doing this surrogacy thing,
where they just rent a womb from a woman and they're there posing in pictures
with like their baby that they've just kind of like bought from a woman
who I assume is not as well to do with them and people are like celebrating.
It's it's like you see it and I'm just like, what is what is going on?
Like and why is it that if I say, hey, there's something wrong with that?
Yeah, someone's going to want to say that I I'm a homophobe or I'm hateful or I'm this.
And I'm like, I'm like, I'm like, this would have been crazy to anyone 15 years ago.
Even even a liberal 15, 20 years ago, if you suggested this gay marriage,
they're all against gay marriage.
But let alone just let alone just like this rent a womb kind of thing.
And then I'm just like, this is not right.
Like this is this is weird.
Like I'm having a visceral reaction to some of these things that I'm seeing.
There are at least questions.
Yeah, or the whole very least they're transing the kids and the pushing of
like when I was in the States, I spent I was in the states four or five times
this year and you know, you go into like a target or some of these stores
and they have like LGBTQ clothes for children.
Yeah. Right.
And I'm like, why should your baby be wearing
your why should your six month old be wearing a trans trans pride T-shirt?
Like really good. That's weird.
Like it's just like there's no boundaries.
I'm just like, yeah, come on, man.
Like the thing is that that what hates them.
We're running out of time because there's loads.
But that is that is fundamentally what liberalism is predicated on.
It was it was predicated upon because it before liberalism,
we had these kind of like hard social bonds that kept everything in place.
And liberalism was designed to break some of these bonds and say, well,
actually, all men are equal and actually no one's above someone else.
And therefore this hierarchy of bonds that kept everything fixed in place
well, that's what it was for.
And it's got to the point now where then they're no longer in existence.
Yeah.
And liberalism is still cutting.
And I think another thing that's happened.
I'd love to I don't want to I don't want to you know, go go go over time.
But I think another thing that's happened is because
I'm I think I've accepted at this point that every society
has must have a dominant religion or ideology.
Yeah.
And the truth is what's happened with where we are in the West,
certainly in the UK is that has gone from being Christianity to liberalism
to being secular secular liberalism slash progressivism.
Yeah.
That's become the dominant sort of orthodoxy and ideology.
And I think that the liberalism works with the base layer of Christianity.
But once you knock out that base layer of Christianity
and it's now just this sort of liberal secular humanism thing,
then I think people thought, OK, that'll work fine.
And I think we're quite rapidly seeing no, this doesn't work.
And this also opens you up to I'll be honest, I think it opens you up to being
conquered because when you do bring in something
that is more orthodox and rigid and hard line.
And your only thing is your final moral value is tolerance and consent,
which is kind of what it is, what it is.
Then you you over time, yeah, you will be you'll be conquered.
And and but also you have so many terrible things happening to kids on the way.
Yes.
And you know, you're you're totally right about this, right?
And the thing is the the original liberal thinkers knew this, too.
Like John Locke thought atheism should be made illegal.
I'm not even joking.
Atheism should be made illegal because he knew that his conception
of liberalism was predicated on rights given by God.
And that actually is quite a strong framework, but that's gone.
You know, the and I mean, the founding fathers literally knew this as well.
And they're setting up the United States.
They're like, no, this is for a God fearing people and no one else.
I'll tell you what else is nuts.
I'll tell you another thing that's like I already hated and was freaking me out.
But again, it's just hit me just some of the stories
like I've seen recently with in Canada, with this whole
made medical assistance and dying thing, where they're just now just killing
thousands of thousands of people.
Because like I think from March 2024,
they're opening it up to depression and mental health problems.
What it's so bad.
I'm looking at this and I'm just like, guys, what are you?
I'm not a Canadian.
I'm like, guys, what the heck are you doing?
Like, can you not?
How can you not see?
Yeah, what this is.
Dude, I'm at the point where I'm like, I'm not a Christian, but aren't we all
God's children, you know, it's really dark.
Yeah, it's really dark.
I'm just like, I'm literally at that point where it's just like, no, no, no,
this maybe there's something sacred about a person
because they can't get a stair gate or a stair lift or whatever.
They shouldn't be offered suicide.
Actually, you know, the state maybe shouldn't be killing any of its own citizens
like that. It's gnarly.
And but that but then people are like, oh, well, it's their choice.
They consent. Well, exactly.
It's like, yeah, OK, I agree.
They consent, but they were depressed, you know, or sad or whatever it is, you
know, and maybe some things are no one.
No one take this the wrong way.
But OK, no, let me let me frame it in a way that can't be taken the wrong way.
Maybe there is more to morality than simple consent.
Yes, maybe consent is not the basis.
It's an important component of morality.
I agree. It's not the be all and end all.
It's not the sum total of it.
And there are there are areas of morality that are as important
that simply can't involve consent.
Again, the relationship you have with your parents, you know,
that that I would say is one of the most core pillars of morality.
And it's nothing to do with consent.
You were born into the choice.
Carl, give us some hope.
We've talked a lot about the problems.
How do we? How do we?
How do we save the UK? How do we save the West?
God, I don't know if I have an answer to that.
I think.
Having a good understanding of what liberalism is doing to the West
allows us to put it in its proper place, because it does have a proper place.
Because, I mean, in a way, for the English speaking world,
liberalism has the kind of sort of the kind of level of importance
that Sharia law does in some Islamic countries.
It's literally like Anglo Sharia.
It's part of our DNA.
You know, we've always thought this, but it can't be everything.
And in the same way that many Islamic countries don't have Sharia,
you know, it's not everything.
And we need to put it in its proper place and recognise, actually,
we have a right as a people to have a country of our own,
which sounds like a radical statement in 2023,
but sounds really normal in any other time and place.
I mean, it's, you know, I agree that the Palestinians should have their own country.
I agree that the Israelis should have their own country.
I agree that peoples deserve their own countries.
The Kurds should have their own country.
And I totally support all of that in the same way that I support the Europeans
having their own countries.
And when we do have that kind of understanding of the civilisational
understanding of ourselves, suddenly, actually, it becomes way easier to get along.
I mean, I'm sure you've seen Europeans talking to other Europeans, right?
The French and the Germans in the English,
put three French, German and English in a room together.
They'll get along, but it'll be very ethnic, you know,
be lots of German and French and English jokes.
But that's how we get along.
Suddenly, we've got a way of doing that.
And when we return to that way of thinking,
actually, it becomes so much easier to get along as well.
Absolutely, ma'am.
And where can people find and follow you online?
Go to lootseaters.com or find me on Twitter or wherever you want.
Awesome. Carl, always a pleasure to speak to you, man.
So glad you came down. Appreciate it.
