A number system would be no good if there wasn't some way to determine how big a number
was or how far away one number was from another.
If you've got some complex number that's a real plus some imaginary component and you
want to know how big that number is, you just take the square root of the sum of the squares
of each of those components, same as it would be if they were two sides of a right triangle.
And we tend to think that the size of a number is trivial and it usually is.
If I ask you how big is 25, well you'd tell me it's 25 big, that is the size of the number.
If I were to ask you how big negative 25 is, you'd say the size is 25, it's the absolute
value of that number.
Similarly, if you wanted to know how far apart two numbers were, what you typically do is
you just subtract those two numbers and take the absolute value.
So if you want to know how far apart 8 is from 15, you just take 15 minus 8 and look
at the absolute value of that, so it's 7.
But this is something we actually take for granted, that there's such a nice easy definition
of size.
Because when we get to piatic numbers, all of a sudden we can't really use those definitions
anymore.
Remember, these piatic numbers go on infinitely to the left.
So using our normal definition of size, all of these numbers are infinite, but that doesn't
really work.
That doesn't tell us anything meaningful about scale.
So today I want to build up the intuition behind what's known as the piatic metric.
It's the way that you determine a piatic number's size.
The definition of the piatic metric is this.
That's that d of some number m, which means the size of m equals 1 over p, where p is
the prime number base we're in.
So if we're in a 3-adex system, p is 3.
If we're in a 2-adex system, p is 2.
And we're putting this to the power of n, where n is the number of times that m is the
divisible by p.
So what that means is that if you want to know how big a piatic number m is, maybe it's
a 3-adex number, well what you would do is you'd ask how many times does 3 go into this
number?
And if 3 goes into your piatic number maybe 5 times, then the size of that number would
be 1 over 3 to the 5.
This sounds really random, doesn't it?
Really arbitrary.
Where would we get such a strange notion of size?
In my last video I made a comment that in a 2-adex system, 4 was farther away from 5
than it was from 8.
And now we can actually see why that is.
So let's look at a 2-adex system and ask what is the distance from 5 to 4.
In a piatic system, if you want to know the distance from one number to another number,
what you do is first what you'd expect.
You take the absolute value of the difference of those two numbers.
But that's not your answer.
In a piatic system, what you would then do is plug that number into this equation.
This 1 over p to the n.
So 5 minus 4 is 1.
And now we need to ask ourselves how many times does 2 go into 1?
Because we're in a 2-adex system.
Well 2 goes into 1 zero times.
So the distance from 5 to 4 in a 2-adex system is 1 over 2 to the 0.
Because 2 goes into 1 zero times.
Compare that to the distance from 8 to 4.
The difference from 8 to 4 is just 4.
And 2 goes into 4 2 times.
So the size of the difference from 8 to 4 is 1 over 2 to the power of 2.
Which is 4.
This by the way is 1.
So you can see that in a 2-adex system, 8 and 4 are closer to each other.
They're only a fourth away in distance.
Whereas 5 and 4 are a whole 1 away from each other.
It kind of seems like this was plucked out of thin air.
And there's not going to be any way that we can intuitively understand what this even
means or how we'd arrive at it.
But it turns out that this is related to something very fundamental about piatic numbers.
It's related to the fact that they can extend infinitely to the left.
Whereas real numbers can extend infinitely to the right.
So before we jump into that, I want to mention something really important that I omitted
from my last video.
And it's the fact that piatic numbers are an extension on the rational numbers in the
same way that real numbers are an extension on the rational numbers.
But they branch off in different directions.
So let me explain what I mean.
We've got the rational numbers, right?
It's the set of all positive and negative fractions of whole numbers.
So negative one-half is a rational number, 14 is a rational number, 37 over a thousand
is a rational number.
All of these are rational numbers, the things that we're more used to dealing with.
However, pi is not a rational number because pi can't be written as a whole number over
a whole number.
We often denote the set of all of these rational numbers with a Q.
Now the story that you've probably heard before is that from the rational numbers we
expand our scope of what we think a number is and we get the real numbers from that.
So numbers that can't be written as an integer over another integer.
Numbers like the square root of 2 or pi or the log of 2.
All of these are examples of what we would call real numbers.
The real numbers don't exist within the set of rationals, but they're an extension of
rational numbers.
We add on real numbers to rational numbers.
But there's another way that we can go here.
We don't have to go from rationals to reels.
We can actually take a totally different path, the route of the pediatrics.
And pediatrics do much the same thing that reels do.
They fill in all of these little gaps between the rationals.
So the square root of 2 fits somewhere between 1 and a half.
And you could never get exactly to it using rational numbers.
And that's why we need real numbers.
They fill in those spaces between the rationals.
Pediatrics also fill in these gaps the way that real numbers do, but they do it in a
different way.
We'll come back to this later, but for right now I just want us to realize that there's
a correlation between real numbers and piatic numbers.
They share a sort of duality, and we're going to use this duality to construct some kind
of intuition about piatic metrics.
If you were just looking at real numbers on the outside, you may say that we're facing
much the same problem of defining size as we are with piatic numbers.
Why is that?
Well, because real numbers are allowed to have infinitely many digits.
Take pi, for example.
Pi goes on forever as 3.14159265 blah blah blah.
So how can we define size if this thing has infinitely many digits?
Well, the trick is to decide which of the digits you're going to focus on.
Which digits are most important for determining the size of a number?
When it comes to real numbers, like pi, we usually define size by looking at the left
most digits.
So if I were to ask you how big this number is, you'd have no problem.
It's 3.14.
The size of 3.14 is just the absolute value of 3.14.
So it's not an issue.
And now notice that 3.14 on its own is really close to pi.
We definitely have a gut sense that that's true.
And the reason is, is because the left most digits are the same as pi.
And typically, the more left most digits of a real number are the same as some other number,
the closer we say those two numbers are.
So for example, if we were to consider 3.1415 and then maybe a bunch of zeros here, we'd
say that these numbers are close because they share the first five digits with each other.
Another way to say they share the first five digits is to say that if we were to subtract
these two numbers from each other, we'd get five zeros before we hit some non-zero number.
This gives us a hint as to which digits we should focus on for piatic numbers as being
most important to the size of a piatic number.
For piatic numbers, the digits trail off infinitely to the left.
And so we can't see all of the digits all at once, but we can see the right most digits
of a piatic number.
So the hint here is that maybe we should focus on those digits.
Let's look at what happens if we do.
If I had some number, maybe 2, 1, 3, 2, 2, 1, 3, and it goes on forever, maybe this is
a five-adic number, and I wanted to construct something that I thought was close to this
number, another infinitely long to the left number.
I might say 2, 1, 3, 2, 2, and then maybe I'll let this deviate a little bit.
There we go.
So these numbers certainly look similar, and if I subtract them from each other, I do
get zeros, but now on the right.
So taking the hint from the real numbers, we may guess that the more zeros are on the
right-hand side of a piatic number, the smaller that number is.
Analogous to the way for reals, the more zeros are on the left-hand side of a number, the
smaller that number is.
So let's say we like this definition of size for piatic numbers, that the more zeros there
are on the right-hand side of a piatic number, the smaller that number is.
How would we go about measuring how many zeros there are on the right-hand side of a piatic
number?
We don't want to just count them by hand, that just doesn't feel very elegant.
So can we come up with some better way to do that?
So let's imagine that we're in a three-adic system, and we have some number that is 0,
0, 0, 0, 2, 1, 2, 2, 1, 1, 1.
Digits going off to the left.
So first, let's remind ourselves what this means in a three-adic system.
What do these digits mean?
Well, remember, they represent powers of three increasing from right to left.
So this means 0 times 3 to the 0, plus 0 times 3 to the 1, plus 0 times 3 to the 2, plus
0 times 3 cubed, plus 2 times 3 to the 4th, plus 1 times 3 to the 5th, and so on.
There are four zeros at the beginning of this number, and we notice something else interesting
about this number.
The first non-zero term has 3 to the 4.
It's not a coincidence that those numbers line up, because you can think about the powers
here as indexing what position we're in in our string of digits.
If I were to now rewrite this number without the zeros, what we'd find is that it's just
2 times 3 to the 4, plus 1 times 3 to the 5, plus 2 times 3 to the 6, and so on.
And this actually highlights something really important, that we can pull out 3 to the 4
from this number.
If we do that, we're just left with 3 to the 4 times 2, plus 1 times 3 to the 1, plus
2 times 3 squared, plus 2 times 3 cubed, and so on.
Now let's stop for a second to make sure we understand that this makes sense.
Every subsequent term to the left after our 3 to the 4 term is guaranteed to have a higher
power of 3 to the n, so we know that each of them will have at least a 3 to the 4 to
spare to give us to pull out and put on the side.
Also, note that once we pull out 3 to the 4, we know that this number can't be divisible
by 3 anymore, because it's got a bunch of terms divisible by 3, plus 2.
This guarantees that the number in parentheses here won't be divisible by 3, and this means
that this whole number right here, whatever it is, is divisible by exactly 4 threes.
No more than that.
Any more than 4 threes, and you're left with a number that is no longer divisible by 3.
So maybe you see where I'm going with this now.
We can relate the number of zeros on the right hand side of some piatic number to the number
of times that the base of that number goes into that number, or how divisible a piatic
number is by its prime base.
And now think back to our definition of the piatic metric.
It's 1 over the prime base of your piatic number raised to the power of however many
times that number occurs in the prime factorization.
That's exactly 1 over this right here, 3 to the 4, at least for this number that we're
looking at right here.
So what the piatic metric is actually doing is telling you how many zeros there are on
the right hand side of your piatic number.
And this is analogous to determining size in the real numbers by looking at how many
zeros are on the left hand side of your number.
All right, now at this point you might have some discomfort with this.
Probably the main one being that we don't actually use the number of zeros on the left
hand side of a real number to determine its size.
That's not what we do.
It's just related to it loosely, but it's not the same as the size of a real number.
So why is that what we're using over here?
And this is where I want to go back to what I was talking about earlier, where we take
the rational numbers and then we can either branch off to expanding them into the reals
or into the piatics.
There's a theorem in math called Ostrowski's theorem.
And what it states is that there's only two non-trivial distance metrics on this set of
rational numbers.
Now whatever metric we end up using, maybe we're using the piatic metric for the piatics
and we're using the normal absolute value metric for the real numbers, whichever one
we end up using, we can also apply to the set of rational numbers because, well, rational
numbers are included in the piatics.
Metrics are just added on to rationals and the same way that reals are just added on
to rationals.
So it's important to keep in mind that whatever metric we decide to use for the number system
that we're in is also going to be the metric that we're using for rationals because rationals
are in this set of numbers.
And this is why it's eerily not arbitrary that we chose to determine the size of a
piatic number by the zeros on the right hand side.
Because that metric for determining the size of numbers is the only one besides the absolute
value that you can come up with for the rational numbers.
And since rational numbers are in piatics and in reals, we have to use metrics that
play nice with the rational numbers.
So there you go.
Hopefully that gave you some intuition behind the piatic metric.
Interestingly, a lot of times when people are introducing piatic numbers, they start
with a Strausky's theorem and say, we've got this other metric.
What numbers converge using this other metric?
And that is a totally fine way to go about defining piatic numbers.
In fact, it's a lot more rigorous than what I've done in my last two videos, but it doesn't
involve any intuition.
It doesn't tell you why that piatic metric exists or it doesn't show you how you can
make sense of it.
So I really like this way of building up first piatic numbers and what they look like and
then thinking about how we can define the size of it, because I think it makes their
entire invention very sensible.
In my opinion, intuition in mathematics is this luxury that we don't always get to have.
And it's really nice when there's a situation that you don't even expect you'll be able
to get the luxury of intuition, but you find it anyway.
So I hope you guys liked this video.
These are a lot of fun for me to make and thanks for watching.
So originally, I actually talked a little more about what defines a metric and what requirements
go into being a metric.
And then I also went over an example where we used the piatic metric to show that the
sum of powers of two approaches negative one, but this video is already getting kind of
long.
So I'm going to make it a bonus footage video and hopefully release it sometime soon after
this video is released.
So be sure to check that out.
I'll put an end card somewhere on the screen.
Thank you.
Bye.
Bye.
