Lecture 2 What is it and did the Greeks invent it?
The second lecture I've titled Philosophy, What is it and did the Greeks invent it?
And more than a few sentences of qualification are required on a subject of this kind.
We live in what I should call fairly sensitive times when it comes to attributing all sorts
of things to one people and leaving the rest out.
We do have an increasingly multicultural perspective which I think on the whole is sound and summoning.
And so one does have to explain why it is when one approaches the House of Intellect,
that most of the early rooms are going to be occupied by the Greek-speaking people.
Why is it that whether we're talking about philosophy or mathematics or biology or political
science or even economics, that woeful subject, why is it that our thoughts constantly recur
to the ancient Greek world as we search for origins and the earliest development?
And in some cases, a development that indeed competes quite favorably with what Evelyn
War referred to as this alleged 20th century.
What was it about the ancient Greek people that gave them an opportunity to found all
of these subjects?
Was it something ethnic?
Is there something about the climate?
There are theories to that effect.
Lots of sunshine, that sort of thing.
Nice clean air, plenty of fish in the Aegean.
Maybe it's that they ate so much fish.
Bertie Worcester explains the genius of his gentlemen's, gentlemen's jeeves on the basis
of jeeves eating almost nothing but fish.
So various theories have been propounded to account for the Hellenic achievement.
And I shall review a few of them.
I don't think this is a genie that we can get into the bottle.
This kind of breath of accomplishment is simply too large for single theories to embrace.
Well, what is philosophy anyway before we address the question of whether the Greeks invented it?
What's the difference between a philosophical perspective and, let's say, the perspective
that Homer had in composing Iliad and Odyssey, or the perspective the singers and writers
of the Upanishads had?
What's the difference between folk wisdom and philosophy?
What's the difference between science and philosophy?
Top lines here can be drawn only at peril.
Indeed, the more developed thinking gets, the more philosophical and scientific thinking
tends to bleed into each other.
Of course, the difference between mythology and drama and poetry and song on the one hand
and philosophy on the other is that philosophy takes a systematically and critical perspective
on all of the claims that we find in these other epistemological or quasi-epistemological
genres.
The playwright indeed is attempting to get at a kind of truth, and indeed the playwright
very often gets at the deepest of truths and passes these on in a memorable and indeed
unchallengeable way.
The greatest depth psychologies are served up by Euripides and Sophocles and Eskules,
and we understand ourselves at a level by way of such dramatists, Shakespeare and the
poets and the like, that that would be almost impossible to approximate in any other way.
Notwithstanding the insights that are passed on in great art and architecture, but philosophy
is different.
The bottom line in philosophy is not to solve practical problems, it's not to solidify the
civic bonds among people, it's not to make us feel better, it's not to make us feel worse,
rather it is to test the most fundamental beliefs, the most fundamental values and convictions
we have, and to test them for the purpose of getting them right.
So the central aspect of the philosophical perspective is a critical aspect.
Criticality, criticism, self-criticism is at the very heart, it's at the very center
of the philosophical enterprise.
What is beloved by way of the philosophical worldview is wisdom itself.
Not wisdom so that, not wisdom in order that, not to get more of this or more of that, not
to be reassured, not for the good night's sleep, not for its consolations with all due
respect, no, it's to get it right, and we're getting it right might indeed be bad news
also.
It's not inevitably good news, sometimes it's not news at all.
It's a question that's answered with yet another question and answered with yet another question.
I sometimes say that profound philosophical insights should always be followed not with
exclamation points but with semicolons because the long debate goes on.
It wasn't ended by Plato or Aristotle or John Locke and it certainly isn't ended by
the editorial page of the New York Times or our other journals of learned dispositions.
Well, did the Greeks invent this sort of thing?
They certainly didn't invent thought.
I should think the first time homo sapiens started dropping out of trees or whatever
it was we dropped out of and had to civilize his litter with a stick and find the evening
meal and fill up the lauter to the extent that there was a stationary lauter.
Questions of a persistent nature emerged.
Should we stay here?
Should we leave?
Is this a reliable place to raise children?
What are children anyway?
Are these things little adults?
How come they don't know how to do this and that?
Why are they all going ba-ba-ba-ba and then at a certain point they seem to be making
some sense?
How is it these dogs keep following us around?
They're awfully nice creatures after all and yet these other things aren't following
us around except to eat us up.
How do we tell the difference between one and the other?
Can you know at a distance whether something is prey or predator?
Who's that chap over there with the feathers on his head who says if we don't do what
he tells us to do, he's going to kill us.
Maybe we should do what he says.
Anyway, he's the oldest one among us, he's survived longest and that minotaur, what was
that all about when we finally get into the age of mythology?
Why do we find this man bull eating meat?
Well, this is, I guess, is an answer to the question, why do we eat meat?
I mean, there are so many things around that live and grow and prosper and they don't eat
meat, but we grow and prosper when we do eat meat and maybe that's because we've got
some sort of divine bull in the background or some animal aspect of our nature and our
heritage, something special about us.
I say these queries are insistent, listen to children.
Children are raising what might be called pre-philosophical questions.
We do a parody on this when we have the child saying why is the sky blue and why can't I
have more ice cream?
But these are questions that are getting at a philosophical orientation.
I mean, the answer to the question, why can't I have more ice cream, never is successfully
because I said so.
The old John Wagner explanation of what it means to be brought up by a disciplining father
where the answer to your question is shut up, I explained, do you say shut up, I explained.
It's not a philosophical reply, but the question is a philosophical question in a kind of childlike
idiom.
Why can't I have more of something is getting at what is the rule that governs what I can
have.
Make this decision intelligible to me.
And if you say because you won't eat your supper, suppose the child then says let me
have the ice cream and I promise I will eat my supper.
And then you get into points of the sort, but ice cream in that quantity isn't good
for you and it won't mix well with what you.
Before you know it, there's a kind of debate going on, one that parents very often find
quite punishing.
Why is the sky blue is a very interesting question.
Why is the sky blue is a very interesting question and indeed most textbook answers to
that question which fail to take into consideration the unique properties of the visual system
and color vision mechanisms do not give complete answers to, but it is a good question.
A child sees a cat, sees many cats, sees alley cats, sees cats in the street and then for
the first time goes to a zoo and sees a tiger and is told it's a cat.
It's a cat.
My goodness, it's 20 times the size of a cat.
The colors are different, the teeth are longer, the sound isn't a meow, it's a roar.
How can that and that be cats?
And so there's a searching for some scheme of classification.
How you render the world intelligible.
Philosophy doesn't begin with the need for an intelligible world.
The need for an intelligible world begins with the fearfulness of pre-philosophical,
pre-literate societies facing an unpredictable world of change.
The ancient Greeks from the earliest record we have of them tend to see themselves as
it were estranged in the world.
They're not part of the divine scheme.
The Olympians are something very, very different from themselves.
They're here alone in an intimidating place.
They're engaged in trade with people who speak a different language, who have different beliefs,
who bow down in the presence of their leaders bedecked in gold as if those leaders were
Olympian gods.
The Greeks in Asia Minor, in the settlements in Miletus, in those places where philosophy
is founded, are the near neighbors of people whose cultural practices strike them as bizarre
and peculiar and unreasonable, and they're trying to make sense of that.
They're trying to make their estrangement from the world less punishing by coming to
understand the world, and you come to understand the world by asking questions about it.
Well, this isn't yet philosophy, but it's on the track, and we can ask the question
again, well, why the Greeks, why those people, why at that time, why there in that place?
And what time are we talking about?
We're talking about the 6th century BC and thereafter, the Pythagoras is in the 550s,
Parmenides, the Presocratic philosophers, 6th century BC.
This is at least 150, 200 years after the Homeric epics, and yet this is already a rich,
philosophically suggestive body of knowledge that's being developed.
What is it about the time and the place and the people that would give rise to this most
extraordinary of intellectual achievements?
I think we can say it is the most extraordinary of intellectual achievements.
It's certainly not the beginning of culture or civilization.
The Egypt and the First Kingdom goes back thousands of years before anything passing
for philosophical inquiry.
Certainly Chinese civilization predates anything we would describe as Hellenic.
Certainly what we find in India is already developed versus what we will find in the
Greek-speaking part of the world at the same time.
So there can be great, vast, successful civilizations without any philosophical activity at all.
And I think it's a common mistake to think that civilization somehow matches up with
philosophical and indeed scientific and abstract modes of understanding.
You can have great, vast, enduring civilizations that nonetheless are fairly thin at the level
of abstract rationality and abstract inquiries.
Great civilizations come about by solving practical problems and by putting in place
a form of government able to preserve itself.
So great civilizations, particularly those guided by pharaoh or tyrants of one kind or
another, are able to preserve themselves as long as they can continue to solve the problems
of feeding the people and defending the place against enemies and incursions.
So you don't get philosophy inevitably as a result of having a developed culture or
civilization.
Now what about the climate?
Is there something about, I do like the climatological explanation of the Hellenic achievement.
Apparently on this theory the Greeks were favored by having somewhat more sunshine than
pharaoh.
That isn't quite going to work.
The sun tends to shine in most places of the world.
It shines in Denmark and it certainly, it's shown on the Etruscans surely and there was
plenty of sunshine on the island of Crete.
There's still a lot of sunshine on the island of Crete.
Something about the Greek mainland, however, is quite suggestive.
Two-thirds of it is unerable.
You can't grow anything on it.
It's a very, very rocky place, tough soil.
Olives do well, lemon trees and lemon groves in some places do fairly well, but surely
you would not say that the Greek-speaking people were blessed by having a place where
if you throw some seeds out, your food requirements for the next millennium are taken care of.
No.
The 7th century BC, they're colonizing Sicily, they're colonizing the east coast of Italy
and they're colonizing islands off the coast of Asia Minor largely for the purpose of producing
produce that can be sent back to the mainland.
I say by 700 BC, they're already having trouble feeding, so I don't think the sunshine theory
quite does it.
I mean, I'm all for ecological approaches to the study of culture and all that, but
I don't think the weatherman has the answer to the rise of Hellenic thought and Hellenic
philosophy.
Well, we're told, if you take a look at the period of great philosophical achievement
in the Greek world, it's when the Greeks, through military success and conquest, acquired
large numbers of slaves.
And so you now have an aristocratic class with plenty of sunshine, a lot of time on
their hands, and slaves to do the scut work.
And isn't just this the ideal combination for producing that most useless of enterprises,
abstract philosophical thought, you know, sitting in the armchair and speculating wisely
and widely.
Well, I don't think that's going to work either, and its failure is at several levels.
First off, slavery is not introduced by the ancient Greek world.
It is co-extensive with civilizations, older and contemporary, with the Greek world.
In the Greek world, the way you become a slave, until the reforms of Solon, Greek could enslave
Greek for non-payment and other offenses and the like.
With the Solonic reforms, Greeks could not enslave Greeks.
But the way you become a slave in the ancient Greek world is your side loses the battle.
And the reparations call for some indentured period of service, which you can buy your
way out of.
There are instances of enough being earned by slaves in the ancient Greek world for them
to have slaves.
The majority of, quote, slaves are actually domestic servants.
There's no evidence at all of a conception of slavery based on ethnic or racial grounds.
That's a rather modern invention.
And indeed, the great, great bulk of servants in the ancient Greek world are engaged in
domestic service, their house servants.
A few, if any, of the major architectural achievements are constructed by way of slave
labor.
There was slave labor working on the silver mines at Loriam.
But by the way, there was a quite low ceiling on just how many slaves could be imported
without wrecking the domestic economy.
This was a very fragile economy throughout the classical period.
And of course, the more slave labor, the fewer jobs for the locals.
So I say this kind of explanation just doesn't do it.
We have long periods of economies grounded firmly and much more lavishly in slave labor
without so much as a ray of philosophical light emanating from them.
And we've got this extraordinary achievement of the Hellenic world, which depends rather
little on slave labor, and achievements that are going to be served up by those who are
not inevitably higher-born, more prosperous, more endowed with domestic servants, footmen,
valets, and the like.
So I don't think that's going to do it.
And I don't think scholars have ever seriously proposed that that is the best way to understand
it.
But I do think scholars agree that the peculiarities of Olympianism as a religion do have something
to do with this invention of philosophy.
This is a subject unto itself, and I must touch it all too briefly.
Recall from the previous lecture, the particular epistemological vulnerabilities of the gods,
they don't know everything.
Not only don't they know everything, but except for certain lapses, they don't care too much
about us.
Zeus is found admonishing the lesser gods and goddesses, not to spend so much time concerned
with these human affairs.
When he placates Aphrodite after Diomedes has cut her, it inevitably happens when you
get yourself mixed up with these characters, do you see, spending all your time worried
about what they're going to do.
It's a wonderful little vignette that comes out of this.
There's blood and gore everywhere in the pages of the Iliad.
When we don't have hecatomes of ox being sacrificed, we've got great crashing helmets
with the eyes falling out and blood everywhere and the like.
We find the fallen hero being attended to by his chums.
They stuff the open wound with some herbs and the like, and they try to cauterize it,
and he gets up on the field of battle, and he's got a limp, he'll never lose, and he's
not the man he used to be, but at least he's still serviceable to the cause.
That's one thing that goes on.
Aphrodite goes back to Olympus, and she says, you know, after Diomedes turns on her, she
says, and as Zeus puts his hand on Aphrodite's wrist and removes it, all evidence that anything
had happened is gone.
This is perfected surgery, do you say.
There are no health plans that will cover this kind of surgical attention and skill.
It just underscores the extraordinary separation between, to use contemporary parlance, heaven
and earth.
We have to solve our problems.
We propitiate the gods.
We engage in rituals of a certain kind.
We don't try to anger them in any way.
We don't adopt them as patrons or patronesses of the polis, only then to shame them with
the conduct that we perform within that polis.
So there is that reverential attitude.
But the ancient Greek world never has a state religion.
It's an interesting fact.
It's a rarity in the human experience.
It never has a state religion.
I'd also have to say, of course, that the ancient polis is never entirely secular either.
So there is no official state religion, but there is no totally secular polis either.
Either there is a complete extraordinary integration of the secular and the reverential, the secular
and the devout, an integration of belief and action and thought and practice, myth.
An integration that I think has probably not been matched since.
It's hard for any citizen of the contemporary world, I should think, to enter empathically
into that frame of mind in which one has a religious attitude, but not a religion as such.
What are the priests doing in this ancient world?
Well, they are presiding over ritual.
You've got to get the thing right.
But the priests don't have a epistemological authority.
It is not to the priest or priestess that you go with a bona fide philosophical question
trying to get an answer.
You might consult the oracles, and the oracles, they're not as much for hire as sometimes
secondary sources suggest.
But it is not for no reason that what the oracle at Delphi says is described as Delphic.
I mean, very often these utterances can mean almost anything that you want them to mean.
And most of the time it has to do with whether Jack and Jill should get married, how the
crops are likely to do, whether this particular strategy in battle is likely to be a successful
one.
No one's going in there with questions of, is the ultimate reality atomic or is it molecular?
Nothing like that.
How do you account for an eclipse?
No.
So there are not oracular answers to these questions.
There isn't anything on Olympus that is tooled up to provide answers to questions of this
kind.
The religious aspect of the ancient Greek world almost begs for a philosophical approach
to the problems of life and mind.
And I would lay great stress on the relationship in any society and civilization between the
authority conferred on religious figures, the epistemological authority conferred, and
the philosophical vitality of that age.
And when I say religious figures, it can be the wise man, the saint, the priest, the
lofty, pum-pum, zuni, obey a man, Indian chief, it doesn't matter much.
If Farrow, if you're fairly satisfied that the most burning questions, the questions
that are most insistent on your mind are best answered by going to an authority, a named
person, someone who holds the office of answering questions, answering the questions of life's
meaning.
If you've got that kind of arrangement, I submit that the philosophical dimensions of
that culture will be fairly thin and fragile if present at all.
There's something about philosophy that is at once humanizing and utterly human.
It's the court of last recourse, when the oracles have failed us, when the saints have
grown silent, and when God has chosen not to reveal himself.
Then we stand back in the dark, dark shadows of confusion and fear and to ask, what sort
of being am I?
What kind of life is right for me?
And how should I govern or be governed?
So there's much to the peculiar relationship then between a religious outlook, which is
co-extensive with the human experience, and a vital ingredient I should think in any life.
A life devoid of the spiritual dimension is a life that has been emptied of one of the
greatest sources of its activity and its devotion and motivation.
The question is, where that particular life is suspended and suspended for the purpose
of critical...
The philosopher doesn't enter the arena of philosophy as one devoid of belief, one devoid
of values, one devoid of hope and purpose and plan, aspirations, goals and the like.
No, all of that is in place.
The philosopher is, we are the philosophers.
But there are those rare moments then where we say, no matter how much this means to me,
no matter how centered my being is on this pattern of beliefs, no matter how close I
am personally and emotionally and even romantically to those who hold these convictions, I'm going
to be skeptical about those statements.
I'm going to plumb the depths of those arguments to see finally what their true value is.
And I'm prepared to follow this golden chord that will get me out of the labyrinth, no
matter how many twists and turns there are, because once I let go of that, which in one
of the dialogues Plato will say, we are like puppets and the gods can move us any which
way they will by pulling on these strings, but we have one string that we can pull back
on.
And he says it's the golden string of reason.
There's that golden string again.
Thesias had a golden chord that gets him out of the labyrinth.
Socrates gives us the golden chord of reason.
We can pull back.
It doesn't mean we can oppose the gods.
It means we can resist a bit.
We can make some way ourselves.
We're not simply foils, do you see?
We're not merely material objects to be moved around by the whim and caprice of dark forces.
But lose that reason, suspend that criticality, become gullible, become credulous, accept anything
that custom serves up, and you are a puppet on a string.
And the form of life you are living is the life of a slave.
So these are some of the things that are taking place in the ancient Greek world.
These queries entered into by Parmenides and Aximander and the other pre-socratics,
where did the cosmos come from?
What's it made of?
Democritus is fairly satisfied that you can take almost any object and break it down into
something smaller, and you can take those smaller pieces and break them down.
It must be that the ultimate constituents of reality are invisibly small things, and
that apart from those invisibly small things, the only thing left over are the spaces between
invisibly small things.
So Democritus famously says that people have speculated endlessly about what has real existence,
what is really out there.
I tell you, there are only two things that constitute reality, atoms and a void.
Do you see atoms and the spaces between atoms?
Well, does that mean that all I am is a congeries of atomic and, as we'd say today, subatomic
particles?
Is there no more to the story than that?
Tell me, Democritus, is there no more to that?
Is there no more to constitutions and political regimes?
Is there no more to diet and romance and love and childrearing?
Is there no more to life and death than atoms and a void?
And what about life?
What is it in the atomic level that allows some things to live and not others?
And of course, Democritus and interpretations of Democritus later on in the philosophical
period will talk about the swerve which gives a certain freedom and originality to what
are otherwise atomic processes.
But here you see a question not unlike what's raised in the Upanishads.
What's the source of everything?
But what we find in Democritus is not atman, but atoms.
Something quite material and here, something underfoot, something very natural.
And again, and I fear I do repeat myself, there is in this Olympianism, in this separation
between humanity and divinity, an inducement to an earthiness and a naturalistic perspective
that has us understand ourselves and our lives at least partly in terms of what the world
seems to be made up of and what we seem to be made up of.
That naturalistic element, even in Plato, will be discoverable.
Platonic thought will attempt to get beyond and above the plane of mere materiality, but
it will begin at that plane and it will recognize that you must explain at that level as much
as you can and you only move to a transcendent plane when you discover there are some things
that cannot be accounted for in terms of materiality and corporeality.
Well, did the Greeks invent it?
Is it something ethnic?
Is it something in the very language?
It has been observed that the Greek language does lend itself to a kind of analyticity.
The question was raised by Isocrates in the fourth century BC.
Isocrates ran the most successful school of rhetoric in Athens and one of his works titled
The Panagyrexes is the rhetorical art of panagyrical rhetoric, how you sing praise in a rhetorically
successful way.
And he raises the question within the panagyrexes as to whether or not philosophy is something
that just the Greeks do, is this just something, just something, Hellenic?
And I wish I had the text in front of me.
I can give you a version of it in the ancient Greek.
I think this is pretty faithful to the original text.
I believe he says something like a Paso Metacontis imaterus paeveus helinastin.
Those who share our conception of paevea, culture, do you see, are Hellenes.
It isn't something ethnic.
It's a cultural conception.
Those who come together with us in what we take to be the most important aspects of life
are Hellenes.
There's a statement on the birth of philosophy.
