Hello. I'm Tom Rawlins, President of the Teaching Company. These lectures are part of the Superstar
Teachers series. They are produced by the Teaching Company.
The lectures on these tapes are titled, The Great Ideas of Philosophy. The lecturer is
Professor Daniel Robinson. Dr. Robinson has been teaching psychology at Georgetown University
since 1971. He earned his doctorate in neuropsychology at the City University of New York. His scholarly
books and articles have established him as an authority in the history of psychology,
philosophy of psychology, as well as in psychology and law. He holds the position of Professor
of Psychology and Adjunct Professor of Philosophy at Georgetown University, and, since 1991,
has lectured regularly for the sub-faculty of philosophy at the University of Oxford
in England. Professor Robinson is past president of the American Psychological Association's
Division of History of Psychology and the Division of Theoretical and Philosophical Psychology.
He is fellow of the American Psychological Association and of the British Psychological
Society. Dr. Robinson is also visiting senior member of Lynn Aker College, Oxford.
Lecture 11, Mind and Body, Hippocrates and the Science of Life.
In this lecture, I want to pause, in a manner of speaking, between Plato and Aristotle,
and to include a separate lecture on Hippocrates and on Greek medicine in general, and that
for several reasons worth recounting at the outset. Chronologically, Hippocrates' dates
are just about the same as Socrates' own. Approximately 469, we're not quite sure when
Hippocrates was born, but it must have been very close to 469, Hippocrates of Kos, and
much more certain about the date of death being 399, so he is just about a perfectly overlapping
contemporary. Secondly, the movement from Plato and the Academy to Aristotle is a movement
very much in the direction of natural science, and a natural science perspective on the nature
of things, and Greek medicine had much to do with promoting that perspective. Thirdly,
and as is well known, Aristotle's father was a physician, and Aristotle is probably most
at home in all the subjects that he developed and mastered and invented. I'm inclined to
think that he was most at home with the biological disciplines, though he did not pursue a career
or a profession of medicine himself. And finally, Hippocrates' offers and the School
of Hippocrates, Greek medicine in general, provide us with a clear picture of what it
means to secularize and naturalize a subject which in other cultures and civilizations would
otherwise come under divinity, theology, religion, priestcraft, magic, superstition,
and the like. I don't think one could be guilty of hyperbole in declaring the ancient Greek
medical perspective almost a miracle of types. It is virtually without precedent when you
examine the ancient medical writings on diseases and disorders. They are so close to what we
would take to be a contemporary view of things that the widest range of disorders, including
epilepsies and seizures and bouts of madness and so forth, are inextricably bound up with
conditions of the body, or bound up with considerations of diet, or bound up with hereditary predispositions
and the like. What is so remarkable about this is that if you look at any other age,
even the great age of Egyptian medicine, medical views are inseparable from theological views,
from religious views, from considerations that we would call, not in a derogatory way,
but in a descriptive way, that we would call mystical and superstitious. So it is something,
I mean, if one wants to take literally the charge to give 50 lectures on great ideas in
philosophy, I should think that one of the great ideas as it were in the history of ideas
is the idea that the conditions of, whatever form the disease takes, that the conditions
of health and disease are to be understood in a naturalistic, systematic, scientific
way. And here Greek medicine is tracking something that is already present in Hellenic thought.
It's already present in Homer. Homer, you will recall from an earlier lecture, is explaining
the behavior of the heroes in terms of conditions taking place in their bodies. In fact, sometimes
the death scenes in Homeric battle are so graphic in describing precisely which organs
fall out when the sword has been removed. I mean, the Iliad is a particularly ghoulish.
I don't know what the Hollywood ratings are these days, but I mean, if there is a rating
for, you may not want to watch this while you are having supper. I think Homer's Iliad
certainly would get that rating. But more than simply reporting how death is attendant
upon particular destruction of organs and systems within the body, there is also the
psycho-biological form of explanation the Homeric epics provide to tell us why someone
is driven or possessed. One is guided by thumos or epithymia or lusa. And these always
have reference to something taking place in the body. So there's already as early as
the Homeric epics a naturalistic tendency in the matter of how one is to explain significant
human undertakings. With Pythagoras, of course, we have a philosopher whose subject is nature
and for all of the transcendental elements in Pythagorean thought, there is a Pythagorean
school of medicine and there is great attention paid to the health of the body and to bodily
regimens because after all, the body is the house of the soul and there is a communication
between the two such that one can corrupt one's spiritual element corporeally. This is
what's behind the vegetarianism of the sect, it's what's behind the ritual performances
of the sect, and it is behind much in the Pythagorean therapeutic regimen. You treat
the soul through musical harmonies, through the right dietary regimen, the right exercises
and the like. That is to say, you treat the soul by treating the body. So I say, even
in Pythagoras, who surely would be the most transcendental of the medical or quasi-medical
practitioners of the 6th century BC, there is this hefty dose of naturalistic, naturalistic
thinking. Now I want to get behind the naturalism to what I submit impels naturalism and a naturalistic
outlook. It really is quite remarkable what's behind it.
Hellenic civilization objectified itself. Hellenic civilization took itself, its central
values, its core beliefs, its most committed desires and aspirations as a culture. Both
at the level of the polis and the level of the person, and externalized it and objectified
it for the purpose of critical scrutiny. I submit that this is not a natural sort of
thing to do, which is probably why it took so long for it to happen. I do recur now to
the question of what is philosophy and did the Greeks invent it. But think of it for
a moment. We go through life, the subject of our own experiences, the thoughts that we
have are the thoughts that we have. There isn't something external whispering to us
about these thoughts. They are just our thoughts and our desires and our motives. And to stop
in our tracks at a certain point and say, wait a minute, I'm going to treat all this
as if it were out there. I'm going to take these desires and thoughts and beliefs and
convictions and I'm going to sit back and I'm going to do a kind of editing on this,
a kind of critical scrutiny of these things. I'm going to do the same thing with my body.
I'm going to do the same thing with everything I encounter. That objectification is just
the process of secularizing knowledge. It's to say that there is not some scriptural authority,
there is not some priestly hermeneutic, there is not some divine voice that tells us what
things are. We have to externalize these things. We've got to put them in the world that is
accessible to us, which is the natural world, and we've got to view them the way we view
everything else. When the hypocrites take up the question of sacred diseases, I mean,
this is one of the great noted achievements of the Hippocratic School. Are the Hippocratic
people skeptical about religion and the gods? No, they're not skeptical about that. They're
skeptical about going about understanding health and disease that way. One of the Hippocratic
writers, I should say the corpus of Hippocratic writing certainly was not put together by
Hippocrates himself. These are treatises developed over a period of time, whether he wrote any
of them remains a subject of scholarly concern and dispute. That these writings are richly
indebted to Hippocrates' teaching, there is no doubt. So let me refer rather to Hippocratic
writings than to what Hippocrates said. But when the question is taken up as to the nature
of the sacred disease, the Hippocratic writers are not saying, well, there are no gods, therefore
there are no sacred diseases. No, they're saying, well, look, religious teaching tells
us that the gods are able to produce anything and everything. You know, they've got great
and formidable powers. Therefore, there's no one disease that's any more divine than
any other. So in a manner of speaking, you can hold the religious element constant because
it's going to figure indifferently in everything. And therefore, there's no point in singling
out one kind of disorder and say, ah, you know, the gods are the ones responsible for
that, or that one is bequeathed directly or inflicted directly by the Olympians. Now,
this becomes a perspective available only to those who have not accepted priestcraft
as having epistemological authority. I do want to underscore this. It is a point worth
repeating. Something happens, as I said in an earlier lecture, something happens when
a culture takes the position that the problem of knowledge is essentially a religious problem
and invests its credulity in a denominated group of official interpreters whose judgments
on matters of this kind are taken to be dispositive. I'm not brokering the claims of religion and
the claims of the secular world. I would not presume to do so. And my guess is that for
every secularly produced fact, there may be some profound religious truth on which it
depends. That's certainly a subject for a series of lectures entirely independent of
these and a series of lectures I surely would not be giving. I find difficult theological
questions to be a source of headache in my own case. It's something that I not only don't
do well, but I do in a conspicuously poor way. So I'm not brokering those competing claims.
What I am testing, however, are the implications that follow depending on which of the positions
you take. And it does seem to me, by way of implication, that once you grant to a select
and denominated group epistemological authority on core questions arising from the problem
of knowledge, the one thing you can be sure of is that you're not going to make much progress
philosophically. And what is more likely to happen is positions will become quite hardened
and the only thing left for scholarship is to interpret the words of the wise. So the
entire debate now is not a debate about the nature of truth, but a debate about what Smith
meant when he said X, all granting that whatever Smith says is true because Smith is the repository
of all truth. Now the same sort of attitude can infect or invade or dominate or control
thinking in any branch of knowledge and that would include science and medicine and mathematics
and the like. The Hellenic world is not devoid of these influences. Again, I refer to Pythagoras,
who was a man of great spiritual commitment and devotion, a man whose mathematics is seeking
to rise to the level of the divine. And of course, in Homer as well, whether it's Lucifer
or Thumos or anything else invading the body, of course, Homer leaves ample room for the
realm of spirit to operate according to its own principles, these being obscure and powerful
and chronic. I said in an earlier lecture that the ancient Greek world never had an official
religion, but the ancient Greek world never had an entirely secular polis either. There
is this integration of the secular and the religious in this robust and flourishing life
that we think was available to citizens in the fifth and early fourth centuries B.C.
The Hippocratics give us a particularly useful example of a science liberated from priestcraft.
This is not to say that their medicine was superior to what we might have found in Egypt,
for example, even 500 or 1,000 years earlier, but it is to say that it was based on an entirely
different set of presuppositions. Throughout this course and in philosophy in general,
there is a term that's quite commonly used. The term is empirical. We engage in something
called empirical research. We describe a philosopher as being an empiricist. We say that science
is an essentially empirical enterprise. What do we mean by empirical? Empirical is grounded
in the ancient Greek word empiria, which means simply observation. Now, the Hippocratic physicians
describe themselves as empiricoi, each one of them being an empiricos. Now, why are they
describing themselves as empiricoi? Note what this means if a doctor says it. You come up
to a doctor and you say, what is your approach to medicine, Dr. Smith? And Dr. Smith says,
well, my approach to medicine is an empirical approach. And what he means by that, of course,
is that his approach to medicine is based on his observations on a thick and thickening
book of clinical observations that tell us when a particular condition is treated in
a particular way, certain consequences follow. Those consequences that promote health are
taken to be the right kind of therapy and those consequences that don't do that or make conditions
worse are to be abandoned. And there isn't some overriding, overarching, non-scientific,
unnatural theory that's driving the practice. What's driving the practice of medicine is
just clinical observation itself. So when Smith says, when Dr. Hippocrity says, I am
an empiricos, he's contrasting what he's doing with a rather different approach to medical
practice. What approach? Well, an approach that has one consulting oracles and engaging
in certain ritual acts and appealing to priests or holy men, to intercede with the gods, to
relieve these symptoms. More importantly, one who believes that the symptoms themselves
have been visited upon the victim, presumably because of something the victim has done.
Now, in case you think that this is some ancient perspective, and thank goodness we have that
behind us, when I do have an opportunity later in this course of lectures to consider the
period 1400 to 1700, the which panics and the which persecutions, I will recur to some
of these non-scientific, non-medical perspectives on why it is certain people have certain disorders.
Let me just point out here, at a much earlier period than 1400 to 1700, and understand that
the which persecutions went on not only for 300 years, but primarily in a period we describe
as the Renaissance, followed by the great age of science, which is being executed and
burned in the age of Newton and Galileo and Descartes and the like. So this is not only
a bleak chapter in the history of ideas, but a fairly recent chapter as well. I mean, speaking
of someone who actually died in the fourth century BC and is just reincarnated before
you now, 1400 to 1700 is the day before yesterday. Now, I want to go to an earlier period than
that, the first several centuries AD. Now, and particularly with respect to those forms
of illness that we would describe as mental illness or madness, or forms of illness that
seem to attack the spiritual side of life, depending on your perspective. And of course,
central among these was epilepsy. How do you account for someone falling to the ground
and engaged in all sorts of gyrations and eyes rolling up if anything looks like a visitation
from dark spirits? That does. Now, how a condition like that was understood in the early Christian
period really depended on where in the Christian world you were. Were you in Eastern Christianity
or were you in Western Christianity? And if you were in Eastern Christianity, where the
influence was primarily the influence of the Hippocratics and Aristotle, well, a condition
like epilepsy was understood the way we might regard a viral attack. I mean, this is just
something that happens to people. It's a condition of the body. It's indeed possession was understood
the same way. People claiming to be possessed, but witches were understood the same way.
To be possessed is to have a kind of, I speak metaphorically here, to have a kind of bug.
It's, you know, and you might need some shots for that, not that there weren't any shots.
If however you were in Western Christianity during this early period, which is a much
more theory driven, theory driven world, indeed a world driven by highly rationalistic understandings
of religion and the like, well, then all sorts of hypotheses have to get welded together
very much to the disadvantage of the sufferer whose condition is understood as a kind of
retribution for one's wicked sins. When we look at the Salic laws of the seventh century,
a person is permitted to dissolve his marriage when his wife after marriage becomes mad and
we are told when becomes mad, quote, because of her grave sins. Do you see this sort of
blaming the victim? But blaming the victim here is not a thoughtless act. It's a theory
driven act according to which the body takes on the conditions that it does as a result
of divine or spiritual or non-natural influences. And so I say again, the Hippocratic achievement
is a central one in the history of ideas. It is part of the scheme, part of the program
of naturalizing the natural world and having us understand it in its own terms. And this
required great intellectual integrity and discipline. This isn't just a bunch of doctors
running around with tongue blades and trying to get good fees for the practice. There is
a philosophy of medicine behind the Hippocratic medical teachings. Now, if one is to promote
health and well-being in the body, then one has to raise the question of what is it that
controls the affairs of the body? It might be of some interest to listeners and viewers
of today's lecture to note how late in the game it was that naturalistic philosophy actually
spoke of organs and systems in the body. There's much talk, as early as Homer, there
is much talk about certain fluids and humors and things that flow around the body. There's
talk of blood everywhere except where the gods are concerned. They are the talkers of
iCorps. But even as recently as Aristotle, and Aristotle is one of the great figures
in the history of biology and natural science, we don't really have the sense of Aristotle
understanding the body as a collection of integrated systems. Oh, he certainly knows
about the organs of the body because he has done dissections. But we don't get accounts
that by today's lights we would call physiological accounts as such, accounts of integrated
systems functioning in a certain way. That actually comes later, and I should think one
of the early bleeding figures in that line of thought would be Galen, second century
AD, and we will have things to say about Galen. So I don't want to guild the lily and suggest
that this naturalistic perspective was modern. I want to say that this naturalistic perspective
is a bridge to the modern. It's a bridge to science. It's a bridge to, it is a secularization
of an enterprise that indeed should be secularized, namely the natural functions of the body in
health and disease. The Hippocratics also were quite correct, and against even such
formidable people as Aristotle, quite correct in identifying the brain as the part of the
body in which sensory and rational processes are grounded, that the disordered or destroyed
or traumatically insulted brain is the condition that reliably gives rise to events that we
would call psychopathological, do you see, sensory losses, the dragging leg, the paralyzed
limb, the blindness, the deafness, the unconsciousness. The Hippocratics were not the first ones
to discover that if you, shall we say, if you take a board and bang it on the backside
of the lion, you're likely to become the lion's supper, whereas if you bang it on the head
of the lion, you're likely to get a sleeping lion. I don't want to say that we had to wait
until the fifth century BC to discover that there was something significant about the
head end that seemed to be rather less significant about the tail end. No, I want to say, however,
that in their clinical observations, the Hippocratics actually observed certain structure function
relationships tying the brain in with specific sensory and motor and cognitive abilities.
And of course, Aristotle, as we shall see, is finding some of this located more in the
chest and the heart than in the brain. Aristotle famously regarded the central mission of the
brain to be the regulation of the temperature of the blood. So I sometimes say to students
that Aristotle had a good head on his shoulders, though he tended to think of it as a kind
of refrigerator. And the contemporary philosopher, Daniel Dennett, who is very famous for believing
that the brain is essentially a computational device, I sometimes say that Professor Dennett
has a very good head on his shoulders, though he tends to think of it as a kind of computer,
that if I, for one, had to choose between the computer model or the refrigeration model,
I'm not quite sure which one I would find more compelling. But that will surface much
later in this course of lectures. Now, the ancient Greek medical writers and practitioners
were not a breed apart. They were part of a community of thinkers, naturalistic in their
orientation, whether the topic was politics, ethics, conduct of daily life, conduct of
foreign affairs. There's a realism, a kind of common sense realism that we find in the
Hellenic world. And that would be rare even today. And this leads me to an observation
that can't be stressed enough. They were also in a conspicuous minority.
Several things that have to be kept in mind regarding the Hellenic world include the following.
First, Socrates is put to death. Socrates is not made philosopher king. Aristotle leaves
town, we have every reason to believe, just in time so that as Diogenes Laertius will
say when asked why are you leaving town, Aristotle will say so that this city does not sin against
philosophy a second time. The ancient Greek so called man in the street is not to be confused
with Hippocrates, Aristotle, Sophocles, Euripides, Plato and the like. The Athenian citizen is
given to mystical beliefs, superstitions of a gargantuan nature, ritualistic enterprises,
that surely would look almost preposterous by certain contemporary lights. A deep suspicion
toward philosophers, a suspicion played upon by Aristophanes in plays like Clouds where
philosophers are found to be speculating either on what nobody can know or speculating in
a way that the man in the street, the writer of the Clapham omnibus would regard as absolutely
ridiculous. Philosophers very often held up for scorn in the developed world of Rome
when things take a bad turn, the philosophers are actually exiled. So we want to say about
this great age of Hellenic philosophy and Hellenic art and architecture and Hellenic
science that it really is the work of the few. Now you might say well of course inevitably
it's the work of the few, how many Newtons are there, but it's the work of the few not
in the sense that genius is rare, but in the sense that the perspective developed is not
widely shared. There is a leavening effect that I would also like to note in this connection
and that is not withstanding the observations that I've just summarized for you. There is
also an element of uncommon tolerance in the Hellenic world. Though the general public
attitudes, the attitudes of the mob and the crowd may be hostile to the forms of art and
intellect and science being proposed by the major figures. Nonetheless these major figures
are given leeway and they do become targets of admiration and respect no matter how grudging
and the better families do send their children for instruction to these people, not judged
so much to be wise men as to be learned, to be learned in the arts of science and in the
science of the arts, in the art of rhetoric and the science of rhetoric when Aristotle
tells us in the rhetoric that of all the aspects of rhetoric that render it most effective,
that which renders it absolutely most effective is the perceived standing of the speaker himself.
And this I say does finally get to the heart of the common sense realism that surfaces
and occasionally abounds in the ancient Greek world. When all is said and done, the ancient
Greek is inclined to look at that which is successful, that which is an improvement, that
which seems to approximate perfection ever more closely as something to be prized even
when one doesn't quite understand it and even when one might find in it something pernicious
or dangerous or against the cultural norms. There is this perfectionist feature in ancient
Greek thought surfacing in the art and architecture of the period but also in the science and
philosophy and mathematics of the period. We do have the picture of very often poorly nourished,
underfed, overworked, pimply, orthopedically disordered persons looking up at statues done
by Polyclitus and Phidias and seeing perfection exemplified and honoring it and revering it.
These are not statues of the average Greek citizen. These are statues that represent the
possibilities of human life. Thank you.
