Lecture 12 Aristotle on the Knowable
I've occasionally said to classes that if I had to single out any event as evidence of extraterrestrial life,
of some civilization in a distant galaxy beyond the Milky Way that took great concern
for the slow progress of the human race and the human imagination,
it might well be the life of Aristotle and his accomplishments.
It's almost as if such a distant galactic neighbor might have said,
for goodness sake, those human beings, they don't seem to be getting on with it at all.
Aristotle, why don't you go down there and get things going?
There's so much in Aristotle that is original that, inevitably,
much in Aristotle would undergo criticism in subsequent centuries.
But the sheer intellectual power of this man, expressing itself in biology
and natural science and ethics and politics and metaphysics and logic,
is I think it's safe to say without parallel in the history of at least scholarly thought.
There's almost no academic subject, commonly taught, that has not been stamped by his influence.
Sometimes stamped so durably that we had to spend a lot of time to get rid of that stamp
and get on with things and perhaps progress beyond the point where Aristotelian thought left the subject.
No single lecture or even the several lectures that I'm going to devote to Aristotle
can do justice to the breadth and depth of his accomplishment.
He is the son of a physician. He is naturalistically inclined, interested in biology.
He becomes a student in Plato's Academy and he stays there for very nearly 20 years.
This is not because he's a slow learner.
He stays within the Platonic circle. There's evidence that his earliest writings were in the dialogue form.
Those writings are no longer with us.
In fact, such accounts as we can put together of what he did write, of the treatises he was responsible for,
indicate that we've got only the thinnest fraction of the total works that came from that fertile imagination.
One answer to the question, what is the Aristotelian position on x, y, or z, is,
well, do you mean in terms of what survives in his works or what may have been his position in works that we probably will never find again?
At the beginning of his metaphysics, which is a formidable and significant work in so many ways,
it's obviously one of the great works in the history of thought,
one thing about it that's particularly important is that it probably is the first treatise that constitutes a critical history of philosophical thought on major subjects.
The metaphysics is the work in which Aristotle sets down the teachings of a wide range of pre-Socratic philosophers,
as well as the Socratic teachings themselves, tries to give, and I think by and large does give a fair hearing.
He obviously has his own programme and agenda, and that is going to colour and affect his judgment of things.
But this treatise is the earliest one we have by any philosopher in which there is a systematic presentation of the ideas dominant in the several schools
of pre-Socratic and generally Hellenic philosophical thought, and the metaphysics then is going to examine the assets and liabilities of these schools
and try to build upon the assets and avoid the liabilities or the defects.
So it's important as an historical document, it tells us perhaps more than any other document, just what the teachings of competing schools were.
But the work opens up on a new note. I quoted part of the opening passage in a previous lecture.
All men by nature desire to know. An example of this is the delight we take in our senses.
For even apart from their usefulness, they are loved for their own sake and none more than the sense of sight.
That's how the metaphysics begins. All men by nature desire to know, so he already accepts that there is an inexplicable impulse within us
to develop a knowledge of the world, to develop a knowledge period, a knowledge of things.
And then goes on with the quite straightforward, characteristically Aristotle here,
the quite straightforward matter-of-fact common sense position is, all men by nature desire to know, an example is the delight we take.
So here we are not going to have a philosophy that depreciates the evidence of sense.
Aristotle is too much the biologist, too much the natural scientist, too much the man with both feet on the ground to be dismissive of the information gleaned by the senses.
Not only that, but famously Aristotle will argue that nature produces nothing without a good reason for it.
That chance is not the operative principle in the universe, and that things are to be understood in terms of the purposes they serve.
Well, nature certainly would not have fitted out the animal kingdom with sensory organs for the sole purpose of deceiving the entire animal kingdom.
And indeed, if that had been the design of nature, the senses as organs of deception, creatures would not be able to get from one side of the street to the other.
So we already see in the very opening of the metaphysics a common sense naturalistic perspective in this work which is probably the most subtle of Aristotle's philosophical writings.
This is going to be a work of great, great depth and will leave ample room for misunderstandings and misconstruals.
But as an opening statement, the opening statement of the metaphysics is a veritable vindication of knowledge gleaned by perception.
Now this isn't going to be enough, but that's the starting point.
The starting point for our journey toward the truth is a sensory awareness of the world around us.
In fact, in other works, Aristotle will define animal as that which has sensation.
The very principle that establishes an entity as an animal entity is a sensory principle.
And this again for a quite common sense reason.
What animals have to do is gain information through the sense organs in virtue of which they are able to adapt to the requirements of the world as they face the world.
Aristotle is going to invest perception with many, many powers and possibilities.
In doing this, he will grant to the animal kingdom rich perceptual resources, but will deny the animal kingdom the ultimate rational resource,
that is the special attribute of the human psyche, that degree of rationality.
This is not so much Aristotle depreciating the animal kingdom as Aristotle elevating the role of perception in the affairs of life and in adaptation to the demands of the environment.
So human beings have this desire to know and we take delight in our senses not simply for practical utilitarian purposes,
but because there is something joyous about the experience that we have of the world, the experience of gaining knowledge.
Now we can do this in virtue of the fact that we are constituted biologically in such a way as to be able to pick up information from the external world.
That's what the sense organs are all about.
And this leads us to Aristotle's understanding of the various powers that the animal kingdom comes equipped with and a scheme of classification that will distinguish between and among animal types in terms of the powers that the animals have,
the powers or faculties that they have.
Powers and faculties in the Greek would be dunamis, dunamis would be power.
The English word dynamic is etymologically related to that.
But what we'd mean by a faculty or power is what the word dunamis tries to convey.
Now Aristotle again begins with the common sense biologists position.
What is the fundamental power in virtue of which a living thing has life?
That is, what is it that the soul as it were, the psuké of an entity must possess by way of a dunamis such that life itself becomes possible?
At the most fundamental level, there must be a nutritive power.
There must be some means by which the creature can absorb nutritional elements from the environment and through that grow and survive.
So there must be a nutritive faculty or nutritive power.
Anything alive has at least that.
And that's essential for the survival of the individual creature.
For the survival of that whole class of creatures, there must also be a reproductive power.
There must be some means by which a given organism is capable of duplicating its kind or bringing its kind about.
So again now at the most fundamental level of psychic power or psychic faculties, we find nutritive and reproductive capacities in the kingdoms of life.
Added to this, where living systems are more complex, and this includes plants of course, where living systems are.
There's also a locomotive power.
The entity is capable of some degree of movement.
And he notes there are plants that do this, like Venus' flytrap, which will close in on an insect that has been caught in its sticky substance.
So as we get ever more complex in the kingdom of life, we move from the nutritive and reproductive to the nutritive, reproductive and locomotor.
The animal kingdom begins as Aristotle when you get sensation, the power of perception, the power of acting as it were knowingly, consciously I'm tempted to say, reacting to events in the external world.
So now we have a nutritive, a reproductive, a locomotor, and a sensitive faculty.
And these are all powers of the soul.
And when Aristotle, in his treatise on the soul, gives his definition of the soul, what is the soul?
He says, by soul I mean by psuke, I mean the archezon, the first principle of living things, the principle according to which a thing, if it is alive, comes to have life.
So he's not treating the soul as something beyond the natural, he's treating the soul as a generic term for those processes that are life-giving, life-sustaining, and mediating otherwise such powers and faculties as movement and sensation.
Now when you get to ever more complex organisms, he wouldn't use the term organisms, but ever more complex animal forms, to these powers of the soul is added some kind of intellectual or intelligent power.
The power of problem-solving, and he grants this to much of the animal kingdom, they have that in common with us.
But he reserves to human beings a psychic power or faculty of a very special kind, sometimes rendered in English as reason, but the word he uses in his treatise on the soul for this power is not the Greek word for reason, the word he uses is not noose.
The word he uses first time around is epistemonicon, and I don't want to be tedious trying to define some of these ancient words, but by epistemonicon one is referring to the means, the power, the cognitive ability by which we comprehend universal propositions.
That is to say a young child can learn anything you'd want the young child to learn about a this or a that, but at too young an age that child will never learn about all these, all that, universals do you see.
The child can learn that Uncle Jack and Aunt Mary have died, but it would be very, very difficult for a three-year-old to know that all men are mortal, do you see.
Now that capacity to traffic in universal propositions, to deal with cognitive items that are universal and necessary, abstract, that's what epistemonicon allows one to do.
It's a special feature of rationality, and it's the sort of thing that fits us out uniquely for among other things the rule of law itself, because after all what is the rule of law except the ability to apply some universal precept to an individual instance, do you see.
And it's in virtue of this rationality that we become fit for a mode of political and social and civic life otherwise unavailable within the kingdom of life.
Now given that we have these faculties and powers, how is Aristotle going to understand and approach the problem of knowledge?
Well for Aristotle to know something is essentially to know the cause of something, happy is the man who knows the causes of things is the ancient maxim.
A full understanding to possess what in the Greek is called epistemi, to have that kind of systematic scientific understanding of things is to know the causes by which things like that are brought about.
Aristotle gets back very, very briefly without even mentioning it, he's getting back to the Meno problem, and you can see the difference between Aristotle's and Socrates or Plato's approach to this when Aristotle says look,
when we say that someone knows that a right angle triangle has 180 degrees, this can be known in one of two ways.
One person may know, Smith may know that a triangle has 180 degrees because Smith has a measuring instrument and he measures the angles and he sees that triangle has 180 degrees.
Jones knows the triangle has 180 degrees because Jones knows that by definition triangles are three-sided figures circumscribing 180 degrees.
So what Jones knows, Jones knows to be universally true of all things that are triangles, and what Smith knows he knows only in the particular case of this triangle.
Now what is the difference then between Smith's knowledge and Jones's knowledge? Smith has the knowledge of a fact based on an experience.
Jones has a genuine form of epistemi with respect to triangles. Jones really knows what the triangle in and of itself is.
Smith just happens to know something about that triangle.
So on Aristotle's account developed knowledge is a knowledge of the regulative principles and laws that govern the affairs of things.
It's not simply a factual knowledge of this or that.
But of course to say that knowledge requires an understanding of the causes of things is to raise a question about, well, just what is a cause?
The Greek word is used indifferently across cases. The Greek word for cause is itia, A-I-T-I-A.
But as Aristotle is quick to point out, in the metaphysics and elsewhere and in the physics and in his logical writings,
as Aristotle is quick to point out, cause is not a univical term. It actually has rather different senses.
Now this is something that can be easily confused. Let me take as an example some statue or bust or work of sculpture,
something that all tourists will know about. Everybody goes to Rome and it's not long after they land in the airport that they tell the taxi driver,
take me to the Piazza Navona where all Americans will congregate and have very, very expensive cups of coffee and take a look at Bernini's Fountain of the Rivers.
I mean this is sort of a shrine. You've not been to Rome unless you've sat there, paid those prices and looked at that rather rhetorical, large,
very, very muscular congaries of figures. Now suppose what you're trying to establish, suppose you came from Mars or somewhere
and you plopped down in the Piazza Navona right in front of the Fountain of the Rivers and you raised the question,
what's the cause of that? You ask some knowing person to account for that.
Well understand that a lot of answers entirely correct can be given to that question. One answer might be this, look, to have anything like this,
you've got to have some kind of material that will retain shape. You can't get something like this if the universe consisted only of air or if the universe consisted only of fluids.
So if what you mean by a cause is that which, in the absence of which, something else could not be, then surely one of the causes of the Fountain of the Rivers is the material of which it is made.
Absent that kind of matter, you can't have that kind of thing. And that's what Aristotle means by the material cause of something.
Well of course the Martian at that point might say, well, I mean, look, lots of things can be worked. I mean, this looks like something special.
Well you might go on to say, well look, not only do you need something that's able to take on a certain shape, but in order for it to be this kind of thing,
it has to take on a recognizable shape. It has to have a form that reveals the fact that indeed it is a representation of something, it stands for something,
it is something of a certain kind. It is a cup, it is a person, it's a puppy, etc.
And to the extent that you can't have that, unless it formally incorporates these special features, we can say that the very form of the item is constitutive of its causal grounding.
And that is what Aristotle would mean by the formal cause.
Now of course a pile of bricks is not a house, so what you've got to do is you've got to start piling up the bricks and you put cement between them and so forth.
And when it comes to the fountain of the rivers, somebody or some group has to stand there with hammer and chisel and start working this stuff into an identifiable shape.
And each blow of the hammer on the chisel is having some definite effect on the matter that is thus being struck.
And blow by blow by blow by blow, that material is being changed.
And each one of those interactions is the efficient cause of ultimately the fountain of the rivers.
It's the billiard ball colliding into the other billiard ball and the second one moves, the efficient cause.
Now the Martian at that point, if he's an intelligent chap, the Martian at that point might say, well, how do you know where to hit this thing?
Well at that point, Aristotle would be inclined to say, well look, you don't know where to hit this block of matter unless you already have in mind, as it were, what it is you're trying to bring about.
That is, unless you've got Bernini there with this goal, or in the Greek, this tillos, this end or goal, the fountain of the rivers, well there simply isn't any basis upon which to attack or approach this block.
Thus the ultimate understanding of the cause of this thing is just that plan, that intelligent design that the thing itself realizes.
And Aristotle refers to this as the final cause, and what he means by the final cause is that it is the final thing realized in time, but it is the first consideration in conception.
Unless you have the intelligent plan to begin with, none of the rest of these causal modalities will operate to any effect.
So all of the other causal modalities, choosing the right material and giving it a certain shape and striking blows, all of these are done for the sake of something, and what they are done for the sake of is the original plan or design or pattern or goal.
And that kind of causal explanation is generally referred to as a teleological explanation. You explain an event by showing the purposes or plans or designs that that event realizes or instantiates when brought about.
Now, teleological explanations do not have to presuppose some actually intelligent divine being with a plan. Evolutionary theory is teleological in that certain characteristics, phenotypic properties of organisms are what they are because they serve certain purposes integral to the life of the organism.
And you understand fins and wings and plumage and mating behavior and the like in terms of survivalistic considerations. Well, these are teleological explanations, though they are not what might be called agentically teleological.
They don't assume that there is some super entity with a telos that is then realized by giving creatures characteristics of this sort.
In any case, on Aristotle's account, you don't understand anything fully. You do not have an episteme with respect to something unless you are able to comprehend the four causal modalities to understand what a thing is, is centrally to know what a thing is for.
The number of things we can know is based on the number of questions we can ask, he says, of which there are the following. Does a thing exist? If it exists, to what degree does it exist? In what relation does it stand to other things? And what is it for?
Now, this is the central part of the Aristotelian program, whether it's going to be in the domain of knowledge or in the domain of ethics or in the domain of politics. In the domain of politics, the question is, what's the policy for?
In the domain of ethics, it's going to be, what kind of being am I? And in light of that, how do the actions of mine either realize what is potential within me or stultify what is potential within me? These potentialities are, in a manner of speaking, what I am here for, and how do I live my life in such a way as to honor that central fact of my being.
Now, the developed knowledge that we have leads us to an understanding that the things of the universe, including the living things of the universe, do instantiate a design feature, a plan. They fit in. Nature does not do things without a purpose.
So, when you find a reliably occurring phenomenon, the ultimate question you're asking at the epistemic level, the ultimate question you're asking after you've satisfied yourself that, well, it's made of stone or it's made of marble or it's got wood in it and the like, the ultimate question is, how does this fit into things? What is it for? What purpose does it serve? What is its function? The explanations are to be functionalist explanations, but functionalists in a rather enlarged sense.
You do know with the outset that nothing with pattern and design is going to come about accidentally. As Aristotle says, if the art of shipbuilding were in the wood, we would have ships by nature.
Now, let me repeat that. It's a statement made in the physics. If the art of shipbuilding were in the wood, if there were just something about wood, such that if you left it around long enough, do you see,
a great trireme would develop with three tiers of oarsmen and leather sails and all that. No, this is Aristotle. You don't get ships like this. The art of shipbuilding is not something intrinsic to wood.
You need wood to make ships, but wood just constitutes the material cause of a ship.
You need all sorts of workmen to know where to put the dowels and the like, but that's also at the level of efficient causation.
The art of shipbuilding is in the ship designer and the art of shipbuilding is in the ship designer in the sense of the ship designer knowing what ships are for, what function they're going to serve.
And it would be absolutely useless to think that knowledge ends with some consideration of material composition. This is an almost offhand reply to Democritus and the...
It's not enough to say that the ultimate constituents of reality are atomic particles. I mean, that's simply an account of the materiality of the universe.
But that surely is a very, very pared down form of knowledge and certainly nothing that rises to the level of episteme.
Truly developed knowledge embraces not only the material efficient and formal causes, but the that for the sake of which these causes were recruited in the first instance, the that for the sake of which.
Now there's something else in Aristotle's philosophy of explanation or philosophy of... I'm inclined to say philosophy of science that is worth noting because I think Aristotle on this count is sometimes misunderstood.
Aristotle does argue that a thoroughly scientific explanation is one that is capable of producing a universal principle of which the thing to be explained is an instance.
Something that is always what it is, that is always the case, what he's getting at is the notion that you understand an event when you can show it to be an example of some universal principle of which it is an instance.
But when Aristotle is writing on biological subjects as opposed to purely physical types of events, when he's writing on biological and particularly on psychological and social phenomena, he always puts in a qualifier.
It's almost like a place mark in the treatises. The expression in Greek is osepitopouli, which I think is best rendered as for the most part or by and large or in general.
So I wouldn't want you to come away with the view that Aristotle's model of explanation requires of an explanation that it always be correct to the nth place after the decimal covered by an unswerving determinant physical law.
If there's any noisiness in the phenomenon itself, then you're on the wrong track. You really don't get the point.
Aristotle teaches and teaches centrally to expect precision only to the extent that the subject at hand admits of it and to seek no more precision than what the subject at hand will admit of.
We do not ask for probable reasoning from a mathematician, he says, nor do we ask for certainty from a shoe cobbler.
So when it comes to those phenomena, those complex social and political and moral events and undertakings and dispositions and characteristics, overwhelmed by the complexities of daily life, by the ambiguities inherent in the case,
what we look for are general precepts, which are right by and large in general and for the most part, osepitopouli. The last word can't be written in this area as it is written in mathematics.
This I should say, read in a certain light, is a rather liberating conception in relation to the teachings of the academy.
If we take the teachings of the academy as aiming ultimately toward a kind of mathematical necessity, aiming toward a degree of precision and purity represented by something like the Pythagorean theorem,
well, for goodness sake, progress in the social and biological and psychological and political domains would be impossible. We just know, I mean, we know at a common sense level that you're never going to have the a-square plus b-square equals c-square when it comes to phenomena of that sort.
And what Aristotle is insisting is, look, those very phenomena by their very nature, they're never going to admit of that. That's no reason to give up. What you look for is what is the case generally, for the most part, by and large. Nature does nothing without a purpose.
So there will be pattern and design and reliability in all of the things that really are consequential in the natural realm, and we are part of that realm.
And when you consult that realm because of the very nature of things, expect no more precision in your explanations than what the phenomena themselves will allow, but there will be enough precision and reliability for explanations to rise to the level of a systematic understanding.
What's required here is an exercise of the senses, an exercise of reason, the recognition that the data of experience must be incorporated into intelligible holds. Those intelligible holds are in the form of causal accounts, and a causal account is incomplete until it reaches the very point and purpose of the phenomenon itself.
What is the point of something? In the ancient Greek, the point is the logos. If we had a law dispute between us, the point of that dispute would be called the logos of that dispute. And when the Greek is translated in the great, great good book, in the beginning was the word, well, the Greek there is logos.
And that might have been translated, in the beginning was the point of it all, the plan that would be realized, you see, the intelligent design that the balance of human life and human history would instantiate. In the beginning was the point.
And Aristotle is very helpful in getting us to the point. Thanks.
