Hello. I'm Tom Rawlins, President of the Teaching Company. These lectures are part of the Superstar
Teachers series. They are produced by the Teaching Company.
The lectures on these tapes are titled, The Great Ideas of Philosophy. The lecturer is
Professor Daniel Robinson. Dr. Robinson has been teaching psychology at Georgetown University
since 1971. He earned his doctorate in Neuropsychology at the City University of New York.
His scholarly books and articles have established him as an authority in the history of psychology,
philosophy of psychology, as well as in psychology and law. He holds the position of Professor
of Psychology and Adjunct Professor of Philosophy at Georgetown University, and, since 1991,
has lectured regularly for the sub-faculty of philosophy at the University of Oxford in
England. Professor Robinson is past president of the
American Psychological Association's Division of History of Psychology and the Division of
Theoretical and Philosophical Psychology. He is fellow of the American Psychological
Association and of the British Psychological Society. Dr. Robinson is also visiting senior
member of Linacre College, Oxford.
Lecture 21, Facts and Values, The Reappearance of Experimental Science
Intellectual historians, if they are willing to use the term renaissance at all, very often
will refer to the renaissance of the thirteenth century, which is a rather coy way of saying
the term renaissance lends itself to a variety of interpretations. It is at once a way of calling
attention to some of the great achievements of the thirteenth century, and also calling attention
to the fact that the term renaissance was a nineteenth-century invention, chiefly by
esthetes, by scholars in the field of the history of art and architecture, who would find in the
Florence of the Quattrocento a recovery of certain architectural and artistic forms quite
common in the classical period, in the ancient period, hence the rebirth of that particular
genre of art and architecture and sculpture and the like. I don't think there's much wrong
with terms like medieval renaissance and the like, unless we allow them to control our
imagination and to control our thinking. And very often when we use a term like renaissance,
we are led insensibly to the view that something has been actually reborn because it had died.
And so the question that we would ask is if we're talking about the Italian renaissance,
which I shall get to in a later lecture, what is it that had died that somehow got reborn in
Florence in the 1400s? Of course the Florentines thought they knew, and the esthetes of the
nineteenth century thought they knew also. And four or two have died, it must have once lived,
and so the question that naturally arises is, well, what was it that was so alive that
was worth reviving, as it were, resuscitating so many centuries later? Well, I don't want
to be picky about this, but I would say that if what we mean by the classical, what we mean
by the achievements of Hellenic and Hellenistic civilization is just this self-perfectionist
goal, a self-perfection achieved through deep and disciplined inquiries of an ethical and
epistemological and a political nature. That is if what we mean by the classical world view
is inextricably bound up with scholarship and philosophical power and originality, then
as we shall see in a later lecture, the renaissance, the renaissance as usually meant by renaissance
doesn't really feature that kind of activity very much, though the medieval period does.
So to a certain extent I'd be inclined to say that if we want to talk about the rebirth of one of the
defining features of the classical world, that rebirth probably comes by way of the Islamic
losses on Aristotelian and Platonic works, the movement of that thought into a more settled
west picking up those traditions with the founding of the university and on and on and on.
This will be a subject touched upon again later. But the 13th century itself, what might be said
in its behalf? Well, there is a renaissance in the 13th century, in addition to the one I've
just mentioned, and that is a rebirth of experimental science. And before I go into this, I want to
say a few things about experimental science in the ancient Greek world, because secondary sources
quite routinely point to the abstract nature of Hellenic and Hellenistic thought, and very often
to accentuate the abstract philosophical dimensions of that achievement, they play down the
scientific achievements of the Hellenic and Hellenistic world. It would take a separate series of
lectures, even to begin to cover the extraordinary technical and basic science work that was done
in Hellenic and Hellenistic Greece. It was not abandoned. I've already spent a few minutes on
Greek medicine, and of course I've noted, as everyone understands, the great contributions
Aristotle made to natural science and the biological sciences and anatomy and
ethology and so forth. But in physics and in astronomy, the shape of the earth, the distance
between the earth and the sun, navigational principles, general astronomical theories to account
for celestial dynamics, mechanical principles that involve mechanical advantage, Archimedes running
down the street naked, shouting Eureka, he has found it. This was a world rich in insights into
the basic physics, and to some extent even the chemistry of the material world and the principles
that operate in the material world. Now, Aristotle is like the almost a twin kind of, two-headed
kind of figure. Aristotle is a man for all intellectual seasons, and we can find whole ages that
understood Aristotle as that great logic-chopping father of syllogistic reasoning and metaphysical
treatises and all that, and we find other centers of scholarship and scholarly thought that see in
Aristotle one of the premier natural scientists that the world will ever produce, and then of course we
have other ages that are devoted chiefly to showing that Aristotle was a knit and didn't understand
anything at all. Well, the 13th century, again thanks very much to Islamic discoveries,
commentaries and the like, the 13th century western intellectual community begins to recover
Aristotle the natural scientist and sees in these Aristotelian works the possibility for progressive
knowledge, and a group of scholars of this persuasion actually forms at the University of Oxford.
I'm thinking principally of Roger Bacon, who's Opus Myos, whose major work is one of the foundational
works in the modern scientific movement, and I shall read some passages from that and some related
texts in a few minutes. Scholasticism, and it's allegedly logic-chopping potions and the like,
scholasticism is an attempt to rationalize the teachings of the church to rationalize what is
essentially a Christian doctrinal understanding of the universe, its purpose, its cause, its end.
This can't leave out the scientific dimension as Thomas Aquinas will teach, and as I will note in connection
with Thomas Aquinas, the facts of faith and the facts of science can't be in conflict because these are truths
about the same thing, they're about the same creation. You might need some sort of algorithm or
translation device to get from one to the other, but there is no fundamental tension between the
perspective of the natural philosopher, the natural scientist, and the perspective of the theological
or religious person. All this comes from the same shop. There's one creator in one plan, and it can be seen
in different aspects and does it work through somewhat different prisms.
Now, there's something else in Christian teaching as celebrated by the scholastics, and here there is a
debt and an acknowledged debt to Augustine and some of the early church fathers. We have an obligation
to know God. That is a positive duty to acquaint ourselves with our father, to understand the sense
in which we've been created in his image and likeness. You know the maker by his works, and so
scholastic scholarship recognizes the central place of what might be called a scientific inquiry
in a life of faith. The scientific inquiry becomes one of the modes by which one of the ways we come to know
the otherwise unreachable in material, in substantial divinity, is through the material manifestations
of his plan. And the scientist then is engaged in what understood in a certain way is an essentially
theological undertaking. So again, there isn't a war between science and religion. It's one thing to say
that the medieval period hadn't quite worked out experimental science as Galileo or Newton and so forth.
It's quite another thing to describe that period as either hostile to or aloof to what we would take to be the
teachings, the methods, and the contributions of the scientific enterprise. Now, what else does experimental
science engage in us? Well, we apply our senses to God's creation, and the evidence of sense then has to be
integrated into a more rational framework, a more integrated and rational framework. After all, even if one is
committed to rationalism, an essentially rational, logical approach to truth, well, rationality and logic have to
work on something. And what is it that these powers work on? Well, they work on the available facts of the world.
After all, this is exactly what Aristotle's teaching is. Right-angle triangles ought to be measured, and triangles ought
to be measured. We want to make sure they've got 180 degrees of them, but this is finally going to be part of a
systematic scientific body of knowledge which we would call geometry. But geometry is about something, isn't it?
And physics is about something. And yes, the art of shipbuilding is not in the wood. The art of shipbuilding
includes the design considerations of the make. But if there weren't ships, this question would never arise. So all
knowledge begins with certain core facts that are accessible to the senses, and these facts then become collected
and integrated and worked over and put into a systematic form that is now judged to be and learned to be governed
by universal laws so that, indeed, we can come up with full scientific explanations. Now, that recovered
Aristotelian canon is going to be richly pursued, I say, by this cadre of scholars, chiefly at Oxford and later
at the University of Paris. Well, at the risk of numbing you into a kind of torpor, I mean, I think the only thing
more than sitting through lectures is sitting through readings of lecture material. And I'll make this as brief as I can,
but there's a passage in Bacon's Opus Myos that's worth more than a thousand my words. I now wish to unfold the principles
of experimental science. So I'm not manufacturing a discovery whose discoverer was unaware of what he was doing.
I now wish to unfold the principles of experimental science. Since without experience, nothing can be sufficiently known.
How about that? Absent, direct, sensory commerce with the physical world. Knowledge is jujune. It's empty.
Isn't anything there? Did you just be at words, do you say? For there are two modes of acquiring knowledge, namely,
by reasoning and experience. Reasoning draws a conclusion and makes us grant the conclusion,
but does not make the conclusion certain, nor does it remove doubt so that the mind may rest on the intuition of truth
unless the mind discovers it by the path of experience. Now, look, this is perhaps I'm going too quickly,
and this really is a scholastic mode of commentary anyway. Look here. All men are mortal. Socrates is a man, therefore Socrates is mortal.
Now, this is the textbook syllogism, and everybody knows that it's certainly the case that if all men are mortal
and if Socrates is a man, then necessarily Socrates is mortal. This gets us nowhere, except in so far as we know what is meant by men
and we know who Socrates is, and we can relate this rationally certain, rationally conclusive argument to the facts of experience.
We don't die because of the syllogism. Nobody ever died of a syllogism. Some logicians might die in the presence of a four-term fallacy,
but I don't think of the syllogism itself. Aristotle's statement, then, that proof is reasoning that causes us to know,
proof is reasoning that causes us to know, is to be understood with the proviso that the proof is accompanied by its appropriate experience
and is not to be understood as the bear proof, which I've just indicated with the syllogism. He, therefore, who wishes to rejoice without doubt
in regard to the truth's underlying phenomena, must know how to devote himself to experiment.
What an incredible statement of purpose. What a pedagogically rich, instructive, guiding precept. Who would have said such a thing in the fourth century AD?
I'm not sure I know many who would have said such a thing in 1400. I mean, this really is the scholastic, incisive mind at its best.
And let's understand what's going on here because a lot is being incorporated into that paragraph. This thing runs about 16 lines.
The opus meios is a thick work. What's being said here? What's being said here is, look, we are equipped with two modes of knowing.
That is, the problem of knowledge can be addressed by two roots. There is a rational root. We are rational creatures.
We are made in the image and likeness of God. This rationality is the reflection of the maker in his works. Nobody's going to depreciate that.
What's it for? Is it for logic chopping? Is it for some abstract exercise? Is it for crossing our legs, taking the lotus position, contemplating our navels, etc.?
Is that what it took? No. No. This is the means by which we come to know God. It's the means by which we come to know ourselves and our place in the world.
Ourselves and our place in the world. Well, we are in the world. We come to know God by his works.
You don't come to know anything merely by fashioning abstract rational depictions of what it might be. No. Knowledge is first about something.
And that about which knowledge is going to discover itself is what is gleaned by the senses, what is gleaned by the facts of experience.
But it can't just be the undisciplined facts of experience. It can't be to use the expression of Shakespeare's contemporary Sir Thomas Brown.
It can't be one who is staring about with a gross rusticity, do you see? No. This is a different sense of experience.
This isn't just looking and gaping or listening and sniffing. This is experimentation. This is the systematic, disciplined observation under conditions in which you have more or less controlled things so that you can be fairly certain of what it is you're looking at.
Now, again, I don't want to gild the lily. I don't want to make Roger Bacon into an early Galileo or Newton or Robert Boyle and the like.
The actual experiments conducted by Roger Bacon and his friends and colleagues are interesting. Well, let me think of one that might amaze you.
He does use an opal stone and with it he is able to divide sunlight into the colors of the spectrum and therefore show that white light is a composite made up of constituents.
Not bad. I mean, you know, he's not Newton after all, so this is fairly good work.
There's something much more important than the finding itself. What's more important than the finding itself is the method of the finding itself.
It's the understanding that the world of sense, this is the other Aristotle, do you see, that the world of sense is the created world.
It bears the mark of the maker as richly as human reason bears the mark of the maker and that it would be self-contradictory at once to summon the person of Christian conscience to know his God at the same time to tell him to turn off the lights of his own sense organs.
So, experimental science now in the hands of Robert Grossatesta and Roger Bacon and others, experimental science becomes part of, I would call, the ethics of Christian life.
It becomes a duty as it were. It's not a depreciation of the world to examine it at the sensory level, though it would be a depreciation to leave it at the sensory level.
Now, there is a great Christian philosopher of the medieval period, Don Skotis, who puts the case in yet another way.
And I think it's important enough just to read this passage too, and then I promise I shan't be reading any more to you.
If I read any more, it'll be the brother's grim or swift or Shakespeare or something like that.
Philosophy is tough enough to sit down and read and learn. It's awfully difficult to have it read to one.
I sometimes think that the ultimate penalty that might be exacted on the recalcitrant student is to have him stand up and to read to him Kant's first critique, including the revisions and the notes, and to read it slowly.
Don Skotis, as for what is known by experience, you see, there's already this recognition that you're going to have to justify knowledge claims based on experience.
What is it you can know this way? You can't see God, can you? So as for what can be known by experience, he says, I have this to say.
Now, remember the context here. The context here is going to be that heroic platonic contempt for sensory knowledge.
Sensory knowledge is an oxymoron, do you say?
Free yourself of the delusions and deceptions of the material, sensible world.
Get with the program. If it's really true, it's a true form, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. I'm exaggerating to make the point.
So here we have Don Skotis, who's thoroughly tutored in the platonic tradition and in the neoplatonism of Christianity itself.
So as for what is known by experience, I have this to say.
Even though a person does not experience every single individual, but only a great many, nor does he experience them at all times, but only frequently.
Still, he knows infallibly that it is always this way and holds for all instances.
You know what he's getting at here, don't you? This is a forerunner of that frequentist probabilistic kind of thinking that says, look,
inductive inference is a permissible mode of knowledge.
Once you've sampled a number of cases and you see that things work out, member Aristotle or Cepi Topoli, by and large for the most part in general,
well, you don't have to wait around for infinite time to consult every single instance of this.
By inference, by logical inference, by a plausible rational mode of thought, you can lay claim to understanding how this will be under all circumstances,
no matter how many times it's sampled.
So he says, even though a person does not experience every single individual, we might say every single individual instance, but only a great many instances,
nor does he experience these at all times, but only frequently, still he knows infallibly that it is always this way and holds for all instances.
He knows this in virtue of this proposition reposing in his soul, that is, he knows this intuitively. This is the proposition that he knows intuitively.
Whatever occurs in a great many instances by a cause that is not free is the natural effect of that cause.
This proposition is known to the intellect, even if derived from erring senses.
Here's a justification for experimental science, if I ever saw one.
Now, what might the, I'm going to give you a sort of a stock figure, a Plato, this is not a Plato in either the early middle or the late dialogues.
Let me give you a kind of theatrically produced Plato who says, who say, you're doing an experiment, you're going to do the effects of this on that and so forth.
There's ball banging against that ball and so forth.
Well, it's never going to be the same way twice.
I mean, the wind is blowing and the table tilts and they might be an earthquake off and creed and so forth.
You're not going to get anything out of this at all.
You'll make some limited observations.
No, one of them will perfectly match up with any other one.
Any conclusion you draw is going to be extremely iffy.
Are you going to call this sort of thing a search for truth?
This is the Gilbert chemistry set.
You're just messing around.
You're wasting your time.
Serious philosophically oriented people don't do things like that.
We're looking for the Pythagorean theorem, my friend.
Not what happens sometimes under certain occasions if the moon and the stars are in the right.
No.
And from this limited number of observations and each one of them is corrupted by the imperfections of sense anyway,
the inferences that you draw would be entirely illicit.
You have no way of knowing what the next outcome is going to be because you have no precise knowledge of the one that you've just recorded.
Now, there's a solid rationalistic.
I'm not submitting any name as one who would stand behind what I've just said, including Plato.
But I say there would be a sort of extreme rationalist critique of experimental science.
What's Donskoda saying?
Donskoda is saying, look, but now again, I'm going to give you a theatrical Donskoda.
Donskoda is saying, how many times do you think you have to drop something and watch it fall
before you don't have to keep doing that anymore and you're in a position plausibly now to argue
that just in case I do that again, it's going to fall again.
It's not going to go up.
Do you think you have to do this often?
You see, if you do this a few times and it behaves the same way every time, then intuitively,
what is it you understand?
You understand that it is being controlled by a causal law.
And if it's being controlled by a causal law, if this is not an event that is free, then of course,
that causal law is going to operate always and ever.
And therefore, you will know to a moral certainty what would happen if you did it again,
meaning you don't have to do it again.
The whole point of an experimental inquiry, a disciplined experiential engagement of the world
is that it discloses God's plan.
And God's plan, as Einstein will say many, many years later,
is not put together with a random number table or by throwing dice.
Well, of course, now I think we might be inclined to think that God does use dice,
at least at the subatomic level in determinacy and all that.
But may I remind you, by the way, in case you're frightened about this indeterminacy principle,
in case you're wondering, for example, whether the next time you step on the accelerator,
the car will go backwards.
The indeterminacy drops to something like one part in 10 to the 30th
by the time something gets to be the size of the head of a pin.
So I wouldn't worry too much about indeterminacy in the world that we knowingly occupy,
though if we ever shrink down to the size of subatomic particles,
quite literally all bets are off, or at least according to a very popular and pervasive theory,
all bets are off.
Now, Don Skotis and Roger Bacon are recording a mode of thought in the scholastic period.
That, to some extent, I think we can say is characteristic of that period.
There's something quite common sensical about it all,
even amidst the logic chopping and the analytical rigor and the formal arguments.
And this comes about in a very considerable measure as a result of Christian teaching itself.
The requirement that we know God, that we know God through His creation,
an inquiry into our own nature.
Because by way of Imago Dei, to know oneself then, to know oneself in the relevant way,
is to know God because we are in the image and likeness of God.
There's going to be a programmatic approach to the nature of human nature itself.
It's going to pick up where Aristotle left off.
It's not simply going to repeat Aristotle.
It's going to proceed from Aristotle.
We'll see this especially in the great achievement of Thomistic thought.
So this is not an age that's hostile to the senses,
indifferent to experimental modes of inquiry.
There's nothing dark about this period at all.
It's an age of great intellectual energy,
which seems to some extent rather innocent and remote,
because it really is resuming something.
It's resuming something that had long lay fallow.
And it doesn't have that quite habitual and sure-handed use of these ancient intellectual resources.
But as a result of the labors of medieval scholarship,
particularly within the context of the university,
the corpus of scholastic teaching, scholastic thought, methodology,
criticism, textual analysis and the like,
will be bequeathed to a western community
now as a result of these developments,
being able to handle this in a more sure-handed way,
and in a way that is progressively getting us toward what we delight ourselves
into believing as the correct and modern perspective on things.
Of course, every age is fairly confident that its perspective is the modern perspective.
And of course, it always is the modern perspective within that age,
once we reflect on all of the witch hunters.
We're using the best evidence, you know,
and legal procedure, rules of evidence,
the right kinds of tests to determine who a witch is.
So we're always quite confident in our science,
quite confident in our religion,
and quite confident in our philosophy,
which is why I generally end a lecture of this sort
by saying that when your confidence has reached a really high level in these regards,
particularly everything that can be learned experimentally,
and by reason, by direct observation,
by analyticity, by linguistic analysis,
by a consultation with cultural historians and anthropologists,
so that you're absolutely certain you've got the thing nailed down.
Then what I would urge as a therapy is that you go to the mirror,
and that you look in the mirror and you say,
I may be wrong, I may be gravely wrong,
I may be hopelessly and irretrievably wrong,
and in that, you may very well be right.
Thank you.
