Lecture 30. No matter, never mind. Bartley and the challenge of materialism.
No mind, no matter. No matter, never mind.
In those trenchant brief utterances, we find a number of positions on philosophy of mind.
No matter, never mind. Is the classic materialist position absent of material organization, there could not be mental life.
No mind, never matter. This suggesting that the material world to have any kind of existence at all presupposes a thinking entity or the realm of idea in which the material world might in here.
Well, during the period after Locke's influential essay, any number of scholars saw in it both skeptical and materialistic tendencies and also found its empiricistic orientation radical.
It seemed to underestimate the activity and complexity and creative power of mind as such.
It seemed to be the old blank slate, tabula rasa, tabula neuter theory that just didn't match up on the view of certain influential philosophers, didn't match up with the facts.
And I say it also seemed to conduce to a kind of materialism, even a kind of gascendist materialism that certainly would be an insult to patrons of the faith and indeed to philosophers who, notwithstanding to the contrary, one or another religious difference of opinion,
thought that human mental life was simply more complex, I say active, creative and the like, than a materialistic theory could account for.
Leibniz is one of the great, great figures in the history of philosophy. He was also a statesman.
He was an inventor of the calculus along with Newton and that scandalous debate across the channel as two questions of priority and plagery and all that. Newton's calculus and Leibniz's are different enough so that we know they weren't plagiarizing against each other.
Leibniz was a profoundly insightful, his was a profoundly insightful mathematical mind and logical mind. Many of his writings would be foundational for a probability theory.
Indeed, he issued a variable invitation to the development of a probability theory when raising the question. As a good rationalist, he raises this question, suppose you find yourself in a juridical or adjudicative context that's going to be settled on the basis of evidence.
Of course, evidence is never decisive. Slam dunk, that's it, no question about it. What's the basis upon which a reasonable person will take a firm position given the fact that there is not absolute certainty in the circumstance?
Do you see? When you use weight of evidence in determining guilt or innocence, what is it you're doing? And I say some of the early developers of probability theory were responding directly or indirectly to questions of that sort raised by Leibniz.
Locke's famous essay is an essay on the human understanding. Leibniz's reply to this is in the form of new essays on the understanding, and it was the death of Locke that had Leibniz withholding publication for a time.
The new essays are very interesting. They raise fundamental questions that are with us to this day, and they constitute a formidable challenge to any radically empiricistic philosophy of mind.
Leibniz takes Locke to be asserting, though you won't find this sentence anywhere in Locke, he takes Locke to be asserting something that we can find in medieval philosophy.
We can find it in the writings of Don Skotis. He takes Locke to be saying that nothing is in the mind at all except what was first in the senses.
The old medieval or scholastic version of this being knee-hill, est in intellectu, quod prius fuerit in censu, nothing is in the mind or in the intellect except what was first in the senses.
It all begins there. There isn't any mind at all until supplied by the senses. I say Locke didn't say that.
But Leibniz takes Locke's position to be advocating, and you might see the traditional rationalist reply to empiricism in three Latin words.
If indeed the expression is knee-hill, est in intellectu, dot, dot, dot, except what was first in the senses, Leibniz's reply is knee-see intellectus ipsa, except the intellect itself.
You might see that unless there is already in place an organizing, integrating, as it were, mind aware of itself, a self-reflecting or aperceptive kind of power, experience would count as nothing.
Overall, the world of experience, so to speak, the world of potential experience is just a barrage of incessant stimulation, having neither rhyme nor reason.
We don't just associate things willy-nilly. The function of mind is to take the welter of potential experiences, select from that welter, so to speak, those that bear in some significant way on life and mind,
and integrate the information in the external world in such a way as to render the world and ourselves intelligible.
So what Leibniz is at pains to point out is that Locke simply has underestimated what really is constitutive of knowledge.
It's not just a collection of sensations pulled together to form elementary ideas, which are then pulled together to form complex ideas.
He has one of the participants in the debate that just is the new essays on the understanding. He has Theophilus put it this way.
This tabula rasa, Theophilus says, is in my opinion only a fiction which nature does not admit.
Uniform things and those which contain no variety are never anything but abstractions.
So Leibniz here is distinguishing between the sort of nullity that might be a useful concept in mathematics and what indeed is properly said about the mind.
There can't be a mind that is empty. There can't be a mind that is ever that simple, that unwritten on.
A mind is, I say, an integrative, active and creative set of powers and potentialities.
He says the very concept of experience itself presupposes that kind of activity and self-reflection and awareness.
Perception itself is grounded in aperception. We not only see things and feel things and touch things, but we know that we're doing this.
We have a self-reflective activity which itself cannot be the gift of experience, but is the necessary condition for there to be experiences.
Perception, Leibniz says, is just inexplicable on mechanical grounds.
Now in this he's also going to take a swipe at materialism and a quite formidable one, one that's serviceable to this day.
Here's the question. Suppose we want to argue that elementary sensations constitute the basis of all mental life and that these elementary sensations are pulled together by associative processes
such as to form ever more complex ensembles of thought, and presumably now this is taking place because we are constituted the way we are
and because the nerves, the brain and the like are able to do this kind of work.
There's nothing in luck to suggest that this is being done in some other way.
He is very much the biologically oriented philosopher.
He has made clear in the essay that he's not going to be dragged into what we call the mind-body problem and whether the soul ultimately is a kind of matter or controlled by physics.
He's not going to do that, but I think one gets the distinct impression.
Not that he's not going to do that because his mind isn't made up on the subject, but he's not going to do it because that's not the sort of metaphysical debate that he thinks is useful.
He's in the patrimony of Bacon and Newton. You don't do metaphysics. You do physics, so to speak, and so he's going to leave that part of the mind-body problem aside.
Nonetheless, there seems to be very little doubt, and there was very little doubt in the minds of Locke's contemporaries and immediate followers, that his philosophy of mind conduces directly to a materialist philosophy of mind.
Indeed, it conduces to some extent to a kind of skepticism by way of the secondary qualities, the fact that we, you know, what is this? Is this some kind of invention?
And it also conduces to materialism in that the very argument of the essay is an essentially Newtonian argument.
It's essentially a mechanistic argument about how the laws of mechanics pull things together.
Well, says Leibniz, look, this isn't going to work. We don't have to ask whether our biology is important and the like. It isn't going to work. This is not a technical problem.
This is so, Leibniz, ever the model builder says, look, make a device that functions the way we do. Make something like us.
Except make it very large. And have it work. However it is we work, have it work that way. But make it so large that you can actually walk around inside it.
You can walk around inside the head of the thing. Do you see? You make it as large, he says, as if it were a kind of granary or a mill or that sort of thing.
Now what will you see? As you walk inside that place, what will you see? Well, you might see threshing machines and all sorts of gearing devices with mechanical advantage and stuff coming down on top of other things and making sounds and all that.
This is what you'll never see. You'll never see a perception. You'll never see an idea. You'll never see an odor.
That is, all of the contents that we understand to be contents of the understanding, all of the perceptual experiences, the qualia, the actual feel of things, all of the properties of idea, that kind of abstract, spaceless property.
None of this is going to be found anywhere within that machine shop. So that from the mechanical workings of such an entity, and you understand that Leibniz's position here is going to survive any degree of complexity.
It's not like, well, the brain is much more complicated than a threshing machine. That's not the point. However complicated the brain is, at least in principle, here's a Newtonian move.
All right, let's create an idealized model. Take the brain, no matter how complex it is, and blow it up as if it were a balloon so that it is now so large that it is large relative to us.
Meaning we can walk inside, we can walk over, and we can swim in the synaptic space, we can swim in the transmitter substances that functionally unite adjacent neurons.
We can take a look at the nerve endings. They're as large as a house. All of that. And what you will not see is a perception or an idea.
So with Leibniz, there is the rationalist rebuttal of empiricism, according to which mind is active, perception is grounded in a kind of aperception or self-reflecting power.
A materialist reductionist strategy isn't going to work, because when you finally get down to the level of corpuscles, you've lost all of the attributes and qualities constitutive of mental life itself.
It's a non-starter, and what's needed instead of it is a more rationalistic appreciation of the mind as an organizing, law-giving, integrating kind of non-physical entity.
And Leibniz in his monodology and other writings will make clear what kind of entity is capable of achievements of this kind.
Now another and quite famous critique of materialism in all of its forms, not just as it might be implied in Locke's essay, but as it is defended robustly by Gassendi,
and indeed as it has been defended robustly by materialistic psychologists and materialistic philosophers ever since, is the philosophy of George Barclay.
Now, I once dared myself to get through a lecture on Barclay without ever raising the question, if a tree falls in the forest and no one is there to hear it, does it make a sound?
And I think it's almost impossible to do. I guess you could do it on a wager of sorts, but you'd come away feeling so guilty about it that you might then run back into the lecture room,
even as the students were leaving and say, did I tell you the one about the tree falling in the forest?
Well, first a few words about Barclay, who, if all we ever talked about in connection with Barclay, where there's rubbish about trees falling in the forest,
you'd think that he was just some sort of bumpkin who, you know, one late night over a glass of Guinness, Barclay is a great philosopher from Ireland,
a great scholar in Irish intellectual history, that Barclay was just sort of sitting there with the boys saying, what do you think, Mike, if a tree fell in the forest?
Barclay was a preeminent figure in science and scientific thinking. He was one of the masters of optics in his period.
He set forth the basic principles by which we have the experience of depth. He was an expert on the subject of perspective, an expert geometer.
Later in life, he would become Bishop of Clawne, and so his religious credentials are very often asserted as a way of explaining his philosophy,
which I think is always a mistake. There's one very influential text in the history of psychology in which the author pointing out,
Thomas Reed's critique of David Hume, concludes by saying, not bad philosophy for a Presbyterian minister.
And of course, the same author would never summarize Hume's philosophy and say, not bad philosophy for...
I think we probably should resist infecting our analyses of philosophical systems with a kind of psychoanalysis of the philosopher whose system it is.
Sometimes this can be... I mean, Barclay thought this, that, or the other thing, and do recognize he was Bishop of Clawne.
But then we have to get back to the question of whether what Barclay thought was sound or not. And if it's sound, it's sound even if he's Bishop of Clawne,
and if it's unsound, it's unsound even if he's the Bishop of Clawne.
Well, Barclay tells us what his philosophical program is early on in his essay.
He says he wants to show that materialism is an untenable metaphysics. It's an untenable ontology.
And he's going to do this by establishing that not only is materialism not the best explanation,
but that it is a fatally flawed explanation because the material world itself does not have independent existence.
Now, if you're going to pace students through an argument, the culmination or conclusion of which is a certain skepticism about the reality of the external world,
I think the first thing you have to do is sort of nail them down to their chairs and tell them that you're going to present this in a very sober way
while arresting the strong tendency to start giggling and hoping that they can arrest their strong tendency to start giggling too,
because according to Barclay, there is no material world.
Well, this, of course, is not what Barclay said. Barclay did not say there isn't a material world.
Barclay, in fact, spent a lot of time treating himself with tar water for a biological ailment of his.
He came to America to raise funds to establish a university in Bermuda.
He thought that to get education back on the right track, you'd better pick someplace quite far removed from those centers of intellectual corruption,
which just are the contemporary university. I should tell you as an aging Don that I quite understand his inclinations in this regard.
I'm not quite sure Bermuda would be the place. These days I find myself thinking more of Mars or Neptune.
But Barclay is a man of affairs. He's not only Bishop of Cloyne. He's a teacher. He's a writer. He's a world traveler.
He's a fundraiser. He's planning, but unsuccessfully, to be the founder of a new university that'll have a special curriculum.
This isn't a chap who's skeptical as to whether or not there are ships and oceans and cash transactions and tar water.
The question really is the grounds on which we would ever claim that there is an independently existing material world.
That is, apart from all perception, all sensation, all ideation, all thought, all understanding, all wisdom, all possible experience,
there remains nonetheless, brute, thoughtless, empty, massive, matter, independently going its way throughout all time,
not depending on anything other than itself for its not existence, but to use Barclay's term, subsistence.
Now, how could anyone make such a claim, Barclay wonders? I mean, we tend to do this.
The mind is given to some fairly woeful habits, particularly when those habits are vindicated by high-flown philosophies,
which we think were too stupid to criticize, but Barclay says, look, step back for a minute and give this some thought.
Here you are. You assume that in addition to seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting and the like,
there's some independently existing entity in the external world that's causally bringing this about.
Remember Descartes finally coming around to the view that we must have in some sense an innate concept of matter
because from the arena of experience itself, you could never construct something that was matter.
You more or less have to have that in place. Well, I think Barclay would be inclined to say to Descartes,
well, you know, you're half right. Now, let's get all the way with it.
What does it mean when we refer? What is it we're doing when we identify some material object in the external world?
How do we identify it? What do we say about it? Well, as Barclay is quick to point out,
anything possibly said about any material entity in the external world is said by way of, according it, attributes.
It's big. It's small. It's blue. It's yellow. It's sweet. It's hot. It's cold. It's distant. It's near.
It's massive. It's ethereal. It floats. It sails. It sinks.
Now, what do you have left when all the attributes are removed?
When there is nothing in it that conduces to any possible experience at all? Nothing describable.
And the answer to that question is what you have left is nothing. Nothing.
The material world just is a congeries of attributes. Now, what are these attributes?
These attributes are perceptions.
Absent perception, there are no attributes. Nothing's long or short or blue or yellow or sweet or sour,
except in so far as it is thus sensed. For a thing to be, it has to be the potential object of a perception.
Essa, est, prakippy, there's Barkley in a nutshell. To be is to be perceived.
Now, what about the dark side of the moon? Until the Apollo program, what could possibly be said about the dark side of the moon?
I mean, is there a dark side of the moon? As Barkley saying, is Barkley being so bold and preposterous as to say
that that which has not been experienced does not exist. Indeed, it doesn't come into existence until it's experienced.
Would Barkley absent the Apollo program say that there isn't any other side of the moon, the only moon there is is the moon that's seen.
Well, of course, he's not saying that. Is Barkley denying that there is no top to the highest mountain unclimbed?
Of course, he's not saying that. What Barkley is saying is that for there to be attributes, these attributes must in here in a recipient.
That is, for there to be any such property, it has to be a perceptible property,
and that in fact it is the process of perception itself that brings the attribute about.
You might want to think that the remedy that Barkley is applying to Locke's ontology and epistemology.
The remedy is this. All qualities are secondary qualities.
Do you see? It makes no sense to say that independently of my experience of hardness, there's something out there that's hard.
That independently of my recognition of the shape of something, that there's something out there with extension.
That all of Locke's primary qualities are objects of perception just as much as the secondary qualities.
So that everything that is, is in virtue of its being perceived, of its being potentially perceived, being the potential object of a perception.
Now, on the notion of the dark side of the moon having no existence, or the top of the highest mountain yet to be climbed having no existence,
Barkley of course recognizes that the delimatic status of his philosophy when it comes to things like that.
The solution, however, is ready to hand. Everything that exists in here's in the mind of the source of it all.
Now, you might see this quite literally as a deus ex machina.
But the invocation of God is not for the purpose of establishing Barkley's own Christian belief.
It's an attempt to solve the ontological problem that arises when it comes to answering the question,
how can there be something which is not yet the subject of human perception?
Well, it's consistent with his own metaphysics.
It's going to have to be the subject or the object of some perception.
And obviously, the ultimate recipient, so to speak, the mind in which reality can be eternally in hearing, is the mind of him who made it.
So there is this happy coincidence, I should think for Barkley anyway,
this happy coincidence of the old time religion working very, very well when it comes to the real existence of entities that have yet to be perceived.
And indeed, that may not ever be perceived by human recipients.
Now, again, this might have you say, ah, not bad philosophy for the Bishop of Clawne.
But I say again that he doesn't start with an attempt to vindicate Christian religion
and then conveniently bring in this one at the end because he's got to handle the dark side of the movement.
There's another important feature of Barkley's critique of Locke and of philosophies like Locke's.
Captured in Barkley's phrase that an idea can be like nothing but another idea.
This is the sense then in which all the qualities are secondary qualities.
An idea can be nothing like anything except another idea.
Now, again, Locke wants the following to be the case.
From elementary sensations pulled together by associative gravitational principles,
we have some simple ideas of things.
These can be pulled together in such a way as to form more complex ideas.
Now, take an elementary sensation, a flash of light, or an elementary sound and the like.
This already is a psychological phenomenon.
That is to say, a feeling, a sound, a sight is already at the level of perception.
When I see a chair, I do not have the physical object, the chair itself, in mind.
Chairs can't occupy mind. Ideas occupy mind.
Barkley wants the term idea to be generic for all of the contents of consciousness,
whether these be sensations, perceptions, abstract thoughts, and the like.
These have nothing in common with physical objects.
You might see Barkley in his own quite empiricistic way doing what Leibniz is doing with the large mill analogy.
If you can walk through that mill, you'll see nothing that looks like a perception.
And what Barkley is saying is that take everything you're prepared to say about an external physical world of objects.
They could not have anything in common with idea as such. Ideas are only like other ideas.
Now, Barkley wants to put on notice anyone who claims to know that of which he has no idea.
It takes it to be a contradiction to claim that you have knowledge or an understanding of anything, quote,
of which you have no idea, close quote.
But as ideas can only be like other ideas, then all knowledge is ideational knowledge.
And that means that everything you would be prepared to say about a physical world,
you can only say in ideational terms. The ultimate reality is the ideational reality.
What is rejected here is not the material world.
In the debate that he stages in his major dialogue, the question is raised,
well, am I now to get up in the morning and assume that the sun and the stars and the glass of water,
none of these things really has any existence at all?
Is this not a complete and total skepticism?
Is this a skepticism that outstrips the skepticism of Pirro of Aliyah?
I mean, this is unbelievable. Am I to assume that everything is sort of a hallucination?
And Barkley says quite directly, he says, look, if you accept the argument I've developed,
which is really an undefeatable argument, note, nothing changes, do you see?
That is, anything you've ever taken for granted, you will still take for granted,
but now you will understand what it is that your knowledge claims are referring to.
Are there tables, chairs, glasses of water and sunsets? Of course there are.
Are there planets and stars? Of course there are, do you see?
And how are we to understand these external entities?
We aren't to understand these as entities that subsist in the experiences and perceptions
and minds of those who know them.
Subsist, that is, absent the realm of idea and spirit.
Absent the transcendent realm in which the mental exists.
There can be nothing else, because for there to be anything else
would require that there be attributes without there being recipients.
And this Barkley takes to be nothing less than a contradiction.
So, as all such attributes are ideas, that is to say contents of some consciousness,
then indeed for anything to exist is for it to be the object of a perception.
The material universe then subsists, of course, in the mind of him who made it,
but it also subsists in its parts and particulars in the perceptions
and understandings of those who have experience of the world.
Barkley then might be said to take empiricism to the end of its logical tether
by making experience or perception the ontological foundation of all that there is.
So, you see, arguments against materialism are interesting, sometimes amusing,
and not transparently false.
I'm Tom Rollins, president of The Teaching Company.
I hope you've enjoyed these lectures from our Great Courses on Tape series.
To order your next course or to speak to one of our knowledgeable customer service representatives
about our broad selection of more than 80 courses,
call us today toll-free at 1-800-TEACH-12.
That's 1-800-832-2412.
Our Great Courses on Tape are produced in response to interviews with customers like you.
All are designed to serve learning as a way of life and to suit your needs,
whether you're commuting, exercising, traveling, or just relaxing at home.
Please give us a call at 1-800-TEACH-12.
