Lecture 33, The Play of Mind and the Salons of Descent, France and the Philosophs
My works are the issue of pure and simple experience, who is the one true mistress.
These rules are sufficient to enable you to know the true from the false.
Leonardo gives us that in his book on painting, this in a period that's hosting witch hunts
and burning saints in the town square, an age that has already featured a rasmus and
Luther doing battle with each other in print, reformation, upheaval, counter-reformation.
My works are the issue of pure and simple experience, who is the one true mistress.
And when we move into the age of the Enlightenment, to the 18th century, we pick up as if the
same author were writing, and we read, let us console ourselves for not knowing the
possible connections between a spider and the rings of Saturn, and to continue to examine
what is within our reach.
And that is Voltaire.
And Leonardo and Voltaire will have much in common, though much, of course, will divide
them.
Both are satisfied that the light of experience casts sufficient illumination for us to understand
the nature of our difficulties and to find a way out of the labyrinth.
If theseus needed a golden string, we need the light of experience, which is provided
chiefly by a systematic study, a disciplined study of nature, and what Voltaire has going
for him that Leonardo didn't, though I don't think Leonardo required it quite as much,
is of course the genius of Newton and the age of Newton and the great age of 17th century
that precedes the Enlightenment and, to a very considerable extent, becomes a veritable
template for Enlightenment thought.
Now the question is sometimes raised, this age that calls itself the Enlightenment, and
these extraordinary members of the Paris Salons and the like who wrote so prolifically and
wittily and the like, are they mere polemicists?
Is there any reason to pay close attention to what they had to say within the context
of serious philosophical inquiry and the like?
After all, how many philosophy journal articles are written on the musings of Diderot and
Holbach and Helvetius and Condorcet, Voltaire, La Métrie and Company?
Well, I think it's maybe a credit, to some extent a credit, to what might be called a
common sense philosophy, to record the fact that if philosophy has some fundamental purpose
in human life, it should be to help us at the level of daily human life to figure out
problems of an essentially civic, social, political, moral and intellectual nature.
It can't be an activity intended chiefly for its own few handful of practitioners.
One thing that these great figures of the Salon achieved, and I'll be talking about
some of them specifically, and then the group of philosophes generically, one thing they
did achieve was they invited the intelligent parts of the world into the long debate.
They did not reserve philosophy to the philosophers, but understood that the philosophical mind
is essentially the human mind when it takes itself seriously.
They understood further that once invited into the long debate, the ordinary citizen
would be able to weigh the claims and the competing claims of crown and cross, of rabble
and prince, and decide for themselves on the basis now of a thinking fortified by close
philosophical and discipline thought, just which way their own inclinations and judgments
should be inclined.
So I would say that the positive side of the productions of the philosoph was one of opening
up into the public discourse issues that long had existed only at the level of, or
primarily at the level of abstract philosophy.
Of course, for everything the gods give us, they take two things back, some of the ancients'
thought, and for every blessing there's a pair of curses.
Well, this, if listened to in the wrong way, is going to sound terribly sniffy, and I don't
intend it to be at all sniffy, but one thing that has to happen inevitably when you render
the philosophical enterprise accessible to an ever larger and larger group is that you
are going to take some shortcuts by some light, you're going to debase the enterprise, and
indeed, as we shall see in 19th century thought, where the appeal is directly to large collectives,
the appeal is directly to the crowd, what turns out to be the philosophical musings
of an 18th century salon can actually reach or sink to the level of propaganda when it
is rendered so populist and so direct in its appeal as almost to leave all of its philosophical
refinements behind.
The philosophists, as best as they tell us themselves, weren't actually out to prosecute
the agenda of academic philosophy, they were out to change the world, and as I said in
connection with scholastic philosophy and Thomas Aquinas, Thomas Aquinas wasn't trying to get
tenure in a philosophy department, he was trying to defend and put on an intellectually
firm foundation the canonical teachings of the Catholic Church.
What the philosophists are trying to do is change the world and render it more compatible
with the evidence of sense, with the findings of science, and what every man, woman and
child capable of disabusing themselves of the pretensions and superstitions of the ages
will recognize as the right approach to the problem of governance, the right approach to
the problem of knowledge, the right approach to one's own daily conduct in life.
Now, when I say rendering accessible to a larger and larger audience the traditional
subjects of philosophy and science, that this was an aim of the philosophists, well this
aim expressed itself quite directly in the composition of the encyclopedia, the work
chiefly of Dennis Dedevo and his associates, and in the encyclopedia there are learned,
by the way, items that still repay attention, learned disquisitions on matters of philosophical
and scientific, especially scientific and ethical consequence, ranging from geography
to moral issues to the natural order of things, the species of animals, plant science and
the like, trying to put in encyclopedic form the best productions of the world of scientific
inquiry from remote antiquity, but even and especially more recently, basic principles
of mechanics and the work of Galileo and Newton and the like.
The project of the encyclopedia is in and of itself the utter secularization of knowledge.
This is not paid here to any dogmatic teaching or any religious teaching, rather the authority
of experience, the authority of science, the authority of common sense will all be arrayed
against more traditional modes of authority and indeed it is the traditional modes of
authority that the philosophists singularly and collectively are challenging.
So the encyclopedia is one quite important production.
Now Voltaire himself is a powerful influence in this whole operation.
He's early in these developments.
He has declared himself to be not merely an anglophile, but perhaps even an anglomaniac.
His letters on the English people constitute not only unrestrained praise of English people
and English practices, but a praise that has as its specific target of abuse the practices
and perspectives of his own native France, the preposterous nature of French institutions
and what they set out to establish compared with what Voltaire takes to be the entirely
liberated and liberating perspective of the English people.
In one of these letters he contrasts fellowship in the Royal Society with membership in the
French Academy.
The former based on merit, the latter based largely on who you know and what kind of influence
peddling you've done and what family you come from and the like.
Of course Voltaire has proceeded in all this by the great Montaigne whose essays again
are a veritable celebration of secular knowledge, common sense, common decency, the right way
to work through problems, the philosophies worth having, and the gentle ridicule of the
pomposities of traditional authority, that traditional authority pompous in its own ignorances.
So we have at once the enlargement of the discursive community and the secularization
of knowledge.
The business of knowledge is not to celebrate or vindicate what exists only at the level
of belief but to determine which beliefs are worth having.
Now it's in the nature of things that a secularized body of knowledge is going to be a highly
naturalistic body of knowledge.
The concern is going to be with what makes itself accessible to the senses, the natural
world, the world that is describable in physical and mensurational terms.
If a thing exists, it exists in some degree.
If it exists in some degree, it can be measured.
When it's measured, it is known.
We find repeatedly in the productions of this community of philosophically inclined wits,
we find repeatedly interest in the calculus, interest in precision and precision instruments.
Very often precision instruments are used metaphorically to talk about what constitutes
knowing something thoroughly.
The metaphor of the machine is taking on a certain reality in its own right.
The state as a kind of knowable, complex, mechanical entity with moving parts designed
to achieve certain ends is also figuring directly in the literary.
Now one person I haven't mentioned on that list of 18th century notables, and you might
say to yourself, well, good and safest, this is the one who trumps all of them in influence
and power, is Russo.
Russo really is somewhat on the outside of all this.
He's not in the fashionable salons.
We come to see Russo as this sort of tortured person, misunderstood, toward the end of his
life patently paranoid.
You know, I'm reminded of the comment that I believe it was Henry Kissinger defending
his president when he said, if everyone's against you, you're not paranoid.
Well, Russo had many, many critics.
Russo is important here.
I mean, he's consistent with the larger program in these respects.
First, in the education of Emil, Russo takes the position that civilization at least as
it customarily works on us, works to the disadvantage of what is most authentic about us, that the
very processes of civilizing someone is to strip him of certain natural tendencies and
sentiments.
It can be to harden and render indifferent the product of that very education.
It can be at the cost of authenticity and an independence of mind and spirit.
So we already have a recorded suspicion of the instruments and institutions of civilization,
these are not compatible with the essential nature of human nature.
We find that much in Russo.
Russo in writing about the social contract begins with the summoning statement.
I mean, this is, if they had been putting things on t-shirts in the 18th century, this
certainly would have been on a lot.
You could have turned a tidy profit putting this on a t-shirt.
Man born free and everywhere in chains.
Well, in what kind of chains?
I mean, Russo was not in chains.
The English people were not in chains.
Good to say the French people were not in chains.
You might not think that Burke got everything right in his reflections on the revolution
in France, but he certainly knew that what would be going on in France at the end of
the 18th century was not the reaction of the people everywhere in chains.
It's the chained mind.
It's the mind tied to orthodoxies that render it indifferent to the world.
It's the orthodoxies that render it incapable of its own natural functions.
That's the chain.
If you can chain that, the rest, you know, chain the mind, the body follows.
So we find again in Russo himself a particular form of naturalism, a concession to nature
as the last word on important subjects, and a suspicion, a skepticism toward merely human
trivences, merely habitual modes of conduct.
Now if you can find that much in Russo, you can find it in spades when you get to the
traditional salon type wits of the period, and here I refer to D'Alembert, Diderot,
Condorcet, and one I want to speak of at a little length, Julien La Métrie.
La Métrie wrote one book that got him in trouble with the authorities because he was
a young physician, and young physicians were only supposed to write treatises on the accomplishments
of older physicians.
That was the way the game was played.
I think there are departments of medicine that are still organized that way.
What the untenured assistant professor of internal medicine is supposed to be publishing
is how the chairman of the department got it right, you know, and I suspect that's a dying
breed of medical departments, but it certainly was alive and well in the 18th century in
France.
Well, having been reprimanded for his brashness in this regard, La Métrie then undertook
to publish a work titled Man, a Machine, La Machine, and the scandal surrounding the
appearance of that work was sufficiently intense to have La Métrie running off to the protective
custody of Prussia and that tolerant tyrant Frederick, friend of Voltaire's, by the way.
Well, what's man, a machine, all about?
Now, look, any number of appreciative articles have appeared in the last decade.
We are, you know, in one of those decades of the brain sciences, as we like to say.
I think we're in the eighth or ninth or tenth decade of the brain sciences, but now that
we're in the decade of the brain sciences, we're looking back to the notables who understood
that this is what science is all about.
Well, La Métrie has gotten a very appreciative press in the last 10 or 15 years, and it must
come about as a result of people who either never read that book or assumed that the people
who were listening to their praise of La Métrie would never get around to reading it.
It's a really thin work.
How shall I capture it for you?
At one point, he notes that that motility is inherent in biological systems.
You don't have to presuppose the existence of some spiritual source of motivation or
movement.
You don't need something external to the forces of nature to account for significant movement.
It's sort of built into the thing.
And the proof of this, he gets from, I think, a Turkish corporal or somebody who notes that
over the evening fire, if you take the heart out of a chicken and throw it in boiling water,
it jumps up.
Now, this is not what we would refer to as a successful employment of the methods of
bacon and Newton.
What man and machine is, I say, is a polemic.
It's a polemic that includes this almost paralyzing phrase since all of the faculties of the soul
depend as they do on the proper organization of the body and more specifically of the brain.
The soul is surely an enlightened machine.
Now, that is an attention-getter.
The soul, do you see, this most precious and transcendent of entities, this entity that
most closely approximates the image of God and His creation, is an enlightened machine.
It's an essentially mechanical contrivance.
This is how learning and perception and motivation and emotion and thought are to be understood
in terms of the basic mechanical properties of matter in motion, the body being a species
of matter in motion.
I say this was an extremely attention-getting device and it puts on notice any rationalist
or transcendentalist or idealistic philosophy that is trying to make more out of man than
a kind of enlightened machine.
Solometry is worth noting here.
Now another thing that we find in this period of philosophical agility, which I think I'd
say philosophical agility more than philosophical originality, is taking some developed philosophical
work and through the use of metaphor and exegesis, enlarging its teaching, one of the earliest
translators of Locke into French was Condeac.
And Condeac serves up the image, the model of the sentient statue.
And what we're given is this.
We're given a block of stone, do you see, and that block of stone is worked on by the
environment.
And as that block of stone is, in a manner of speaking, experiencing the impulsive assaults
of an environment, of a shaping environment.
And out of those interactions, that pattern of efficient causation, this block starts
to take on the form of a recognizable being.
The process continues.
And through the result of an incessant interaction with a stimulating environment, this statue
now comes to form elementary Lockean sensations, ideas, more complex ideas and the like.
What imagery this is, the idea that our essence does not precede our actual existence in the
world and that the kinds of beings we are just are given, they serve as a record of
the experiences we've had.
Here's the prince and the peasant developed yet further and metaphorically.
What is it that goes into the making of a prince?
It's not the will of God.
There are certain traditions and customs that just generate outcomes like this.
They're man-made, they're inventions of ours, they're like gorgons, they're nowhere except
in the human imagination.
Our own Tom Payne, well of course a British native, but we can say our own Tom Payne.
Our own Tom Payne, when he talks about titles, what does he say?
Payne says, titles are like a magician's wand, which circumscribe human felicity and prevent
us from living the lives of men.
He says, nowhere in the book of Genesis do you find reference to a duke, a prince or
a duchess.
And even today, when that term is used, you don't know whether it refers to a person
or a horse or a dog.
So again, it's snide, it's catchy and it's polemical, but it's grounded in something
quite fundamental and quite philosophical.
And that is that the guide in all things is nature, and you learn nature, you learn to
read the book of nature by the methods of Bacon and Newton, not through authority, not
through some other set of translators, but through direct experience aided by the critical
resources.
Helvetius is in the same tradition of a radical environmentalist.
In fact, Diderot will take exception when Helvetius at one point argues that the difference
between Diderot and some derelict in the street is just that they had different environmental
histories.
Diderot himself, willing to be a genial environmentalist, would not quite accept that description
of his own achievements.
But Helvetius recognizes in the world in which he lives that the classes that exist, they
must have been made, as it were, because it's quite obvious what political forces are keeping
them where they are, how deliberately the engines of society and politics and government,
how the engines of the court are designed to be self-preserving and preserving the status
quo.
If you've got to do that much energy to keep this sort of social organization in place,
there must be something horrifically unnatural about it.
If that much work has to be done to preserve it, it must be because it is opposing what
are otherwise natural forces.
Condorcet is, in my mind, a particularly interesting figure, maybe more poignant than the rest.
Diderot was a man of great, great literary talent and perspicuity, and I say the leader
in this great project of the Encyclopedia.
Condorcet was the hopeful philosopher, a hopeful philosopher who, nonetheless, would
find himself hiding out in the last months of his life in the very France whose democratic
and republican principles he had done so much to install and defend.
Of course, he is living in the shadows of a terror that is going to consume everything
that doesn't stand behind the now official orthodoxy.
And I find what is so poignant in Condorcet that in this state of hiding where you would
think he would be so bitter, so melancholy and pessimistic toward an age that turned
on him, indeed toward now a more allegedly more popular government that he and his friends
had done so much to bring about.
I say instead of affecting or indeed expressing a rage or a melancholy or a depression, we
find his final writings especially hopeful, progressive, optimistic.
He sketches out something.
He couldn't complete this, but he sketches out what he refers to as a sketch for an
historical picture of the progress of the human mind.
Way to work.
Central to it is the idea of progress, and the idea of progress, which I think surely
has Renaissance engines behind it, deep Renaissance roots behind it, the idea of progress is quite
an interesting idea and it's not a classical idea.
For all of the classical revival elements of the 18th century, the classical revival
in architecture, the Georgian style, the monumental architecture, so redolent of Athens
and particularly Rome, I say for all of that, for all of the self-consciousness that 18th
century writers and thinkers had about their kinship with the classical world, the world
of Cicero and the world of the Stoics, the world of Pericles and the like, for all of
that, there's an 18th century idea that's quite incompatible with the classical worldview.
The classical worldview is a world devoted to principles of harmony and proportion.
The golden mean, the middle course is the best.
Everything having a place and a function, hopeful that whatever is good can be preserved
in its state, a search for an absolute that has as its defining feature its unchangeability,
as you see, that feature of the ancient world in which you attempt to achieve a degree of
integration, that then sets up the obligation to maintain it, not disturb it and not change
it.
An idea of harmony is an animating idea.
What is disharmonious in the ancient world comes as close as the classical world ever
gets to the idea of sin.
What is out of harmony, what is discordant, what is disproportionate, what is rebellious
and revolutionary and hubristic, anything that finds us referring to ourselves as in
any way godlike or divine in our wisdom.
Now if we take that to be an essential feat, the 18th century idea of progress couldn't
be more different.
The idea of progress is an idea according to which what is stationary is stagnant, that
what science reveals is if you play the game right, tomorrow is better than today, that
there isn't anything in the career of your parents that necessarily predicts, you know
the future is under no obligation to mimic the past, predicts what you're going to do
with your life.
That the whole idea is to liberate the human imagination and in the process it will, alright
it might not be able to figure out the relationship between the spider and the rings of a planet.
The progress is within our reach and progress is won by essentially scientific modes of
inquiry.
So Kondoase is giving us a sketch of the historical picture of the progress of the human mind
and he sees in the scientific world view just the engine of this progress.
So even as he faces his own impending death and at the hands of those who should have
been his greatest admirers, he's able to conclude on a quite optimistic note.
He rounds out his work by expressing a certain hopefulness, a certain hopefulness of a grand
association between science and society.
He would hope that this quote would meet no obstacles and it would assure among all
the sciences and all the arts directed by their principles an equilibrium of knowledge,
industry and reason necessary for the progress and the happiness of the human race.
Scholars have often noted, I remember Kenneth Clark in that old and still wonderful series
called Civilization, referring to the 18th century and particularly to Voltaire as representing
this, referring to what you see in the 18th century as the smile of reason and of course
there are statues and paintings of some of the later figures where you do see that it's
not a Delphic smile, it's a kind of confidence smile that would be recorded by one who understands
his situation in the world and the world at large and knows that things are going to get
better before they get worse because we know what we are up to, not to worry.
Well Condor say, even in the shadows of his own demise, even facing the dark hours, says
to himself and says to the world at large, if we can ever wed the proper aspirations
of humanity to the power of science, progress is inevitable and he's fairly sure we can
do that. Well there's the enlightenment in a nutshell, everything is within our reach,
all we have to do is make the right observations and measurements and get that antique authority
out of the way. Do we still believe that?
