Lecture 38 The Idea of Freedom
Tennyson in Memoriam writes, I trust I have not wasted breath.
I think we are not holy brain.
Romanticism is one of the great achievements of the human imagination, one of the great
episodes, events in the 19th century, its residuals are very much with us.
And I should want to say, at least at the beginning of this lecture, that the seeds
for Romanticism are actually sown in the Enlightenment itself.
Let's consider first the principle agenda of the Enlightenment.
The principle agenda of the Enlightenment is to challenge traditional authority through
the tools and resources of a scientific worldview and a scientific worldview that takes as its
subject matter nature itself.
So in the Enlightenment there is already a respect for the central proposition that
what we know or what we can ever know is what there is and what is given is nature itself.
What is opposed are the artificial contrivances, the overly analytical, scholastically produced
truisms.
What is opposed is all authority that is scriptural or personal.
Consider the motto of the Royal Society, you know, on the words of no one.
Title and rank and peculiar forms of social organization, the product of minds committed
to a kind of slothful acceptance of whatever has been in the past.
This again is what's going to be set aside, indeed is going to be revolted against and
turned upside down.
Descartes, we say, is one of the fathers of the modern worldview, and Descartes begins
with what?
He begins with an officially skeptical position, and he will accept nothing as true unless
it appeals at the level of the clearest of ideas, indubitably so, something that a rational
being couldn't even get himself to reject.
So in the Enlightenment, there is this commitment to the real being the natural, and to science
being the right way to explore the nature of the natural.
Thomas Reid on natural language, that we come into the world in virtue of the very kinds
of beings that we are able to enter into covenantial and compact-like relationships.
We have a natural way of signaling fear, signaling cooperation, signaling pleasures,
signaling anger, and so forth, and that if it weren't for this natural language, there'd
be no way for an artificial language such as the one I'm using to get started, because
to have conventional meanings, there must be conventions for them to be conventions,
there must be some mode of agreement, so you would need a natural language as the basis
upon which you could have conventional meanings in an artificial language, again, the emphasis
on nature.
After Tom Paine, I mentioned Tom Paine's attitude toward titles, titles are like a
magician's wand, he says, which circumscribe human felicity and prevent us from living
the life of man.
When Tom Paine says nowhere in the book of Genesis, will you find reference to a duke,
a baron, a duchess, a prince, do you see what he's saying is nowhere in the book that records
how the earth was actually populated?
Do you see any reference to things like this?
He says even today, when you talk about duke and princes, you might be talking about a
dog or a horse.
He says titles like this, you don't have to outlaw them.
These things will go away when the world at large agrees to laugh at them.
Now of course, Paine is a, I mean, he's a very well-known rabble rouser, he has an utterly
winning style, and he's a man of great depth and penetration.
He is trying to, he's not a rabble rouser, but he is a rouser, and what he's getting
at succeeds in his writing because he's addressing it to a world that has already been won over
to the proposition that nature is what is given, and that science and observation and
systematic study turn out to be the ways you find out what is given, and there really isn't
any alternative to that.
This isn't the way you're going to know everything, but it's the only way you're going to know
anything with any kind of confidence and practical consequence.
So this is all there in the Enlightenment.
With Rousseau, we get what might be regarded as the beginning of a veritable religion of
nature, the abundance of nature, the sheer beauty and power of nature, natural man being
something that has a majesty about itself that's covered over and concealed and distorted
by the awkward and artificial impositions of what we are pleased to call civilization,
such that with these impositions we cease to live an authentically human life, do you
see?
This is what Payne is getting at when he talks about circumscribing human felicity.
You come up with these institutions and titles and legal and political machinery, and for
goodness sake, the principal casualty of this is our very natural humanity.
Now there's that in the Enlightenment.
There's something else in the Enlightenment, the first lecture that I gave on Kant points
to this, Kant's categorical distinction between what we can know by way of the exercise of
our perceptual powers, and that is all at the level of phenomena, and what we can never
know, that being the real, numinal existence of the things that stand behind the appearances.
Well, look, Kant wouldn't be quite happy with this, but this already is going to support
the view that non-perceptual means must be invoked for us to get to the bottom of things,
to see what's behind the screen, we know there's something there, perception won't get us there,
oh, and by the way, if science is based primarily on observation, and if we know that observation
yields only phenomenal reality and not numinal reality, then it could be that science has
built in limitations, and that indeed one of the reasons we're not seeing, in a manner
of speaking, what is there to be seen is because we are engaging reality with nothing more
than our eyes.
So there's that possibility that's also built into that enlightenment criticality of which
Kant perhaps is the greatest exemplar.
So what happens then is we begin to think there may be a text behind the text.
Behind the scene, behind the appearances, behind the measurements and the like, something
really true is there to be found, and if we can't find it with the eye, or the ear,
or the anatomical blowpipe, how do we find it, do you see?
So romanticism is going to be growing out of this, there's something else in Kant, Kant's
moral theory.
Kant's moral theory establishes our exceptionality, not merely as rational beings, but given
that we are rational beings, we occupy the realm of the intelligible, and thus the only
way you account for us adequately is not in terms of the causal machinery of science,
but in terms of the rational apparatus of the introspecting, thoughtful being who discovers
it once that he is a morally free being.
So now we begin to see a literature, we begin to hear deep, deep resonances to the effect
that what really defines us is our freedom, that what renders us unique in the entire
cosmos, apart from all other things, is our freedom.
And of course the free play of ideas is what finally is at the bottom of genius itself.
So the way you get behind the world of mere appearances to the world of reality is through
that freedom expressed by the exceptional person who actually can come to see things,
and when he sees things that way, he sees that there's much more mystery than you ever
would have guessed given the mere light of experience.
What we see then is the appearance in the late 18th century of the Gothic, the Gothic
novel, Mary Shelley's Frankenstein, the Castle of Otranto, what are these horror stories
all about?
Think only of the paintings of Henry Fusely, for example, think of Blake's work.
What is this all about?
What's the monster all about?
What are we prepared to make of Fusely's nightmare?
Fusely's polyphemus.
If you take a look at Fusely's painting of polyphemus, you've got this giant like half
man, half beast, he's sort of sitting there sulking now, Odysseus has driven a stake through
the one eye that polyphemus that the Cyclops has.
Polyphemus doesn't quite know what's going on, something like Goya's giant.
You get this sense of a mystery behind the reality, and a mystery that somehow gets uncovered
through the genius of art and literature.
It's not something accessible to the eye, and therefore it's not something accessible
to science itself.
These are going to be mere implications in some enlightenment thought, and they're going
to become explicated by the leaders of romanticism.
So there's going to be what scholars have referred to as a romantic rebellion against
the line and angle precision, and pretensions to knowledge of the scientific community.
With whom do we want to date these developments?
You know, when it comes to the history of ideas, it just isn't the case that somebody
jumps out of the jack-in-the-box and announces a possibility that had never been thought
of, and now everybody marches in that direction, doesn't work that way.
But certainly one of the very souls of the movement we call romanticism is going to be
Goethe.
Goethe will be viewed this way by his contemporaries and by those who come after.
This is the great literary figure, this great artist and artistic genius of the little duchy
of Weimar, and what sometimes overlooked is one of the longest books Goethe wrote.
It's certainly longer than Meistersinger, and one of the most detailed analyses he ever
set forth was in a book on color, on color vision, his carbon layer.
You might say to yourself, what is Goethe doing writing a book on color?
Well, Goethe on color is presenting a sustained critique of the Newtonian theory of light.
This is a broadside against Newton's physics of light, the corpuscular theory, and the
burden of Goethe's book is to say, look, I mean I think if you want to put it in one
sentence it would go like this, look, Newton has told us everything about light, which
is to say the scientific world has told us everything about light except what we see.
There just isn't anything in there that tells you anything about how the world actually
comes to appear to us and the meanings that we extract from it.
It tells us nothing about that most central of visual experiences, the perception of beauty,
do you see?
So Goethe steps back and in this work, I mean it's not just this work obviously, it's in
his great literary works, Goethe is stepping back and saying, wait a minute, if this is
the culmination of scientific thought on a subject, science must be a woefully limited
enterprise.
If this is the most we're ever going to get out of what we all agree to be the greatest
scientific achievement of the modern age, well we're not even on page two yet.
We want to know about light for one central reason because the visible world is a world
that moves and summons us.
It's the world that presents us with the emblems and icons of possible lives.
None of this is existing at a corpuscular level, you can't push it through a prism and
the like.
You know, even on the mere physics of color, the theory doesn't really quite work, Goethe
already recognizes, as per Benham's top and so forth, that you can stimulate the visual
system alternately with light and dark and generate color experiences, that indeed you
don't have to have the Newtonian physics of color in order to generate color.
And of course the implication of this is quite clear.
We have creative resources within us, we are not entirely dependent on the physics of the
external world, even for the richest experiences that we might have.
Perception can defy physics.
It has organizing and inventive powers of its own, it's not merely a passive process.
So that what defines human nature is not going to be the mechanical causation examined in
the realm of physics, it's going to be something deeper than that.
Schiller, you know Schiller, the author of the undefoited, the ode to joy that Beethoven
will incorporate so magnificently into the carol movement of the ninth symphony.
Schiller did a wonderful collection of essays under the title, Letters on the Aesthetic
Education of Man.
Letters on the Aesthetic Education of Man, a core precept in Romanticism of course, is
that the dimension of human life that counts most is the aesthetic dimension.
And in his Letters on the Aesthetic Education of Man, Schiller gives us the sentence, I
think this is a quite accurate quote, man is never so authentically himself as when
at play.
Man is never so authentically man.
We are never our authentic selves, so fully as when at play.
And you say to yourself, well what could he be getting at here, is he talking about people
going to Vegas and cranking on one-armed bandits and so forth, well this is what he's getting
at.
Well, I think this is what he's getting at.
Schiller as with all the romantics was deeply read in the classics, they certainly all know
about Aristotle and the like.
We call Aristotle on the matter of life on the Isle of the Blessed, where almost like
a god one engages in contemplative activity for its own sake, not for any purpose beyond
itself but for the sheer eudaimonic form of life that is lived when one is engaged in
contemplation.
The idea being that the true, that the divinity within us expresses itself most fully.
And what we are doing, we are doing for the sheer value of the activity itself and not
for anything external to it.
This I think is Schiller's sense of the authenticity of play.
Play is not effortless.
People consume far more energy when at play usually by the way than when they are at work.
They take it deadly seriously.
Find a person who has a passion for a hobby.
Find a person who sculpts or paints or tries to write poetry or sails or plays chess.
These are people who die for these things.
They overcome all sorts of obstacles.
They lose jobs over it.
They quit jobs.
They take early retirement, do you say.
Can't get Smith out of bed in time to get the eight o'clock bus.
But there he is at 4.30 in the morning ready for the weekend fishing trip.
So to talk about play is not to talk about something trivial.
It's to talk about something that is passionately engaging.
And what's the characteristic of play?
It's the thing we do when we are free.
It's freedom that allows play and it is in play that we discover our authentic selves.
Here is romanticism speaking in a voice that if anything the modern citizen hears more
clearly than perhaps even the 19th century heard it.
I'm not sure the 19th century was quite as given to play as we are, though I'm not at
all sure that in the forms of play we've developed for ourselves, we have become for that reason
more authentic.
I always reserve about 10 seconds per two hours for an inspirational homily and a finger
wag.
So there's those seconds.
If you play a word association game and I serve up the word Goethe, 99 people in 100
are going to reply Faust.
And so let me do say a few words on the Faust legend as given to us by Goethe.
It's given to us in two parts, written years and years apart.
The optimistic Goethe is the Faust in part two who gets saved by the saving angels.
But let me go back to what the Faust story is a story about.
You almost all of you surely will know about it.
Faust knows everything.
He's a don.
He's a tenured professor.
He's a polymath.
He's a fellow who's read a lot.
He's got glass tubes and Bunsen burners and all that.
He's got astrological maps and flow charts and chemistry things, stuff boiling on the
sink.
He's a clever chap.
He's studious.
He's got books galore.
He's got a wonderful library.
If you picture the Faust, we're supposed to be picturing this.
This is a chap who lives in a place that probably looks like an Oxford College, you know, some
room designed by Chris Ren and Florida ceiling books and all that, leather bound to be sure.
He is bored to tears.
Life has lost its meaning.
He knows everything.
Nothing means anything.
There he is.
You've got the picture of this, this titanically filled head with an empty heart.
Looking for some meaning, trying to get something out of this earthly life.
He's ripe for the picking.
He's ripe for the picking.
He's just so smart and clever that you can get at this fellow.
And we know who shows up to get at this fellow.
It's chap Mephistopheles shows up, all tricked out and smiling, do you see, wants to do something.
We've got the therapist for all your pains.
There he is.
Whatever ails you.
He's got something.
Opens up the devilishly black bag and will pull something out for whatever irks you at
the moment.
He says to Faust, how's it going?
Do you see anything I can do for you, my friend?
Faust is no fool.
This is a learned fellow.
Why we might even say he is a philosopher.
So Faust says, oh, flake off, you know, what do you think I am?
Some simpleton.
No, no, I know you're a very clever fellow.
So the colloquy goes on and the like, and Faust makes quite clear what he's prepared
to.
He's prepared to play the game.
This is sophisticated man, man of the world, too.
He knows that there are no free lunches in Weimar or wherever he is at the time.
You want something, you've got to pay for it, and he's prepared to pay dearly.
What is it you want?
Do you want my very essence?
You want my soul?
You know, there's a lot of controversy about what souls are anyway.
You want that.
Oh, sure.
Well, that's negotiable.
This is what it would take.
You would have to create in me an experience of such a nature that I would command time
itself to stand still.
There's the deal.
Do you see?
As in, do the impossible.
Do you see what the terms are?
To create within me an experience of such a nature that I would never tire of it for
all time.
A non-habituated condition of my being, something I will never be bored with, something which
at any moment has all of the vibrancy and vitality and animating properties that it
ever had, that it had at the first moment.
The bloom on a rose that never loses its bloom, seen by one who is always affected by the
bloom and the aroma and the beauty.
Do that.
Do that, do you see?
And of course, we get this extraordinary epic of love and romance and passion and the
death of loved ones, and Faust goes through one dilemma after another.
This fellow is on an ocean of turmoil and possibilities, and it is quite a bargain that
he entered into, that Faustian bargain.
What would you sell your soul for is the question at the bottom of the play, do you see?
What is it you would sell your soul?
What's your price?
Are you a calculator?
Are you caught up in something other than the categorical imperative, do you see?
Here you are, you're free, and part of what it means to be free, of course, is that you
can engage in these transactions.
You're not some mechanical clod being banged on by the world, you're a participant in this.
Hey, you've got moral autonomy.
That's a double-edged sword, isn't it?
You're also free to do wrong.
It's in part two that Faust now has, he has been the beneficiary of some very good and
some very awful things, and so the question in part two is how this whole Faustian bargain
is going to work out, and having gone through the range of possibilities that only the devil
can present, Faust is found looking out over a field, and he sees it's a novel experience
it's unheard of in the history of his time and place.
He sees three men and women working a land that is theirs.
They are doing it for themselves.
They own it.
They are inextricably bound up with its possibilities.
They are bringing about forms of life chosen by them, do you see?
He sees this, he looks out on this, and he looks skyward, and he says to time, stop.
It's one of the great traumatic moments in all of literature.
The celebration here, the experience one can have that one would never want to end, doesn't
happen to be something at the bottom of a bottle.
It doesn't happen to be something that you get on a Saturday night date.
It doesn't happen to be something that comes with the new Toyota.
In fact it isn't anything that happens to you, do you see?
It is the externalization of the ideal of liberty, the ideal of freedom, freedom for
its own sake, as the creative ultimate moral force of the universe.
God made the world freely, do you see?
It's this absence of constraint and this search for authenticity.
Better to be authentically oneself and in a gutter than a king by mechanical contrivance.
Oscar Wilde will say, look, we're all in the gutter.
It's just that some of us are looking at the stars.
Now there's a context for this.
One of Kant's young contemporaries was Johann Fichter.
I shall say a little bit more about Fichter in another lecture, but not much.
Fichter had written several very important works, one on the way toward a blessed life
and characteristics of the age and the like.
Fichter is taken by the Russo, man born free but everywhere in chains.
But Fichter raises an interesting question, sure man is born free.
How would you ever know you were free?
You know you're free.
The first time you're freedom is constrained by others.
There's a kind of dialectic of freedom.
Freedom only comes about as an aspect of consciousness when it is opposed.
I shall say a few more words about this, I say.
But it's Fichter's view that if all you're doing is engaging in freedom for the sake
of freedom itself, you're in an age of perfected sinfulness.
This is where your freedom is simply a kind of rhetorical or assertive thing.
I'm free, look at me.
And the ultimate liberation that Fichter points to is if you really would live forever,
you can't live forever as a particular material entity.
You would have to render yourself fit for absorption into the great eternal framework of things.
Fichter was very much influenced by Eastern thought.
We see a bit of this in the position that Faust is taking, do you see?
It's their freedom that is something he would do anything to secure.
There is finally this moment of selflessness.
It is the externalization of desire.
It is rendering universal.
It is making us a universal law of nature.
Something that he himself will not experience or doesn't think he'll experience.
And of course he's been, he entered into this contract, didn't he?
You know one has to be faithful to one's contracts, might call a lawyer, otherwise
this devil probably has plenty of lawyers available to him.
So we've got poor Faust done in now.
He's had that pleasant and glorious moment where he's seen something that would have
him have time itself stopping its tracks.
And as he, his committed soul now descends and falls toward that depth from which no
one returns, that depth and dark place.
He is suddenly, his soul is suddenly born up by the angels.
There's an interesting parallel, I think, between the way Faust ends and Fichte's view
that in the selfless life, in de-individuating ourselves, in giving up the merely personal
private exercise of freedom and externalizing all of the possibilities of freedom for the
benefit of the many.
We end up at once with a life that is thoroughly authentic.
At the same time, it is no longer in fact a personal life, but it is now a life that
possibly can find itself absorbed into an eternal and immutable cosmic scheme that is
divine by its very nature.
Well, look, Emerson and the Lake Poets and Coleridge and Wordsworth, Thomas Carlisle,
all these are figures in the Romantic movement.
Carlisle is a particularly influential figure in Critic and Stern and Stern and Scotsman
and so forth.
One of the leaders of thought in the French materialist tradition was Pierre Cabanes.
Cabanes is an important chap after the revolution, Mirabeau will die in the arms of Pierre Cabanes.
He's made head of the hospital system in Paris and he was an influential and thoughtful
writer.
He wrote a series of essays on the relationship between the psychological and physical dimensions
of human life and comes across, as you might guess, as a very materialistic psychologist
who thinks that the best way of understanding human nature is through clinical neurology,
through the study of brain pathologies and the like.
And I say Pierre Cabanes would have quite a following and indeed was worthy of one.
His writings to this day read very well.
They're very scientific writings.
Carlisle comments on the works of Pierre Cabanes and Carlisle, here he is in the Romantic tradition,
is astonished.
He reflects on Carlisle's writings and he says, here is this scientific figure, this
Frenchman, do you say, the revolution and the terror all behind the excesses of the French
are very well known to British people and particularly to Scotsman and the like.
And he says, here's this fellow, he's medically trained and he's got all these instruments
available to him.
He has his Bunsen burners and he's got his anatomical blowpipes.
He has his dissecting needles and scalpels and armed with all this, he says, Carlisle.
Cabanes goes through a world of wonder, unwondering.
Well, if there is one attribute of the Romantic imagination, it's the attribute of wonder
and the firm commitment that anything that would explain the world mechanically has not
really seen the world.
