Lecture 40, the world as the gift of genius, the aesthetic movement.
In November of 1862, one of the great scientists of the 19th century, Hermann von Helmholtz,
who was one of the important figures in the conservation laws and physics,
conservation of momentum, conservation of energy.
In November of 1862, Helmholtz gave a lecture at Heidelberg,
and one of the issues that he was trying to clarify was why it was that, as of 1862,
the leading people in science not only had very little to do with philosophy,
but were quite visibly shunning philosophers.
The question before the House was, how do you account for a divorce?
Between those who a century earlier were living in the same house doing the same work.
The natural philosopher was the natural scientist.
And here we are in 1862, and you hardly can get a conversation going between members of those two camps.
I shall read a passage from Helmholtz's answer to that question, how this came about.
Helmholtz says, he refers to Hegel's system.
He says, Hegel's system of nature seemed at least to natural philosophers absolutely crazy.
Hegel launched out with particular vehemence and acrimony against the natural philosopher,
and especially against Isaac Newton.
The philosophers accused the scientific men of narrowness.
The scientific men retorted that the philosophers were insane.
Well, the rift between the esthete and the men of science was not complete by 1862,
but it was certainly on the way to becoming complete.
The romantic movement had made clear, at least, to its own disciples
that a mechanistic science was incapable of seeing anything clearly and anything truthfully.
And that indeed, if you're looking for some underlying fundamental, numinal reality,
you're never going to get it through some reductive scientific scheme based on microscopes and astronomical tables and the like.
You're much more likely to find it in the great productions of art,
which is to say in that manifestation of the absolute that expresses itself through the progressive refinement and beautification
and deep sensibilities of a rational and a spiritual creature.
So we find that the world as given to us by the romantics is a gift of genius,
and this is all taking place within a movement that comes down to us as the great aesthetic movement
from the middle of the 19th century till the end of the 19th century.
The main players here, the main contributors to this movement will be Walter Pater and Matthew Arnold and Trollop and John Ruskin.
Later in the century, Oscar Wilde with his great comedic talents, his epigrams,
and of course his very tragic story, which itself is a romantic tragedy.
It's the fallen prince, you know, and his day profundus, I think,
measures up almost with the confessions of St. Augustine as a record of what the judged,
misspent life does to the soul when it begins to reflect on itself and on the deeper meanings of life.
So the aesthetic movement.
Now, the aesthetic movement is not alone in the 19th century.
It is joined by other movements.
It's nourished by them and it nourishes these other movements.
One of the salient political facts of the 19th century is that it is a century of reform.
It is a genuinely humanitarian century, a century whose major ethicists at the level of public discourse
are setting out to remove obstacles to progress, to save people from traditional patterns of oppression.
It's particularly concerned with those in society who are least able to care for themselves.
It's particularly concerned with those who have suffered the heaviest burdens of discrimination and the like.
It's an age of great reform, I say.
The British Reform Acts that take place in the 1830s extend the franchise to people who are not members of the Church of England.
It becomes at least in principle possible for Roman Catholic and Jew and Muslim to have academic positions at the ancient universities of Oxford and Cambridge.
I say what becomes possible in principle doesn't immediately become, but the litters off, so to speak.
Many of these reforms were on the inspiration of the Earl of Shaftesbury and other leaders of what at the time were regarded as radical groups.
John Stuart Mill's father, James Mill, was one of these radicals, do you see?
And radical there just meant someone committed to a radical reshaping of society,
along lines that were argued for and advocated and philosophically bolstered during the Enlightenment,
and that materialized in the success of the American experiment, the Constitution of the United States, the Federalist Papers, the Land of the Free, the Home of the Brave.
All the marvelous progress taking place in the United States and identified by many people as signal evidence, incontrovertible evidence,
that when in fact you extend the franchise, open up the bandwidth, let people express their native powers and prosecute their personal agendas,
progress is within reach as is wealth and power.
Have I failed to notice a little something in 19th century America that doesn't quite go along with this?
Yes, the institution of slavery. Of course, the anti-slavery rhetoric is among the finest productions of the entire history of humanitarian discourse.
The anti-slavery movements in the United States were launched by some of the best minds in the country.
Benjamin Rush, for example, who was a signer of the Declaration of Independence, medically educated at Edinburgh,
and a famous physician, quite well known for the reform of sanitariums, hospitals and the like, Benjamin Rush co-found the first anti-slavery movement in America with Pemberton.
Benjamin Rush writes passionately about how the crimes we commit against each other, the horrific conduct that we behave in toward each other,
is matched by things we do to defenseless creatures. He's making a kind of animal rights speech, indeed it is an animal rights speech,
that if you can harden yourself in such a way as to cause pain and suffering to anything, what is going to discipline you when it comes to exploiting others?
So I say there's this growing sense that our sentiments of benevolence are our noblest sentiments, that in fact if the defining feature of human nature is its moral freedom,
nothing can be worse, there can be no grave or sin than to institutionalize that which denies the very exercise of moral autonomy.
So we have an anti-slavery movement. I want to say that utterly romantic views of the causes of the Civil War have been successfully defeated by historians,
and no one any longer says with a straight face that the only reason there was a civil war is because right-minded people wanted to put an end to the institution of slavery.
But there's a tendency for the pendulum to go too far in one direction when we use our critical scholarly faculties.
There is no question but that the moral impulses behind the Civil War included centrally the gravest recognition of the sin of slavery as a denial of the very condition on which we would identify ourselves as human beings.
When Abraham Lincoln argued more than once that if slavery isn't wrong, nothing can be wrong, he was essentially taking a page out of the Kantian moral theory.
The great promise of the Enlightenment was that social problems would admit of scientific solutions.
And of course the great hope of the reform movements was that now in a scientifically knowledgeable period with the right methods and the right perspective,
with traditional modes of oppression and narrow-mindedness and the like, put our notice or indeed through revolution set aside, we actually could solve problems.
And the trick here was to keep our nose to the scientific grindstone, to keep our shoulder to the scientific wheel.
Now, there had to be a reaction to this because in fact, as I made clear in the previous lecture, there was already within romanticism a recognition that science's understanding of nature is incomplete.
It's narrow. Yes indeed, the Hegelians might have sounded crazy to men of science, but the Hegelians were already onto something when they insisted that science provides descriptions and it provides correlations
and it provides correct but rather empty equations. What it doesn't give is the reason for things and of course until we understand the reason behind things, we've understood them not at all.
We've understood them so superficially that our understanding is distorted.
Now added to this aspect of romanticism is the recognition that it is through art, it is through beauty, poetry, commitment to these needs of the soul that we become ever more aware of our essential nature
and through an understanding of that nature ever more aware of the kind of world we should try to bring about.
So the aesthetic movement as part of the romantic movement is to supply something widely perceived as having been neglected by science or beyond the reach of scientific methods and perspectives in their own right.
There are any number of ways of illustrating the tension and illustrating the competing perspectives.
I find a particularly convenient way to be a review of a speech that Thomas Henry Huxley gave at the founding of what today would be called the University of Birmingham and then a reply to that speech that would be published by surely one of the saints of the aesthetic movement, Matthew Arnold.
The Birmingham Technical Institute enjoyed a gift from a quite successful commercial man by the name of Josiah Mason and it was within the terms of the gift to the Birmingham Technical Institute one of the stipulations was that classics not be taught.
Now, of course he wouldn't have to stipulate that as a term if he were giving a gift to a contemporary American university where classics is rarely taught anyway and even if it's taught it seldom learned.
But Josiah Mason wanted to make a statement, you know, when we name people in places in our wills we're not only being generous, we're also being rhetorical.
This is one of the ways you make clear to the world what you stand for, what you count as very important. So classics shall not be taught.
Now, who would you get to give a Founder's Day address at an institution that is going to devote itself to scientific and technical studies?
Well, you would get the patron saint of 19th century science, Darwin's very good, maybe even Darwin's closest friend.
That very Prince of Debaters, Thomas Henry Huxley. Huxley is a great writer, he's a solid thinker, he's a passionate man, he's a man who can turn a phrase into almost anything he wants it to be and make it do any work that he wants it to do.
Well, Huxley gives this wonderful address on the place of science in education and he raises a question. The question is something like this.
He says, suppose some youngster setting out on a path in life in which he would hope to have some real practical worthwhile effects on the world, do you say?
Had a choice of two curriculums of study. One featuring a pair of dead languages, perhaps of some use to a future reviewer of books, he says,
and one devoted to the laws and principles and methods of scientific discovery. He says, now, is there anyone who has any doubt about what course of action should be chosen by that youngster?
He said, I think almost everybody will agree as to what course of study is the right course of study. He said, except of course for certain people.
He said, for example, quote, that Levite of culture, close quote, Matthew Arnold. Now of course Arnold and Huxley were friends and there was a certain amount of tweaking that went on and the Victorian prose writers bring the essay to the level of an art.
You can't read much in Arnold, Peter, Ruskin, Macaulay, John Stuart Mill, Huxley without seeing that what's going on here is not just essay writing, but the use of the English language in a way almost never dreamed of by those otherwise writing at the level of fact.
It's quite extraordinary. It instructed an entire age.
So he refers to Arnold in his public address and of course this gives Arnold an opportunity to reply in a frequently anthologized essay of Arnold's on science and culture.
Well, Arnold begins his reply to Huxley. I mean, here he's been named a Levite of culture. He begins his reply first by acknowledging that he, Matthew Arnold, is so well known for the unsystematic nature of his thought that the distance between his way of understanding things and a scientific way that nobody would expect him to engage Huxley in a debate as regards science.
This is obviously, he does want to point out, however, that his own defense of literature, his own defense of the best things said and thought by the human race includes the creations of science, the greatest creations of science are part of that very literature.
But I mean, he just notes in passing that he certainly never would have intended to exclude science from the instruction of the human mind.
He says, although I certainly couldn't take on and wouldn't take on as an adversary Professor Huxley in the domain of science, he said, I've been thumbing through the works of his friend, you know, that great scientific figure of our age.
He's referring to Darwin, of course, and the book he's thumbing through is Arjun of Species. He says, and I, he says, I find this in it. And then he takes a passage from Arjun of Species. I think I can quote it almost exactly.
I don't have the text in front of me. Quote, Our ancestor was a hairy quadruped with pointed ears and a tail, no doubt arboreal in his habits.
Close quote. Arnold says, well, this is very possibly true. And in any case, I'm in no position to dispute the point. It's a claim of science, and it will either be rejected or redeemed by the discovery of science.
He says, but I am prepared to say something about this chap, this poor chap, he calls him, this poor fellow, this hairy quadruped with pointed ears and a tail, no doubt arboreal in his habits, he says.
He says, of this poor unfortunate, we can say that there must have been something in him, a veritable necessity within him. There must have been something in him that inclined him to Greek.
Now, we want to understand the profundity of that retort. This is not just Arnold being Arnoldian. That would be good enough in my book, by the way.
This is Arnold saying something about how you go about understanding human nature. Here are your options.
You can do a very careful biological inquiry into the remote ancestry of the human species. If you keep this going back far enough, you'll go back to eggs and spermatozoa.
And before that, you'll go back to genes and dozoxyribonucleic acid. If you keep going back on a particular theory, you come to some sort of slimy primitive soup with all sorts of gook around it and the like, under favoring conditions,
the right humidity, sparks of lightning, or whatever it takes, maybe some of this stuff actually coming together and forming a living thing.
You might have all of the attributes of a bacterium or something, but if you keep it going long enough, good things might happen. That's one way of understanding the nature of human nature.
And what way is that? That is the scientific, reductive way. Go back to the corpuscular, ultimate ontology of things, and that is the essence of the thing.
The essence of the thing is whatever you get when you break it down to its components. If you want to know what a radio is, smash the thing on the floor, pick up the pieces, and start cataloging the pieces.
Now, of course, if romanticism is asserting anything at all, what it's asserting is you're never going to find out what a radio is that way. You'll just end up with a broken radio.
In fact, if somebody comes in and just sees the pieces, there'll be no way of knowing that it's a radio at all. If you want to know what a radio is, turn the button on the thing.
And when you hear the Schubert quintet, you'll say, oh, my goodness, this is sort of thing that's transmitting heavenly music from someplace right into my parlor. Radio is that kind of thing.
And once you break it down, you don't have a radio anymore. You have pieces and parts.
So let's not break down humanity by going back to its remote past. Want to find out what humanity is?
Take a look at what it achieves under favoring conditions. Take a look at what it achieves when it takes itself most seriously and recognizes within itself a need, a virtual addiction,
an addiction based on the proposition that I am not complete ever and that the point of life is the perfecting of life.
And I begin to perfect the life that I live by perfecting the exemplar that I am prepared to follow in that life.
And these exemplar are in the form of statesmen and statues and the acropolis and poetry and drama and the deep dark mystery of things as achieved in the writings of Euripides and Sophocles and Estulus.
Something in us must have inclined us to Greek because we got there, didn't we? We didn't get there for pay. We didn't get there on the wings of science.
We got there out of a deep, mysterious need that will not be satisfied until we are there. This is what Arnold has in mind when he says in that characteristically off-handed way,
well, regarding this hairy quadruped, there must have been something in him that inclined him to Greek and as he goes on to say, and that will always incline us thus, do you see?
This isn't a matter of sending boys and girls to school to learn the heiarest form in ancient Greek or to learn a thousand lines of Homer and the like.
In fact, you don't have to learn those dead languages at all and, in fact, on the right kind of construal, those languages aren't dead and they're not dying.
They are the wellspring of the ideas and principles and values that have now been expressed in a variety of languages that have come after them.
No, the whole point of this study, the whole point of the aesthetic movement is not that you will prepare yourself for the life of a reviewer of books, but that you will prepare yourself for the life of a rational being.
The whole point of culture, Arnold says, is to make a rational being ever more rational and to achieve what Arnold famously refers to as sweetness and light.
Now, many have found in that very phrase something so precious, actually, as to be rather prissy, sweetness and light.
I mean, we do take our age in measures that are rather herculean, don't we?
This is the age of atomic and thermonuclear weaponry and the National Football League and vicious stock transactions on Wall Street, the road to success is paved with heads.
Come on now, what's all this business about sweetness and light?
Well, I think what Arnold would say is, all right, you've done all this, you've got this muscularity going for you, you can pull off these deals and blow up the world.
Are you happier for all this? Do you think you've discovered something ever more authentic in your nature as a result of these achievements?
One of his friends, Harrison, who's a very famous liberal of the time, is quoted in one of his political speeches as saying that the reason that the world's attention is focused on England and what makes England great, he says, is coal.
You see, it's coal. Well, you know that this is precisely the sort of claim that Arnold is going to have a field day with. It's coal.
And you find Arnold in another essay stepping back and saying, if I understand this right, it would be as follows.
But if this nation had never produced Shakespeare and Johnson and Marlowe and Milton, if it had never produced John Locke and Isaac Newton and Robert Boyle, if it had never had any accomplishment of this sort to show for itself,
but if it really had a lot of coal, then in fact it's standing in the pantheon of nations would be high and untouched, whereas it could have had all these people.
But if it didn't have any coal, there wouldn't be much point in paying much attention to it. And again, this is the same chap who talks about something in us that inclines us to Greek.
It obviously isn't coal. I mean, coal is going to be the basis upon which people like Josiah Mason can make big gifts to support a curriculum that forbids the teaching of Latin and Greek.
But again, Arnold speaking for the aesthetic movement says, no, no, it's not coal. It's not even the warm house. That will never do.
The utilitarian calculus includes everything except what we're finally prepared to die for, or less dramatically what we are fully prepared to live for.
So that's going to be a central feature of it. And of course, the idea of freedom remains alive and well.
The other aesthetic who must be mentioned in a brief lecture on this chapter in intellectual history is John Ruskin.
His three volume Stones of Venice had much to do in architecture and art with the revival of the Gothic form and an appreciation of the Gothic.
Ruskin also wrote a collection of essays which later in life he said he wished he hadn't written, but I don't think he really wished he hadn't written, titled The Seven Lamps of Architecture.
And in The Seven Lamps of Architecture, one of the lamps is The Lamp of Obedience. I particularly like the essay on The Lamp of Obedience because there we find Ruskin raising the question,
Well, suppose an age has found itself so destitute of artistic energy and genius that it really can't come up with anything good.
Do you see anything of abiding value? What should it do? Well, for goodness sake, do a pastiche. Do the acropolis over again.
Do anything, but just don't do something dreadful.
Now, we clearly operate on a different principle, it seems to me in my brief comment on much of modern architecture, having absolutely no genuinely authentically creative and humanizing power within the art of architecture,
we will put up something that is big, and there is sort of a take that. I don't have any idea behind this thing, but why am I going to raise this non-idea ten stories higher than Jack's non-idea?
And of course what Ruskin would be saying is, look, if that's where you are in the development of your aesthetic sensibilities, why don't you just make another Gothic cathedral and be done with it?
And of course in Washington, we've got one right on Wisconsin Avenue, took 75 years, it's an absolutely beautiful.
And anybody who stands back and says, oh, it's a pastiche, nobody's going to confuse that with Chartres, that I think is simply being a nag.
It's not to confuse it with Chartres, nobody's going to confuse Chartres with Clooney.
It's a great, great massive, it is a massive, permanent, inflexible assertion of what we value, what we aspire to.
There isn't anything wrong with doing that in the 20th century, and it's a lot better than McDonald's arches, if you see what I mean.
Though McDonald's arches will turn a much greater profit than anything that takes place inside the national cathedral.
Well, Ruskin in the Stones of Venice sees in the Gothic something long missed, he says.
If you compare the high Renaissance architecture, you know the high Renaissance design patterns, these inexhaustible little curlicues and rosettes, they repeat themselves up and down the page,
book pages are marked out with these things, the buildings have them, you get all these funny little sigmoidal shaped things in wood and in stone and the like.
You compare that with, and all the great precision of the thing, the whole point of it is that it's precise, it's precisely and perfectly repeated.
He said, what is this? This, he says, I love this phrase, here's a quintessential Victorian phrase.
This, he says, is the servile ornamentation of the Ninevite.
That is, he sees in the high Renaissance ornamental architecture, and for Ruskin, beauty is ornamentation.
He sees in this, taking a human being and reducing him to a kind of mechanical device that can repeat endlessly a small particular, none of himself invested in the thing.
He's functioning as a kind of stamping instrument, so to speak.
He says, when you turn from that to the Gothic, something entirely different is conveyed.
This freedom in the very imperfection of the thing, you actually see expressed the personality of the craftsman, and it's expressed in the variety and diversity, the imprecision.
The whole enterprise has a great and summoning harmony about it, but each particular is done by someone who is laboring freely in behalf of what he takes to be a noble enterprise.
The noble enterprise might just be celebrity for his guild, but there's a personal element in this.
Ruskin then, in his celebrations of the Gothic, is recovering the idea that we are never so authentically ourselves as one at play, and that one of the greatest productions of play is art itself.
The authentication of human nature is found in its aesthetic enterprises, not in its mechanical, routine, servile undertakings, do you see?
Matthew Arnold wrote something called Last Words on America before he ever visited the country, and he was so cuffed by his critics that he finally did visit the United States and then wrote something called A Word More on America.
What triggered Arnold's interest in this was, among other things, he had a daughter living here, of course, but what triggered his interest as an estate was a remark made by Sir Leppell Griffin in print.
Leppell Griffin was an officer for the Crown in India, and he had toured the United States, and people always toured the United States wrote an article, and Sir Leppell Griffin said,
Of all the countries in the world, a gentleman would at least want to live, next to Russia would be the United States, and Arnold wanted to try to figure out what it was.
He said, look, you might not count on Leppell Griffin for insight into how India should be administered, but he comes from just that class of people you'd consult to determine where a gentleman would like to live.
What is it he finds missing here? And Arnold does a very interesting analysis, not a Tocquevillian analysis.
He even mentions Tocquevill and says, I'm not a systematic thinker. You turn to Tocquevill for that.
But he does perform a quite interesting service to us when he says, look, no people ever had political institutions that better match themselves than the United States.
The political problem is solved. It's the right form of politics for people like that. You can't improve it.
He doesn't see much poverty here, and he doesn't think poverty amounts to much here because this is the country where you can turn that around overnight.
To a very considerable extent, he thinks the social problem has also been solved here. At least it's not going to be plagued by class wars.
But we've not solved the human problem. And what Sir Leppell Griffin is getting at is this. Of course, America, he says, don't listen to the critics.
It is already the most powerful country in the world. It can protect itself. It's vast. It's rich. It's getting bigger all the time.
The problem is this. It's not interesting. And he says, the reason it's not interesting is this. What makes a nation interesting is its capacity to inspire awe, which it does chiefly through the engines of beauty.
And until America makes itself awe-inspiring by an attachment to beauty, it will remain uninteresting, and therefore the gentle spirit will not find a home there.
Well, so some of the us leads thought.
That's 1-800-832-2412.
Our great courses on tape are produced in response to interviews with customers like you. All are designed to serve learning as a way of life and to suit your needs, whether you're commuting, exercising, traveling, or just relaxing at home.
Please give us a call at 1-800-Teach-1-2.
