Hello. I'm Tom Rawlins, President of the Teaching Company. These lectures are part of the Superstar
Teachers series. They are produced by the Teaching Company.
The lectures on these tapes are titled, The Great Ideas of Philosophy. The lecturer is
Professor Daniel Robinson. Dr. Robinson has been teaching psychology at Georgetown University
since 1971. He earned his doctorate in neuropsychology at the City University of New York. His scholarly
books and articles have established him as an authority in the history of psychology, philosophy
of psychology, as well as in psychology and law. He holds the position of Professor of
Psychology and Adjunct Professor of Philosophy at Georgetown University and, since 1991, has lectured
regularly for the sub-faculty of philosophy at the University of Oxford in England.
Professor Robinson is past president of the American Psychological Association's Division
of History of Psychology and the Division of Theoretical and Philosophical Psychology.
He is fellow of the American Psychological Association and of the British Psychological
Society. Dr. Robinson is also visiting senior member of Linaker College, Oxford.
Lecture 41, Dark Corners of the Soul, Nietzsche at the Twilight.
Shall we rehearse those summoning, optimistic, Arnoldian one-liners and sentence fragments,
sweetness and light, a rational being making himself ever more rational, the best things
said and thought by the human race, the eternal summons of beauty to a spirit that is the
human spirit, something in us that inclines us to Greek. As I speak, it's 1997. It's the
closing portion of the 20th century. I don't know many people that actually would identify
the state of human affairs as one best characterized by seeking sweetness and light, attempting
to render ourselves ever more rational, or in any way feeling particularly inclined toward
Greek and things Greek and things Hellenic. Ours, I think, is a rather nervous age, rather
less confident than the Victorians. The Victorians were always complaining about bad health,
and they have mortality, which was going to ring true at any minute. Most of them lived
to be 80-something. These were the healthiest sick people I think the world had ever produced,
and of course they were worrying constantly, but they weren't worrying simply about themselves.
The Victorians indeed saw us coming and wondered, and I want to be understood on this, so it
doesn't sound utterly taurish. I want to be clear on this point. Look, the reform movements
of the 19th century, the whole force of an egalitarian ethics, an ethics of liberation
opposed to discrimination, opposed to rank and class and exclusions, has to be counted
as one of the great achievements of human moral sensibility. But a price does get paid
for this. You very often find the unleashing of forces that all of those removed institutions
and social practices and the like had initially been brought about to bring under control.
I mean, there is something, if I may use the expression, entirely dialectical at work here,
but at least that was perceived. Well, the 19th century would host more than one luminary
of thought. Luminary is an odd word to use, with which to begin a brief lecture on Nietzsche.
Nietzsche's world is not a world of sweetness and light. It is a world of light and dark.
It is a world of opposing polarities and opposing tendencies. Is there something in us that inclines
us to Greek? Which Greek? Apollo, Eros, Planitos, Medea, Clytemnestra, Agamemnon, Alcibiades.
Which Greek are we inclined to? Are we inclined to the Greeks, given to us by Euripides, Sophocles,
Escalus? Are we inclined to the Greek, who is Aristotle, or who is Plato, writing down
the teachings of a Socrates, executed by, self-executed by a verdict against philosophy
itself, against the examined life? Look too deeply and you will find things that should
not be known. Is that the message in the... What was it that corrupted Athenian youth
in the teachings of Socrates? And indeed, what was it that was insufficiently respectful
of the gods of Athens? Is this self-examination merely hubristic, or is it dangerous? Do we
finally start to uncover what really makes us tick? And is this not to be found in any
number of the dialogues? Is this not the horse that can barely be controlled by the charioteer?
How did the ancient Greek world understand Eros? Is it this wonderful, life-giving force
that gives us spankingly new seven-pound babies? The world is their oyster and the future is
theirs? Eros is a powerfully destructive force. It's behind rape and pillage. It's behind
victory and conquest. It's behind what Nietzsche will call, and indeed there is a Schopenhauer
influence here, the will to power. Do you see? This is what Eros is all about. I keep myself
alive through victory and vanquish. I keep the species alive in that well-known way, that
well-known way which, left to its own devices, is indifferent to categorical imperatives and
making a rational creature ever more rational and the like. We are destroyers, and if indeed
progress is won by destruction, then progress may be far less the aim than the consequence
of a motive which at base may be a motive of willfulness and destruction and darkness,
a side of the Greek world too often overlooked, a side of the Greek world that we don't get
when we fix our gaze on Apollo, but we do get when we fix our gaze on Dionysus.
It was Nietzsche who, in the birth of tragedy and the spirit of music, begins that habit
he will have, that important habit, of literary habit, of contrasting the Apollonian and the
Dionysian. These are two faces of the Greek world, and Nietzsche who was an outstanding
classicist, student of classics, translator of classical works, I mean ancient Greek works.
Nietzsche says, look, yes, yes, there is the Apollonian, but let's get back to the ancient
Greek world and understand what its sources of animation were. The Dionysiac sects, which
by the way very often were populated chiefly by women, had as their goal a liberation from
the strictures of the ancient Greek world, a liberation from the strictures of life within
the polis. This isn't just a sect that goes out into the woods and plays horned instruments
and runs around with phallic shaped objects. This is a sect that will allow itself to be
possessed by the gods for the purpose of a liberation and form of experience of a transcendental
nature. This is the first, Faust, do you see. The followers of Dionysus are the ones who
have finally entered into a Faustian bargain. Indeed, there is a word in the Greek for presenting
oneself in such a way that the god can enter oneself. Enthusiasm, do you see. Enthusiasm
in the original acceptation is not simply being quite excited by something, it's in
fact being possessed by something. And to be possessed by something, you have to abandon
yourself. You have to step outside yourself. You've got to stand outside yourself. It has
to be a total out of body sort of thing to leave room for the movement in of the gods.
And of course the Greeks had a word for that standing outside of oneself and that word
was ecstasy. And what ecstasy is, is not simply being in a swoon, it is being removed from
oneself. It's a form of what? It's a form of death, do you see. So there's a dialectic
here, right within the Dionysiac context. The dialectic is to have the most fulfilling
experience of life, you must die. Could Socrates have had anything like that in mind when suggesting
that the whole point of philosophy is to prepare us for death? Well, he certainly must have
had something like that in mind. I don't think he had anything Nietzschean in mind, and I
don't think he had anything Dionysiac in mind, but I think he did have this much in mind.
There is something the soul cannot know as long as it's trapped within the prison of
the body. And to the extent that the soul is the immortal side of our nature, the only
way it can live freely and authentically as itself is through our death. It's only by
the death of the body that that kind of liberation takes place. So the dialectic is there as
well. And the dialectic is not unlike the implicit dialectic of the Dionysiac. This is all prevailing
on Nietzsche's thought as he looks at the world around him. There cannot be many people
who have felt the presence of the world as directly and as heavily and abidingly as Nietzsche
did. He must have been made mad by his attention to it each time that attention was focused
on the world, which seems to be almost ever present in his life, in his troubled life.
You know, of course, that he had this on again, off again, and then finally off again relationship
with Wagner. He was very much taken by Wagner's music. He was particularly taken by Wagner's
commitment to Germanic legend and law, the abandonment of the traditional Christian vision
of things. He was taken by the utterly secular and profoundly cultural aspects of Wagner's
music. He wrote admiringly to Wagner. He wrote music criticism himself. He was able to get
an audience with Wagner. He visited Wagner in his home, and they struck up a relationship
that lasted for a time. Wagner, of course, was titanically anti-Semitic. It is one of
the sad chapters in the history of the biography of great artists that Wagner could never get
past his anti-Semitism. In fact, it had so pernicious an effect on his thought that
one must conclude it's at the bottom of those aspects of his music, those aspects that seem
to be merely vulgar. On this point, he and Nietzsche would have a falling out. Also, when
Wagner had completed Parcifal, which seemed so much, you know, the Easter pageant sort
of thing, sort of the revival of an essentially Christian mythos, that Nietzsche came to conclude,
well, this fellow is simply lapsing into the well-known old modes of understanding things.
So there was a falling out between them, but a profound falling out between them. But I
think it's important in that relationship is that each found in the other this understanding
of the darker side, a side that's contained at the level of myth, not at the Apollonian
level of rationality and scientific inquiry, but at the level of legend and dance, legend
and song, ancestral tribal resonances and customs, if any of you has had an opportunity
to see Brian Freel's dances at Lunasa, he's capturing the same thing within Celtic tradition
that the burden of the play is to establish that at this superficial level of a lived
Roman Catholicism, a superficial level of quintessentially Irish Catholicism, you have
to find what it's grounded in. And as the play and the characters are developed, you
see that these beliefs and practices are grounded in an absolutely chronic, earthy, Celtic set
of mystery beliefs and myths that are not even known to the participants, but that are
driving the participants in every consequential thing they do. I'm tempted to say because
it's the 20th century, I'm tempted to say it's utterly Jungian, but of course this is
to miss the point. It's utterly Nietzschean is what it is because Nietzsche surely is
the first great depth psychologist of modern times. He doesn't happen to be the one I
would designate the greatest depth psychologist, some of you who know my wayward ways know
that I think that title belongs to Sophocles and Euripides, but between Sophocles and Euripides
and Nietzsche, the only one who's going to qualify for recognitions of this kind will
probably be St. Augustine and all right, let's just say St. Augustine too. But Nietzsche
is actually committed to probing the depths of the unconscious. He recognizes these as
the unconscious. Augustine is plagued chiefly at the level of what he is consciously aware
of, passions within him and how come I do things this way and might my memory be deceived
and dear God tell me why things work this way rather than that way. Nietzsche says Nietzsche
understands that at that level, at the level of our conscious daily work, so much of what
we do is actually a sublimation of the very basic instinctual impulses that we refuse
to face. Nietzsche is the first to use the term sublimation in a way that it will come
to figure in Freud's psychoanalytic theory. Now in reading Nietzsche, one confronts soon
enough the famous Obermann. This is going to be somebody now who's not like the rest
of us. Tame conventional creatures are committed to a life of comfort, staying out of trouble,
keeping our noses clean, doing a good day's work, behaving ourselves and wanting to be
nothing more than a nice boy or a nice girl all the days of our lives. This society of
essentially servile, mechanically living people whose lives are empty, pointless sets of distractions
one after another is there nobody who can rise above this. And how did we ever get into
this situation in the first instance? Now in Zarathustra and in works in which the Obermann
is presented, Nietzsche seems to be indicating that there's some sort of super race out there
just waiting to take over. That is, you could see Nietzsche as something of a prelude to
Hitler and the Nazis, and that parallel has been suggested by scores of scholars who really
should know better. Nietzsche surely does not regard himself as the Obermann. He certainly
doesn't regard Wagner as the Obermann. I don't know that there's anything in Nietzsche's
I guess the closest he ever comes to declaring somebody Obermann is Goethe. And what he finds
in Goethe is this capacity Goethe had of sort of living at the aesthetic level that is being
called, if we can say that life authentically lived is a life lived in honor of one's vocation,
Nietzsche might find in Goethe one whose life just instantiates his calling. It's the life
of the artist, and there is an artistic integrity found in Goethe. He will not play to the galleries,
he will not sink to the level of the clawing and the mawkish, he will remain true to himself.
I don't know the extent to which Nietzsche quite got Goethe in that regard. Goethe was
a man deeply respectful of certain conventions, manners and the like. There is the story,
if I can digress, the occasion, one of the few occasions when Goethe and Beethoven were in
each other's company, and this is the great Congress of Vienna, Beethoven is going to write
that trite Wellington's victory, that he's going to keep doing, God save the quiz, it's the best
orchestration of the British national anthem I think you're ever going to hear, Beethoven's
orchestration of it. But apparently the two of them were eager to meet each other. Here you've got
two of the great geniuses of the 19th century. Now I don't know that this actually happened,
though the witnesses report that it did. Apparently Beethoven and Goethe were strolling,
and they were approached by noblemen. I mention this just to say that if Goethe is Obermann,
that doesn't mean that he lives to defy the conventions of an age. And as the noblemen come
by, Goethe quite properly, by the conventions of the period, steps aside and quite gracefully
acknowledges their nobility as they passed. Meanwhile, Beethoven, utterly hard of hearing
anyway, has continued the conversation even as Goethe has paused to let them go. And when
Beethoven turns it around to see that there's Goethe letting these people go by, Beethoven is
said to have shouted in his characteristically Beethoven way, come on, there are thousands of
them, there are only two of us. Now, he was right on both counts, there were thousands of
noblemen in Europe, and there was only one Goethe and only one Beethoven. Obermann here has to
refer to something rather more penetrating than a mere anti-conventionalist bearing, do you see.
It's Goethe's integrity, it's not his manners, it's his integrity, it's not the surface Goethe,
it's the interior Goethe that Nietzsche is going to locate as the sort of spirit capable of rising
above the welter of mere conventionality, mere opinion, the stock beliefs and phrases of a
narcotized, self-hypnotized population that will do anything to keep itself out of trouble and in
the gravy, so to speak. So there's this kind of sneering side to Nietzsche, and I think it has
been exaggerated by those who've written on Nietzsche. He's often portrayed as somebody who's
either melancholic or just always angry, just a scold in a manner of speaking, but a man has to
love in an ultimate way to be so painfully concerned about the number of persons, the large
majority of people who have yet to catch up with the authentic dimensions of love. Now, there's also
in Nietzsche the worry actually, I mean, how shall I phrase this? We've got the idea of progress,
it's an enlightenment idea, we've got evolutionary thinking, you'll find it everywhere in Hegel,
you don't have to wait around for Charles Darwin, though as we shall see, Charles Darwin is going
to give this a finish that is probably unmatched in the history of natural science. But there is a
cheerfulness, there is a cheerfulness in enlightenment progressive thought, the cheerfulness is not
that the world is our oyster or a perfect place, but that it's perfectable, that you get the right
methods, the right instruments, the right measurements and so forth, and you're going to correct
your problems. Well, Nietzsche is wondering, he's wondering aloud and he's wondering in print,
whether these dialectical forces are inevitably in favor of the production of something better.
These dialectical forces have as their central mechanism destruction, do you see, that creation,
however you're going to come to regard it, creation is inevitably part of an essentially
destructive act. Every creative act has to destroy, of course it has to destroy. You can only bring
about the new through the death of what it replaces. And the pulsant for destructiveness may
give rise to what at the superficial level looks progressive. And of course, what you ignore
is the prime impulse itself, and the prime impulse itself is the impulse to destruction. There is
even an impulse to self-destruction, to a liberation from everything that is oppressive.
Now, where do we get the patina of rationality and sweetness and light and all that? How did we
ever come to, how did we ever come to fail to notice what most deeply moves us? Oh, well,
Nietzsche says, you don't have to look far for that, at least if what you're talking about is
so-called Western civilization. You remember when Gandhi was asked what he thought of Western
civilization, he said, I think we should try it. When Nietzsche looks at the impulses behind
Western civilization, of course what he finds is the Judeo-Christian religious beliefs. What does
he have to say about this? He says, look, this is the religion of servitude. This is what keeps one
down, inevitably. Of course, it's the religion of servitude. He has a scandalous depiction
of Jesus as a character very much akin to Dostoevsky's idiot. This is someone who is so utterly
innocent and naive, so utterly devoid of the impulse to power, that in fact he goes through life
as an almost unbelievably good person, but he's not emblematic of anything. He's almost
utterly unreal. His salient characteristic is that what is authentic in him is almost childlike,
unless you become as little children do you see. But the lesson of the life of Christ, what
Christianity has taught with it, turning the other cheek, born in sin, love thy neighbor,
take care of the needy, Nietzsche says this is just the rehearsal, a religious rehearsal
designed to keep people in their place, to set a limit on their progress, to set a limit on
the expression of their feelings. It is a religion of guilt. It's a religion of servitude. The Jews
are even worse at this. The Jews are spending all of their time under thick clouds of guilt and
sin and the like. They've got a God that punishes them. They've got to enter into
compacts and covenants with them. If they do this, he'll do that. It's like some nasty, merely
commercial transaction. And so we get a Nietzsche who is simply at odds. Well, shall I say it,
he's at odds with everybody and everything. He can't get on with Wagner. He can't get on with
Judaism. He can't get on with Christianity. He thinks if you really get a handle on what the
classical world was like, you're going to come up not with Athena and the Goddess of Light,
you're going to come up with Medea poisoning her children, do you say? Oh well, so sweetness and
light and something in us inclining us to Greek and a rational creature rendering himself ever
more rational. No, there seems to be rather more to it than this. There is the will to power.
There is the recognition that we have, if only at an unconscious level, that we do not have some
innate dignity. That dignity is the kind of thing that's won. It is won through a contest in which
some are victorious and others must be defeated. Oh, there's a dialectic here, but it's not some
abstract Hegelian dialectic. There is the real tug and tussle of the brutal physical world,
and it is within that world that we express our impulses to power and control. Now, we can't begin
to do this until we go through passages of what Nietzsche describes. I think I should choose his
word. It's a process of suffering, actual suffering. It has to be almost a goal if you if you understand
the point. One has to go through a kind of striving and suffering that includes, quote,
self-loathing, the torture of mistrust, and the misery of him who has overcome.
Now, this is a side of the dialectic that is utterly personalized. This isn't, again, this isn't
some abstract Hegelian process that's taking place. This is what has to take place within the lived
life. It is a life that first has to be defeated. One has to recognize that one has been so in the
thrall of an inauthentic, rationalistic, Apollonian, Judeo-christian, Western Civ 202 picture of possible
worthy life that one has been like an actor in a bad theater piece. One has not yet begun to live
the life of man. The first time you recognize that, the first time you recognize what you are
willing to give your life in return for, these tawdry little baubles of a distracted world, you
know, the house and the suburbs and the two-car garage and the children with perfect teeth,
that you were willing to surrender and sacrifice, give up everything, everything that makes you
the kind of being you are so that you could have that, what shall we call it, that stuff, do you say?
Well, self-loathing is the inevitable consequence of that. And once you begin to recognize that these
human relationships in which you have placed such, on which you've placed such a high premium, these
so-called loving relationships, these friendships, have been based on little more than habit and
sloth and mutual manipulation and exploitation in the same sort of middle-class, mindless,
distracted process of half-life, then, of course, you come to grips with the fact that, indeed,
you are the tortured victim of mistrust and distrust and fraud.
You are finally overcome, and it is in the depths of suffering that you finally look for a palliative,
and the palliative has to be in the form of rejecting everything that had given substance
to an inauthentic life. It has to be the death of that life. Do you see, once you come to grips
with what is in the unconscious, what has really acclaimed on your life, and how long you have
repressed it and sublimated it in ways that are treasonous to it? It's only at that point
that you begin to see some light at the end of the tunnel, no, that you begin to see that you
are in a tunnel, and you're going to stay in that tunnel, and you're going to make the best of it.
This is not, Nietzsche is not giving us a version of the idea of progress, by any means. He's giving
us a version of the idea of knowing oneself, and what Nofe Sealtone might have meant to the
ancient Greek is certainly not what it's going to mean to Nietzsche. To know oneself is to know
a divided nature, a corrupt and corrupting and corrupted nature, in which the best thing that
can be said about it is that it might suffer with a certain kind of dignity. So the dignity of the
struggle, victory and defeat, making oneself worthy of what? Making oneself worthy of oneself.
You finally have to satisfy the terms of your own values as regards to the life that you are living,
otherwise you are as a puppet the instrument of another's purpose. Well, there is so much,
much of it aphoristic in the teachings, in the writings of Nietzsche. Sometimes he's dismissed
as a fellow whose brain pathologies had him go out of the world half mad, if not fully mad.
You can't read much by way of Nietzsche, the aphorist, Nietzsche's epigrams, without saying that
here is a fellow with great wit and great depth and great power and indeed great suffering in his
own life. He died at 56 and it was not long before he died that he caused a crowd to assemble
as a result of collapsing, fainting on a public street in Italy in Turin. Before he collapsed,
he had run over and put his arms around a horse. He was hugging and caressing and kissing a horse
that had been mistreated by a coachman and he must have found in the suffering of that innocent
animal just the sort of authentic experience that human nature sets out to deny itself and in
denying itself that it inflicts it on the other and the innocent. The picture I have of Nietzsche
is the picture of Nietzsche caressing the innocent animal who has been the subject of abuse.
