Lecture 43 Survival of the Fittest, Darwin and the Blind Purposes of Nature
It's a veritable truism that Charles Darwin revolutionized modern thought and in the process
he revolutionized much in the traditional subject matter of philosophy.
It's very difficult these days to take on issues in bioethics, in sociobiology and the like
without recurring to the theory of evolution as bequeathed by Darwin and refined in the decades
and in the century following his major productions.
To cover Darwin in 30 minutes is very much like trying to cover the influence of Aristotle or Plato in 30 minutes.
The influence is so diffuse it has affected our conceptions of inquiry itself.
What we are as a species the problem of knowledge now becomes an expression of our own adaptive capacities.
The problem of conduct as I say within the context of sociobiology becomes a radically different sort of subject
from what it was when Plato took up the question of how we should live our lives
and what an ethical and virtuous form of life might be.
So I say it is a truism to point to Charles Darwin and say look how he changed everything he obviously did.
Nonetheless he does not come to us full born from the brow of Zeus.
He comes out of a context which is very much an enlightenment context.
The enlightenment after all is a period that venerated the idea of progress
and indeed progress through conflict and competition.
We will find these tensions in any number of writings in enlightenment philosophy, social and political philosophy
not to mention more scientific productions of the period which do anticipate central features of Darwinian theory.
But of course this is the sort of game that is always played in the House of Intellect.
It is always tempting to say well Charles Darwin was a great figure but after all didn't so and so say this and so and so say this.
And if we want to play the game for a moment we can go back to remote antiquity to a time before Aristotle
when Empedocles is making an essentially evolutionary argument to account for the variations that we see in the natural world.
The 18th century itself with its idea of progress and progress through competition
nonetheless still supported at least a deistic position on religious issues.
The 18th century deists are famous. Was Thomas Jefferson a deist? Probably. Was Voltaire? I'm not sure.
But I say in the 18th century it was part of the stock ideas of the period that nature i.e. a providential god
has fitted out creatures in such a way as to be able to accommodate the challenges of daily life.
It's not accidental that we have binocular vision that we stand erect.
It's not accidental that animals in cold parts of the world have a lot of fur to keep them warm.
So the 18th century view on all this is not so radically opposed to traditional religious teaching as to be problematical.
If we go back to the 17th century to Descartes most famous and ultra materialistic critic Pierre Gassendi
let's remember that this is the Abbott Pierre Gassendi. It's Father Gassendi.
So you could be a radical atomistic materialist in a manner of speaking and still take the position that of all the ways
God might have constituted the universe. He happened to constitute it atomistically. No problem there.
With Darwin we are getting something rather different. Hegel who has a dialectical theory according to which
the very ontology, the very reality of the world is the outcome of dialectical or opposing processes
is still a philosopher used by people of profound religious conviction as a defense of religion.
Hegel is the one who has God operating in nature and in the world.
I say with Darwin you do get something different. You get design without a designer.
You get a teleological theory, a theory about ends being served by variation.
But these are not ends contrived by some super intelligence, let alone some providential super intelligence.
There's that much new in Darwin's theory. Not to mention what is colossally new in the theory
and that is grounding notions of this sort in a database that is truly amazing.
Darwin as a collector of fact, as one who will martial evidence in support of general propositions
is one of the great naturalists in the history of that subject.
He is persistent. He strives for accuracy. He's absolutely obsessional in paying attention to detail.
The detail of the single organism as it might reveal some general law, the details of a species at large
as that species does instantiate or verify or lend support to a general proposition.
So it's not enough to say, well, the 18th century anticipated these ideas, the idea of progress in the life.
Darwin is an original, one of a kind master.
Now what about the controversy that surrounded the appearance of origin of species?
Are we to believe what I sometimes regard the Cecil B. DeMille approach to intellectual history?
We should take that at face value.
If you examine the major literary journals of the period, the journals that would provide lengthy critical reviews of important books,
when Origin of Species came out in 1859, if you consult reviews that appeared in the Dublin Review,
the Edinburgh Review, London's Fortnightly Review,
I'm talking about critical reviews that might run 40 pages of print, small print, single space and the like.
The reception is remarkably positive.
Darwin is praised for being one of the leading naturalists of the period.
I should think the journal that comes closest to being a journal of official Roman Catholic opinion,
which was the Dublin Review, does refer to an aspect of the work as a, quote,
horrid genealogy, I mean, there's that much in there,
but otherwise it's an entirely respectful work, admiring of a scientist who's been so careful in presenting his findings,
so systematic in his observations and the like.
So Origin of Species does not get the sort of press that secondary sources might lead us to believe.
Now, of course, 11 years later with The Descent of Man, this is a rather different book.
This is a book that has moved, the ratio of fact to assumption is very, very high in Origin of Species.
That ratio starts to shrink in Descent of Man.
Natural selection, which was the flavor of the month in Origin of Species, is now being replaced by sexual selection.
There's a quite argumentative tone in Descent of Man,
and of course there is that great inductive leap, according to which the particular characteristics of our humanity are understood as lying along the same continuum that covers all of animal life,
and so what we are to understand about human nature is that it is an extension or an enlargement or a modification of an animal nature that is there for all to see.
So this is a more controversial work, and when he then writes lengthily on the expression of the emotions in animals and man,
we get a fully evolutionary psychology in which human nature is not separated from the balance of nature,
and of course this is going to upset not merely clergymen and divines and the like,
it's going to cause consternation in many precincts, particularly those proper Victorian precincts that had a quite elevated sense of human nature and its place within the cosmos.
Now Darwin was not flying on a wing and a prayer.
There were already important scientific developments that his theory had to have going forth with theory, particularly developments in the field of geology.
Charles Lyle had done a monumental three-volume work in 1830 to 1833.
Lyle produced a bona fide revolution in geological thinking.
Among the contributions of that work was the idea that, drawn from the fossil record itself, that species had been eliminated over the course of time.
Another central contribution of Lyle's work to what would be Darwin's theory was the recognition that the earth is very, very old indeed.
It is far older than anything anybody might get from Scripture.
And indeed the importance of it being that old is that it provides a time base for evolutionary processes to produce organisms of such complexity,
for natural variation to have a sufficiently large temporal framework within which to do its work.
Lyle's contributions here were important.
And indeed Darwin himself thought of them as revolutionary.
Now on the theory itself, and I shan't dilate on the specifics of the theory, but criticism against it was not inevitably from orthodox circles.
There were scientists who thought that there was something rather quirky about this theory.
Let me just pause for a moment to say something that one might still find rather quirky about the theory.
If I might say so, I find it rather quirky about the theory.
One of the characteristics of a developed scientific theory of the sort we would get from Newton or Einstein,
a theory in physics for example, or a developed theory in chemistry, is that it not only predicts what will happen,
but it also explains what has happened, which is to say a developed scientific theory is expected to be predictive and retro-dictive.
So if we take the stock textbook example of dropping a piece of chalk and falls toward the center of the earth,
and invoke the universal law of gravitation, and if we say all objects attract each other with a force directly proportional to the product of their masses,
inversely proportional to the square of the distance between them, then we know two things.
First, we know that if we let that piece of chalk go, it's going to fall toward the center of the earth.
Secondly, we know that if we see an object falling toward the center of the earth, we can give an account of why it happened.
So a scientific theory is expected to not only predict what will happen,
evolutionary theory has the right kind of retro-dictive power.
It tells you how variations that you can observe all around came about,
but it doesn't tell you what the future contents of the natural world will be.
Of course, it can't do that. It doesn't do that because it can't do that.
This is an organic evolving sort of thing.
We have no idea what selection pressures might arise.
We don't know what cataclysmic changes might take place in the world.
We don't know if we're going to be hit by a meteor and a dust cloud goes up and dinosaurs come back or disappear,
or whatever it is they're supposed to do when the earth becomes dark and gray and grimy.
So we can predict what the future is going to be.
But this leads some to wonder whether the theory of evolution is really cut from the same cloth as developed scientific theories.
Darwin himself described his method, as 19th century people would, as a natural history method.
And in a certain respect, Darwinian theory is much more like a kind of historical explanation of things
than it is like, for example, a Newtonian explanation of things.
And I say some of Darwin's critics, as late as the second half of the 19th century,
were insisting that Darwin here is not proceeding according to the established methods of Bacon and Newton.
I say, I don't want to spend much time on this.
I do want to make clear, however, to students addressing these issues for the first time
that criticism of the theory need not be grounded in some sort of religious orthodoxy or conventionalism.
Now, among the other complaints was that the fossil record, contrary to what Darwin's defenders were saying,
the fossil record was not incomplete. It was too good.
If you take a look at the fossil strata that would have been available in Darwin's time
to see what variations are taking place in the species recorded in these temporal strata,
you do not get that kind of linear or quasi-linear progression of changes that lead from one species to a new species,
nothing like it at all. The fossil record didn't support the theory.
It would be Alfred Russell Wallace, the co-founder of the theory and a distinguished scholar in his own right,
who would put forth in his book on Darwinism that, indeed, although the fossil record is quite complete,
it's not an accurate record because of the upheavals that have taken place at the level of the strata.
They are not a simulation or record of how they actually developed in time.
They've been reversed. They've collapsed. It's a broken record and the like,
but if you really did have the authentic undisturbed fossil record, it would support the theory.
But I say that was another basis upon which Darwinian theory was criticized that the fossil record didn't support it.
And finally, I'm touching now only scientific criticisms.
Finally, nobody ever was able to succeed in centuries of animal breeding and animal husbandry.
Nobody was ever able to bring about a new species, a theory that says that by continuously and selectively modifying certain characteristics,
certain phenotypes, you will be able, gradually now, to produce such accumulated changes as to produce a new species.
Well, the critic said, for goodness sake, there are people who have been trying to do this with falcons and dogs and cows
and domestic pets and livestock for centuries and centuries and centuries of time out of memory.
Nobody has ever produced evidence of a new species brought about this way.
Darwin's time was not aware of the science of genetics, which would be developed later,
not aware of mutations, not aware, therefore, of the great rapidity with which evolutionary changes can come about.
It is a theory of gradualism, and indeed Lyle's geological work reinforced that view,
that uniformitarian view that the processes at work in the world right now are just the processes that have been at work since the beginning of time,
that there are no new forces that have to be reckoned with.
So I say there are these grounds of criticism, and Darwin and his contemporaries answered them effectively, though not always convincingly.
It's more in the patrimony of Darwin's theory that corrections, modifications and refinements have been provided, thus salvaging the theory in the form of a neo-evolutionary or neo-Darwinian worldview.
Now, what we get from evolutionary theory is not the peaceable kingdom of a providential God.
We get a hellish place of violence and competition and conflict. It's a bloody sort of thing.
It's a process that has, mindlessly, the means by which to liquidate, to make disappear, anything that can't keep up.
And to promote in number and in kind those entities that are able to succeed in the struggle for existence.
It would be Spencer who would use the term survival of the fittest, but in this Spencer was simply capturing the spirit of the theory itself.
So I'm tempted at this point to say that there's something of an apologia in a theory of this kind, given the nature of commercial life in Victorian England
and places very much in the model of Victorian England, the idea of survival of the fittest progress through competition,
no telling who's going to win out. It's not in your remote ancestry or the titles that you have.
It's your ability to roll up your sleeves and get busy and beat out those who are trying to win first place, put in a vulgar way.
It's predicated on the assumption that the road to success is paved with heads.
And I say there's so much in the Victorian ethos that this theory seems to track that even if the theory were fatally flawed,
it would be quite an interesting period piece to be the sort of theory that you would expect a Victorian era to host,
even while it condemned it, of course, and condemned it for sound quintessentially Victorian reasons.
Now, the implications that arise from a theory of this sort are many, as I mentioned at the beginning of the lecture.
One of the accomplishments of the theory, so to speak, is that it draws attention to large collectivities.
You begin to see that the forces of nature are based on a large enough pool of specimens for there to be a fairly wide range of variations.
Do you see? You need some substantial sample.
If you're going to have a significantly wide range of variations, that nature then can choose from.
Natural selection says that nature, not consciously and intelligently and providentially,
but mindlessly and relentlessly, favors certain variations and punishes other variations.
Now, to get variation at all, you do need number.
But, of course, the whole point of having number is just to have a wide range of types on which nature can do its work.
Now, there's only going to be one type or a small number within that set whose variations take on a form that guarantees survival and prospering.
So, you focus on the collective for the purpose of finding the unique instance for the purpose of finding that which nature will favor.
It's not coincidental. It's almost a deduction of the theory that will find Galton, Darwin's cousin, writing on hereditary genius in 1869,
and making a point of this, that if you take a large sample of human beings, there'll be a negligibly small number of truly exceptional instances.
But that the entire race is finally going to depend for its own prosperity, survival, and the like on the achievements of that small group.
So, again, you've got a kind of, I don't want to call it an elitism because that's assuming that the principle variable is class.
It's not class. It's the evolutionary equivalent of class. It's type. There are favored types.
Favored types are the types that win out. The answer to the question, what form of life is the right form of life?
That central problem of conduct that has animated so much of philosophy, the right form of life is the life that survives.
The life that succeeds in the struggle for scarce resources. The life that succeeds in the face of relentless competition.
So, the ethics of the situation now boils down essentially to the biology of the situation.
Now, this doesn't mean that there isn't room for altruism. Evolutionary theory makes ample room for what an evolutionary biologist would be inclined to call altruism.
Namely, animals behaving in such a way as not to favor their own survival, but to do things that might benefit or aid in or make more likely the survival of the species as a whole.
Now, I think very, very few moral philosophers would regard that as altruism.
I mean, if in fact you're simply playing out the dictates of a certain genetically driven set of physiological processes so that you just happen to do some things almost robotically that favor the survival of the species,
even if it means you go belly up in a manner of speaking, that surely is not what a moral theorist would regard as altruism.
Altruism begins with the conscious intention to serve the interests of others at one's own expense. Intentionality is everything here.
You don't judge something as altruistic in terms of its outcome, but in terms of what motive.
Back to Aristotle's view that for an act to be virtuous, it has to be performed by a virtuous person.
You can do virtuous looking things accidentally or as a contrivance or indeed as a kind of gambit to win one over.
So I would say that although evolutionary theory, will I put it this way, pays lip service to the notion of altruism and ethics,
evolutionary theory makes provision for a theory of altruism that would not match up readily with standard moral theories regarding altruistic or selfless behavior,
the behavior of the saint and the hero.
Nonetheless, Huxley himself, the great defender of Darwin and evolutionary theory, recorded in more than one essay that he wondered whether, indeed,
natural selection was a principle that ever could match up with what we take to be the ethical dimensions of life.
And indeed, that's still a burning question.
Now, inevitably, particularly given the time in which Darwin's work was published,
inevitably the application of these views to problems in society will be ready to hand.
Social Darwinism, which we very often associate with the name Herbert Spencer,
Social Darwinism is a possibility that is not only imminent in Darwin's published works, but expressed in Darwin's published works.
So it's not like the nasty side of evolutionary theory should be attributed to Spencer and none of this to Darwin himself.
The plain fact, we see it in books published even as we meet, the plain fact is that in any complex society there do seem to be winners and losers,
where winning is defined as getting more than one's share of the resources that are available and having quite an easy time maintaining a form of life
that is protected both in its basic biology and in its larger social projections,
and losers, as in those who have extremely limited access to the available resources and indeed would describe their own lives
and their lives would be described by others as lives of need, penury, and the like.
Now, on a certain account, this is an inevitability. One need not go to bed feeling guilty about this.
This is just the way the genetic lottery works.
It's the way natural forces work on natural variation.
Over the long haul, this is the way a species improves itself.
So over the long haul, it's a good thing because it refines and develops and aids in the evolution of types that are ever more fit.
And if you, in hearing something like this, say, my goodness, this is a ruthless, thoughtless, brutal conception of what life is supposed to be all about,
then you're simply recording the fact that evolutionary theory in the form of social Darwinism is not something you're prepared to attach yourself to.
But I say the world bequeathed by Darwin is an organic world. It's an evolving world.
Nothing's fixed anymore. This is no longer just the idea of progress.
There are natural engines of change. Those engines are operating 24 hours a day, and what is it they're operating on?
They're operating on each of our characteristics, internal and external, behavioral, visceral, neurological.
Each of those characteristics either does or does not meet the daily moment-to-moment challenge of survival.
The survival of an organism that must keep itself alive by competing for resources.
How this game is going to be played out over the long haul, no one knows.
We do know that the laws operate, and the question of who is best fit is answered after the fact.
Take a look at the survivors, then you'll know the ones who are most fit.
The theory then assumes that beneath rationalized accounts of our various social and moral practices.
You see, behind these superficial, self-congratulatory accounts of how good we are, how altruistic we are, how decent we are, thoughtful and rational.
Look at the buildings we put up, all these hospitals and the like.
Behind all this, just like behind the beavers' dam, there's something operating within us that is inclining us toward behavior likely to enhance survival prospects
and inhibit those tendencies that are incompatible with survival.
So there is a subtext, do you see?
It's a subtext that's going to be used quite energetically and originally by Sigmund Freud.
It's a subtext that Karl Marx will find much into to recommend it.
It's a subtext that goes back to Adam Smith, do you see, in economics.
There's something that works behind the scenes.
It brings things about that indeed our rationality may provide a different text for,
but what is being brought about doesn't come about as a result of our rationality.
It comes about as a result of certain basic core impulses and instincts,
which, if they were lacking, would see to it that we could not survive.
So there are no fixed values, eternal attributes, fit for all circumstances.
Rather, all is contingent, all is based on the moment to moment facts of the natural world
and how these interact with what is finally a natural creature.
There's no telling over the long haul which particular set of attributes will trump the others.
This is a matter for the historical record to settle.
Now what do we want to say about this?
In an earlier lecture I mentioned the famous speech that Huxley gave at Birmingham
and Matthew Arnold's thumbing through the pages of Origin of Species,
setting out to defend himself against the charge of being a Levite of culture
and noting that that hairy quadruped with pointed ears and so forth discussed by Charles Darwin
seemed to have something in him that inclined him to Greek.
Now, I don't want to repeat all that.
I do want to say that what Arnold is getting at there is something that still can be invoked
as we assess Darwinian theory for its assets and liabilities.
Is it really the right kind of account as to what sorts of creatures we are,
what kind of life we should live, and how we should be governed?
Alfred Russell Wallace, the co-founder of the theory,
and a man deeply admired and respected by Darwin, Darwin in one of his letters said,
the thought of my disagreeing with you gives me sleepless nights.
Wallace wrote this, one of the best defenses of Darwinism ever composed, long book, wonderful book.
The final chapter he asks himself, all right, are we prepared to accept this lock-stocking barrel?
He says, it seems to me there are three domains that are so distinctly removed from the theory
as not to be assimilated by it.
There's, first of all, the domain of what might be called purely abstract thought
which seems to serve no particular evolutionary end.
There is the domain of aesthetics where resources are squandered in the interest of what is merely beautiful
and that surely cannot be serving the kinds of ends envisaged by the theory itself.
He said, and then there is the domain of moral thought and ethics
in which we intentionally sacrifice our most cherished interests in the benefit of others.
He cannot see how natural selection matches up with this, or how sexual selection matches up with this,
and so Wallace is inclined to think that in the aesthetic, the intellectual, and the moral dimensions of life,
the theory really doesn't tell the story that has to be told.
Nonetheless, the theory is influential.
It's hard to think in the close of the 20th century in terms that are utterly non-Darwinian,
let alone anti-Darwinian.
Thank you.
