Lecture 48, Helping the Fly Out of the Bottle, Wittgenstein and the Discursive Turn
Wittgenstein who's surely one of the most influential 20th century philosophers, a veritable
cottage industry exists to interpret Wittgenstein, to make Wittgenstein accessible to non-Wittgensteinians
and the like. I'm a non-Wittgensteinian so I'm ever grateful to those who keep writing books
saying that the disciples themselves got it wrong and this is the right way. Wittgenstein is responsible
for all this, dear man that he was, complex character, very complex personality. He had
a tendency, a very strong tendency to express himself in homiletic or aphoristic ways, actually
numbering his philosophical utterances and leaving it up to the more agile members of the
philosophical world to plumb these aphorisms for their deeper meaning and significance.
Nonetheless, that plumbing has gone on and we do get to see a Wittgenstein of immense
philosophical power and subtlety, a philosopher who has changed the way we understand the very
problems in philosophy and subjects that are near kin to philosophy, particularly psychology
and philosophy of mind. Now to appreciate the magnitude of his contribution and influence,
let's rehearse where the typical philosophical position would be on the matter of the problem
of knowledge, on the matter of philosophy of mind, the nature of the mental and so forth.
You can go back to Plato for this and you'll find very few exceptions between Plato and Wittgenstein
himself, very few exceptions to the account that I'm now going to summarize with a brevity
that borders on parity, but it goes something like this. Look, what's the problem of knowledge?
Well, the problem of knowledge finally boils down to my knowledge of the external world.
Can I ever really know anything for certain? And if I can, what's the right mode of inquiry
for me to achieve that certain knowledge? And then we get the candidate solutions to the
problem of knowledge, empiricism and rationalism, one or another species of materialism.
But what we find when we examine these closely is that the method of inquiry is an introspective
method. I sit back and consult the contents of my own consciousness. I understand the world
to the extent that I am able to represent the facts of the world in my mind. Skeptics may come
along and point out that you'll never know whether those mental representations are reliable
depictions of what's in the external world. There may be some grave distortion imposed by the
organs of perception themselves, but nonetheless what we would be arguing about then is not
whether the organs of perception are the best or they are the only way we can do it.
Now we can argue about the quality of the representation. That is, to see the world you need
the camera, we can now argue about which cameras have good lenses and whether the lens is chromatically
aberrated, etc., etc. And what you get is really a version of the picture theory of knowledge.
I know the external world because I have a mental picture or a mental representation of it.
Indeed, early Wittgenstein stands behind a depiction of just that sort. The tractatus is
something of a picture theory of knowledge. Now something else goes with this in the history
of philosophy, and that is that with respect to the contents of my mind, they can only be
reached introspectively, and I have a unique, even ultimate, authority when it comes to declaring
what's in there. Because only I can see the contents of my mind. My knowledge as regards
my own mental life is really incorrigible. It can't be corrected by anybody else.
Now this is a quite interesting state of affairs. Let's think of it for a minute.
The central claim of science in the patrimony of Bacon and Newton is that the suitable subject
for scientific inquiry is that which is in principle accessible to observation.
Radical empiricism says that knowledge is exhausted by just such encounters with the
external world and the exercise of the senses. But of course if the contents of my mental
life are something over which I have total epistemological authority, and if all of my
mental life is filled up with the facts of the external world, well for goodness sake,
if you keep running around with this one long enough, you'll reach the conclusion that
protagonists did. Man, each one separately, is the measure of all things. That's a hopeless
situation. Nonetheless, think of the contrary. Now to illustrate the contrary, let me imagine
that I've got an extreme toothache in my lower right jaw. And I come into the room and my jaw
is red and swollen and I'm holding the lower portion of my jaw. And I say something like
this, I have an excruciating pain in my jaw, comma, unless I am mistaken. Now at that point
you'd say, what a rather bizarre way to put it. How could he possibly be mistaken about
something like that? I mean, I might say to Jack, you know Jack from the looks of your
jaw, I would think that you have a pain there because it's all red and swollen, but of course
I may be mistaken. But when Jack says he's got an exquisite toothache, unless he is mistaken
you assume that there's something wrong with Jack. Now this is the usual way of illustrating
what in philosophy is referred to, here's the 24-carat term, as the incorrigibility of
cooperative first-person reports of sensation. Let me try to pass that dreadful utterance
for you. The incorrigibility, it means, look, Jack may be hallucinating, he might be deluded
and the like, but his claims regarding his pains are not correctable by anybody. That's the sense
in which they are incorrigible. If there is some level at which he may be wrong, that's
something only Jack can know. We can't prove that his statement that he's in pain is incorrect,
so it's incorrigible. Cooperative, he's not trying to deceive us. First person, I have a pain. The
incorrigibility of cooperative first-person reports of sensation. And I should think just about
everybody, at least to a first approximation on a matter of this kind, would say, you bet.
Whether or not I have a toothache or a tummyache or a tickle, I've got the last word on my
sensations and anybody coming in saying, you know, the dentist who says in response to,
I've got an excruciating pain in my jaw doctor, the dentist who says, no, I don't think you do.
Well, you're going to change dentists. You're certainly not going to change the account.
Now, I say that is more or less the common sense world of epistemology, the credibility of first
person reports, the picture theory, the solution to the problem of knowledge, the problem of
knowledge as a problem of my knowledge of the external world. I have a certain standing with
respect to the contents of my own mind. The external world represents itself in something called
my mind, which is, as you know, inside me someplace, reached only by that tried and true
technique called introspection. And although I can share my experiences with others, you cannot
know the tree that I see. That is private. It's for me alone. Nobody gets there except me.
I can't even invite you in, do you see? I can share the experience by language, but I can't
share it by fact. I can give it to you by description, but you'll never know it by acquaintance.
Do you see? That's sort of the perceived view. Well, to the extent that that is anybody's view,
listening to this lecture, Wittgenstein, among other things, set out to show that that view is
entirely untenable. It's based on any number of mistakes, and the mistakes are largely grammatical.
They have to do with the way we go about using words, not grammatical as in a textbook on grammar,
but the rule nature of the game that we play when we go about talking about things like this.
That is the way we play what Wittgenstein famously refers to as the language game.
Now, one way Wittgenstein illustrates the futility of a model of this kind is with the example that is
referred to as the beetle in a box. Now, let's say that everyone in this room, or everyone listening to this
lecture, is given a very small box. It has a lid on it, and each person can take the lid off the box he or she
is holding. You are allowed to look inside to see what's inside your box, but you cannot see the contents
of anybody else's box. You've never met each other. You don't know where anybody comes from.
You might all be extraterrestrials and the like. Now, the master of ceremonies goes around the room,
and he asks each person what's in your box, and each person inexplicably says the same thing.
As we go around the room, the room might have a million people in it. We hear over and over again,
beetle, beetle, beetle, beetle. Everybody claims to have a beetle in the box.
Now, you've never been able to see inside any other box. You don't know each other. You've not entered into any
shared form of life. You're not from any known culture. We don't even know, for all we know, you might be
wind-up toys. Now, the question is, how could you possibly know that when the person next to you says beetle,
that person is referring to something very much like what you're referring to when you say beetle?
Suppose that person comes from a place where the utterance beetle equals empty.
So, what do you have in your box? Beetle means empty. Suppose the person comes from a place where when you
put your lips together and force air out and make the sound beetle, it means Chevrolet, do you see,
or souffle, or a beetle, a bug, an arthropod. How could you possibly know what this utterance means?
The party gets rougher than this. Suppose, in fact, you are the only person in the whole cosmos,
and you've never met anyone like yourself. You've got some rudimentary resources. You can create sounds.
You come across a little bug in the road, and you pick it up, and you've made a box, by the way.
It's one of your talents. You made a little box, and you put this little bug in the road and this little
box that you made. Now, suppose you want to name the thing beetle. How would you go about doing that?
To assign a name to something is to conform oneself to a rule. But, of course, a rule is a convention.
It's a convention that is, as it were, adopted. But conventions, adopted conventions, are
ineliminably social phenomena. They are part of the actual practices of people in the world.
You wouldn't even know when you were violating the rule if you called this thing something else.
How could you possibly violate a rule if you're the only entity in the cosmos? You can't break a convention
unless there is a convention, and nobody brings about a convention singularly. So, in fact, you can't
even know what's in your box, except in virtue of having certain resources of a grammatical, linguistic
nature available to you. So the first thing that Wittgenstein wants to challenge is the proposition
that there is some private domain to which only the experience has access, and that whatever he claims to find
there is incorrigibly the case. Now, what about the chap with the toothache? Is Wittgenstein doubting that people
can actually have pains in their jaws unless they're engaged in some social or cultural life? No, Wittgenstein
is not doubting that somebody can have itches and pains in the life. What Wittgenstein is doubting, however,
is that when Smith comes in and says, I have a toothache, an extreme toothache, an extreme pain in my jaw,
that he is describing something. That's what Wittgenstein wants to oppose. Because to describe
something is to say that, in fact, there's some kind of entity or thing to which Smith has private access,
he sees it on his screen, and he's telling you what it looks like, what color it is, or what it feels like.
No, no, and a thousand times no. How does the game actually get played? Well, the game actually gets played
this way. There's little Billy who falls off his chair and hurts his knee. One of the natural consequences
of damage to the body is reflex crying, tears are formed, lacrimation takes place, Billy's lower lip
quivers, and his eyes are half shut, and he's cringing and the like, and he sees his own blood,
and this is an awful thing, and adults come over and reassure him and say, that's all right, Billy,
we'll clean this up, and it'll heal, and everything will be okay, and little boys, you know,
you shouldn't cry that much, and when you get older, you won't cry that much, do you see,
and you've got to learn how to take these things and suffer in silence and on and on and on,
now through a culturation of one sort or another, depending on the culture you're in.
What you come to do later in life when you fall off something and bang your knee is you say,
ow! And even after that, you might say nothing at all, you might just rub the knee,
or you might say in a quite sensible and toned down fashion, goodness, I just fell off the chair,
and I think I've bruised my knee, of course I wouldn't be pulling my pants leg up in company,
but I am going to have to look at this later because I think my pants are actually sticking to my kneecap.
Now, what's this all about? This is just another version of screaming, crying,
dragging one's lips back over one's teeth, pulling one's eyes closed, lacrimating and the like.
It is simply something that is substituting for the earlier behavioral expression that signals the presence of pain.
So what you've said to the dentist, what you've offered the dentist, is not a description of something
only you have access to, you've simply provided behavioral evidence of the sort,
which in a given community, in a given discursive community, represents a certain state,
and a state now that is worthy of examination and treatment.
Let's do this one more time so we understand precisely what's going on here.
Pain talk is not descriptive, it's substitutive.
When one invokes the language of pain, one is not looking at something on a private screen
and describing its attributes to somebody else.
One is engaged in a form of behavior that is intelligible within a given community
and indeed might be entirely unintelligible outside that community.
The pain talk itself is constructed out of the discursive resources of the community.
Had those resources been entirely different, had the very grammar of pain statements been different,
the entire affair would have been different.
Now, there is something in common. I must stop referring to Thomas Reid,
or people are going to think that this whole 50 lectures was merely a devious attempt to create
readings wherever that is possible.
But look, let the chips fall where they may.
There is a close correspondence between Thomas Reid on natural language,
which I alluded to all too briefly in a previous lecture,
and a position that Wittgenstein is taking on language itself.
Let me go back to Reid for a moment.
Reid took the position that if there were not a natural language,
there could never be an artificial language for this reason.
He starts with Locke's theory, the conventional theory, and indeed it's a conventionalist theory.
How do words come to have meaning?
Well, they come to have meaning because people agree that this will be called paper in this culture,
and this will be called a shoe, and so forth.
Now, Reid says this is obviously not going to work.
That is, if all of language is acquired, so to speak, that would be absolutely impossible,
because in order for there to be conventional meaning,
in order for persons to agree on what certain signs will mean,
there must be some system by which to signal agreement.
And Reid says there is.
There is a natural language.
It's a property.
It's a possession that most of the animal kingdom has, not just human beings.
And indeed, in some cases, the natural language is the same.
For example, cries of distress or tearing with human beings.
There are ways we signal a desire for cooperation.
There are ways we signal stay away.
No, there are ways we threaten.
There are ways we show joy.
Now, these Reid takes to be constitutive of human beings.
This is just part and parcel of the endowment that human beings have and that much of the animal kingdom has.
It is in virtue of this natural language that we are able to establish such patterns of agreement,
such covenants, as will make artificial language have the meaning that it does.
We agree by having natural means of signaling agreement,
and it is on this natural language that artificial languages can be grafted, do you see?
So Reid says, in order for there to be an artificial language, there must be a natural language,
and artificial language is a set of conventions for there to be conventions.
There has to be some way of signaling agreement and covenants,
and therefore there must be a natural language for there to be an artificial language.
Well, Wittgenstein is taking very much the same position.
What, after all, is the natural language of, quote, pain, close quote?
It's grimacing and crying.
It's cringing.
It's tearfulness.
And this is something that isn't learned.
This is something that's in place.
Now, what can be grafted onto that are rather artificial forms, conventional, artificial forms and signs,
by which we no longer have to emit the natural language,
but we now can make ourselves clear in what Reid would call an artificial language.
I say the analysis provided by Reid briefly and at length by Wittgenstein is a very similar analysis.
Namely, we begin with certain purely natural resources that then become the resources a culture can use
in order to create a genuinely discursive community able to share and exchange ideas, meanings.
It's not a matter of anybody having private access to a screen on which the world projects itself,
but only for one person at a time who is using the means of introspection.
The mind is not a screen.
Introspection is not a tool of discovery and the like.
What we do have are public ways of reacting to certain events,
and then we have resources available by way of culture so that these events can become shared.
Now, so the traditional view of the mental is rejected and is replaced by an essentially discursive model.
Meaning is shared.
There is nothing that is meaningful to an N equals 1.
The only person in the entire cosmos cannot really know the meaning of anything.
Such a being can have experiences, flashes and the like, but how could such a being see a tree?
Not an object with certain colorations and forms.
No, no, that can be seen.
But seeing a tree, let me make it a little harder than that.
Seeing an automobile.
Suppose there were one person in the universe, only one, there had never been any other,
and miraculously we presented a Ford station wagon.
Now you recognize immediately that that person could not possibly know what this thing was.
In fact, we could find people in the world today who wouldn't know what that was.
There are instances to this day in which members of quite remote tribal communities think of the occasional airplane they see flying overhead as a divinity.
They say prayers to it.
They don't realize it hasn't been on time in two years, you see.
To know that something is an airplane or an automobile or a sandwich or a school is to be a participant in a kind of game, in a kind of discourse
in which there are rules that govern how things are described, how things are ordered, and just what it is that confers meaning on them.
This is ineliminably social.
This is not something done at an individual level.
It is something that can only be done at the level of culture itself.
So where there is meaning, there must be social conventions and social practices.
The task then is not one of the individual finding some truth within him and trying to figure out a way of making it public.
Rather, there is a discursive history behind every experience by which that experience gains its meaning.
The discursive history is what gives it the meaning.
It begins as a public phenomenon and might be internalized in some way thereafter.
Now you might say, well, does this mean that I can't have, as it were, I can't really have a two-fake as such.
I can only have some sort of brute, blunt experience.
Well, on one reading of Wittgenstein it does say that.
It says that indeed even the incorrigibility thesis is based on a mistake.
It grants the sufferer a sensation.
But the idea of a two-fake, the idea of something to be treated, the idea of something taking place in a particular part of the body
and therefore rendering itself accessible to therapies of one kind.
This is also culturally colored and shaped and defined.
But it's not entirely clear.
It's not entirely clear that a non-cultural entity has two fakes in that full, rich sense.
Certainly, painful experiences, aversive experiences and the like.
But even at the level of pain, the influence of culture is everywhere and indeed is ineliminable.
Now, well, gee whiz, if it's true or even plausible at the level of a two-fake,
suppose we get to something rather more complicated.
How many philosophers have we dealt with just in this series who've taken on the question of personal identity?
The old ship of Theseus.
Of course, Locke takes it on directly.
David Hume looks for himself and can find only a bundle of perceptions.
Thomas Reed dipping into the old George Barclay barrel that includes Elsa Frann
gives us the brave officer and so forth and the like.
Well, what about personal identity?
There's an interesting reversion from Wittgenstein back toward Aristotle in this regard.
What does it mean to be who one is?
Butcher Baker, candlestick maker, teacher, student, policeman, nurse, airline pilot, child.
Is the concept of a child consistent across cultures and across time?
Did Roman law regard one as a child for purposes of law if one was 13 years old?
No.
How about in the medieval period?
What's the notion of a family?
Is the family just a breeding pool?
Or is it some pattern of obligations, duties and the like as Aristotle taught?
What does it mean when one asks what's your nationality and you say I'm American?
Or your occupation and you say I'm an engineer?
Or your religion and you say I'm a Lutheran?
Where does all this apparatus come from?
Now, it certainly isn't something that inheres in entities in virtue of their biological being.
So these are all culturally produced.
And in fact, they're not only culturally produced, but the person himself is culturally produced.
If you strip away everything that is conferred by way of discourse, social institutions and the like, what's left?
What's left is a merely biological entity, a physiological, you might even say a kind of physiological specimen or system.
With some moving parts and perhaps some experiential aspects or capabilities, but with no identity at all.
Well, how far might one want to go with this?
Is gender, as opposed to one's sex now, is gender socially constructed?
Is morality socially constructed?
And understand what I mean by socially constructed.
I mean this.
If it is the case that meaning arises from covenants and conventions within a community of shared lives,
that that's how you finally decide what is a beetle.
We decide what is a beetle as a community that has authorizing privileges with respect to what sounds referred to.
If it is the case that each cultural enclave has the creative power to bring about bakers and candlestick makers and Lutherans and the like,
and if it is further the case that what we mean when we refer to Smith is a person who is,
and then we go down a list of these things, a Lutheran baker, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera,
then what is left of the individual when the discursive, grammatical, social interactionist and constructionist features are removed
is just a kind of corpse with a pulse?
Well, there's much more to be said about this, but of course it has to raise questions about the problem of knowledge,
and the problem of conduct, otherwise not anticipated or richly anticipated by those who preceded Wittgenstein.
The problem of knowledge now becomes part of a language game.
It becomes a problem of meaning, and what's called for here is an essentially linguistic analysis rather than an epistemology or a metaphysics and the like.
Metaphysics gets built up linguistically. Wittgenstein, I say, was quite keen to note that he's not here to solve problems.
He's here to show the fly the way out of the bottle. This is not to change the nature of the fly.
Out of the bottle, it's still a fly. Out of the bottle, it's still an entity that might very well be attracted to sweet things in the bottom of some other bottle.
But to show the fly the way out of the bottle is not unlike Ariadne providing the golden string so that the theses could find his way out of the labyrinth.
With Wittgenstein, the golden string is very much a grammatical, linguistic, sociological sort of device, recognizing that philosophical confusions are at base linguistic confusions.
They're based on habits of grammar that we hardly pay any attention to. It's the use of the first person that gives pain utterances.
They're seemingly odd and inexplicable possessory quality. There are other languages in which pain is not signaled in the first person and therefore other cultures in which pain is not regarded as something owned by the sufferer in some unique way.
So linguistic analysis, cross-cultural studies, anthropological inquiries and the like, fortify, for many anyway, though not for your lecture of today, fortify an essentially Wittgensteinian notion of meaning and the essentially Wittgensteinian confidence that philosophical problems are at base linguistic problems or grammatical problems,
clarity being promised at the end of the right kind of linguistic analysis. Is that so? Well I say I've read this with optimism and reverence and respect and I still think at the end of the day there's more to it than that, though I'm not entirely out of the bottle yet myself, so more later.
Thank you.
