Here everybody, it's James Lindsay, you're listening to the New Discourses podcast and
it's time to talk some more about queer theory.
I want to make the case, and I suppose there's a bit of billion ways I could do this,
I want to make the case that queer theory is the doctrine of a sex-based cult.
That's it. In other words, to put it more frankly, or more clearly I suppose, queer theory,
which pretends to be an academic discipline, is the doctrine of a religious cult that primarily
targets children, and that is based on sex and topics related to sex, and that sex meant in both
meanings of the word, both the biological fact and the activity, which is related to the biological
fact incidentally, and it has very little to do with gay identity. So those are the main points
of contention. Some of you will recognize, if you're readers as well, that what I'm going to do
in this episode is actually summarize, or mostly run through and ad-lib off of a essay that I
published on New Discourses in February after I gave this as a talk in Pittsburgh at the University
of Pittsburgh, which is the one where people dressed as clowns came to protest me. And if you
remember that image on the website, you know what I'm talking about. It was an amusing little story.
The clowns were outside, I didn't see them, then the clowns came in, I did see them, and there was
one clown actually and her friend, and about five minutes into the talk, about the time I'd given
like the basic introduction and some serious facts, she started crying, got up and left,
and called her mom so loudly that you could hear her kind of blubber into the phone,
hey mom, as she walked out, and no further incidents were recorded. But the way I started
off was as strongly as possible by saying exactly what I just said. I'm here to talk about queer
theory and its major points can be summarized very easily. Queer theory is the doctrine of a
religious cult that religious cult is based on sex. That's not the same as saying a sex cult,
by the way, that's actually different. It is based on sex in both regards, but it's not necessarily
sex as an activity oriented cult. And that sex based religious cult primarily targets children
and almost none of it has anything to do with gay people or gay identity. And all of that is
actually demonstrable in their literature. The least obvious of these points is that last point
that has nothing to do with gay people, and it's a great place to start. And the way I make this
case, I could point to an awful lot of their academic literature, drag queen story hour,
which I read their academic paper about drag pedagogy in the groomer school series,
I think it was groomer schools four. I read that paper talks about how the point of drag queen
story hour is not actually for LGBT empathy. It's not even about LGBT identity. It's about awakening
a queer potential, queer horizon, living queerly, alternate modes of kinship, blah, blah, blah.
In other words, what queer theory is doing is hiding behind the gay identities,
and it doesn't even have much to do with them. The gold standard proof in their literature
comes from David Halperin, which he's a scholar who is the one who defined queer in queer theory
in his book from 1995 called Saint Foucault Toward a Gay Hagiography, which means toward
making him into a saint. Now Saint Foucault refers to Michel Foucault. People have heard me say Saint
Foucault referencing the book, particularly I did it at Oxford in my debate, and they thought I
was making a joke. No, it's literally the title of the friggin book. And you can actually go look
at this book and read how horrifying it is. It's impossible actually on anything that you want
to publish, you know, FCC guidelines or even the much looser online guidelines to read this book
to you, because it's too blatantly inappropriate. I mean, it occasionally talks about topics
like I don't even want to say it because I don't want the video to get demonetized.
Let's just say that it refers to putting fists in certain orifices very explicitly and refers to
it as a liberatory practice, and calls it anal yoga explicitly. I mean, you can get the book
and to search the term anal yoga, and you're going to find all of this right there in the book.
It's pretty shocking to read like a lot of queer theory, but David Halpern's book is kind of the
gold standard for defining the word queer. It's where the word queer was first defined. It's
like the first major treatise that lays out queer theory as queer theory and what it's aiming to
accomplish. Obviously, given the title, it's building off of the ideas of Michel Foucault,
who is this French postmodernist. He's also a pedophile. He was also a BDSM gay man. He
bragged about his experiences in bathhouses in San Francisco and elsewhere. There's some
very unfortunate stories regarding male children or boys around 11, 12, 13 in Tunisia that have come
out at any rate. That's who he's harkening back to, and what he's really pushing back to, he could
get into discipline and punish, birth of the clinic, civilization and madness, some of Foucault's
kind of groundbreaking, I guess, if you want work in what we would recognize now as critical
constructivism. But in this case, it's mostly the history of sexuality and primarily history
of sexuality volume one. And Foucault in that book is laying out what is the idea of a homosexual
in a very kind of parallel way to what Simone de Beauvoir was doing, laying out the concept of
what is a woman in the second sex in 1949. Although, allegedly, Foucault was not copying
Beauvoir. I don't know if that's the case or not. I'm not going to get into it. I'm not going to try
to parse it out today. What I am going to say, though, is that it's the same idea, is that the
homosexual should be defining himself on his own terms, and those terms have to be defiant to the
heterosexual, homosexual binary, and the power constructions built around it. And this idea
of an oppositionally defiant identity, political identity, against norms and expectations is what
Halperin said means queer. And in fact, he says that it means queer, where Foucault says the
homosexual, it can only be interpreted to mean queer. I probably have that citation somewhere
and could pull it up to read it to you, but I didn't plan to. I don't think I put it in this essay,
but it's an eye opener. But I'm going to read some from St. Foucault as it is,
just so that you can have a sense that this is not about gay identity. So the first words of
this relevant definition appear on page 62. That's the page in this book. You have to read 61 pages
of Jesus Christ. Could you just shut you weirdos before you get to the point where he defines
queer? And here's how that paragraph starts. The first three words, which are by a type setting
quirk, are in bold all caps are unlike gay identity. So when he sets out to define queer,
the first thing he says is it is unlike gay identity. It's something different than gay.
Queer is not the same as gay. This is why he had to do his whole exploration about the homosexual
from Foucault, because it's something different.
So what he explains the difference is, is that gay identities, as Halpern puts it,
are grounded in a positive fact. That means something about reality. They are grounded in
the positive fact of homosexuality. Now Halpern does not actually say that gay is something that
is intrinsic and essential to the person as an accident of birth, because he says that it's grounded
in the positive fact of homosexual object choice. That's his actual phrase, which means that it
might be the choosing of same-sex desire. He doesn't go so far as to say it's innate,
but he does say that it's real, the positive fact of homosexuality. Queer, he is contrasting to that,
and he says explicitly that it need not be based on any positive truth or in any stable
reality at all. And he says there is nothing in particular to which it refers. Queer doesn't
mean anything in particular is what he's saying. He calls it an identity without an essence. That
means, unlike gay identities, it is not based in reality. So what is queer if it is not based in
reality? It is a radical political view. In fact, if we want to pull from the Antonio Gramsci ideas
of cultural Marxism, it is a counter hegemonic idea. There's this idea that we have prevailing
cultural values and they tend to maintain themselves and transmit themselves and stabilize
people and themselves, and that's cultural hegemony. The way things are, and queer is a defiant
oppositional position against that. In other words, it's counter hegemonic. Just like Antonio
Gramsci said, the point of what we now call cultural Marxism or Western Marxism is to establish
counter hegemonic infiltration into our institutions. So bringing queer theory into
institutions, whether education, law, whatever happens to be, media doesn't matter.
Bringing queer theory into institutions is a counter hegemonic activity in line with
Gramsci's Western Marxism, which we often call cultural Marxism. Halperin tells us that queer
means adopting a politics that is against whatever the normal, the legitimate, and the
dominant are. And so you can tell I'm not just making it up. Here's exactly how he phrases it.
Unlike gay identity, which though deliberately proclaimed in an act of affirmation is
nonetheless rooted in the positive fact of homosexual object choice, queer identity
need not be grounded in any positive truth or in any stable reality. As the very word implies,
queer does not name some natural kind or refer to some determinate object.
See, it's not real. It acquires its meaning from its oppositional relation to the norm.
Queer is by definition whatever is at odds with the normal, the legitimate, the dominant.
There is nothing in particular to which it necessarily refers. It is an identity without
an essence. Now, I'm cutting off here a lot of how actually psychotic David Halperin is
when I present it this way. I have the book open, so I'll just read to you a little bit more. He
says queer then demarcates not a positivity, that means something real, but a positionality,
that means a politics, vis-a-vis the normative. Here's where it gets weird. They can't leave it
alone. A positionality that is not restricted to lesbians and gay men, so it's not really about
being gay, but is in fact available to anyone who is or feels marginalized. You don't even have to
be marginalized. You just have to feel marginalized because of her or his sexual practices. It could
include some married couples without children, for example, or even, who knows, some married couples
with children, with perhaps very naughty children. I'm just going to pause. What the hell is he
talking about? I'll let you speculate. What the hell is he talking about? Why does he say that it
could be couples who are married with very naughty children, very naughties and italics? What does
he mean here? Why do they always go there? But I'll continue the rest of the page. Queer, he says,
in any case, does not designate a class of already objectified pathologies or perversions,
so it's not just about that. Rather, it describes a horizon of possibility, just like communism
is a horizon of possibility for socialist praxis. It describes a horizon of possibility
whose precise extent and heterogeneous scope cannot, in principle, be delimited in advance.
It is queer Marxism, in other words. It is from the eccentric positionality occupied by the queer
subject, so it's subjective. It's not real, that it may become possible to envision a variety of
possibilities for reordering the relations among sexual behaviors, erotic identities, constructions
of gender, forms of knowledge, regimes of enunciation, logics of representation, modes of self-constitution,
and practices of community for restructuring, that is, the relations among power, truth,
and, of all things he could pick, desire. This is why in the Drag Queen Story Hour paper,
it says explicitly that Drag Queen Story Hour, or Queer Worldmaking, as I think what it actually
says, Queer Worldmaking, is always a project rooted in desire. He underscores his point, though,
that it's not about gay identities by saying that it's not restricted to lesbians and gay men,
but in fact that it's open to anyone who is or feels marginalized because of his or her sexual
practices. So what are we dealing with? We're dealing with something that doesn't have a lot
to do with gay identity at all when we're talking about queer and thus queer theory,
and we're talking about something that is rooted in sex because of his or her sexual practices.
It's right there in the text, it's extremely clear. But what is the conclusion that we draw from this
discussion that Halpern gives us, the defining characteristic of queer in queer theory? It
is that you cannot be queer. Do you understand me? There's no such thing as a queer identity.
There is, let me say it again, no such thing as a queer identity. You can only do queerness. You can
only act queer, and that's what it is. It's an act, and that's why with Judith Butler's work,
we see that her work could boil down to drag is life and life is drag, and that the enlightened
people or the people who know we're always doing a drag performance. What do I mean by that? If I'm
a man and I present as a man and look like a man and act like a man and am a man, I'm just doing
male drag as a man. And if I'm a woman and I'm doing female drag, or I'm sorry, if I'm a woman
and I present myself as a woman and live according to feminine choices and stereotypes
and activities and so on, I'm just doing female drag. And if I'm a male who does female drag,
I'm still just doing drag, but now I've chosen to do it. I'm not just doing it like a socialized
robot. I'm awake and I've chosen to do that in a defiance of the norm. So nobody is queer. People
feel queer against some standard. In other words, they feel defiantly opposed. And I keep using this
language, by the way, oppositional defiant. Oppositional defiant. Why? Because there's a
disorder known as oppositional defiant disorder, which seems to fit the bill here.
They are people who feel and act against the norm and against legitimacy on purpose. So they are
not queer. They are acting queerly. And that means they are acting defiantly against normalcy and
legitimacy, while denying and even decrying reality. You can only perform queerness. That's
what Judith Butler's work is really about, gender performativity. You can only perform queerness,
but they think everything is a form of queerness. You just don't know. You're either upholding
the status quo, or you're rejecting it. So you can only perform queerness, or if you refuse
their liberatory politics as they see them, you can perform straightness instead. Performing
straightness to queer theory isn't being who you are if you're straight, just like gender
performance. It's just another kind of performance, one that upholds the allegedly oppressive status
quo instead of opposing it, which is thus problematic. We see the same theme in the
Drag Queen Story Hour paper from a couple of years ago. Let me see if I actually found this
other quote from Foucault, just to kind of really drive in the point. I know that I have it in this
other document. Yeah, he says, this is Halpern talking about Foucault, the homosexual. He says,
Foucault insisted that homosexuality did not name an already existing form of desire, but was rather
something to be desired. So it doesn't describe a way of being romantically or sexually attracted
to people. It's something that you want to become. It's an identity you seek to become.
He says, our task is therefore to become homosexual, that's quoting from Foucault,
not to persist in acknowledging that we are homosexual. Or to put it more precisely,
what Foucault meant is that our task is to become queer. For his remarks make sense only if he
understood the term homosexual according to my definition of queer. Remember we're reading David
Halpern here. As an identity without an essence, not a given condition, but a horizon of possibility,
an opportunity for self-transformation, a queer potential. Because one can't become homosexual
strictly speaking. Either one is or one isn't. But one can listen to this shit. One can marginalize
oneself. One can transform oneself. One can become queer. Indeed queer marks the very sight of gay
becoming. So that is what Halpern is saying is the point of queer theory. And that's what meshes
with the dry queen story hour paper that I was about to jump to. So I just want to remind you
that in that paper there is a section near the end titled From Empathy to Embodied Kinship. It makes
the same point we just made. That section makes the point that queer programs are presented as
improving LGBT empathy in their words. And that dry queen story hour makes use of such tropes again
their word. It then says that that's not really what dry queen story hour is about at all.
It says that's not what queer education or queer world making are about either.
Instead they use the so-called tropes of empathy strategically, that's their word,
as a marketing platform. That's their word too. To justify getting it into schools, libraries,
and in front of kids. But it's actually not about empathy at all. It's about leading the kids to see
the world in themselves in a queer way. In other words to lead them into a queer worldview. World
views, by the way, have ideologies. The ideology of the queer worldview is queer theory. So it is the
doctrine of a sex-based cult that primarily targets children should add through manipulation and
deception. And it has very little to do with gay people. Here's how it's worded in the dry queen
story hour paper in the relevant part. Finally they say it is often assumed that that's Lil Miss
Hot Mess and Harper Keenan. Drag queen at Arizona State University, whose real name is Harris
Cornstein. And Harper Keenan is a trans education researcher somewhere, I don't know, maybe Canada.
Finally they say it is often assumed that the primary pedagogical tool of queer education
should be to increase empathy toward LGBT people. That's what you've heard. That's why we're supposed
to have drag queen story hour because we have to care about the poor little gay kids who don't have
representation and apparently needed a drag queen to look at to feel represented. They go on to say
while this premise has some merit and it underlies many sincere projects and educational and cultural
work including drag queen story hour, the notion of empathy has also been critiqued by feminist
scholars of color and others for the ways in which, notice they throw that intersectional
kitchen sink. This is about drag queens but it's been critiqued by feminist scholars of color and
others for the ways in which empathy can enable an effective, emotional effective, A effective
with an A not an E, an effective appropriation of an individual's unique experiences and
reinforce hierarchies of power. That's a lot. But what they're saying is that when you can start,
basically that you can do munch housings by proxy, you can start to show empathy in order
to elevate yourself and thus cause problems for the people you're allegedly empathetic toward.
Whether through literature or virtual reality, these tropes tend to reflect an overstated ability
to understand difference as well as empathy's potential to preclude meaningful relationships
of solidarity. See, you can't be in solidarity with somebody you feel sorry for. They go on and
say it is undeniable that drag queen story hour participates in many of these tropes of empathy
from the marketing language the program uses to its selection of books. And here it is. Much of
this is done strategically in order to justify its educational value. However, we suggest that drag
supports scholars' critiques of empathy rather than reifying the concept. Reifying in the sense of
George Lukacz, one of the other founders or fathers of cultural Marxism, to means to make real
through social processes. This approach can, this is them again, this approach can support
students in finding the unique or queer aspects of themselves rather than attempting to understand
what it is like to be LGBT. So what they're telling you is that the point is grooming people into a
queer ideological worldview, children in particular, not about increasing empathy. It's not about
understanding. Duh, obviously, they aren't putting a drag queen in front of the kids because it's
trying to teach kids what it's like to be gay. Drag queens are a horrific represent like misrepresentation
of that phenomenon. It's to support students in finding the unique or queer aspects of themselves.
That's what it's really about. Drag queen story hour is not about empathy. That's their marketing
strategy and it is in fact to their eyes a bit problematic. So they know that they're lying
about it in a way that actually goes against their values in order to get it into the schools and
libraries and in front of children in general. But what it's really about is getting kids to
discover any aspects of themselves that they might feel uncomfortable about or marginalized because of
or different because of that might be able to be considered queer by a queer theorist or queer
educator so that those aspects can be nurtured in the sense of making them have more and more and
more discomfort about themselves and then until an initiatory rupture occurs so that they can
develop the children into a queer political stance that will then be conflated with being who they
really are. That's what's going on with queer theory. That's what Halpern is actually describing.
By calling them queer identities what you're doing is saying here's this political activity
and you're going to pretend that that political activity is who you are. By the way that political
activity is hating the world as it is and hating people for being normal and hating
anything that is is based in the idea of legitimacy. So oppositional defiant disorder
as a political stance that you're now going to consider to be who you are which is in fact
in the definition of queer not what it's about. So what will happen is they take these kids they
introduce them to queer potentialities by sticking a drag queen in front of them and then they make
them feel uncomfortable about themselves and they exploit that uncomfortable or emotional crisis or
whatever it is to make them feel isolated and alone and then they say there's a new way to
understand yourself and there's a new way to understand who you are and the world and why it
doesn't like you. So then they can awaken to some basic ideas of queer theory and more than that
they'll be told that they're not truly allowed to be who they really are. Society will object.
Their parents will object. In particular they'll focus on the objection to the parents because
they have to get the kids away from their parents whose parental duty and responsibility it is to
protect them from this kind of ideological and maybe worse grooming. In fact it's so likely that
their parents will reject this this discovery of who they really are as queer that it may have to be
kept secret from their parents in case it wouldn't be affirmed by them and don't worry the state
depending on what state you're in and now more than a dozen states will force your parents to
affirm this or threaten to take your children away or maybe take them away for real. I'm not supposed
to use I know the word grooming to describe this grotesque set of activities that's a part of a
major controversy. In fact it's part of it's one of the main reasons that these kids came dressed
as clowns to protest me at Pitt when I gave this talk but I'm not supposed to call these people
groomers because it makes the left mad that we call them what they are so I'm going to ask a
question instead. Instead of saying this is obviously groomer behavior and I know I already
did let's back up let's slow down let's be a little more careful Jim. I'm going to show you
something else from this paper and I'm going to ask this question what word am I supposed to use
for it. We've already talked about this idea of from empathy to embodied kinship but I'm going
to read something else from this paper and I want to know what word I am supposed to use for it.
Drag Queen Story Hour presents itself as family friendly in a way that characterizes itself as
a preparatory introduction to alternate modes of kinship. That's what it says. What does that mean?
What does that mean? Preparatory introduction to alternate modes of kinship. In fact it says the
family and family friendly refers to a queer code for the other queers they connect with on
the street rather than the family that's like the real family. So the Drag Queen Story Hour people
are not just lying about the idea that they use empathy but they're also lying about what they
mean by family when they sell it as family friendly. They tell us themselves in black and white that
they mean it is a queer code for a new family, a queer family, a drag family that Drag Queen Story
Hour is teaching kids to become friendly to. That's what they mean by family friendly but they want
you to think it means that yeah adults and parents and little kids and their grandparents are all
welcome to come watch. The paper in fact repeatedly invokes the concept of a drag family for the kids
that they would you know obviously latch on to in order to develop their queer aspects of themselves
and then the last sentence of the paper the last half of that sentence anyway is
we'll leave a trail of glitter that will never come out of the carpet. Well what's the carpet
here seems like it's probably children's minds doesn't seem like that's on the up and up now
remember that I'm going to read the actual full quote I've just talked about it. Let me read the
real quote to you the real paragraph and the question is what word am I supposed to use for
this because I'm not supposed to call it grooming okay so here's a full the full quote of that family
friendly part so you don't think I'm lying even though I did a podcast about it before queer
world making including political organizing has long been a project driven by desire that's what I
said earlier it isn't part enacted through art sorry it enacted through art forms like fashion
theater and drag so queer world making is enacted through art forms like fashion theater and drag
notice it's not math or physics or history we believe that drag queen story hour offers an
invitation toward deeper public engagement with queer cultural production particularly for young
children and their families this one of those times where I want to have like digital slowdown
particularly for young children and their families particularly for young children
do you get the point particularly for young children it may be that drag queen story hour is
quote family friendly in the sense that it is accessible and inviting to families with children
that's what we call the mod but it is less a sanitizing force than it is a preparatory introduction
to alternate modes of kinship period that's the bailey here drag queen story hour is quote family
friendly in the sense of quote family as an old school queer code to identify and connect with
other queers on the street so I'm asking I can't use the word groomer what word am I supposed to
use for that I know which word I can't use and that puts me at a complete loss but what I have
actually described to you isn't just drag queen story hour it is queer pedagogy it is queer education
it is the installing of queer theory into children by means of the educational system and
educational methodologies both in terms of curriculum and in terms of teaching methods
so here's how queer theory works you can't describe it you can't say anything about it
unless you support it because otherwise you were applying power to it you were being unjust you were
doing anti-lgbtq hate you didn't engage properly because if you engaged properly that means that you
took on the worldview and agreed with it you can't even talk about queer theory according to queer
theorists unless you support it it is just like a cult one that targets kids as we can clearly see
one that is based in sex and one that doesn't have a lot to do with gay people remember if you
criticize queer theory that's anti-lgbtq hate you will end up with a profile if you're
high enough profile individual such as myself on the southern poverty law center accusing you of
anti-lgbtq hate of hate speech of malice of all these things you'll get accused of homophobia
transphobia and the famous term is anti-lgbtq hate I'm going to keep coming back to that because
there's so many things out there claiming that people such as me and others engage in anti-lgbtq
hate all you have to do to engage in anti-lgbtq hate is read queer theory out loud word for word
as it is written by queer theorists themselves and say that's bad so there's a rumor widely
printed about me that I because of my use of the word groomer to describe what we just talked about
implicates me in some social crime called anti-lgbtq hate which is apparently very bad very serious
and early toxic even though all it means is not agreeing with queer theory it's not just harmful
rhetoric it's in fact also a conspiracy theory they say and I am not just a very bad person
which obviously I must be but also a very crazy person for naming the obvious not as a result of
inference not as a result of guesswork not as a result of any emotions that I have but literally
just by reading out loud and saying exactly what their own proudly printed writings say
without any need to embellish without any need to interpret I just tell you what it says and say
by the way they mean it when they say the empathy is a marketing trope and family friendly is a
marketing trope but they really mean something else that there is a Mott and Bailey rhetorical
strategy in play here I'm not in Bailey actual dialectical lie here all I'm doing you is telling
you what they've written making taking some of the veneer off of it and now I am a conspiracy
theorist I am a hater I have a southern poverty law center article and a profile written up about
me do you think well who cares that's like a badge of honor and I take it that way obviously
that's why I called myself general hate but stop for two seconds and realize
that if I get called to do some professional thing that's going to get brought up as a reason
why I'm not supposed to be there if I try to give a talk and protesters try to get a shutdown
they're going to leverage that against some wavering or even complicit institutional
administration to keep me out they know how this works the accusation and the resulting
social dynamic which is always hostile is straight out of Maoism it's straight out of Maoist China
from the 1950s and 60s I have been alleged to be engaging in a crime called anti LGBTQ hate
and the right side of history and right side of society which are on the right side of history
are called to judge me bully me hold me to account for that crime by whatever means it can manage
the bullying is to continue until I learn to recognize my crime from the queer position
in other words I adopted the positionality of queer theory and see how what I said or what I did
was actually socially criminal and I pledged to reform my thought by adopting queer theory
so that I can not only do better but also become an activist on behalf of queer theory it's a life
long commitment to self reflection self critique and social activism this is identical to the
thought reform programs of Mao's China it's just a slightly different ideology of course their
accusation is absolute nonsense but that's not the point the point is to initiate the social
struggle session on me in order to transform my views to ones that are either at least empathetic
to or ideally that embrace and repeat queer theory the accusation is of an old Marxist standard
form truth married to a lie and here's the truth gays and lesbians fought for decades to break the
public perception that they are predators and groomers of children but here's the lie that's
who and what I'm talking about when I criticize their theory and activism in other words I'm not
talking about gay people just like Halpern's not talking about gay people unlike gay identity
I'm talking about people who are deliberately engaging in the ideological and maybe worse
transformation of children into a queer political identity that's who I'm talking about
but the the the lie is that I'm talking about gays and lesbians or maybe trans people at large
when I criticize their own theory and activism and point out that what they say in their own words
needs a word it sounds seems very groomery even if I can't say groomer about it and we're all not
supposed to of course we can say that and we do say that and it's not hate to point it out it's
right there in black and white but this has nothing to do with any of that the truth is that queer
used to be a slur for gay people so the activists took it on to describe themselves in defiance
of prejudice and bigotry but also because it now becomes impossible to talk about it oh queer
theory you're using a slur there's there's a there's a situation the lie is that queer theory
ever represented civil rights movements for anyone or gay people in particular in fact it was the
opposite it was against everything that the gay civil rights movement was about queer theory is a
destructive form of radical activism because it's a marxist theory so there has to be activism
connected it's not just a theory it's theory and practice combined and it is a destructive form of
radical activism that actually historically opposed gay civil rights inequality well why in the world
would it do that aren't they the same thing no of course not because gay equality and gay acceptance
would normalize being gay within society and would legitimize normalcy and legitimacy right
legitimize gay people as fully equal members of society queer theory is by definition radically
opposed on principle to anything normal and legitimate they even have a word for what would
happen if we had gay equality and gay acceptance homonormativity which is society accepting
gay as being part of the normal expression of what it means to be human sometimes and that would
mean it's within the normative framework now and the gay people are expected to okay you're great
you're gay so what great get a put on a suit and get a job and that would all be very bad because
they're no longer radical activists gay activists who are listening to this from the 1990s can readily
back me up on this they'll readily attest that the queer activists were often strongly opposed to
their ambitions for civil and legal equality for marriage and for social acceptance they just were
why because they wanted radicals queer theory needs radical activists not stable citizens who can go
about their lives in a society that doesn't in any way meaningfully discriminate against them
they need there to be discrimination or the appearance of hate or the the fear that there
will be the bad old times coming back in order to radicalize those people into revolutionary activity
or just to show up and be human shields for the queer theorists who are doing that
the civil rights activists and the gay civil rights movements in the
80s 90s and so on fought hard for decades to over starting at least in the 50s to overcome
stereotypes of predatory behavior and the idea that they're intrinsically groomers
and that's why the queer theorists actually claim that or that's why they're actually able to claim
that calling out their blatant grooming is anti lgbt lgbtq they're saying look
50 60 years ago 30 years ago people said that all gay gay people are groomers and gay rights just
enables groomers and the gays the gay civil rights leaders fought back and said no that is not what
we're about that is nothing to do with who we are that is a harmful stereotype and they won we
trusted them and now you have these freaks and weirdos who are queer theorists who were never
particularly interested in civil rights at all who are saying if you call them which is the
narrower narrower subset the q not even all the rest of it if you call the q groomers then what
you are doing is anti lgbtq hate you see how the acronym works to create human shields
do you understand that l lesbian g gay b bisexual t trans q queer all different all different
lesbians are women who are attracted to women by the way you have to know what a woman is to make
that work gays are men who are attracted to men you have to know what men are to make that work
bisexuals are people who are attracted to men and women by two so you have to believe in the
binary to make that work trans people it's its own complicated topic but they are men or women
who do not recognize themselves as men or women and in fact may actually recognize themselves
as the opposite so something's very different there and then q is queer and we already heard
that queer has nothing to do with any of that because queer is a radical political stance
but if you criticize queer you get wrapped up in anti lgbtq hate when you're not engaging in
any anti lgb or maybe even sometimes t activity thought or anything at all it's super fake it's
a standard trick that these kind of gnostic cults do another example is the christian nationalist
movement does the exact same trick for example if you criticize christian nationalism and you happen
not to be a christian ask me how i know what they will say is james is attacking christians no i'm
not i'm attacking lunatics who are hiding behind the christian identity and brand same thing with
feminists if you do maybe ask me how i know again maybe you call radical feminists hags i don't know
why you would do that you'd say they're a bunch of man hating hags maybe you would say that about
radical feminists for some reason or another maybe nobody could know why you would say that but maybe
you say that maybe you're tempted to say that and you say that and they'll say you're attacking women
no you're not attacking women you're talk you're attacking radical feminist hags it's very clear
who you're actually talking about and they don't get to represent all women it's very much like
when donald trump is one of my favorite donald trump incidents was in an interview with one of
these hags probably katie kerrick or something like that i don't remember the details what he was
in this interview and they said well what about when you called women hags and luckily he knew what
the hell they were no pigs what about when you called women pigs and uh donald trump luckily
knew what the hell they were talking about he said i didn't call women pigs i called rosy o donal a pig
which is hilarious because that's actually what's happening and of course i'm i'm way off script here
but this is generally what they do they blend contexts that are not the same together and treat
them as though they're the same radical feminists might be women but they are not representative
of all women no matter how much they think that they get to be the gnostic representatives
of true womanhood they don't get to do that so if you criticize the specific group say radical
feminists or christian nationalists or queer theorists or whatever they hide behind the general
group by claiming to be the true representatives of that thing they're blending together the context
of the specific their group with the general or the whole which they actually are a part of
yes it's true when i criticize um radical feminists who happen to be women that i am
criticizing some women but i'm not criticizing women as i don't even like to think of women
as a class i'm criticizing particular women just like rosy o donal when i criticize
queer theorists i'm not criticizing lgbtq because lgbtq doesn't even exist that's that's a
manufactured synthetic coalition so that queer theorists can hide behind other people who are
sympathetic characters when i criticize christian nationalists it doesn't really matter they call
themselves christian but they're obviously not so whatever what's happening is that the fact is
that queer activism explicitly as we've described it so far puts the appearance of glaring truth back
into the stereotypes of groomers and then when you call them out for it they get mad and hide behind
gay people and say see they're attacking you all you gay people see the conservatives everybody
the society hates gay people and everyday gay people who are good citizens lose the most from
this little trick because eventually things start to break down and the queer activists gain the
most because they end up with a larger pool of radicalism they end up with more contention and
division in society and they end up with more instability in society queer activism is therefore
a strictly parasitic behavior like any cult activity but about grooming more specifically i
am talking not even necessarily about the thing that they are accusing me of i'm not when i say
that ant that this is grooming i'm not actually talking about the sexual grooming that they try
to pretend this is them again blending context i am grooming talking about grooming specifically
into a cult ideology called queer theory i've been very clear about this over and over again you
can look the word up type in the word grooming and see what it means yes there is the idea of sexual
grooming and oh there it is ideological or political or whatever other professional grooming
but just to really drive home that they are doing ideological grooming like it's not already clear
let's direct our attention to another scholar another queer educator kevin commissaro who wrote
a paper in 2002 called against repetition and i remind you against repetition means against the
repetition of the existing society by teaching kids to be queer activists anyway in that paper he
describes the purpose of queer education for children and commissaro explicitly says that
teaching children about social justice including about ideas from queer theory is meant to induce in
fact it is the obligation of the teacher to do this to induce an emotional and identity based
crisis in them he then says that's why it's so important to have queer educators in place
who can guide the the now vulnerable students who are experiencing emotional crisis so that
those crises are resolved in favor of social justice and queer theory here are some relevant
quotes from the paper from pages 74 and 75 he says repeating what is already learned can be
comforting and therefore desirable students learning things that question their knowledge
and identities on the other hand can be emotionally upsetting for example suppose students think
society is meritocratic but learn that it is racist raise your hand if you're sick of this
shit or think that they themselves are not contributing to homophobia but learn that they
in fact are raise your hand if you're sick of this shit in such situations students learn that the
ways that they think and act are not only limited but also oppressive learning about oppression
and about the ways they often unknowingly comply with oppression can lead students to feel
paralyzed with anger sadness anxiety and guilt it can lead to a form of emotional crisis
they think this is an educational mandate this is what the point of education is and then he says
once in a crisis students can go in many directions some that may lead to anti oppressive change
others that may lead to a more entrenched resistance therefore educators have a responsibility not
only to draw students into a possible crisis but also to structure experiences that can help
them work through their crises productively let's just pause for a second educators have a
responsibility to draw students into possible crisis that's a real sentence and then they also
are meant to structure the environment and experiences around the student to get them
to go in a particular direction that's cult indoctrination it's knowingly willfully and
deliberately cult indoctrination but other scholars in the same domains confirm this for us
there's another paper in 2019 two scholars torres and fairy they say it explicitly
in a paper called not everyone gets a seat at the table they say it explicitly that this is
what their model of education represents that it's in and i mean it that it's indoctrination
here's how they said it for all the criticism teachers receive for quote indoctrinating
students turning them into liberal minded cry babies not much has been said in defense
at the very least a shy denial is made it is time for educators to own this criticism and admit
that is exactly what we do there it is in black and white on page 33 of not everyone gets a seat
at the table you can read these quotes in the querying of the american child where logan lansing
put them he found these these quotes actually i did not but what kevin kumashiro is describing
is actually worse than the indoctrination that torres and fairy are talking about saying that
that's exactly what they do a cycle of inducing crisis and then resolving it toward a particular
doctrine isn't indoctrination it's trauma bonding that's a practice of ideological
transformation or thought reform or brainwashing or cult grooming so it can be pretty plainly said
queer theory practices thought reform and it practices thought reform because queer theory
is the doctrine of a religious cult we already see that that cult is based on sex and that it
primarily targets children and that it has little or nothing to do with with being gay
so that pretty much lays out my primary thesis that's what queer theory is now of course fine it's
a cult what now well nobody joins a cult to join a cult so do you want to have in mind that the
people in it don't know it's a cult and in fact they may not even know that they are subscribed
to queer theory or that queer theory is a critical constructivist ideology of sex
gender and sexuality they probably don't know those things as a matter of fact
but people don't the point is people don't join a cult to go find a cult and join it nobody says
in the morning hey i'm going to get up and go find a cult and join a cult because i don't have
anything better to do people join a cult because they are suffering in some way and the cult comes
in parasitically and offers them some false resolution to their suffering it seems like
something that will get them out of loneliness out of spiritual malaise out of vulnerability of
some kind virtually everyone who has ever escaped a cult tells this same story they wanted to belong
they wanted a social circle they wanted to understanding they wanted purpose in life they
wanted something to do the cult preys upon these people and slowly locks them in one of the tools
they use is trauma bonding one of the tools they use is separating people from their their family
and friends what's trauma bonding though that sounds bad besides what Kevin Kumashuro says
is the point of queer education or education for social justice trauma bonding is as harmful
and manipulative as it sounds it is the technique of cult initiation i should say and abuse it's
basically like hazing the basic formula is really simple first you traumatize your targets until you've
harmed them enough for the process to work and then you celebrate them when you do it when they
do what you want and you don't celebrate them or even punish them more when they do what you don't
want that's it they will bond with the people traumatizing them because of the rewards they
get when the trauma is the traumatic experience is is lightened up this is what robert lifton in
thought reform in the psychology of totalism refers to as an alternating cycle of harshness
and leniency and that's key to how cult bonding works or thought reform works as a matter of fact
which is basically the same thing so in queer theory what you do is you take people particularly
kids and you tell them the world isn't at all the way that it seems and in fact neither are they
and it isn't the way that they've been led to believe if they're different it's because they're
oppressed if they feel uncomfortable it's because society doesn't like people like them they're
probably different than they've always been told maybe they've been lied to about themselves
they've certainly been lied to about other people and how society should be and it's been
holding them back and making them feel bad and maybe instead it's well maybe you're not in that
category but the way you act hurts other people you're hurting people that's what kevin kumashiro
actually said now if you're interested in exploring further even though you're young you should you
should explore these feelings these guilt anxiety anger sadness weren't those the ones he talked about
discomfort with your body discomfort with your sexuality discomfort with your social environment
discomfort with your parents if you're uncomfortable with any of this for any reason
maybe your body is wrong maybe your family is wrong maybe there's somebody else who you who
is who you really are that you don't know about in society just doesn't want you to be who they
that person is your parents don't want you to be that person either and if they're parent if your
parents disagree maybe they're going to disagree maybe they shouldn't be included in these decisions
maybe you need to trust a trusted adult instead maybe you need a school counselor maybe you need
the faculty member in charge of the gay straight alliance maybe you need a teacher who has the
flag up that represents that they're a safe space and that they won't tell on you maybe you need
a queer family queer theory is then offered as the lens that resolves all the resulting confusion
shock dissonance pain guilt anxiety sadness anger and vulnerability that's how this works
and then what happens next is that you affirm and celebrate them when they show interest
if they get interested in this think oh yeah maybe that's right maybe I am different maybe
there maybe society's not free maybe my parents wouldn't like me thinking this or doing this maybe
I was made wrong maybe I'm in the wrong body maybe I'm in the wrong family then you celebrate them
you lead them to believe that they're making brave decisions that are worthy of interest
and respect you coerce them and their social groups to participate in this ritual of affirmation
and tacitly threaten anyone who doesn't want to go along with it or maybe not even tacitly maybe
you talk about how not inclusive they are and how they're part of the problem and how they're
hurting people's feelings you make the people who are taking the path feel like they belong
and that they just for being who they are are special and have a special purpose in the world
to fulfill to change the world to transform the world to make it more accepting of people like
them who don't get to feel that way or others that they know their friends you teach them special
words that describe the very small but growing number of people who identify just like they do
outside of the norm outside of what society and their parents consider legitimate this is the
trauma bonding process of queer theory in particular in schools this is also called programming
or grooming and it takes predictable paths the first thing it does is it leads people
into emotional vulnerability that's what Kevin Kumashiro said what I just described by the way
was it lead them into emotional crisis and then structure their experiences so they resolve those
crises in the direction you want them to go in that's all I described but it leads people into
this emotional vulnerability and into a kind of a path is offered to resolution and that generates
personal and social interest which is followed up by psychological and social commitment they don't
want to let the people down that they've so far impressed they want to keep feeling brave and
unique and different and special so they get a psychological commitment but also a social
commitment these people have invested in them these people care about them these people are
supporting them and affirming them in their journeys and you're going to let them down if
you just bail out and think maybe it's not for you this is then deepened into an increasingly deep
social and emotional commitment to the cult that's achieved largely through repeated cycles of
trauma bonding techniques that's how they do this that's what it means to lead people into crisis
and structure their environment so that the crisis resolves in the desired direction this process
creates emotionally and socially bonded members who populate the wide majority of any cult membership
those who are socially and emotionally locked in without necessarily understanding the doctrine
they don't have to know a word of queer theory they don't have to know queer theory exists they
don't have to know anything all they have to do is feel like they belong in the cult and feel like
they don't belong in the world anymore they don't need anything more than that I've called this in
the past talking about the structure of cults the outer school of the cult the social psychological
and emotional cues are then steadily deepened over time through processes of increasing exposure
to doctrine by processes of increasing exposure to trauma bonding by having them facilitate the
same process on someone else who's newer in the path so that they get more and more committed to it
the feelings the themes increasingly focus on guilt shame isolation alienation confusion
at least on the one hand but meanwhile they're also talking about a horizon of potentiality
in other words hope excitement inclusion belonging on the other shunning people who act like haters
that's why it's called anti lgbtq hate to disagree with them shunning haters who don't support and
affirm them even if it's their own families is also increased over time to make sure the cult
environment is the predominant influence in the victims lives that's what structuring the environment
looks like as this process is repeated this is brainwashing it is thought reform it is not education
when the in fact it's child abuse and it's happening at scale by demand in virtually every
school system in the united states and in canada where it's actually worse what happens when these
kids get committed enough to the cult when their emotional and social connection is so deep that
they're that's who they are now that's who they know themselves to be in terms in terms of what's
in terms of what's called psychosocial valuation well when the commitment is high enough a process
of study begins that's when they're going to get introduced to the actual doctrine the more
committed outer school members will start to learn the doctrine of the cult here they'd be
studying queer theory in mal's prisons they would be studying Marxism and Leninism and socialism
they're not just learning how to use pronouns or discover new ones they're not learning how to
present themselves how to denounce everything against queer theory how to shut people out of
their lives for disagreeing what the cult thinks is good for supporting people who are going through
this process affirming blah blah blah cancels what's what's against them and affirm what is for them
they're not just doing that they're also learning to defend that with pseudo-intellectual arguments
based in queer theory they're learning to do a lot of queer activism which deepens their commitment
every time you act on behalf of a set of beliefs you become more committed to those beliefs every
time you act in a commitment to a group you become more committed to the group why would you be doing
any of this stuff which is unpopular and difficult i might even involve scary stuff like surgeries
or standing up to your parents or throwing at your parents under the bus when you could be doing
other things better things easier things unless you are really committed that's the psychology
here and these people who are socially and emotionally dependent on a cult that has groomed
them to be that way are then led to become intellectually committed to it and they form
not an outer school of the cult but an inner school they are what we might call adapts not initiates
most of the scholars the community organizers and the queer theory cult are in this tier most of
the teachers that visit this upon kids by the way are not they're caught up in the outer school
themselves they don't know the doctrine they don't they may not even like it they're just stuck
having to do it or going along with a current or they're just caught up by empathy which is we
already heard a lie to push it on to people just in case the activists the consultants they definitely
are the scholars they definitely are they know what they're doing there's another tier beyond this
of course the so-called inner circle to cults members of the inner circle of a cult direct the
cult and profit from the cult they might or might not believe in its doctrine depending on their
motivations with queer theory undoubtedly some of the biggest organizers and financiers of the
movement which primarily targets our children do not believe in it itself but fully believe in its
destructive and disruptive potential on our society and our kids others do believe in the
enormous amount of profit that's available from destroying lives and turning them into a permanent
complicated medical or psychiatric patient others see political utility i don't think it's likely
that much of the biden administration really believes queer theory but they see it as a political tool
and they also see its capacity to build a permanently disaffected group with partially
legitimate demands that will make for the rest of their lives against a system they hate that they
can then pander to others see getting millions of people to participate in the cult and its affirmations
is the way to affirm themselves and their own journeys think of the kind of big trans billionaires
martin rothblatt the pritzkers and so on they shovel money into it so lots of kids will become
trans so that society accepts trans so the society accepts them and that they were a trailblazer who
made it happen that's their journey and it has to be affirmed so then they just happen to have
billions of dollars to finance campaigns for mass affirmation there are lots of reasons why people
at that tier of the cult might be involved and it's not always that they fully believe in it though
it can sometimes be that the most important thing to remember about these different tiers of cults
and the basic structure of cults and the guiding principles behind each is just that they exist
that's the most important thing to realize the outer school are initiates they're seeking
psychological and social reward through the cults manipulative offerings they're overwhelmingly the
majority of the captured cultists the inner school seeks the same thing but more they have
existential fervor tied to it in some degree that increases over time of intellectual immoral superiority
because they know the doctrine the inner circle may or may not even know the doctrine they usually
do but they don't always tends to be small in number and is ultimately using the whole cult
to whatever its twisted purposes are which may not agree with one another in a case like this
in the case of marxist cults the inner circle always uses the revolutionary cult of the era
and then disposes of it when it's time to move on to the next phase of the revolution
and i don't think that we should see anything different i think that these destabilizers
that we see in queer activism are likely to be disposed of when they become a liability if the
revolution succeeds but they're really useful for tearing apart the society we have now
by tearing apart families and children's lives and so much else
so a little more on the environment about cults though because i think it's important to understand
the environment in which cults transform their victims needs to be kind of looked at
and nobody's done it in greater depth than robert lyfton robert j lyfton who studied the
Maoist cult in detail as it was happening in the 1950s and he asserts that cults effectively take
advantage of up to eight qualities that allows them to do thought reform on their populations
queer theory as you'll see very obviously utilizes all eight of these and does so in
sophisticated ways and so i'll talk about each one of these eight very briefly first there's
melu control cults control the environment and make sure it only reflects cult doctrine
this is why they cut people off from their friends or families uh any outside information
and views that's all problematic it's harmful it's hurtful it's hate you can't look at it don't
listen to james lindsay's podcast he's a hater he's lgbtq hate it's just gonna hurt your feelings
it's so much transphobia you won't be able to stand it they keep you isolated in your melu from
anything that might challenge or or break you free of cult doctrine so by the way if you happen
to be imbibed in queer theory or you're kind of a queer theorist or you think you have a queer
identity and you happen to be listening to this you're in a fucking cult now i'm just let me tell
you just bluntly i use the bad word not because i lack words not because i'm missing vocabulary
but to get your attention you are in a fucking cult and you are gonna you need to wake up it will
your life will get better from the day you start getting away from this but anyway the melu control
is all about like in our our world what we see is that it's using inclusion policies to ensure
institutions and people only present cult agreeable views and affirmation and they remove anything
that might cause doubt to the cult including people materials and so on aka cancel culture
it is the immersive media and messaging that we get from all levels entertainment school
politicians everything once you have melu control second lyfton says that you can then engage in
something he calls mystical manipulation and i did a short bullet point episode of the podcast
recently about that called plan spontaneity the lie of plan spontaneity cults he says create an
appearance of total agreement mostly by silencing all disagreement and a sense of inevitability
you might hear it kind of phrase this way there's a change coming and there's nothing you can do
about it but you want to get on the right side of it because things will be good for you you might
also hear it is who's on the right side of history there's a sense of total agreement all of society
is going this way in inevitability history is moving this way there's also planned spontaneity
which is organized protests and activism and activities that are made to look like they were
spontaneous and organic because that gives the impression that the people are motivated to
bring this into being and it also gives a sense of higher purpose like being on the right side of
history and the point of mystical manipulation by a cult is in order to convince the victims
of their power and influence the inevitability the total agreement of society it's just happening
look there's so many people involved and they're working toward a better future it makes the
cult appear more right and righteous to those captured by its spells think of the film the
Truman show Jim character and Jim Carrey's character Truman was at the center of a huge
operation of mystical manipulation if you want to understand what that looks like that was a totally
controlled milieu third Lyfton says that within cult environments there is a demand for purity
actually he says within ideological totalist environments which is to say cult environments
there's a demand for purity cults are virtually always puritanical in their value systems they
present their victims with stark contrasts of good and evil of right and wrong on virtually every
issue and they demand purity with being on the right side of every issue and in fact they leverage
that because you can't be you can't be perfectly pure so you keep this constant wheel of shame
turning inside of you of guilt and shame and then you use that to pressure other people into
better compliance to cover up for your failures so that it's not you getting called out it's them
instead first these dynamics manifest in dichotomies like pure versus impure absolutely good versus
absolutely evil sacred versus profane or specifically in social justice cults like queer theory
affirmation versus existential denial or care versus hate they're also interested at cults are if
not obsessed with the binary of queer theory in particular with the binary of innocence versus
initiation to various levels of standing within the cult including inclusion within the cult itself
in the extreme this demand for purity sets up a dichotomy as stark as the people versus the enemies
of the people the people support queer theory the enemies of the people are anti lgbtq hate who
must be destroyed in the name of the queer people fourth he lists or he mentions what he calls a
cult of confession that's based off of the demand for purity the demand for purity leads the cults
victims to readily identify how they fall short of cult perfection leading them to both fear and
desire to confess their failures and their evil ways that's the whole program confess recognize
your crimes you have to confess look at the three body problem scene look at these other scenes of
the cultural revolution that keep going viral now that people can kind of open their eyes and see
what's happening that's what it's about a cult of confession confess how you are transphobic confess
how you contribute to homophobia confess how you could do better cults often encourage this behavior
to facilitate the trauma bonding process but they also do it to get you to recognize cult doctrine
and its application to your own life and situation and what paul frady calls your own existential
situation the trauma bonding wheel of pain it's turned through pressuring people to confess say
to homophobia or transphobia being a made up gender a made up sexuality or whatever and then
rewarding them what they do and punishing those that get accused of you know not being on board
only later after they they say you know they after they do what they're supposed to do later you
that it's a wheel of pain as I said you later indicate that their confession wasn't sufficient
or sincere enough and you pull up some little detail where they fell short to point out that
they didn't really mean it they're not really on board they still have internalized transphobia
or whatever to initiate another round of struggle the melu control and demand for purity come together
to create a uniquely exquisite psychological environment lyftons very clear about this
in this environment almost everyone believes everyone else is pure while they themselves are
not by the way if you search I actually did do a podcast about this chapter of lyfton specifically
where I read I think the whole thing if not very close to it so you can go listen to lyftons full
exposes exposition on this on new discourses and another podcast I'll think of the title
scenario later but if you search go to the search bar and type in lyfton you can figure out which
podcast is lyftons and I read the entire chapter of his book for for this topic but anyway sorry
this is I was talking about the unique psychological environment an exquisite psychological environment
created by melu control and demand for purity so you're in a completely controlled environment
and your purity demands are high and you're being manipulated all the time mystical manipulation
and what it results in is that almost everyone believes that everyone else is pure while they
themselves are not think about that everyone you look around at is somehow a saint because
everybody else got cancelled and thrown out by the way everyone else is a saint of the ideology
but you nobody will tell how they are secretly transphobic nobody will come up it's like the
time I had this young woman come up to me and the friend of the family and she came up and
asked if she could talk to me because she knows my stance on these things and she said I want to
talk to you because I know I can can tell you this and I have something I have to say and I was
like what is it and she said I'm just done with the pronoun thing and she started crying because
she didn't have anybody she could tell she was done with the pronoun thing she thought the pronoun
thing was ridiculous so she knew she had this inner sin against the trans doctrine or the
queer theory doctrine that the pronoun rituals ridiculous and it's just demanding and it's
compelled speech but she didn't feel like she could tell anybody that so she thought she alone
among her she came to me to tell me because she thought she alone alone in the world completely
isolated felt that way and she had to find some forbidden outsider to tell it to so the feeling
is that you're the only one falling short even though sometimes you see your so-called classmates
confessing to their own failures and then at that point you're like well at least it's not me and
you join in the denouncing of them motivated by your own sense of hidden shame because you are
led to feel like you are alone and that you alone have the deepest darkest failures against the
cult doctrine which is impossible and the guilt and shame are so overwhelming that they fuel even
more accusation and criticism and confession which is self-criticism just by virtue of how
they make you feel and that is the part of the environment the cult environment that does the
bulk of the indoctrination or brainwashing or thought reform work what is it brainwashing you
into well fifth lift and describes what he calls that all cults have at the center or all ideological
totalist environments have at the center a sacred science so at the heart of every cult is what
lyfton refers to as a sacred science that is infallible people can and do fail it all the time
but the doctrine itself cannot fail you've probably heard that before it's in this case it would be
queer theory cannot fail but people can fail queer theory and people are being brainwashed
into that sacred science the point of the cult of confession is to create a dynamic that forces
people to confess their failure to understand internalize and act and even embody the sacred
science the point of kevin kumashiro's leading people into emotional crisis and structuring
the environment around them so they resolve it productively is to lead them to internalize
and act and even embody the sacred science all while accusing others of their failings as much
and often as possible in the name of helping them in the same way the point of the confession is to
get people to willingly adopt the lens of the sacred science in this case queer theory so that
they can learn to quote recognize their crimes against the sacred science and the society aka
cult that supports it and to pledge to do better pledging to do better means ideologically remolding
yourself to use mouths words for it and here queer theory is given as the sacred science the
one true correct understanding of sex gender sexuality and all the normal features of society
and its definitions of what is and is not legitimate it is more than we're going to cover today but
it's a critical constructivist ideology of sex gender and sexuality which believes is sex gender
and sexuality are ultimately socially constructed phenomena that are the products of dominant power
that imprison people in a life that is structured by the power dynamics of society and it is their
obligation to wake up to that fact and to denounce all norms and legitimacy in order to try to overthrow
that system sixth lyfton calls it doctrine over person cults place doctrine over people if we
quote from hegel as i like to do at times like this history uses people and then discards them
the person isn't even a person in the eyes of the cult if they don't hold to and enact the doctrine
as mal said not to have correct political opinions is like not having a soul
i don't really need to elaborate on how doctrine operates over people you're not really a person
and you can't be associated with unless you are involved in and support the doctrine seventh
lyfton lo calls it loading the language do i have to describe how queer theory loads the
language all the words mean more than one things everything's got an agenda tucked in it
we're all very familiar with the language stuff now inclusion belonging diversity hate this is all
heavily loaded language that all advances the acceptance and spread of the agenda of the cult
and keeps people locked into it and eighth lyfton says the last characteristic of cults is dispensing
of existence and he says at the deepest level i'm not quoting him here i'm paraphrasing him
the cult decides whose existence counts and whose doesn't the punchline of this is that those who
accept the cult doctrine which is the sacred science and its application are considered people
and no one else is it's like they don't have a soul my is what mal said only the doctrine
nearly legitimate are allowed to exist at least in a spiritual sense everyone else is some kind of a
fallen deplorable hater effectively enemies and non people which justifies their abuse
their disenfranchisement their silencing cutting them out of your life even if they're your parents
and so on that's a cult environment and queer theory as you can see very easily satisfies
all of that just kind of for fun um the standard iron law of woke projection of course always applies
because it never misses and the dispensing of existence aspect of the cult environment says
kind of why woke activists always say everything is denying their existence or a genocide you know
they always say oh you deny our existence unless you give us gender affirming care uh it's a trans
genocide they're projecting what's happening is they're projecting it's the iron law of woke
projection their belief is that you don't have a right to exist if your beliefs quote unquote
deny their right to exist which is in quotes because you aren't denying their right to exist
you're denying their political identity which isn't even a real identity in queer theory this
means if you don't affirm their embodied political activism against everything legitimate and normal
then you're denying their existence it's like how they have fat studies people which took this idea
from queer theory by the way say that if you were to encourage weight loss programs and fitness and
eating better and losing weight um that what you would do is a fat genocide because if all the people
lost weight and there are no fat people there would be no fat culture and so you've committed a fat
genocide by getting rid of all the fat people and you say well we didn't get rid of anybody and
they say well there's no fat people so you get rid of fat people um and you think i'm making it up
but that's how they think and um because you are apparently willing to do a genocide of that kind
or a cultural genocide you're therefore beyond the pale of humanity and do not deserve to exist
that's actually the cult's logic and that's the logic of all totalitarian genocides that's it
the people who you know we have we have a communist utopia on the other side we have a queer
horizon of possibility and potentiality but transphobes and selfish capitalists and so on
won't let us have it so we've got to get rid of them we would already have communism socialism
would already be working great we would already have a communist utopia but some people are selfish
and won't won't give up their private property so let's just go seize their farms and get the
program going we could open our society back up you know if if everybody would just get their
vaccines if everybody would just 100% of everybody just got all their shots then we could just get
our economy back same logic all totalitarian genocides come from this darkest piece of cult
logic we could go a lot deeper into the nature of the queer theory cult and how it's a cult in this
i'm sure i will in future podcasts i'm not going to drag it out um i'm not going to get into the
whole gnostic hermetic conception of the world with normal society acting like a evil spirit
that imprisons everyone into performing a fake persona for the world that's gender performativity
so they can never be liberated to be who they truly are i've done that at length in other
podcasts i'll probably do it again i think there's one actually called queer theory is queer
narcissism or something you should go listen to that should also read the querying of the american
child where we cover this in tremendous depth um that would get us into talking about judith butler
when a queer theory's uh founding mothers i suppose fathers i mean whatever and her belief
that gender and sex aren't actually real but her performances we already talked about that um we learned
repeat those performances in order to satisfy normal society which is now acting like a
gnostic demiurge her whole body of work could be summarized like i said before in the six words
drag is life and life is drag so everybody's always doing drag and everything that they do
whether they realize it or not because society writes the scripts for how we do drag which is
usually cis hetero um and that we just do that and in her language borrowing from foucault she says
that imprisons their souls which they then have to script physically on that's her word script
them physically onto their body or inscribe onto their body and script into the society through
their bodies by performing gender and becoming aware of this doingness of gender maybe one day
already doing gender as a podcast as a paper that gets it's super influential that gets overlooked
a lot um but being coming out for judith butler becoming aware of the doingness of gender and
even sex and sexuality opens the door to that queer horizon of possibilities beyond the norm
she got those ideas in turn from michelle foucault we already talked about him
uh also from uh the radical feminism she was embedded in which would be Simone de Beauvoir
we could get really deep into that we've kind of done it before uh
what do i want to say here um the idea though is that you know society forces you to imprison
yourself uh in a gender performance or a mode of presentation and that you can break free of
that prison by understanding it um we're not going to get into the whole john money side of things
and stroller and greenson and the idea of gender identity that's another podcast for another day
but it it's basically what they did is kind of discombobulated the idea of who we are
by misusing the synonym for sex that is gender um initially likely as a synonym but then by
divorcing it from sex entirely that's its own story we're not going to get into the
i mean i did a podcast on this feminist something about feminist nosticism you can look it up
where i talk about uh Simone de Beauvoir and the pressing question of what is a woman
one is not born but becomes woman she said and her point was the same as foucault's about homosexuals
what does it mean to be a woman when no one else in particular society and patriarchy
get to tell you what it means to be a woman uh or for foucault a homosexual which
Halprin says means queer so in short we really could summarize this as a reconceptualization
of what i call social nosticism in which we are imprisoned by the features of our social reality
but can escape at least socio-spiritually with the right hidden insights about who we really are
and into what world we have been flung or thrown that's a hadegra reference if you don't know it
and that um by doing so that we might actually achieve liberation or emancipation that's why
their language is this way um this is a transformative social nosticism that reconceives
of the uh mysticism of earlier ages um that's a lot to get into about how characters such as
rousseau and hagel and marx preceding bivouar foucault and butler or even swedenborg and
jakaboma and some of these other characters maybe viko geambattista viko and some others all led
to this um social alchemy as described by the way and you should listen to my george soros podcast
about social alchemy but with queer theory and queer education in particular and social justice
education more broadly one of its primary laboratories for this mysticism is our children
and we should be really upset but we also should ask the question why children why does queer
theory target kids why is it so interested in children which is one of the characteristics
that i gave remember i said queer theory is the doctrine of a religious cult that cult is based
on sex it is little or nothing to do with gay people and it primarily targets children well
four reasons really first children are in schools typically and even with their entertainment uh
they are a captive environment captive audience in schools they have to go to school for 30 35
hours a week even if unless they're very strictly monitored in homeschooling the curriculum standards
are usually including this and so they're a captive audience second children have not achieved the
necessary cortical development in their brains to distinguish reality from fantasy so the
mystifications of queer theory can be considered plausible to them where adults would be less
interested third children are going through the developmental process processes i should say of
identity formation and puberty which need to be hijacked for this ideology to take firm root
just it's so tumultuous to grow up but you are also literally going through the process of figuring
out who you are which is a whole thing and they have to take advantage of that in order to get
queer theory to really take root but finally children become and this is really important from
the marxist perspective that queer theory is queer marxism again read queering of the american
child and really get your head around this it's important but children become a gateway into
families and they become a wedge into not just families but also other targets families faiths
and any institutions they grow up to become a part of they have to have a bottom up demand
that they're trying to force into our kids through brainwashing them at school to demand
the inclusive policies so they can have the ability to install them by what looks like
dint of demand rather than totalitarian top-down force that's how they're trying to get around that
okay so now we can summarize what is queer theory it's a doctrine of religious cult the
cult is primarily sex-based it predominantly targets children it has little nothing to do
with being gay and what can we do about it well normally we would turn to our institutions and
ask them to see the light and step in but we can't do that this isn't working our institutions are
actually captured our medical institutions or educational institutions or government institutions
or entertainment institutions or media institutions they're captured we face a problem of captured
institutions there's a like to phrase it now ideologically contaminated institutions our
institutions accept and promote queer theory all the way up to the white house we therefore cannot
count on our institutions educational psychological medical governmental anything to help us here
they're all captured what do we do they are part of the controlled melu in lyfton's language
they are creating the mystical manipulation they are peddling the sacred science of queer theory
they are in short the center of the problem so what's this like here's an analogy it's like
being a pilot and you're flying the plane and imagine all your instruments go out right so
you're flying the plane you're you're a pilot and everything goes out on the aircraft right no
navigation computer no altimeter nothing what do you have to do that's us we have our institutions
are like our our instruments what do you have to do if you're that pilot because this tells us
what we're going to do so imagine picture yourself in the cockpit you're flying a plane
and all you're in the air and all of a sudden all your instruments go out what do you have to do
you have to fly the plane safely mechanically and find a runway and land you don't get to rely on
your instruments because you don't have them like i said no navigation computer no altimeter
no speedometer nothing you have you you have your experience you have your wits and you're
hopefully the weather is good and you have enough ability to see what's in front of you to do the
right thing that's all you get that's like us our institutions are like the instruments in that
cockpit but for society not for an airplane and right now they're putting out all the wrong
information consistently they will not help us find a runway or land the plane safely and if we
take the plane analogy seriously our lives and the lives of everybody in the plane aka our society
depend on us doing this so what would we do in that situation we would use our senses we would
trust our eyes and ears in other words we would use our senses directly to look for the runway to
line up lower the plane land it and slow down and stop we wouldn't be looking to the broken
instruments at all we wouldn't be looking off into space we would look at reality around us and
navigate without the instruments as the intermediary and that's what we need to start finding ways to do
now at the societal level one individual at a time we need to start figuring out how to look
around us assess what's really going on and make smart judicious action where if we or if
we're rash if you just jerk the wheel or pull the throttle or whatever you're still going to crash
and everything's going to go bad we have to make smart decisions that take into account reality
individually what does that mean what do you do well what you start with is the truth not some
mediated truth peddled by these corrupt institutions but the plain simple truth the kind that you
can see with your eyes and experience and everybody knows like that there are two sexes that people
can't change sex that most people are straight that gay happens we don't know why that's fine
queer is not an identity it's a defiant political stance we don't have to tolerate or accommodate
how can you know that one with your own senses because it's in the fucking book defining it guys
it's in black and white they wrote it down themselves so if they tell you that you have that
information so if someone claims to have an identity or sexuality that requires an explanation
to put it simply it's fake that's that's common sense right if somebody claims to have an identity
or sexuality that requires an explanation it's fake and doesn't demand our respect
we don't have to respect this we have to be nice we're not nice we have to be
human to people we have to realize that the people in this cult are people in a cult
and they need help they need deprogramming they need therefore patience and compassion
and a landing pad and lots of things but we also have to recognize that there's a lot of predatory
behavior happening and predator predatory behavior of any kind in any place is not something that we
have to support or enable perversion outside of the confines if you want to call it this
of consenting adults acting in private does not deserve our tolerance and shouldn't be given it
our schools should not be doing any of this our schools should not be pushing
our kids into emotional crisis and then resolving it productively that's child abuse
our schools should not be putting pornography in front of our children whether it's in class
or through their libraries or through the curriculum through any various tricks and children do not
benefit from its presence there enough of this this is the kind of stuff is that you can start to
first recognize get your bearings if you're in that plane you've got to figure out what the
heck's going on you've got to get your bearings for yourself that's what i'm talking about wait a
minute porn in the schools what the hell what push kids into an emotional crisis and resolve it
according to our doctrine that's a problem what are you going to do you've got to assess what's
going on you've got to stop listening to the to the gas lighting in the bs and get your head on
straight you've got a plane to land and you don't have instruments in fact you have worse no
instruments you have lying instruments and with the where that is is in the truth so you've
got to look for the truth and you really have to look for it and you have to tell other people it
what i say a lot and you've heard this before i did a podcast on this is that you have to love the
truth i kind of riff from the bible you have to love the truth with all your heart and all your
mind and all your soul and all your strength and you have to love your neighbor enough to tell your
neighbor the truth as you would have him tell you the truth these are basic commandments this is
this this is how it sounds like that's not enough it's everything at the beginning and then you put
that into practice and you can fix the world but you really do have to love the truth because if
you love the truth you'll say it you won't care if they call you transphobic you'll seek it you'll
read these awful books you'll defend it when you get under attack or somebody else says you'll defend
other people who are saying it you'll support them you'll back them up you have to love the truth
because if you don't eventually the splc is going to write an article about you and you're going to
back off you'll buckle they're going to threaten to take something away from you or your kids that
you can't bear and you'll buckle and you'll get pulled into this caring affirming nonsense
but the fact of the matter is that there's no caring and there's no affirmation that isn't
first built on the truth so you're going to have to love the truth and you're going to have to
to push it and defend it and help other people do it in tough situations there's no other way
and every time you tell a lie just remember this every time you tell a lie to to be nice or to fit
in the pronoun game or whatever you're selling a piece of your soul so you have to stop doing that
and that's what it means really to love the truth and if you start there telling the truth that's
what solzhenichin said is that if you tell the truth one man telling the truth can bring down a
regime it starts a ripple effect one person telling the truth is a lot becomes a lot of people
telling the truth facts start to come out then there's more things to tell the w path files come out
next thing you know this entire medical monstrosity starts to crumble out from under and you say well
we can't get the law to go along this we can't get the courts to agree with us keep fighting because
day by day by day something else comes out keep digging somebody had to go look up what's going
on at w path whether it's me a hues or whoever digging into it um there's other revelations
i guess i do no harm just release them the daily color just release them somebody's digging into
it so start digging get curious ask questions read the materials figure out who's funding it
whatever happens to be and then report on it and when you do these things which is what it means
to be based by the way you break the melu control and you can start to break apart the cult you also
need to protect your kids obviously um to keep them out of the controlled melu uh into one that
you children are supposed to be in a sheltered melu and the parents are in charge of that
sheltering um you also when you do these things you tell the truth you seek the truth you fight
for the truth you defend the truth every day you don't just break melu control you but you break
apart mystical manipulation they can't trick you if they end up doing this huge stage demonstrate
demonstration and you say that's planned spontaneity and it's fake it makes it lose its magical power
you by doing this cast doubt upon the so-called sacred science gender ideology starts looking
not just even incorrect but ridiculous and the more people who think it's ridiculous the more
people who will either loudly or quietly walk away from it what happens when you start doing this
and start doing it consistently and start doing it every day like billboard chris showing up one
conversation at a time getting clear on his pursuing the information getting clear getting out there
and talking to people as you start to break those cycles of abuse you break the cult of confession
you tell people that it's okay to trust their eyes and their ears and even their gut intuition
and to believe in common sense again and to understand therefore very clearly that what
they are experiencing and seeing in queer theory is abusive and manipulative because queer theory
is the doctrine as i said of a cult religion that is based on sex that primarily targets
their children has very little to do nothing to do really with being gay it's hostile in fact to
gay interests in every regard if we might use this phrase gay interests and so it's our necessary
responsibility to learn as much about it as we can both in theory and in practice and to
tell people about it and oppose it um like i said you can read a lot of what i had to say here
in my book with logan lansing it's his book really that i helped with called the querying of the american
child um i hope this was a informative episode it was a lot longer than i meant um i gave this
talk at pit in like 45 minutes and here we are at almost an hour and 40 but i hope you'll forgive me
more to come soon i've got more horrifying un documents and other things coming so thank
you for listening and i'll catch you in the next one
you
