Hey everybody, it's James Lindsay. You're listening to the New Discourses podcast, and in particular
you're listening to another long weird episode of the New Discourses podcast because we're going
to talk about something weird yet again in rather tremendous depth. We're going to talk about the
United Nations. And a matter of fact, what we're going to talk about is there was a United Nations
character, I'll kind of spell this out in a minute named Robert Mueller, and in the 2000 days leading
up to the year 2000. So the 2000 days leading up to January 1st, 2000, Robert Mueller, who was by
no means a small player in the United Nations pantheon, laid out what he called 2000 ideas and
dreams for a better world, or sometimes he referred to it as 2000 ideas, or 2000 ideas for the year
2000. And in essence, he was laying out ideas and dreams like kind of his just thoughts, 2000 of
them as a matter of fact, for the direction that the United Nations should take and the role it
should play in the world in the 21st century. And the point of this podcast is to tell you some
of what he said, and so that we can realize that the direction of the United Nations, whatever
the United Nations was intended to be from its origins, and since it originated with the Huxleys,
I don't think it was necessarily ever meant to be a good organization. I think it's always had
theosophical roots, but it is unambiguous in these documents that Robert Mueller, and I'll tell you
who he is in a second, you know who he is, you just don't realize you know who he is. He's not the
guy that prosecuted Trump. That's a different Robert Mueller, or I should say, investigated
Trump. It's spelled differently. They're not the same guy. But you've heard of him before.
It's unambiguous in these documents that Robert Mueller wanted the United Nations to reconstitute
itself for the 21st century, that he wasn't satisfied with how theosophical the United Nations
was in the 20th century, and he wanted it to reconstitute itself as an explicitly
very theosophical organization going into the 21st century. So he delivers this in the late
1999, I should specify, to the UN Secretary General at the time and urges him to read these,
and he actually, the document I'm pulling from is a small document that he sent specifically to
the Secretary General to pay attention to, which is a condensation. So the way Robert Mueller
published 2000 ideas and dreams for a better world, or 2000 ideas for the year 2000,
was in four volumes. I'll make all four volumes are on his website, Robert Mueller.org. I'll make
those available in links to this so you can go see all 2000 ideas if you want. He said he was
going to write 3000 ideas because the plans were meant to extend to the year 3000 for the United
Nations, but I don't know if the other 1000 ever got written. I haven't looked that deeply into it
yet, but he wrote this condensed version where he wrote 59 pages of the ones that he thought was
more most important in the realm of spiritual direction that the UN should take in world
leadership, including of course, a one world government headquartered through the United
Nations or coordinated through the United Nations. And it's kind of creepy how much of it seems to
fit with what we're dealing with, because this is straight occult theosophy guiding the ship of
the United Nations, which means the United Nations, whatever it started as, and like I said, I don't
think it started good. I think it's always been an occult theosophical organization, and I think
there are reasons to believe that that's true, some of which I've discussed before, like in the
WTF is SEL podcast. Certainly for the last two decades, since I will say specifically 2003,
it has been oriented toward a transformational project, and that transformational project is
rooted in occult theosophy. So it's not a good organization. It's not a neutral organization.
It's not even really a governing organization. It is an occult organization. It is a best you
could say is really weird organization. Worst you could say is that it's genuinely an evil
organization. And I think that we, this is all very positive the way that Robert Mueller wrote
this, but I think that we're going to come away understanding that. And because this is going
to be really long, I've set aside almost 10,000 words of his writing to explore. I want to just
kind of dive in and not preamble too much, but we got to start with who is Robert Mueller.
So Robert Mueller worked at the United Nations. It's M-U-L-L-E-R. It's not, again, the same guy
who investigated Trump. That's a different Robert Mueller, spelled differently. He worked at the
United Nations for over 40 years. He was at one time the assistant secretary general, so he was
very high up. He was very well respected. He was very well networked throughout the United Nations
through much of that long career. But more importantly, and this is where you've heard
of him before, is he's the guy who developed the World Core Curriculum, which was meant to be
a new education method for the entire planet, according to a set of core curriculum points
that were going to be core to the entire world's education program. In the United States, that
became Common Core. So Common Core was created slightly indirectly, but basically by Robert
Mueller at the United Nations. Now, I introduced that concept to you previously. In the very long
WTF is SEL. What the F is, Social Emotional Learning Podcasts that I did some time ago,
where I pointed out that Robert Mueller's ideas were, in fact, strongly influenced by
the occult theosophist who created the Lucifer publishing company named Alice Bailey. His ideas
about education were inspired by an an occult theosophist named Alice Bailey. Now, the point of
that podcast wasn't to talk about Common Core and its origins or Robert Mueller, it was just kind of a
sidebar. The point was to talk about Social Emotional Learning and its development at the
Fedser Institute. Now, I want to remind you, by the way, so far as these two programs go,
Social Emotional Learning and Common Core, both of which, both of these were very heavily funded
by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation gave hundreds of
millions of dollars to pushing the Common Core or the World Core curriculum into the United States,
but that wasn't enough. And when Common Core kind of started to falter and it got replaced with
Social Emotional Learning starting in 2015 and 16, Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation has dumped
possibly up to two billion dollars into pushing that. But the point is that they're both based in
the same occult theosophy, deriving from the rantings of Alice Bailey and others. But Robert
Mueller was no small player. Like I said, he was Assistant Secretary General of the United Nations
for a while. He was named the Chancellor of the United Nations University for Peace, which is
headquartered in Costa Rica. He talks about this. He also organized a group you haven't heard about
yet, but you're going to need to hear about, which is called the Evolutionary Leaders. Who are the
Evolutionary Leaders? Well, they're a bunch of theosophical occult weirdos who believe in something
that is called the New Thought Movement or New Thought Religion. I would say it's the Gnostic
New Thought Movement, because it is a Gnostic and Hermetic kind of spin-off cult. It has roots tied
back to, I know I've talked about this briefly in the past with some of the Gnosticism and Hermeticism
podcasts, has roots tied back into the Kabalian, which is probably written by this guy Atchkinson.
I always say his name a little bit messed up. I got to work on that. And so this is like legit,
legit, theosophical, I would say New Age, but the name of it's actually New Thought. And then
it's a Gnostic approach. It's a Gnostic religion. And their goal is to make a Gnostic One World
Religion that's the one religion in the world that's coordinated and interwoven with the governments,
a world government through the United Nations. And you would be very familiar if you are a daytime
TV aficionado from the 90s and early 2000s, with lots of the evolutionary leaders, even though you
didn't know you're familiar with them, because Oprah Winfrey has platformed every single one of them.
The so-called New Age stuff, which is all occult theosophy, that Oprah Winfrey and her
book club mainlined into middle-class moms and primarily their daughters and somewhat their sons
for the last several, you know, decades, is all Gnostic New Thought. And the New Thought movement
itself, by the way, has been recognized as a world religion now. It's not recognized in the
United States specifically as a religion, but it is recognized as a world religion
by the international body that certifies these things. So I want to thank particularly Lisa
Logan for showing me this. I mean, I wasn't digging into Robert Mueller, I probably should have been,
but she started to, and she showed me this, and she's helped me understand and link out all the
connections between Robert Mueller and the United Nations to the evolutionary leaders, which she's
researching tremendously right now, and to the Gnostic New Thought movement, which she's
researching right now. And she got into chasing all this down basically by pursuing the Alice
Bailey stuff that we were talking about about a year ago, and so a little over a year ago now,
like a year and a half ago. So this is deep and dark stuff, and I'm barely skimming the surface
of it. And I really want to thank Lisa Logan for all the work she's doing and for bringing this to
my attention so that I can bring it to your attention. But if you really want to want the
deep dives on this, she's already been putting some of it out, and she's going to be putting a
lot more of it out, she's going to really expose this. You need to go follow and pay attention
to Lisa Logan. So she's at I Am Lisa Logan. Everything's spelled the way you think it is.
That's on the X, and you can figure her out further from there. She's doing an amazing job
digging this stuff up and making us understand it. So she sent me this condensed document that is
59 pages of a summary for 2000 ideas and dreams for a better world. And I have stuck to that
document, even though when you go read the all 2000 of the ideas, like there are some other
ones that are so insane that it was super hard not to add them. It's very hard not to read basically
all of this, which would take like weeks of podcasts to get through all of it. There's 2000
of them. But anyway, this document was originally published and sent with its full reply on March
17, 1999. It says it begins with a handful of letters back and forth between Robert Muller
and the Office of the Secretary General of the United Nations. And it says, Dear Robert,
your thoughtful letter and book ideas and dreams for a better world arrived. The Secretary General
wishes to thank you for the dedication and inspiration you continue to give to the cause of
peace, justice, and freedom. Your dynamic and eloquent leadership gives you courage or sorry,
gives courage to so many who share our goals. The Secretary General looks forward to reading
your book with care and ask that I convey your views to other officials. So why I included this
little letter reply from the beginning is to frame who Robert Muller is. He's a very important
character. The Secretary General has a direct correspondence with him. He wishes to thank
Robert Muller for his dedication and inspiration. And he can he applauds Robert Muller's dynamic
and eloquent leadership. And in particular, though, this is what he says is that he this dynamic and
eloquent leadership gives courage. And I quote to so many who share our goals. Well, what are those
goals? This is an occult theosophy document. As you're going to hear, what are the goals of the
United Nations? That's the question that this really raises. And I want to point out, it says,
the Secretary General looks forward to reading your book with care and ask that I convey your
views to other officials. So this is in March, 1999, March 17, 1999. As a matter of fact,
my thought is, almost all of this horrific stuff, whether it's ESG, guess what year that was created
2003. Comprehensive Sexuality Education, 2003. A bunch of the other UNESCO and UN initiatives
that are actually shaping the global agenda that we're all getting put through right now,
all started in 2003, which is a few years down the road from this. Did this inform those? That's a
legitimate question at this point. The reorganization and kind of pedal to the metal of the United
Nations, which at the time would have been pushing agenda 21. So what's the relevance of the timing?
The idea was that by the year 2021, which did not succeed, that we would enter into a new world.
That was the idea of agenda 21. And it was based off of what we're called the Millennium Development
Goals, which preceded the Sustainable Development Goals. Okay. And there were eight of those,
there are 17 Sustainable Development Goals, I will remind you with their magic number 17.
So I'm strongly suspicious that the reason that it all started in 2003,
and this goes 2003 plus 17 is 2020. So they have a 17 year long cycle in order to try to
implement agenda 21 so that the new world starts on, it starts in, I don't know what date they
would have picked specifically within the year, but in 2021. Much like we're supposed to have a
new world now as they delayed it and pushed it back in 2030. That's why they call it the 17
Sustainable Development Goals are for 2030. It's literally called agenda 2030. People want to say
you're a conspiracy theorist, is it a conspiracy? If it's like literally an agenda, wouldn't the
people be working on the agenda? Wouldn't the secretary general looks forward to reading your
book with care and ask that I convey your views to other officials because it gives leaders,
or sorry, it gives courage to so many who share our goals. Well, what the hell are those goals?
Well, let's dive into this and see what some of this book says. But first, let me give you
some context, because the next thing in the document that was published here that I have
is that Robert Mueller, this is the response to Robert Mueller's letter, Robert Mueller then
includes his own letter that he sent. I'm not going to read all of it, obviously. And this isn't
the excerpts from the book. This is just the cover letter. And he sent that on March 6. So
again, just to underline how what a deal this guy is, Robert Mueller sent this on March 6,
1999. And 11 days later, and I'm not common claiming some numerology to that, 11 days later,
he had a response saying that it was going to be disseminated through the secretary general of the
UN and other people. So he's a very influential character. So his letter, Robert Mueller's letter,
this is Robert Mueller, starts off this way. Dear Mr. Secretary General, with the year 2000,
you are becoming the most important person on earth in the entire human history. How can you
face this overwhelming challenge in one of the most complex and messy human, earth, and evolutionary
situations this planet has ever known? Well, here are a few advices from a lifetime world
public servant and direct aid to three former secretaries general. I'm not going to read all
these advices, which are mostly a reminder to the secretary general of his power and his importance
as what's called the Millennium Assembly for the year 2000 was approaching. So what was this
power and importance? Obviously, you are becoming the most important person on earth in the entire
human history because of the year 2000 is what Mueller said to the guy. And in terms of what
the complex, messy human, earth, and evolutionary situations, the most complex ones that the earth
has ever known. And so he's reminding him of his power in terms of getting all of the world's
leaders on the same page as their agenda. And so that's what that's what the advices are really
about. You need to wake up in the morning and look at yourself and realize how important your job is.
You need to get the other world leaders on board with what we're doing. We need as many of them as
possible. That's your role. We have to prepare for the Millennium Assembly. That's the kind of
advices that are there. And I'm laughing that he called it advices, plural instead of advice.
So then after indicating that the secretary general should have all of his officers read all
four volumes of this 2000 ideas, and to incorporate as many of them are useful into the Millennium
Assembly, which is supposed to set the trajectory for the United Nations in the new millennium. So
in some sense, not just for the 21st century, but all the way to the year 3000, presuming like I
told you a minute ago that Robert Mueller believed that there would be UN global governance till
the year 3000, a millennium of this tyranny. After urging that all the officers read this 2000 ideas
book that I'm going to share from, he then notes that the purpose of this particular document that
he's sending, which is an excerpt from the four volumes, is to relay 59 pages of the ideas that
he wrote in 2000 ideas that are pertinent to a global religious movement. And I'm telling you,
it's a cult theosophy. And that's what we're going to focus on. In fact, we're going to focus hard
on that one magic word there, evolutionary. Because that's what these people think that
they're doing. And like I said, Robert Mueller organized a group that are called the evolutionary
leaders that believe that they're going to be able to direct the spiritual evolution of man
in the correct direction. Now, I will point out that theosophists throughout history have believed
this. The Gnostics believed this. The ancient Hermeticists believe this. Karl Marx believed
this. The point of seizing the means of economic production was that Karl Marx believed that the
means of economic production produced economic conditions. And economic conditions produced
people. It produced who you were. So if you seize and transform the means of economic production,
you seize the means of producing man to be different. In fact, to become socialist or
eventually communist, ideally, which is a spiritual evolution because Marx's idea is that communism
in its true form is the, in his words, positive transcendence of private property as human
self-estrangement. So in other words, it is a Marx believed that we're going to seize the means of
production of man so that we transcend our fallen form of private property owning individuals.
We're going to go back into a unified social and creative entity, mass entity, collective entity,
where we are our own creators, direct our own evolution. And the end point of that evolution
is this liberated communist utopia. And this isn't that far off. This is a another branch
on the same tree. I'm not calling this guy a Marxist. I don't think he is. I think he's another
branch on the same theosophical tree. That's what this document is actually about is
communicating 59 pages worth of these crackpot ideas. And I had to do some work to select down
to just staying under 10,000 words of them pertinent to a global religious movement.
And that global religious movement's purpose is to direct the future evolution of man. There's
a word for that. It's called eugenics. Evolutionary leaders could be called eugenics leaders very
easily. It's like a rebrand to hide what they really are. But I want to stress that the goal
is not whether it's communism, whether it's new thought, the goal, whether it's Margaret Sanger's
Planned Parenthood, which is another branch on this same tree. The goal is not and Alice Bailey
made this very clear. And I talked about this in the WTF is SEL podcast as well about Alice Bailey.
The goal is not to direct the physical evolution of man. So so much to say Alice Bailey called that
exoteric eugenics and said it's not good. It's to direct the spiritual evolution of man, which is
of course co constituted or intrinsically interwoven with the physical evolution of man.
So the goal is actually to direct man on a spiritual level, but we have to work with the
crude means that we have. In other words, as above so below, so the spiritual level of man
imprints on his physical form and as below so above. So we work with the physical forms. We work
with physical things to direct the spiritual evolution as below so above. And when that happens,
just like Karl Marx believed in the cycle of man creates society, creates man, creates society,
here we have the idea that we're going to direct the consciousness of man until the
consciousness of man changes spiritual evolution. And that will cause a new man to arise who's more
in line with that level of spirituality. And their goal is to push us into a new age,
which just so happens to be under their control. Because of their global world, I want to say
religion that there's the word they're kind of using it, but it's a cult. This is the largest
cult startup in the history of the world. And ultimately, the theosophical religions across
the board all have the exact same idea that the fundamental human right is to be back in the
Garden of Eden. We have a fundamental right to a liberated utopia. So when you hear them talk about
our human rights or whatever, then you say, well, they just seem to make up a new right like every
other day. This is right. That's right. Everything's an intrinsic right. What they believe is that they
have an intrinsic right to live in utopia. And literally, it's to, if we go kind of deeper into
the old theosophical religions, that to re-enter into the Garden of Eden, that the God that kicked
us out is some kind of an evil demagogic being, or it's a result of a cosmic negative accident that
kicked us out of our inheritance in the perfected utopia of Eden. And that we have an inalienable
right to live in Eden that we have been alienated from because of a cruel and wicked circumstance
of whatever caused us to fall in the past. It was the serpent luring us to eat the fruit of the tree
of the knowledge of good and evil, and then God kicked us out, which is characterized as an evil
act and proof that the God portrayed in Genesis as a demon, or with Marx as the advent of private
property and the individualism that follows from it. With the queer theory, it would be the advent of
people believing they can define what it means to be normal for a human being, and thus falling into
the same kind of situation and estranging one another. But their belief is that we have a
fundamental inalienable right to re-enter the Garden of Eden. And that happens by advancing our
spiritual and collective societal human evolution into the direction indicated by their religious
crack pottery. So like I said, it is the largest cult startup in the history of the world. And my
essential claim, just to put it very bluntly in this podcast, is that at least in this century,
so at least for the last two decades and maybe a little more, the United Nations has been
devoted to this goal and has been devoted to being the headquarters for this cult movement,
with all of its power, all of its extensions. And so there's no reason that we should be
participating in the United Nations whatsoever. It is a cult theosophical organization. That's
my hypothesis. So just another snippet from Muller, before we get down to these ideas, he says,
with Dr. Karen Singh of India, we have just created a world commission on global consciousness and
spirituality to promote a much needed spiritual renaissance. That's the goal of this document.
That's the goal of what the United Nations was setting up around the year 2000, up to 2003,
when they started pushing all of this stuff. He says, I'm sending other members an excerpt of
59 pages of ideas regarding religion and spirituality similar to the one on the future and
futures capitalized here. So that's this document. That's the 59 pages. This document is the 59 pages
of what Robert Muller thinks the United Nations needs to understand about religion and spirituality
and what it should look like in the 21st century and actually in the entire third millennium.
And it's all connected to something that they call their world commission on global consciousness
and spirituality. There's that consciousness word. That's a theosophical tell that there's
some secret consciousness that you awaken to that if you don't have it, you're basically like cattle.
And this document is meant to be issued in pursuit of a, quote, much needed spiritual renaissance.
Like I said, he then goes on to note that he says, these are Robert Muller's 2000 ideas
started on 11 July 1994, 2000 days before 1 January 2000. So I'd only bring it up because
I want to point out to you how invested they are in symbolism. It's not a hard calculation,
but it's a calculation. You have to sit down and very intentionally decide to figure out which
day on the calendar is 2000 days before January 1, 2000. And that day happened to work out
mathematically to July 11, 1994. And that was the day he decided to start writing 2000 ideas
for the 21st century. He didn't write one idea a day, even though that seems to be it.
He wrote on average one idea per day, but he also is proud that he finished a little bit
early. And that's why he was able to submit this on the 6th of March 1999 instead of having to wait
until, you know, December or something. And so this document I'm about to read from is exactly
what Muller indicates. It's 59 pages totaling perhaps a couple hundred of these 2000 ideas
that he considers specifically essential to a spiritual renaissance for the world,
meant to be facilitated and coordinated into a single world religion through the United Nations.
I am not going to read all of the ideas, all the few hundred ideas in this, I'm not going to read
them in order either because that would bury the lead. Now I am burying the lead a little bit,
but I want to give you a flavor of it. And we're going to, of course, build in the level of crazy.
So stick with me. But I'm going to start with some of the ideas further down on the list.
And then kind of return to some earlier ones with a couple of exceptions. I'm going to do
a couple right from the very beginning, just to give you an idea, because it's again relevant
to understanding who Robert Muller is and what much of his life work involved. And I just want
you to keep in the back of your mind all along. This is the guy who created the education program
that became Common Core. This is the guy who created Common Core. So idea 105 written on the
23rd of October, 1994. For the sake of this planet and humanity's future, an office of global
education should be created in every ministry of education. Global education should be required in
all schools of earth, from kindergarten to university, and in all professional schools,
especially for journalism and the media. So he understood very clearly that messaging
apparatuses and schools, messaging apparatuses need to be captured through their schools,
and he understood that schools themselves need to be turned into brainwashing apparatuses
for his global education. And that's the Common Core program that he invented.
So then that's idea 105, idea 103, which he wrote two days earlier on the 21st of October, 1994.
While the exact sciences are all of a global universal nature, the social sciences are not.
Now, reflecting what we just talked about with George Soros, who published the book Alchemy of
Finance, arguing exactly the same thing two years before this. While the exact sciences are all of
a global universal nature, the social sciences are not, there is urgent need for a global anthropology,
global sociology, global psychology, global political science that he calls planetetics.
Did I say that right? No, planetics, sorry, planetics, planet ICS, planetics, sorry,
global literature, global art, global culture, global philosophy, global futurology, etc.
Margaret Mead was the first prophet recommending it. Now, Margaret Mead is the anthropologist who
went around and is basically the mother of cultural relativism, which is this kind of idea that
matriculated strongly into the social sciences and in particular into the postmodern theory
that says that no culture can judge one another. And this actually dovetails very nicely with these
occult theosophical ideas, which is that there's exactly one religion, thus there's exactly one
philosophy, there's exactly one science, there's exactly one faith, there's exactly one culture.
And what that actually is, is what they called the Priska Theologia, the ancient theology, which
is the occult theology that is frankly flat out denied by the Bible. So we're not looking in
good directions here so far. So let me just give you, now that we've had a lot of preamble,
throat clearing, etc., let me just give you the trigger warning, I guess, what is going to sound
like an old 1950s TV show, or maybe unsolved mysteries from the 1980s. What you are about to
hear will disturb you. It's true. What you're about to hear will actually probably disturb you.
My only commentary then in setting out is, I want you to keep in mind, this is the real United
Nations. When we look under the hood of the UN, this is what we're dealing with. Even with all
the positive aspirational language, this is disturbing. This is a cult theosophy trying to
create a world cult religion that we're all stuck inside. And it's, in fact, a transformational
religion, a transmutational religion, a evolutionary religion. And so they mean to seize the means of
human spiritual production and societal production, such that we will move into our next evolutionary
phase. And that's the goal of the United Nations, at least in the 21st century and third millennium.
So let's start with some stuff we generally already know about the UN and its agendas,
so we don't overwhelm too quickly, so that we can kind of understand how to orient what we already
know about the United Nations in terms of what Mueller is indicating is underneath those agendas,
which is the occult theosophy that this podcast is about. So as a result, I'm going to start near
the end of the document with idea 1912. The creation, he says, by the Rio de Janeiro Conference
of an Earth Council, so we're all familiar that a lot of this environmental sustainability crap
all got kicked off and coordinated at the Rio conference, the Earth Council, in 1992.
So the creation of the Rio de Janeiro Conference of an Earth Council is a great step ahead in
human history. One of its first tasks is to draft an Earth charter. An admirable text of that charter
is now in circulation among non-governmental organizations, NGOs, for their comments. It
opens a completely new chapter of world charters. So here's where the NGOs become the relevant bodies
to push all of this crap. We also need a charter for the seas and oceans, a charter for outer space,
for the air and atmosphere, for the world's waters, for mountain areas, and for arid zones,
for the world's forestry covers, for the world's vegetation, for other species, for human settlements,
etc. A vast new field of human philosophy, behavior, and future evolution has been opened,
the fundamental rights of the Earth. So all of this sustainable crap follows straight from this,
and you hear what they're after, governance of everything in a evolutionary,
theosophical sense, governance of everything, the seas, the oceans, outer space, the air,
the atmosphere, the water, mountains, deserts, forests, vegetation, all the species, human
settlements, they want control over all of it. And we see exactly those kinds of things coming down
the pike today. That's exactly what they're working with with this kind of new Earth charter.
So idea 1930. The UN General Assembly 2000 at the heads of states level must absolutely measure
up to its historical tasks and be remembered for its audacity and long-term views of the future.
It should above all decide to embark on the writing of a constitution for proper Earth
government. If it does not, future historians will not forgive its members. So in the year 2000,
the United Nations General Assembly is tasked, at least in this idea, with embarking on the writing
of a new constitution for proper Earth government. Which does what? What the previous thing said.
It opens up a vast new field of human philosophy, behavior, and future evolution
in the fundamental rights of the Earth. So the constitution, that's supposed to be for global
government, that they're supposed to write in the year 2000, is designed to push the fundamental
rights of the Earth. And he says if it does not, future historians will not forgive its members.
Well, it turns out future historians are probably not going to forgive its members,
but it's not because they did not. It's because they did. Idea 1931. At this stage of our evolution,
the concept of completion and survival of, sorry, I messed that up. At this stage of our evolution,
so let's let's frame our heads here. He's talking directly about our evolution. That means mankind's
evolution. At this stage of our evolution, the concept of competition and survival of the fittest
must be abandoned in favor of the concept of cooperation. Oh, hello Carl Marx. Hello all the
theosophists. The world future evolution of the Earth and of humanity depends on it. Only
cooperation will save the Earth and humanity. From now on, cooperation must be the supreme law of
Earth and human survival. We must aim at a united Earth and nature. There's the seed right there
for the 17 Sustainable Development Goals and how they operate. And he's not just calling for a global
government to be set up through the United Nations and organized in line with extending the 1992 Rio
de Janeiro Earth Council Accord, but that it must also direct the, I should say redirect, the mechanisms
of evolution of humanity specifically. Never mind the laws of nature. Never mind nature's god. Never
mind a biblical god for sure. It is now time for a whole new principle that just so happens to be
cooperation, aka communism, but kind of elevated communism, above communism even. And I want to
stress this point that this evolution is meant in a spiritual sense. The goal is to change the
consciousness of man so that man behaves differently. And through changing consciousness and through
changing how we behave, we become new people, a new species, a more advanced species. And in fact,
we become a communal species. And that's very important. These evolutionary leaders that I
mentioned before that he organized, this is very important because they actually see it that here's
the idea. And I'm stealing from Lisa here. So this is going to be a little bit rough. Lisa Logan,
again, I am Lisa Logan. You should go follow her. So the general idea is they say, well,
look at what you have. You have these bacteria and the bacteria start to make colonies and groups
and they group together. This is a real video. She'll show you the real video eventually. There's
a real video I've seen of this guy given this lecture. So this isn't us riffing. There's also
books explaining this. So the bacteria form, you know, various colonies or whatever. And some of
the colonies figure out that if they share resources in certain ways, that they're more
successful. And so they can now compete the other ones. So bacteria colonies, which are kind of
communities of bacteria do better. And eventually, a thing called a biofilm can form around them so
that the colony itself becomes sort of a single entity. And then the various different bacteria
within it can specialize to do this or do that or do the other thing for the collective. And then
what you end up with is something like an amoeba, you end up with a more complex organism. And that's
one step in an evolutionary spiral that happens to look exactly like all the evolutionary hermetic
spirals that I've put on Twitter over time, like they literally use the same graphic and
outcomes a new species. And this is how evolutionary leaps to higher order creatures,
they say are made. And so eventually amoebas form colonies or something that are like amoebas form
colonies, and they get a biofilm, and then you have a more complex organism and on and up until
you end up with animals, and then you end up with mammals, and then you end up with human beings.
And so they think that we're at the stage. And this is the point of their evolutionary idea,
where human beings themselves are ready to take the next evolutionary leap into a
global collective. And the biofilm, we've already formed communities, but the biofilm that ties us
together that makes us all into one thing is the internet. And the internet can be directed so that
within all the different communities of people, start to work together for one global program.
And so we are meant to become one super organism on the earth. And in fact, in alignment with the earth
as part of the earth. And that's what their their idea of evolution is. But to get people to do this,
they have to elevate their thinking. In other words, they have to have consciousness
raising. In other words, they have to have evolution of consciousness into a global and even as we're
going to hear cosmic consciousness, or astral consciousness that goes above that, and can picture
humanity operating as a global collective. Again, I urge you to realize that this is the exact same
program Karl Marx was was banging on about. Karl just had a different method and a different
formulation. But it's the exact same method that we are all the same. We're all the same
collective, we're all intrinsically meant to be working together. But only the spiritually
advanced what Karl Marx called socialists can actually see it. And here, it's going to be
people with cosmic consciousness. And he is dead serious that the purpose of the United Nations
going forward is going to be to direct the spiritual evolution of man into a single global
collective in a single transformational that is heretical, evil world religion. So let's skip
straight to the end and read idea 2000. And we're going to see this is pretty explicit. He says,
from our current world pessimism, we can be saved and uplifted by this personal conclusion I arrived
at an idea 552. Namely, perhaps out of my passion for life and for this miraculous earth, a new
theory of evolution can be shaped. Namely, that with our recently acquired tremendous human
knowledge of the universe and of our planet, we will henceforth be more than the mere preservers
and savers of the earth, but will be her instruments, her most advanced evolutionary agents, her
children endowed with the evolutionary task to make it an even more astonishing planet and cosmic
evolutionary success, perhaps the most advanced ultimate masterpiece in the universe and God.
Since each species born from nature is a miracle, we are certainly a miracle too.
What great excitement it will be when in the year 2000 humanity will accept this as its new,
all encompassing common objective for the 21st century to make this earth a paradise,
to make humanity a miracle. So I'm not kidding. That's literally what he's about.
That's literally the program. So let's make something extremely clear.
Going to remind you of a word I already used. An intentional theory of evolution for mankind
is eugenics. Let me say that again, because that's what the United Nations through Robert Mueller is
advocating for. And like I said, this is the real United Nations, at least in this century,
I think maybe all along. I seriously think that, but at least in this century. Let me just say
that sentence one more time and I'll say it slowly so it sinks in. An intentional theory of evolution
for mankind is eugenics. The call for man to complete God's creation is esoteric occult
theosophy. We could talk about whether it's inspired from hermetic ideas. You hear the idea
straight up, the Gnostic concept in idea number 2000 here. From our current world pessimism,
we can be saved and uplifted by this secret knowledge that we can actually have a
directed evolution to become the ultimate masterpiece of the universe and God.
So let me make that real clear. This is eugenics. This is the real United Nations and its operating
system is a call for man to complete God's creation, which is esoteric occult theosophy.
This is, we should have nothing to do with this organization. It is not merely a meeting place
for governance to figure out global treaties and things like that. It's nothing of the kind.
And he's extremely serious about this and devotes many of his ideas to making this a reality
through his vision for a United Nations-centered world government. Let's read 1904. Idea number
1904. I recommend that a totally new world organization should be considered for our
earth and humanity. A world organization of evolution into which the United Nations could
be incorporated. This organization would listen to evolutionary scientists who look at evolution
in its multiplicity of forms, from the smallest bacteria to the evolution of humankind,
within the basic elements of the planet, its airs, its water, its climate, etc., and who have a long
term view, Gnostic, who have a long term view of what the future evolution of this planet is likely to be.
This is indispensable because henceforth everything on this planet has to be seen in terms of a long
term future evolution. Our species is now in charge of the earth's future evolution. If we stick to
obsolete values, we will put an end to it. But if we adopt new values, new objectives, visions,
institutions, and laws, evolution will continue. This is henceforth problem number one on this
planet. Everything else has to abide to it. It then continues this thought in Idea 1905. The new
world organization of evolution would issue yearly reports on the state of evolution of our
planet, review the prospects of the future, and recommend corrective actions, including emergency
measures and world laws. Idea 1906. The most important single step that could help save the
earth and humanity would be to create in each government a ministry of the future, and in the
United Nations and in each of its agencies a department and commission of the future. It would
be the first step toward the creation of a world organization of evolution. It is good that the
European Union had the vision to create a position of commissioner for the future. May this good
example be followed by many institutions around the world, public and private.
ESG serves that role, by the way, in a slightly different capacity without necessarily a direct
department. That's what ESG was designed to do. Besides the redirecting of money and impact
investing, ESG was designed to assess the long-term viability in terms of environmental and social
programs plus corporate governance practices. Idea 1907. When one considers the vital importance
of the future evolution of this planet and of humanity, it would be also important to create
a world university of evolution and the future, or at least faculties of evolution and the future
in all universities. When I did that episode not that long ago, where I talked about the UNESCO
document, it was a series of four, the strange death of the university, where I talked about how
the sustainable development goals were to be incorporated completely into university education,
ASAP, at all levels. There you go. This stuff is crazy, but it gets way crazier than this. We're
not even close to crazy. I'm going to skip to the first part of super crazy. This might be the
craziest part. I showed this to Charlie Kirk, and he was just like, what? What? Whoa. Whoa.
Overwhelming. It's this freaking crazy. I want my Christian audience to listen very carefully to
what this says, because I need you to understand how off the rails the United Nations is and how
out of step. Why are they attacking Christianity so hard? You just heard the old values are going
to kill the planet. The old beliefs are going to kill the planet. We have to get rid of them.
So what does he propose here? It's not just that he intends his vision to be moved by the
governments, but very explicitly intends it to be moved by a single new world religion coordinated
as an evolutionary religion, that is occult theosophy, headquartered through the United
Nations or through a new body that the United Nations is incorporated into. And the goal is to,
for him, and I'm not kidding, listen, the goal for him is to envision the United Nations as the
body that is tasked with resetting the world. A great reset, right? Resetting the world with a new
creation. I mean that because the next thing he talks about, at least that I'm going to tell you
about, these are from ideas we were just in the 1900s, we're skipping back to the 1300s,
he literally talks about the concept of a United Nations centered new genesis. Genesis is the first
book of the Bible. Genesis 1 and 2 describe the creation of the world. If you recall your Genesis
1, he talks about the seven days in which God created the world, the six in which he created
it and the seventh upon which he saw that it was good and rested. So pulling from ideas 1301 to
1400, which he offers in a single block in this document with the heading, the spiritual state of
the world, on Earth Day 2013, here's what he writes. Humanity is now a united world community of
nations, not only economic and political, but also spiritual. Following the path opened in the last
century by Doug Homerskold and by Hugh Taunt in the United Nations, by Robert Schumann in Europe,
and also throughout the millennia by prophets and founders of religions and by great sages,
such as Plato, Aristotle, Maimonides, Huxley, Albert Schweitzer, Dillard Deschardin, who is an
outright hermeticist, Thomas Berry, Bishop William Swing, and others. I'm sure digging into all of
those people will uncover that they have very questionable religious beliefs, maybe apart
from Aristotle. Humanity's material, scientific and technological, technological feats of the
20th century, he says, have been transcended first into the moral ethical realm, then into
philanthropy and guiafili, love for humanity and our Earth. That's the key value, by the way,
not just of his program, but of the degrowth communism to fix the metabolic rift that Marx
predicted. If you go back and listen to the degrowth communism podcast that I did recently,
you'll see it's the exact same idea, guiafili, love for humanity and for our Earth. It's all
theosophical occultism. Marxism is just a branch of theosophical occultism that had a very
powerful success record in installing itself politically. And so he says, sorry, humanities
feats of the 20th century have been transcended first into the moral ethical realm, then into
philanthropy and guiafili, and finally into the highest form of all the spiritual dimension heralded
for so long by all religions, namely the right understanding of our place and relationship
in the universe and in time and of our fundamental cosmic nature and role. If you needed more proof
that this is occult theosophy, I don't know what to tell you, but he's invoking the underlying
hermetic concept of the priesthood theologiae there, that there is this ancient world religion,
that all sciences, all thought, all cultures, all religions, all everything are just reflections
of. Hinduism is just doing the best it can, just like quantum physics is doing the best it can,
to explain this one true thing about all of reality. And he thinks that we've now hit the
point where we can actually start to articulate that. The phenomenal expansion of human senses
and physical capabilities through science and technology was followed by the birth and development
of a global brain, a global nervous system, a global heart, and a global soul to humanity.
So Hegel's geist. Much remains to be done to perfect and refine these gains and to integrate
them fully into the total life system of our living planet, skipping a bit. We came to understand
that we are all part of a total living planet which is itself a cosmic body of the universe,
and that in this living system we are linked not only to the earth but to each other and to the
heavens in which we live. The miraculous transformation we have experienced in the
progress of humanity is a result of our cooperation of the world's religions along the lines of the
vast frameworks of our knowledge and our needed actions born in the United Nations and its agencies.
So let's be real clear. He's saying that everything is all one, that's the occult
theosophical view, and that it's actually coming together through the United Nations and its agencies.
These led to a better understanding of our planet and place in the universe of our
total human family, of our place in time, and of the miracle of individual human life.
The last decades of the 20th century provided humanity with the global information
and first experiences indispensable for our better behavior, for better earth government,
and for the physical, mental, moral, effective, and spiritual fulfillment of all humans
blessed with the miracle of life. So we're going to skip a few grandiose paragraphs with
fancy grandiose headings about the unique role of humans in place and time, and we're going to
skip down to one of his subject headings, it's titled the miracle of individual life.
This fourth framework, so you can guess that we skipped three, this fourth framework which
revolves around the centrality of the human person goes far deeper and beyond human institutions.
It has become increasingly clear that in the vast global quantum change in human consciousness,
so does that sound like Deepak Chopra? It does. Why? Because he's one of them. He's actually
a very important figure, he's one of them. You know about the evolutionary leaders and people
like Deepak Chopra? Because Oprah Winfrey put them on TV all the time, dozens of times, over and over
again and mainline them into our culture. It has become increasingly clear that in the vast
global quantum change in human consciousness, individuals are the alpha and omega. Oh, we're
God, okay. The basic living cosmic units of evolution. Individual, what? Don't all biological
things evolve on the theory of evolution? But no, human beings, human consciousness,
individuals. Individual human life is the highest form of universal consciousness. This is just the
theosophical belief set that we are the unique creature that's able to figure out where the
divine has been fragmented so that we can lead God to realize himself so that we eventually,
God realizes that we are no different from one another or anything else and in fact that we
are always God. That's literally it. Individual human life is the highest form of universal
consciousness. With the recognition of universal human rights and responsibilities, it became apparent
that institution systems, states, groupings, entities had no consciousness and could only be
instruments, servants, means for the increase of individual consciousness, fulfillment and
responsibility. The highest goal for humankind is to attain optimum physical, mental, effective,
moral, and spiritual lives as a part of the total life system of our planet.
So are you getting the idea that this is a super crackpot religion? It is. Optimum physical life
involves knowledge and care of the human body, the human ability to see, to hear, to observe,
to create, to do, to act, to transform, and the expansion of all senses and physical abilities.
That's, there you go. Optimum meant that, by the way, Karl Marx says the same thing in the
Economic Philosophic Manuscript, by the way, by the way, he says the exact same thing. It's the
exact same theosophical nonsense and I think that Karl Marx stole it from the Corpus Hermaticum.
It's way too weird that it's in there in Karl Marx's Economic Philosophic Manuscripts and that
it's so closely paralleled to stuff that's in the Corpus Hermaticum, which is the ancient
Hermatic religious text, which by the way has 17 books. The 17s just keep coming up. I'm just saying
this is exactly the same thing that's expressed there and it's not because this guy's a Marxist,
it's because Marx was one of them. It's that they are all theosophical occultists who think that
they have the secret knowledge and the divine right to transform man to complete creation.
They're the alpha and the, man is the alpha and the omega, the beginning and the end, the creator
and the conclusion. He says, optimal mental life involves knowledge and education,
which of course they took control of, the ability to question, to think, to analyze, to synthesize,
to synthesize, to conclude, to communicate, the ability to focus from the infinitely small to
the infinitely large, from the local to the global, from the past to the future,
to be what Hinduism calls trickledarshish, sorry, I can't say it, I don't know, omniscient,
particularly all knowing across time, past, present and future, and tricholanaths,
which is omnipotence, mastery of the three worlds. Optimum, effective and moral life
involves the ability to love and the human virtues of truth, understanding, humility,
liberty, responsibility, reverence for life, compassion, altruism and charity. And finally,
optimum spiritual life involves the ability for interiority, meditation, prayer, communion with
the universe and eternity and with God. Here, the United Nations, the United Religions, UNESCO
and other world agencies stand today in the forefront of human progress and evolution,
in the education, information, enlightened democracy, transcendence, and fulfillment of the
miracle of human life and its contribution and responsibility in the overall cosmic evolution
of our planet and of the universe. We have a role in the evolution of the universe, like this is the
most ridiculous, but it's just a cult theosophy, you've got to understand, you may not even know
the word theosophy yet, you need to know the word theosophy because the spiritual war that
we're in right now is theosophy versus theology. Theology is a serious pursuit of religious truth
and theosophy is a cult. I was going to say it's an occult cult, which sounds stupid so that's why
I stalled out there, but that's what it is, it's a cult based on occult beliefs. He says this is
where we stand at the moment, in the year 2013, I don't know how this is in a document delivered
in 1999, I don't know if it was added later, that's beside the point, it's in the freaking
document, you can go look at it, I can show you the page numbers, he must have added to this
and cobbled it together later as a kind of grouping of things that he thinks. But anyway,
this is where we stand at the moment in the year 2013, 20 years after the second world parliament
of religions. It represents a unique, tremendous quantum jump in consciousness and evolution of
humanity. We know our planet inside out and we are now in charge of its future. That seems very
taking on playing God. We even know a good part of the heavens, we have entered the cosmic age
of our evolution. So skipping more of this waffle, because I want to get to the scary stuff.
Similarly, the pragmatic efforts of the religions and of the united religions,
that's an organization by the way, are complemented by a world spirituality university,
which has developed a science of spirituality, and Alice Bailey called it the science of
right human relations. A strategy for spirituality and a methodology of spirituality derived from
all religious practices, celebrations and rites around the world, aimed at the spiritual fulfillment
and responsibility of human beings. As a result, the world is in a new period of full flowering
spiritual renaissance, far beyond inter-religious dialogue. Remember, that's what he called for
back in 1999, and here it is in 2013, saying that we're there. Based on the common spirituality
of all religions and on a common denominator of all human beings, the yearning for answers to the
mysteries of life and death and of our universe, to which the scientific age, despite its amazing
advances, was unable to find satisfying answers. The age of scientific analysis and dissection,
our checkered history of local cultures and national divisions, the millennia of religious
dissections and of the spiritual nature of humanity, of the earth and of the cosmos,
have now led to a new age of universality, holism, evolutionism, and all-encompassing
convergence, synthesis, synergy, and transcendence. That sounds like some Antichrist stuff,
so I'm skipping a lot more after a bunch of bullet points for what this world might look like in
practice, which probably I should cover, but this is going to be super long anyway. He says,
at that point I looked up from the text, so he's working on laying out what this should look like.
At that point I looked up from the text and seized a copy of a book I had written many years ago in
the last century, meaning in the 90s, when I was a young world servant, I don't know if it's in the
90s, so before 2000 I should say, when I was a young world servant of the United Nations,
entitled New Genesis, Shaping a Global Spirituality, and read the following text of mine. So this is
the vision that was guiding his thought from very early on in his world servant capacity at the
United Nations. He said, he wrote, and God saw all the nations of the earth, black and white,
poor and rich, from north and south, from east and west, and all of the creeds were sending
their emissaries to a tall glass house on the shores of the river of the rising sun, on the
island of Manhattan, to study together, to think together, and to care together for the world and
all its people, and God said, that is good. And it was the first day of the new era of the earth.
Pause. Where is the glass house on the, a tall glass house on the shores of the river of the
rising sun on the island of Manhattan? Hmm, is it the United Nations building? It is. So let's
phrase it more, more straightly. And God saw that all the nations of the earth, and all its people,
from all its creeds, were sending their emissaries to the United Nations building
to study together, to think together, and care together for this world and all of its people,
and God said, that is good. And it was the first day of the new era of the earth.
This is the United Nations. This is the UN. Time to abolish the UN. But he's not done.
And God saw that soldiers of peace were separating the combatants of quarreling nations.
So that's their blue hats, that differences were being resolved by negotiation and reason instead
of arms, and that leaders of nations were seeing each other, taking to each other and joining
their hearts, minds, souls, and strength, that's a reference to Jesus, the Gospels, for the benefit
of all humanity. And God said, that is good. And it was the second day of the planet of peace.
So he just compared the blue hats to Jesus' disciples by the way. And God saw that humans
were loving the entire creation, the stars and the sun, the day and the night, the air and the
oceans, the earth and the waters, the fishes and the fowl, the flowers and the herbs, and all their
human brethren and sisters. And God said, that is good. And it was the third day of the planet
of happiness. And God saw that humans were suppressing hunger, disease, ignorance, and
suffering all over the globe, providing each human person with a decent, conscious, and happy life,
no discontious, and reducing the greed, the power, and the wealth of the few. And he said, that is
good. And it was the fourth day of the planet of justice. And God saw that humans were living in
harmony with their planet and in peace with one another, wisely managing their resources, avoiding
waste, curbing excesses, replacing hatred with love, greed with contentment, arrogance with humility,
division with cooperation, and mistrust with understanding. And he said, that is good. And
it was the fifth day of the golden planet. And God saw that men were destroying their arms,
bombs, missiles, warships, and warplanes, dismantling their bases and disbanding their armies,
keeping only policemen of peace to protect the good from the bad and the normal from the mad.
And God said, that is good. And it was the sixth day of the planet of reason. And God saw humans
restore God. And God saw humans restore God and the human person as the Alpha and Omega. And God
saw humans restore God and the human person as the Alpha and Omega, reducing institutions, beliefs,
politics, governments, and all manmade entities to mere servants of God and the people. And he saw
them adopt as their supreme law. You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, all your
soul, all your mind, and all your strength. You shall love your neighbor as yourself. There is
no greater commandment than these. And God said, that is good. And it was the seventh day of the
planet of God. I let the book rest on my lap and looked around me at the magnificent divine nature
of the sacred Mount Ressur and addressed these words of thanks to God. Thank you, dear Lord,
for having fulfilled my dream. And I seized my harmonica and played on it the ode to joy of
Beethoven. So it turns out this harmonica thing, that's the end of the page, this harmonica thing
actually happened. I kind of meant to play it for you. Maybe we can work this thing in. I'm not 100
percent sure. Maybe I'll work in the sound so you can actually hear that it wasn't Robert Mueller,
but somebody else played the harmonica in the United Nations and played ode to joy. And what
that means is they knew that this was happening. So hopefully we'll cut this in. Dear colleagues,
these are our last decisions in this mandate. And I would like to thank you for five years of unity
in diversity. It is our responsibility to keep Europe together and let rebuild Notre Dame and
Happy Easter.
But that's certainly something, isn't it? Something very heretical.
So how is it all supposed to work? Let's go back to his ideas. So now we know what they're up to,
a new genesis, a new recreated world, a new recreation of life, where God works on all
seven days, by the way, and in which the United Nations is a tall house of glass that is where
God says that it all comes from. Isn't that great? So evil. And how is it supposed to work? Well,
let's listen. Idea 1382 from the 23rd of April, 1998. Like the capitalists and communists did
at the end of the last century, we should think hard and conceive how we can make the next century
a paradise, since both communism and capitalism have failed. And since we live in planetary
conditions very different from those at the end of the last century, we must think afresh all of
our current beliefs, doings, and institutions, and formulate an entirely new ideology or dreamology
for an unprecedented future in all human history. Heads of governments, of corporations,
and of all human institutions should be excited by this new, wonderful challenge. And what should
challenge solve? Idea 1343, 15 March, 1998. Humanity has achieved so much progress,
has solved so many problems, avoided so many dangers, and yet now we face the most colossal
problem in the entire human history and evolution, namely that industry, technology, commerce,
transport, overpopulation, and overconsumption might destroy the very essence and future of the
earth, including our own, namely, its nature. We need innumerable great and small ideas and
efforts to countervail that. But there's a huge problem in this idea, and that huge problem is
called the United States of America. Idea 1338, 10 March, 1998. From an evolutionary point of view,
the attacks of the United States against the United Nations and reduction of its roles and means,
in other words, we were pushing away from the UN and defunding it, will be considered some day
as one of the greatest errors and lacks of vision in world history. It seems that power went so much
to the head of the United States that it lost its sense of proportions and direction. Therefore,
the United States will decline as a power, as did all past powers which did not adapt to new
fundamental trends of evolution. This happens regrettably on the eve of a new century and millennium
when all countries, especially the best informed ones, should have the clearest possible mind,
views, and heart toward a future written in the stars. We must deeply mourn the fact that the
United States has lost its consciousness of the world's future and of its guiding role in it.
So what's wrong with the United States? It's powerful enough to be sovereign and to reject
this theosophy in favor of individual rights and liberties instead of a crackpot world cult.
What's happened since? Much of what has transpired in the 20th century, especially since about
2015, has been actually all the way through, starting in 2001, September 11th. 2001, much
of what has transpired in the 21st century, has been a direct attack on the United States for
this rejection of the United Nations theosophical ambitions, exactly like Robert Mueller said would
have to be the case. The United States will have to decline as a power because it's not in line with
their evolutionary agendas. The United States had its run but it's not going along with the
program sufficiently so they're going to have to let it fall. That seems to be very in line with
their program. So the United States should have absolutely nothing to do with this organization.
It should renew its attacks, it should renew its distance, and it should completely defund
this evil organization. So then there's another big section based on another block of 100,
based on ideas 1401 through 1500, and it's even crazier than this new genesis idea that really
sets the stage for what they want. It calls for a global association of scientists and thinkers
concerned with long-range evolution. Now this is an excerpt added in by Erica Erdman in her interim
report published in November of 1997, and it starts off with a quote from so-called quote
Space Scientist. Eric Chison, I don't think I said his last name right but you whatever.
The quote says implicit within our cosmic evolutionary paradigm is a transcendence of
the Darwinian principle of natural selection, a loftier standard that I call the principle
of cosmic selection. Those technological civilizations of any type on any planet that
recognize the need for development time and fully embrace a global ethics will survive in those
that do not will not. Okay, so let's be real clear about something here.
So my Christian buddies, I need you to listen. When Darwin talked about evolution,
these people reject that. That is not what they're talking about. They are in fact, remember he said
they were going to reject survival of the fittest. We're going to reject competition. That's what
Darwin's ideas were based off of. That is not what they're advocating. They are not advocating for
Darwinism. They're advocating for directed cosmic evolution. And the claim is that cosmic selection
is the only planetary civilizations that survive are ones that adopt global ethics. What does that
mean? And fully adopt, not just adopt, not just adopt it, but fully embrace global ethics. That
means global cooperation. That means something like the vision of communism. That means the
theosophical endpoint where we are all one. So if you don't adopt their theosophical occult views
of what humanity is supposed to be, they believe that there's a pressure that all such civilizations
will eventually go extinct and will not survive in the grand scheme of cosmic selection, which by
the way is not real. That is not a theory by which anything is said to say, speciate or differentiate
persist through time. But that's where it begins. So then we go back to Erica here and she comments
and says his insight into global problems and his vast perspective led Dr. Robert Muller,
Chancellor Emeritus of the University for Peace in Costa Rica and former Assistant Secretary General
of the United Nations to call for a UNESCO backed summit meeting of the world's scientists and
thinkers concerned with the long term fate of our earth and of humanity, which is endangered by
blind pursuit of short term goals. He envisions an exchange of knowledge and ideas among the most
conscientious person on the planet, leading to advances in human wisdom that could not otherwise
occur. And that would initiate a permanent shift toward a more future oriented responsible attitude
worldwide. So this global ethic
supposed to be backed by these ideas that replace blind pursuit of short term goals.
Again, ESG came in in 2003 to start pushing us in that direction from where? United Nations.
Comprehensive sexuality education to, I guess, adopt a new global ethic was developed at UNESCO
in 2003. All straight downstream from these ideas.
So the objective, they state, the importance and urgency of the project lies in the need for a
transformation of past inspired ethics with their many contradictions. Fundamentalist shackles
and mutual hatreds to a future oriented ethic in which all of humanity can unite in a striving
to become more enlightened and more humane. Apparently, we got to take down the US first.
Many scientists believe that the universe is dominated by a quote cosmic principle of self
destruction, a universal law that destroys any civilization in the universe, which has achieved
a level of intelligence and technical capacity similar to our own. I don't know who these many
scientists are, because intelligence is not the result of the fiercest competition during the
process of evolution, they argue, our brains cannot possibly conceive of an alternative
that would avert our fate. Other scientists see in the process of evolution a forward march,
not toward more destructive competition, but toward more foresight, insight, wisdom, and love.
These persons, most of whom are inspired by the teachings of Teilhard de Chardin,
who I mentioned earlier is one of the hermeticists,
believe that the trend from the material to the spiritual, from the amoeba to man,
I told you there's this other video and then they mentioned it here,
will inevitably be continued toward superior heights of love and wisdom. Now this was written
in 1997, the amoeba to man thing video that I mentioned was much later, it's much more recent,
so they've been thinking this for a long time, but this trend from the material to spiritual,
from the amoeba to man, will inevitably be continued toward superior heights of love and
wisdom, however threatening present developments on earth may appear to us now. Skipping down a bit,
an association of scientists concerned with long range evolution would help to sort these
contradictions out, and to align and attract thinkers and scientists toward a superior goal.
It is urgently needed to show the pessimists that alternatives to competition until death
do exist, even in non-human nature but especially in human nature. To show the optimists that
reliance on non-human determination of our fate might weaken our sense of personal responsibility
for our descendants and our earth, and to impress upon the majority the importance of a long range
and encompassing vision to guide our choices. Hello ESG. And then they put in bold, a whole
paragraph in bold, what unites us is a look at the miracle of evolution from a cosmic perspective,
a non-stick perspective guys. It is the effort to prevent our species from becoming another dead
end bypassed by ongoing development of life. It is a search for principles and values guiding
humanity toward further ascent. So we got to spiritually evolve the entire species. And what
in the world is this based on? Where did they get these crazy ideas about oh no everything's
going to be bad, we're going to destroy ourselves, every civilization of our kind at our level of
advancement or whatever destroys itself. And I mean on a planetary sense, I don't mean like the
fall of Rome, I mean like everybody goes extinct, the whole thing falls apart. So what is this all
based on? Aside from some weird book that they do mention of questionable worth about cosmic
evolution and some quote from a space scientist. The book about cosmic evolution by the way,
is taken to be the impetus for what I just read. But it turns out that underneath all this are the
neo-malthusian ideas of the club of Rome and the limits to growth. You remember when I talked
about the limits to growth? Now these guys thought that the world was going to outstrip,
the humans were going to outstrip the world's resources and we would all have a population
collapse. And the whole degrowth premise, the whole depopulation premise that we have to
keep putting on the table is all because they believe what was written in the club of Rome in
1971 or two in the book that they published limits to growth, which turned out to make
lots of predictions for the year 2000 that we're all wrong. Turns out that's their inspiration.
Here's what they write. Professor D.H. Meadows from the United States is a System Analyst
and Journalist. Professor of Systems Management D.L. Meadows from the U.S. is Director of the
Institute for Policy and Social Science Research and Professor J. Randers is a Policy Analyst
and President Emeritus of the Norwegian School of Management, Chairman of the Norwegian Bank of
Industry, Norwegian Institute for Market Research and Deputy Director General of the World Wildlife
Fund, which by the way is, if you didn't know that the World Wildlife Fund is really part of this
whole global agenda big time, well it is. And here's why. In fact, it was probably created as such.
I don't know for sure. All three authors collaborated on the pathbreaking book,
The Limits to Growth, published 20 years ago. Their present book, Beyond the Limits from 1992,
also provides such clear convincing and well documented information about our present world
and the dangers of rapid uncontrolled growth that it is difficult to imagine how it could fail to
have an immense impact. Growth is defined as material resource consuming advance only,
while all other growth is called development. The authors however see no indication that people
are reasonable enough to reverse their lifestyles in time. Once overshoot becomes evident,
moreover in most cases it will be too late once depletion is clearly visible. So these people
are going to save the world from itself in line with the Limits to Growth Club of Rome stuff.
And remember the World Economic Forum guys, Klaus Schwab in particular, invited these exact same
people from the Club of Rome to speak at the World Economic Forum in its second year of existing
way back in the 1970s. So this is this is the idea behind almost all of this. So almost all
crackpot faiths and real faiths both present two alternatives, heaven and hell.
We know what that looks like in Christianity, for example. What we can also see what it looks like
from Herbert Marcuse. He says that we're either going to have communism or liberation,
I should say, or we're going to have fascism. So we have heaven or hell. Those are our two choices.
And here the evolutionary new thought, Gnostic new thought of the United Nations,
which is rooted down in this idea of sustainability and inclusion, presents us heaven and hell.
We're either going to degrow to a utopian circular economy intentionally and intelligently under
their global management with their new global faith heaven. Or what we're going to do is we're
going to collapse our world. We're going to have massive over massive depletion that becomes a
downwards vicious circle that destroys the capacity for life on the planet. And then we all die.
So it's the same, same, same structure. So that's this crazy setup. But let's skip down a little
further. Read idea 1433, which he wrote the 13th of June 1998. He says we urgently need as we enter
a new century and millennium, a world conference to appraise the present state of evolution on this
planet and to provide worldviews on future evolution in the next century and millennium.
After humanism, after the environment, after the earth, now future evolution has become priority
number one. Idea 1499, 18 August 1998. After communism and capitalism, frugalism, which is
degrowth, they just didn't have the word to use in 98. After communism and capitalism,
frugalism might become the new ideology and rule of our behavior on earth, demanding from us
more frugal and simple lives in order not to destroy life giving nature. A new economic system
must be born, which will not produce colossal waste on necessary products built in rapid
obsolescence and colossal duplications between 185 nations. That's exactly the argument of Herbert
Marcuse and one dimensional man. Frugalism and simplicity of life might become the salvation
of the earth and future generations. It's also the argument of the degrowth capitalism or degrowth
communism book, I'm sorry, Marcuse and the Anthropocene that I covered in another episode of the
podcast. This is their agenda. This is how they think. So degrowth is going to be the way to save
the world. Idea 1510, 29th August 1998. We must deeply rethink our world's and humanity's future.
It would be good to remember the fathers of the U.S. Constitution. How dare you? It would be good
to remember the fathers of the U.S. Constitution who believed that the function of good government
was to, quote, affect the greatest happiness of the greatest number of citizens and to affect
harmony between the public and private interests, end quote. Today they would add, get their motherfucking
names out of your mouth. Today they would add harmony with the earth in a worldwide dimension
to the attaining of happiness. No, they wouldn't. You dickhead. Idea 1557, 15th October 1998. Speaking
of identities, we should accept happily that we have a polyidentity. Our specific individual
identity, a family identity, a local identity, a provincial identity, a national identity,
a continental identity, a world identity, a cosmic identity, and eternal identity. The future earth
and human government of this planet should take all of these diverse identities into account.
It gets much worse in the next section based on ideas 1601 to 1700.
This is where, like, New Genesis was pretty crazy and totally blasphemous. This is where the
idea is actually getting nut job because it's his cosmological vision of the future.
And I'm going to try to just, I have to read a lot of it and I'll try to just kind of slide
through it as quickly as we can. I will try, this is Robert Mueller, I will try to condense
briefly my thoughts on a cosmic vision of humanity's future. First of all, the most important factor
determining our time is that in the entire human evolution on this planet, within the
last couple of centuries and especially during the last 50 years, the human race has been able
to extend its knowledge of this planet and of itself in such incredible ways that a profound
transformation has taken place in evolution. This is the talk of eugenicists, guys. We now
understand the mysteries of life, the mysteries of humans, the mysteries of the planet and the
cosmos and now we can direct it because we understand it. We can take it into our hands,
we can seize the means of production of man. He says, this knowledge has meant incredible
benefits for humanity and I skip his big laundry list of them. The fundamental fact that we know
our planet, that we know humanity, that we know how to analyze and recompose matter has produced
miracles. Of course, we believed that the progress of science and technology was for the benefit of
humanity. In other words, that our reason for being on this planet was to get the best for
ourselves. This is the great humanistic age in which we are now living. But we did not know
that these great advances would also result in a whole series of crises due to our global ignorance.
Who ever thought of saving energy? Who ever thought of the ozoneosphere?
Who ever thought of possible climactic changes? Who ever thought of the long-term genetic dangers
of nuclear radiation and radio waves? I am asking this question today. What are the things we are
doing today which we think are wonderful and in which in 20 years from now we'll have the same or
worse adverse effects as a few examples I mentioned? Who is thinking of this? Who is
heeding the Iroquois precept that we should think of the effects on the seventh generation?
We do not even think of the next generation. There is not a single ministry of the future
on this planet. Yikes. And I will point out that he actually in lots and lots and lots of the ideas
invokes the idea that we need to go back to indigenous, especially American Indian,
knowledges and epistemologies that comes up over and over and over again. I don't actually include
any of them I think except for that mention, but it's not like a throw in here. It's like over
and over and over again. Indigenous knowledges are the only way. Why? Because they are the model
for communism. Remember Marx's model of communism? Communism is a global state where we all act like
a big tribal family. That's why. Now skipping down some of this, so we can get to the crazy stuff,
of late there has been another fundamental change on earth. Until now we thought that
this planet was at our disposal, that it was created for us. Uh-oh Christians, there's your
beliefs. That it was here for us to exploit and develop endlessly. I think the word in the Bible
is subdued. Well, we are now in the middle of another Copernican revolution. We thought at
the time that the sun was turning around the earth until we learned from Copernicus that it was not
true. Now we're learning that perhaps this planet has not been created for humans, but that humans
have been created for the planet. Uh-oh, there's your earth worshipping Gnostic,
Gnostic theosophy. We return to the earth, he says, as our American Indians and the great
religions have all told us. Thus we are temporary living manifestations or incarnations of this
earth. Again, the American Indians tell us we are children of the earth and we must take good care
of our mother and respect her. We are living earth. Each of us is a cell, a perceptive,
nervous, active unit of the earth. We are earth alive and are beginning to be concerned about
the earth. The living consciousness of the earth is beginning to operate through us. All over the
world a kind of earth democracy, a gyrocracy is taking shape. What you're witnessing is the birth
of a new pagan cult, by the way. You, as cosmic and earth cells, are part of a vast biological
and evolutionary phenomenon which is of first importance at this stage, namely humanity as a
whole. The whole human species is becoming the brain, the heart, the soul, the expression, and
the action of the earth. Pause. Let's talk about Karl Marx, right? Remember when he said that the
earth is man's inorganic body and that the point of part of our activity is that as we
rehumanize ourselves, we're going to humanize the world and make the world fit for human
habitation. So we're supposed to turn the earth, we're supposed to basically integrate the earth
into ourselves and ourselves into the earth so that it were one symbiotic thing and that would
of course avoid the metabolic rift the capitalism's going to produce and the whole point of degrowth
which is the whole point of the concepts of the club of Rome that I just talked about and limits
to growth. So the whole human species, as a species being, namely humanity as a whole, the whole
human species, as a species being is becoming the brain, the heart, the soul, the expression,
and the action of the earth. We now have a global brain which determines what can be dangerous
or mortal for this planet. Yeah, and limits to growth, it was shitty computer models that he
literally talks about. It's like the shitty computer models of COVID but go back to like
1971 and imagine how shitty those computer models would be because that's what it literally,
that's their global brain, is shitty computer models. But what that means is AI is a future
global brain and it can determine what can be dangerous or mortal for this planet. The United
Nations, what does he say is a colon here? What is the global brain according to Robert Mueller
writing in 1998? We have a global brain which can which determines what can be dangerous or
mortal for this planet and it is the United Nations and its agencies, the innumerable groups and
networks around the world are part of this brain. We are a world heart. Altruism, which we haven't
covered altruism in Augusta Comte yet but that's another bad philosophy. Altruism, the concern
of people to be of help, the live aid and international programs, etc. All of this is a
manifestation of the fact that on this planet after having evolved from protozoas to metazoas,
we are now becoming what one would call terrazoas. We are living Earth that is beginning to be
conscious of its role in the evolution of this particular planet in the universe. This is our
newly discovered meaning, birth of a cult. It is happening every day and we have to draw the
right conclusions from it. The world is changing very fundamentally in terms of consciousness,
behavior and action. We know that we are a global family living in a global home. This is more or
less where we stand. In other words, we are in the process of becoming a global civilization
and yet this is not all there is more to come. Beyond our global consciousness, we are moving
into a cosmic consciousness. Remember this is a guy that created Common Core just in case you forgot
that. In other words, we learn to see the Earth process not only as a global planetary process
but as a cosmic manifestation and evolution on a given planet in the universe. It is not impossible
that the universe has not been able to produce many live planets like ours. We are at the right
distance from a sun. We have the right mass to retain an atmosphere and water and we are very
lucky that the force that keeps atoms together on this planet is just right. A little stronger
and we would be a condensed ball, a little weaker and we would be dispersed into the universe.
I hate to point out creationists but he's making the same argument you guys do.
Our planet and its life forms are the result of many miracles and unique phenomena. The religions
rightly say that this is a unique planet and that God has a special design for us. Science
is now discovering that too. Mathematicians tell us that the conditions required to give birth to
life on any planet in the universe are one of the most staggering astronomical improbability
figures they can conceive. New cosmologies are being produced by the dozens but I do not think
that anyone is as yet the right one. There are many different views. The physicists, the geneticists,
the chemists, the spiritualists each have a view. Which one of those is not like the others?
The idiots. I mean spiritualists. That's right. The theosophists. When I put your little dig there
a second ago, Christians, this sounds exactly like you guys making your creation arguments.
I told you the fundamental spiritual battle is theology versus that's you versus theosophy.
That's them and they are stepping into the exact same space at the same time as you guys
to try to make these claims and to bring people into their cult rather than keeping them in either
reason or faith. He says, but it shows that there is an active search for a new cosmology,
for a new understanding of what is happening on this planet where there are many life forms and
where one of them namely the human form. Humans, remember we said before protozoan,
metazoan, and terazoan? Okay humans are becoming cosmozoas. The main factor of the further evolution
transformation and possibly destruction of the planet if we do not understand what is going on
and act properly. You're witnessing the birth of a cult religion. This is something he says
absolutely extraordinary because it means that each of us is a cosmic unit. Sounds like
Deepak Chopra, right? He's one of them. That we have the ingredients of the total cosmos
in ourselves. You only know who Deepak Chopra is by the way because they elevated Deepak Chopra
because they needed somebody to go talk about this and have debates and become very famous pushing
these ideas into the public. How many times was he on Oprah? Oh shit, lots. The cosmos is giving
birth to billions of humans as seeds. Uh-oh. The cosmos is giving birth to billions of humans as
seeds. Many seeds fall on stone or on infertile ground or do not understand what their duties are,
but growing numbers of people understand that they have a cosmic function deep in themselves.
See only some people are actually Gnostics and they know that they're going to have to direct
the spiritual evolution of the entire human society or the entire human species and the
planet itself and cosmic evolution. These people are esoteric theosophists. He says,
if you look over history, who are the greatest people? You'll find the Mozart's, the Beethoven's,
the philosophers, the sages, the religious leaders. They were all people of cosmic consciousness. Oh,
all the geniuses were people like my cult. Of course they try to claim all the people in history
like they always do. They were conscious of living in the cosmos in eternity and in the universe at
every moment. Really? Mozart was? Like, fucking really? I don't think so. Isn't this like, you
say this, the sages and the religious leaders? Isn't this like kind of fucking exactly what Elijah
was like? Eh, no. Um, wrong. There's certainly Irenaeus, one of the greats, uh, cast down these
heresies in the first century. He says, this is why we listen to them. Well, because they're in the
cult. You know, they're all like hundreds of years ago before your stupid cult, but they were in the
cult. And this is why we listen to them, because they're part of the cult. They're a vibration,
he doesn't say this, I'm saying this, a vibration of the Prisciotheologia, the universal religion.
This is why we listen to him. He says, when we read, uh, when we read them, when we see their
works, we are deeply moved and elevated. Why? Because they are in tune with the universe and
make us feel that way. This is what the religions are trying to sell us. Quote, be in tune with the
universe. Be in union with God, with eternity. Remember that your temporary lives have a meaning,
a duty to fulfill. End quote. And when we fulfill this duty, the universe recompenses us,
recompenses us with a happiness, and possibly even resurrection. It is not impossible that the
Hindu philosophy might be right. That only those who had worthwhile lives contributing to the good
and the further evolution of this planet will be allowed to live again. And that worthless seeds
will be left aside to wither away. The religions can be very helpful in understanding these new
cosmologies. Let me just pause for a second. Holy shit. Okay. In other words, he says, humanity,
the same way as it has become recently a global family, is also becoming now a cosmic family.
This is the United Nations, gentlemen. We will realize that we are a cosmic species,
which will find its way on this planet only by following the imminent rules of the cosmos.
I'm sure, ladies, that they alone know those rules. And they're going to enforce them through
one government, one global government, through the United Nations. Some call it God. Other is a
cosmic substratum that is in each of us. It has the manifestation of the living universe divided
and distributed over all reality. Well, there's the fundamental hermetic belief. It is possible
that stars are just living and dying cells of one body the same way as we are living and dying
cells of that same body. Let me pause again. Holy shit. This realization is of incredible
momentous importance. It will occupy humanity and give us great hope and challenges. The story
was told to us in simple forms by the religions, but now the scientists have come to the same
conclusion that the universe is one in its endless manifestations. The recent scientific
literature is replete with this finding. So the Gnostics know the secret interpretation of whatever
it is he's talking about, and it's whatever they think. My proposal, he says, is therefore that
we proceed toward the year 2000. Sorry, I left out the word as. My proposal is therefore that as we
proceed toward the year 2000, we should pack this last decade with visions, dreams, ideas,
and actions aimed at preparing the next millennium as the cosmic spiritual millennium of this planet
in order to properly respond to the expectations of the cosmos or God. In order to do this,
I will propose that a number of major conferences or efforts be undertaken which are not yet
considered by the United Nations. Peace, disarmament, population, the environment, economic development,
et cetera, are all subjects being dealt with in the UN. But here is a list of others
which should be taken up in order to prepare adequately the next millennium. So he's about
to give a list of suggestions that the United Nations needs to take up that it's not successfully
taking up even though overpopulation and the environment are already part of the plan.
How many suggestions do you think he makes? How many? It's 17. Of course, it's 17. Of course,
it's 17. First, a major conference should be convened on a new cosmology. We just heard what
that sounds like. One should listen to the physicists, to the biologists, to the other
scientists, and to people who have come up with new cosmologies. That's the weirdo spiritualists,
like them. From their views, one would extract a common denominator, a Priscotheologia. They all
have very important perceptions, but these perceptions vary with the point of view of their
professions, physical, biological, spiritual, social, political, et cetera. At the end of such a
conference, we would have a better understanding of what the cosmos is expecting from us in our
next phase of evolution. Second, I would recommend a major conference on a new philosophy, a global
philosophy. Philosophy is the way of life. What should be the way of life on this planet in global
terms in light of our fantastic knowledge? Where are the great sages of our time? Where are the
positive philosophies who are giving us an explanation of the meaning of life and hope for the future?
I'll tell you where the great sages are. You're censoring them. That's where they are.
Third, a new sociology is needed, which will help us understand the meaning and role of all the
innumerable groups, entities, professions, and institutions we have on this planet. Most of
them have a contribution to make to the progress and success of our evolution. Many of them do not
know it and have not even asked the fundamental deeper question of why they exist, why they were
created, what their ultimate purpose and contribution should be in the total human fabric. Their limited
aims and behaviors must be geared toward the needs of humanity, of the planet, and to the continued
success of our cosmic evolution. This is a vast, unexplored, urgent subject.
Fourth, we need a new anthropology, as Margaret Mead recommended. Remember, that's the mother of
cultural relativism. We need world celebrations as we have them in the family and religions in
nations. Humans in the world have to develop common paradigms, common ideals, and benchmarks for
the future. The science of the total human race leaves much to be desired. We do more research
on tribal systems than on global humanity, its meaning, evolution, and system. So we need a
science of humanity, apparently. Fifth, we need an overall human biology. I wonder if it knows
what a woman is. A science of human life on this planet, we study more animals and microbes than
we study the functioning of the human species. To the biologists, this is political. It should not
be so. The biologists should tell us very frankly and honestly how the human species functions,
from their point of view as experts in life. If they do it for the fishes and the mammals,
they can and should also do it for the human species. Well, they're biologists, so maybe they
do know what a woman is, but it doesn't appear to be the case. Sixth, we need a global cosmic
spirituality. We have heard religious leaders of various faiths. It was illuminating. I hope that
religious leaders will get together and define before the end of this century the cosmic laws
which are common to all their faiths. So there's a great ecumenical movement. And imagine if you
tied that thing through the church to the businesses and called it the center for inclusive capitalism.
They have been cosmic experts and interpreters of the heavens for a long time. They should tell the
politicians what the cosmic laws are, what God or the gods or the cosmos are expecting from humans.
It's good that we had last year the Oxford Conference of Parliamentarians, scientists,
and religious leaders, and that in January 1990 a second conference will be held in Moscow.
We must hope also that the Pope will come before the year 2000 to the United Nations, speak for all
the religions and spiritualists on the planet, and give the world the religious view of how the
third millennium should be a spiritual millennium, a millennium in which we will see the integration
and harmony of humanity with creation, with nature, with the planet, with the heavens, and with eternity.
Yeah, let the intergalists do it. Their system is an intergalistic system, by the way, just pointing
that out. Seventh, we need a new world policy and political system. Uh-oh. This planet is mismanaged
to an incredible degree. If the United States were managed like the world is managed, it would be a
disaster. Nobody would understand how 50 states in the world has 185, each having a president
to flag an army and absolute sovereignty could ever work together. Imagine the United States
government in Washington being only a kind of United Nations without any authority, any legislative
power, barely any resources. You mean kind of like the founding fathers thought it would be?
It would be a disaster. Well, we have this disaster for the world, and it is about time we recognize
it. Ken Keyes, I think that's how you say his name. Excellent book Planethood makes this point and
offers a way for the political reform of this planet. The birth of the European Union, which was
seen by Jean Monnet and Robert Schumann as the first step toward a world union, is the biggest
harbinger of hope. How's that going for you now, fuckers? Eighth, we need a proper planetary
management. Private firms and the multinationals must face up to the responsibilities for the
management of the planet. Oh, ESG. They consider themselves responsible only to profits and
stockholders. Well, it's becoming increasingly manifest that this planet was not created for
the purpose of making money. We urgently need a science, a strategy, and a methodology for
of proper management of planet Earth. There's ESG right there. And there is these big investment
firms taking control of all of the private firms and multinationals for the responsibilities for
the management of the planet. Environmental social and governance. Ninth, we need a new world,
philanthropy. People are giving their wealth and monies to a hospital, to a local university,
to a national foundation, or purpose. And the world gets little or nothing. The University for
Peace here in the demilitarized Costa Rica is one of the most beautiful and useful projects on the
Earth. But where are the philanthropists who are taking an interest in it with the exception of
one or two? So he's not getting enough money for his own little stupid project. And yet it is here
in this university where a new science of peace must be developed for this planet. Maybe we don't
want that shit, dude. And thousands of peacemakers educated for a whole series of professions. Oh,
great. More infiltration. The people have to take the financing of the world's care into their own
hands. In other words, you taking it literally into your own hands and giving your money where you
want is not adequate. So it's going to have to be channeled to what they want. So philanthropy is
going to have to be globally coordinated to go to UN designated things. Got you. We do not even have
an intergovernmental world budget. Well, if governments do not want to have a world budget,
let the philanthropists and the people do it in their own way. A new world democracy will thus
be born. 10th, we need a new world education, SDG 4. Global education, namely in the education
of children and our global home and into the human family is making good progress.
But we have to go beyond. We need the cosmic education foreseen by the religious and by people
like Maria Montessori. We need a holistic education teaching the wholism of the universe and the
planet. I am glad that one of the first graduates of the Robert Mueller School in Arlington, Texas,
which teaches my world core curriculum will take the floor during this conference to announce the
creation of a United Nations of Youth. How beautiful. So the guy who created Common Core says we need
a new world global education. What's he going to focus on? Well, we now know and I'll do a podcast
on this sooner or later, the UN's idea of global citizenship and global citizenship education.
11th, we need a new world information. Outer space inspectors would be shocked by the wrong
information that is being spread around the world. Uh oh, we've got to manage misinformation and
disinformation. We need honest, objective, truthful information to guide our way and
behavior and not manipulate information for all kinds of purposes. Iron law of vote projection
never misses as we've now learned. Proper world information, communications and media are another
subject of paramount importance. The United Nations and its 32 specialized agencies and world
programs come closest to that which uh sorry come closest to what such an information system should
be. 12th, we need a new world ethics. What is good for the United States, Russia or any other country
like having atomic bombs and there are 40,000 in the world can be awfully bad for our planet.
I'm sure that God or the cosmos has not created this planet to have all these nuclear detonators
and its flesh and its water and its air and in the stars. Okay, I just have to stop there for
a second. We haven't put any fucking nuclear weapons in any stars and stars are literally
gigantic nuclear explosions of such vast proportions that we can't contemplate them. So
if God made the stars, he did want nuclear fucking detonations in the stars. This guy is a
sorry lost my temper. I'm sick of these crackpots. I really don't like these people. Anyway,
and in the stars and in the stars, what are you adding that for you freaking moron? God.
Our political leaders must be given to understand that they do not only have a responsibility
toward their people and toward humanity, but toward the success of the extraordinary cosmic
process. By the way, dude, the primary energy source of the extraordinary cosmic process is
nuclear detonations in the stars. Perhaps unique in the whole universe unfolding on this planet,
they might finish it or they might help and foster it. I know we kind of lost the plot on that one.
New world ethics. So we've all got to have this new world global ethical system that's
facilitated through their occult theosophical religion that's focused on a gyrocracy.
Thirteenth, and we remember that 13 is the magical number of power in their numerology.
Just like 17 is the magical number of one completed turn of transformation,
13 is the power to turn that transformative wheel. So what do they say is 13th? What does he say?
Robert Mueller, we need a new world science and technology. The scientists and the technologists
must assume a cosmic responsibility. What they are doing might be right or wrong for humanity
and for a further evolution. They have to think of the seventh generation and should place Orin
Lyon's prayer on their desk. And I do not know what that refers to, but apparently it's written
down in idea 899, which is I don't think in this document. Fourteenth, we need a new world economy.
Oikos nomos means the management of the home. At long last, we recognize that planet earth
is our home. We need a world economy in which all people have decent cosmic lives and perform
the functions for which they were born. Sounds exactly like George Soros' idea of an open society
or Herbert Marcus' idea of a liberated society or Marx's idea of a completed communism. It goes
far beyond the new international economic order. It is a restructuring of the economy based on
the ecology, Oikos logos, and the knowledge of our planet. We have to put our house, which is on the
planet, in good evolutionary order to become a planet of extraordinary beauty, conservation,
renewal, happiness, and justice for all. So we need an entire new world economy. I bet you it's
going to work like agenda 30 by 30, where by the year 2030, that's the by 30 part, 30% of the world
will be uninhabited and back to the wild and not used for any commercial or productive purpose.
Fifteenth, we need a new world art. See the table framework for the planetary cosmic role of art
and culture. I love the way they talk. The planetary cosmic role of art.
We need a renaissance of art similar to the Italian Renaissance, which put things into harmony
again. Modern art was the expression of our analytical period. We dissected everything.
We now know it was probably propped up by crackpots who wanted to put ugly crap in front of us to
demoralize us, frankly. Art has to be paid for. We now have to put everything into harmony again.
We need a holistic universal art expressing our faith, sense of beauty, happiness, and planetary,
humanistic cosmic consciousness. As all great poets, writers, painters, musicians, and sculptors
have done in the past. The classic book by Richard Burke on cosmic consciousness gives us a whole
list of such people. We also need world anthems like the one we heard this morning. Some of the
sanguinary violent national anthems need to be rewritten. I think that that one might include
the national anthem of the United States, the Star Spangled Banner, which is a very interesting
national anthem because it's actually not about a war. A lot of people think it's about
happening within a war. The first stanza of the Star Spangled Banner is a question.
Is our flag still there? Are we still going to make it? We have a long, dangerous, perilous night
in this war for our independence attacking us to establish this new nation of ideals and human
liberty, and is it still there? That's the whole point, but I bet you, I bet you that's part of it.
He says, I have a new text of the Marseilles written by young people, which starts with the words
Aliens en font de la plante, come children of the planet. Why not? It is beautiful. I hope that
the young people in Strasbourg will sing it on the occasion of the 200th anniversary of the French
Revolution. Several national anthems have similarly been rewritten by young people. I have a whole
file of them. That's great. No. 16th, we need a new world psychology. Does it know what a woman is?
We must learn how to love our wonderful earth and miraculous humanity above anything else.
Now we're being taught to love a nation or a group or a religion and to kill other human beings,
other divine beings for them. Well, not really. I mean, some do that, but there is this whole
just war concept where you get to defend yourself if people attack you or try to steal your stuff.
I mean, there's a thing. This is contrary to nature and to cosmic divine laws. We have to love
humanity. We have to love the planet. We have to love the universe and have to be their instruments
during our short years on this earth. If we do not, life on this planet will come to an end.
A completely new world psychology must lay down our right sentimental priorities. This is what
Freud told Einstein, the idea 1020, in their famous exchange of views. 17th. And he starts this way,
and this is very significant. 17th but not last. Let me tell you real quick. There's no 18. So it
is 17th but last, but he inserts or insists 17th but not last. Why? Because it's a cycle of evolution.
17 steps to turn history once. And then there will be 17 more steps to turn history again,
another revolution. Revolutions in 17 steps. Marx identified 17 contradictions in capitalism.
Paulo Freire said it takes 17 generative themes to radicalize or conscientize a learner.
The Corpus Hermeticum has 17 books. I'm not going to get into the spiral of Theodorus and
where this comes from from the Pythagorean mathematical numbers cult, but that's ultimately
what it is. 17th but not last. We must teach the children of this planet a new art of living.
Show them how great life is. How's that going for you guys? How's your comprehensive sexuality
education working out for their precious little minds? It's killing them. We should teach them
how thankful they should be to live today at this time of magnificent consciousness and the
incredible knowledge of the universe, that it will be their role to be the right managers of the
planet, that each of them is a cosmic unit or as Pablo Casals said, quote, a true miracle,
a potential Leonardo or Beethoven. Therefore, you cannot hurt, you cannot kill another miracle,
end quote. How's that working out guys? How's your, how are your things working out for that?
Seems like you're lying. Yes, we are miracles, microcosms, cosmozoas of the universe. This must
be taught to children so that they can flower to the responsibility for which they're born. In
other words, global citizenship education, which is defined literally in terms of teaching them to
meet the 17 Sustainable Development Goals of the United Nations Agenda 2030. We also have to teach
frugality, the deep growth, and simple living in order not to destroy or tax unduly the beautiful
creation of God. We should follow in the footsteps of St. Francis, who preached this 800 years ago.
We should read Voluntary Simplicity by Dwayne Elgin. Simple frugal lives of five billion people
are the most monumental contribution to the environment of this planet. Every human being
should know that he or she is an instrument of God or the universe, be it as a mother who gives
life to a child, as a new divine being, or as a father who in the family is raising a new cosmic
unit, or an educator who is educating new cosmogens, or a doctor who will heal cosmic
patients or public servants or artists, etc. There's 17. Then we will fully validate life and
make children and people proud to be alive. How's that going for you guys? We gave you guys a 20
year run on that. How's it going? Is that working? Is that what's happening? Then humans will respect
their own miraculous divine cosmicity, as Buckminster Fuller said when he was offered cigarettes,
quote, I will never do anything that might impair the functioning of the perfect cosmic
unit I have been given by the universe, end quote. This is a language which we should hold to
children. This would be the real fight against drugs, alcohol, and violent television and literature.
How's that working out? You do not damage your incredible cosmic entity by introducing
poisonous materials and images into its functioning. Can we talk about books like Gender Queer?
Which is part of your comprehensive sexuality education stuff. Can we talk about what you're
actually doing? We can validate life to an unprecedented degree and extend it to the
largest and smallest manifestations of the universe. This should be the philosophy of the
next century. I would like to conclude by saying that perhaps we should replace the popular recent
saying, quote, think globally act locally by think cosmically act locally wherever you live
on this miraculous planet. Thank you very much for giving me some of your precious cosmic time.
Doesn't just make you want to punch this guy in the head. Idea 1633. So now we elaborate on this.
29 December 1998. The word politics should be abolished and replaced by something much deeper.
I like planetics, the management of our planet. But it's even deeper than that. What is happening
on our earth is a whole series of fundamental biological evolutionary changes. We need to
consider the biology and evolution of the earth in its entirety. This should be the only concern
of government to manage the entire earth. The collective preoccupations of humanity should
be for the state of the planet and the conditions and future of all life on it. The word politics
must be abandoned. Politicians should become earth biologists and all faculties of political
science faculties of earth biology and evolution. You get the idea that the United Nations sucks
in a big way. Idea 1634. 30 December 1998. Human history proves that there are always
very great barriers, obstacles to a peaceful just and harmonious world. In the past it was futility.
Then the kingdoms and the empires. Today it is nationalism and tomorrow it will be the big
multinational companies. It is a mistake to hope that these barriers will disappear by themselves.
All human history proves that they have to be dismantled in order to be replaced by something
else. We have reached that point of modern history where both nationalisms and big multinational
corporations must be dismantled and replaced by something else. It has to come from an outside
force, a people's revolution or revolution of the scientists, thinkers, visionaries,
prophets, globalists, futurologists and synthesizers of this planet. So there you have the global
agenda. We have to get rid of nationalisms and start thinking in terms of global citizenship.
And there you have ESG. Big multinational corporations are dismantled. None of them
can do what they want on their own. They are all owned by one another and act in monopoly trust.
They are not what they were before. They are dismantled and replaced by something else that
works in line with ESG and United Nations agendas. Why are so many companies so hell bent to achieve
their agenda 2030 net zero targets? Because they've been dismantled and replaced by something else.
It's not multinational corporations even, which are their own set of problems. They are monopoly
trusts that act in the interest of the United Nations agenda. Idea 1708. Regarding globalization,
one could take my world core curriculum, C volume one, and envisions the globalization and
futurization of every segment of it. An individual can globalize himself. Families can globalize
themselves. States, province, departments, that is, local levels of government could globalize
themselves by creating world associations for local communities, states, provinces, etc.
It would be a benefit to them to learn how other subdivisions like theirs are governed,
legislated, and administered elsewhere in the world. It would be an incredibly rich reciprocal
experience. So that's the idea of global citizenship, which is to be implemented on every
single level. It kind of takes the idea of subsidiarity and turns it inside out and on its head.
Yeah, the local stuff is all going to work, you know, as much authority as possible is going to
be put into local hands, but they are all going to have to be transformed to only do the big global
or I guess cosmic agenda that's coordinated through the central coordinating and cooperation
facilities of the United Nations and its new world religion. So if you get everybody in the
new world religion, you can tell them that they manage their own affairs as maximally as possible,
but it's because they all follow the same religion. So that's why it's so important for them to take
over and transform all the faiths into one corrupt global faith. And that's why this isn't,
like if you don't understand that this cult theosophy is in fact a cult religion,
a global cult religion startup, then you're missing the entire point.
Idea 1745. On the occasion of the year 2000, governments and the diplomatic community should
pay attention to the proposals for a better United Nations offered by Harold Stassen,
one of the world's last living members who signed the charter. He sees the United Nations change
from a place where meetings on political, economic and social issues are held
into a creative center where ideas on religion and philosophy are exchanged for a better future.
Among his proposals are a central cabinet of administrators, a universal environmental
institute, a United Nations legion, an inspection corp, a world panel of mediators, a world
board of arbitration, a world court of equity, a worldwide conference on religions, and a research
institute of people and government. His book should be read by every delegate to the United
Nations, by every head of state before coming to the year 2000 General Assembly, and in all
political science faculties of universities throughout the world. So yeah, they're kind of
after like everything. So that's, you've now got a taste of how crazy it is. And those 17 points
and the whole new genesis were the real big points. This is your United Nations. So I'm going to close
by reading three more of these ideas, and that's it. But I wanted you to have a sense that the
United Nations is not what you think it is. The United Nations, what you might think is if you're
one of my followers, but generally speaking, people don't realize what the United Nations is.
The United Nations is an organization that is wholly dedicated to global governance under an
occult, theosophical religion. And if we don't understand what we're dealing with, we're going
to completely misunderstand what we need to be doing. The United States, it said, needs to decline.
Why? Because we're not in alignment, or we can be not in alignment with their program. This is why
they freaked out when Trump took office. Trump actually pulled us back from all of this. He
removed us from UNESCO. They know that he was going to put America's interests ahead of their
theosophy, and that was why they have to attack the United States so vigorously. And that's why
they do attack the United States so vigorously, because the United States, in its fully constituted
form, and its constitution at its heart, is the biggest threat to this cult religion trying to
take over the world that there is. But I'll close with, like I said, three more of these ideas,
so we don't drag this out. Idea number 562, 25 January 1996. Last but not least,
humanity has reached a point when we must consider our human presence, past, present,
and future on this particular planet in the universe. We now have a tremendous information,
sorry, no, that's what it says. Sorry, I didn't read it right. We now have a tremendous information
on the universe in which we live. In addition to our total consciousness of our earth and its global
evolution, we are now also acquiring and developing a cosmic consciousness of the universe. This is
the greatest of all our advances in human history, so their cult is. But the mysteries of infinity
and eternity still escape us and will remain outside of human and scientific grasp. This has
the result of bringing together the spirituality or basic faiths of all religions and science.
Faiths, by the way, is in scare quotes. This has the result of bringing together the spirituality
or basic, quote, faiths of all religion and science. God, the gods, or the great spirit,
or spirits, or their emissaries, prophets, and human incarnations like Jesus, gave humanity its
early stages of a cosmic universal, all-encompassing faith or feeling for the mysteries of the cosmos,
for the norms of love and for the miracle of life and norms of behavior between all humans
and with all other species and nature. That's claiming an awful lot. These messages, or quote,
revelations, should not be neglected. Uh-oh, they probably something should happen to them like
them being transcended. They contain some of the most, some of the profoundest answers to human
behavior, fulfillment, and survival. Great was our astonishment in the environmental crisis
to discover the wisdom and rules of behavior toward nature dictated by the great spirit to
the indigenous people of this planet. The world's 5,000 religions are filled with incredible wisdom
regarding human morality, belief in life, environmental adaptation, survival, and future
evolution. This is strongly coming to the fore at this time as manifested in the following.
But let me pause before we talk about the following because I want to go back to the
Jesus part here. Uh, so God, the gods, or the great spirit, or spirits, and their emissaries,
prophets, and human incarnations like Jesus. So all of these characters, Jesus is just one of many.
Jesus is just another Buddha who gave humanity at its early stages a cosmic consciousness. So this
is the rise, you've heard this phrase recently probably if you're too tapped in on social media,
this is the rise, and this is part of the new thought movement that this is all, all into.
This is the rise of the idea of the Christ consciousness. And of course the Christ consciousness
is the awakened cosmic consciousness this guy's talking about. And this Christ consciousness
was supposed to be embodied by Jesus and many of the other great sages and buddhas of history,
and also the gurus, or the shamans, or whatever else. But Christ consciousness is a counterfeit.
It is not at all biblical. It is a heretical, theosophical idea. And it is actually on the
rise again. And you need to be sensitive to seeing that because the battle at a spiritual level,
spiritual battle we're engaged in is theology versus theosophy. Jesus didn't stutter. He didn't
say there's a bunch of us that are like me. He didn't say that. He said he is the way of the
truth in the life. He said the way is straight and narrow. Many, you know, the path of many is
the path of destruction. He's very clear about what's going on. He said to, he said to follow
the law. Which law was he talking about? The law of the universe? No.
He claims, or the Gospel of John claims that he is the logos itself made flesh. So he is,
in addition to whatever else on a more profound spiritual level, he is literally the embodiment
of truth. This is not what's being presented. This is a Gnostic counterfeit of that. So the Gnostic
New Thought Movement is embodied. If you go listen to, you can listen to people like Deepak Chopra
and all these guys that are their mouthpieces. Look up the phrase Christ consciousness and see
what comes up. I haven't done it, but I'm so confident that what you're going to find is crazy
theosophical stuff that I'm not worried telling you to do it. Okay, so all of this is in our next
stages of evolution is strongly coming to the fore at this time. He said, has manifested in the
following. One, the dream and plan of my compatriot Robert Schumann from Alsace-Lorraine
to see the European Union, which started with a coal and steel community, followed by an
economic community, followed by a political union, culminate in an all spiritual European Union,
including the Eastern European countries, especially Holy Mother Russia.
Let that one sink in. Two, the creation in 85 countries, including as a third party in the
United States of the Natural Law Party. Based on the premise that the laws of nature should guide
humans and their political behavior and organization, there is only one step to recognize that natural
laws are in reality cosmic laws. So they're going to take the concept of natural law, pervert it,
if they were to get their way with this, and then say that that's a step in their cosmic
evolution. It's the same Gnostic thing I talked about in the past where they say, yeah, yeah,
yeah, the thing you've got, that's really wise. And that's also stepped like four out of 10. Come
with us, I've got the other six. And cosmic, astral, blah, blah, blah, is coming down the
pike and only they secretly understand it. Three, the San Francisco, and this is the one I really
wanted to hit, the San Francisco Initiative to Create a United Religions Organization similar
to the United Nations, also born in that city, where all religions of the world could cooperate,
define what they have in common, provide their wisdom on human behavior and morality,
and write relations with nature and the creation of God, which I don't know if that's a pun,
I assume that it's relations with the creation of God, but maybe they mean the act of creating God.
In the process, they will hopefully reduce and progressively give up their fundamentalism,
and in other words, actually believing their real faiths in favor of some theosophy,
they will hopefully reduce and progressively give up their fundamentalism in favor of a global
spirituality, the same way as nations in the United Nations have reduced the national fundamentalism
called sovereignty, and given away their sovereignty to the United Nations to govern their affairs from
a remote, unaccountable, theosophical cult that we should be getting as far away from
as humanly possible. He goes on to say, may God help us that a world conference be convened
on proper earth government through what the world's religions have in common in terms of
universal global spirituality and worldwide human experience, in other words, a Prisket theologia.
So that was one idea, 1998.
20 years ago, I wrote an essay on the need for global education. Today, I would write an essay on
the need for evolutionary education. Tomorrow, I would write an essay on the need for cosmic
education. So I want to phrase those things in different words. I'm just going to say the same
thing. 20 years ago, I wrote an essay on the need to develop common core. Today, I would write an
essay on the need for a social and emotional learning. And tomorrow, I would write an essay
on the need for global citizenship education. That's what it's going on. That's who this guy is.
And we did the first two of those, and we're working on the third. And the United Nations is
actually behind all three of them. And it's all based in a cult theosophical religion that they're
using education to bring your children into, even though it's damaging to them, even though they know
that it causes severe anxiety, depression, and cognitive dissonance, that they can then use
the social emotional learning techniques, which are effectively brainwashing techniques, to override
in the kids. I did that whole podcast on that document called SEL for SDGs, social emotional
learning for the Sustainable Development Goals. So there you go. You can read the Sustainable
Development Goals as evolutionary education and global citizenship as the next step after we
achieve that spiritual, which is the common core, and then material, and that sustainability, and
then, sorry, I did it wrong. Ideal, that's the common core. And then material, that's the sustainable
development education. And then spiritual would be global consciousness or cosmic consciousness,
I guess, which is global citizenship education. He goes on to say, after World War II, humanity
acquired beyond national consciousness, a global consciousness. See, it's about global citizenship
education. Today, humanity is acquiring an evolutionary consciousness. A consciousness
is a future. Tomorrow, humanity will acquire a cosmic consciousness. After World War II,
the United Nations was born as the planet's first global organization. Today, the United Nations is
becoming the planet's evolutionary organization. So it's not meant to be a facilitator of global
cooperation. It's meant to direct the evolution of mankind. Tomorrow, he says the United Nations
will become the planet's first cosmic organization. This is a cult theosophical organization.
With humanity's transcendence into cosmic consciousness and space and in time,
the sciences and religions will converge into an all-encompassing, holistic, spiritual age
dreamt of by our ancestors, prophets, visionary saints, and earthly incarnations of the divine
cosmic forces over eons of time. In other words, Prescott theologia. Our future, he says, is
incredibly bright and hopeful if we hasten these processes and think in time of ways to face
very likely emergencies. Isn't that telling? So the goal is to create a one-world theosophical
religion that blends all of the faiths, all the sciences, all the philosophies, all of the
activities into one thing, one all-encompassing, holistic, spiritual age dreamt of by all of the
cosmic forces over eons of time. Wow. And we will have a bright future if we hasten toward that
and prepare ourselves to face very likely emergencies, which seems to be what the World
Economic Forum decided it was going to do. And what the UN subsidiary, the World Health Organization,
decided to switch its mission from coordinating various things about diseases and medicines
and things like that to whatever the hell it's doing now trying to claim sovereignty over the
world, which we just heard that sovereignty was the problem that has to be overcome. National
sovereignty has to be destroyed. And in similar, he said literally in similar ways to the way that
we're overcoming national sovereignty to a globalist consciousness, we need to overcome individual
faiths and fundamentalism to a global theosophical occult religion. And I think last but not least
idea number 1982. He says in idea 502 in volume two, I listed the three main periods through
which the United Nations and humanity have gone since 1945. One, humanism, two, the environment,
and three, the earth as number one. In these last 500 ideas, I mentioned a fourth period,
our future evolution. That's the really crazy pants part of the document, by the way, that I was
reading through was a reflection on those. Of course, these are ideas 500-ish and those were
ideas 1600-ish, so it's not identical. I'm not saying that, but that's what he actually reflects
there is these three phases. And then the fourth one is our future evolution. So anyway, as he
continues, it suddenly occurs to me that the United Nations is still structured according to the
needs and philosophy of the first period, namely humanism, with the objectives of peace, well-being,
health, labor, food, education, culture, human rights, etc. The structure of the United Nations
system does not reflect adequately the other three recent and equally fundamental preoccupations
except the environment. A basic restructuring of the United Nations and its specialized agencies
must therefore be considered to make it the principal central organization of the earth
and future evolution. We should create a world air and atmosphere agency, a world water agency,
a world climate agency, a world ocean agency, a world outer space agency, etc. Within these
fundamental aspects of the earth, we should consider the place, action, and fulfillment of
the human species. This reform should become a priority on the agenda of world affairs
at this beginning of a new century and millennium. And I think that's exactly what they did.
That's exactly what happened. The United Nations, however bad or whatever it was in its inception
at the beginning, in the 21st century, in the third millennium, became a monster. And that monster is
completely imbued with a cult theosophical view of the world and of humanity and of its mission in
the world. I don't think that disagrees with its founding from the Huxleys, but just to point out
it was being said at the time that the United Nations was not making this change satisfactorily
by high level people in the United Nations. But that's what it turned to become. That's what it
has become. And that's what we're dealing with when we look at the United Nations. It is the
headquarters of a world theosophical cult. It is not what it appears to be. We should have
nothing to do with it. So I hope that we can start thinking about this more. I'm going to,
in the notes for this episode, put a link to all four volumes, not just this particular document,
but all four volumes of Robert Mueller's ramblings and Robert Mueller's website,
so that you can go look through the other God knows how many ideas, almost 2,000 ideas yourself.
I didn't even read a hundred of them. So that you have a real sense of how insanely dangerous
the United Nations really is. And I just want you to remember who this guy is. He was a very
high level player in the United Nations. He is the creator of something we're going to be talking
more about. And I encourage you to listen to Lisa Logan about this, this group called the
Evolutionary Leaders. These are very important people that you think you don't know about,
that it's going to sound totally insane when you find out about them. So we'll probably hear
more about that as we go. But he was also the creator of the Common Core curriculum, in line
with trying to get exactly these corrupt values pushed into these religious values, pushed into
education. I don't think Common Core succeeded. I think the primary effect Common Core had in
practice was to separate the ability for parents to help their children do homework,
and thus disconnect them so that the children became more reliant on the teachers. And as we've
moved into social and emotional learning and global citizenship education and education for
sustainable development, they've been able to take advantage of that broken chain from parent to child
and take the children in this other direction. In other words, indoctrinating them into this
theosophical cult of what they consider to be Earth worship for the direction of mankind and
Earth's future evolution on every possible level. Again, the conclusion is simple. We had it right
when we made them mad. We should pull away from the United Nations as quickly and thoroughly as
possible. We should discredit the United Nations. We should reject everything the United Nations
tries to impose on us at whether it's the local level, the state level,
ideally eventually at the United States federal level, and we should defund it completely. It is
time for us to recognize the United Nations as an evil cult, and it is time for us to abolish the
United Nations.
