These lectures are part of the Great Courses series.
They are produced by The Teaching Company.
The Great Courses cover a broad array of university level disciplines.
The lectures in each course are either 30 or 45 minutes long.
By listening for less than an hour a day, you can finish even the longest course in
just weeks.
Browse our catalogue or website and imagine how much you could learn if you spent just
30 minutes a day for the next year in the best college classrooms in the world.
The lecturers are university professors carefully selected by The Teaching Company and its customers
for intellectual distinction and teaching excellence.
These lectures are titled World War I, The Great War, Part 1.
The lecturer is Professor Vejas Gabriel Lulavichas.
Dr. Lulavichas is Associate Professor of History at the University of Tennessee at Knoxville.
He earned his BA from the University of Chicago and his PhD from the University of Pennsylvania,
where he specialized in modern German history.
After receiving his doctorate, Dr. Lulavichas spent a year as a postdoctoral research fellow
at the Hoover Institution on War, Peace and Revolution at Stanford University.
He has published numerous scholarly articles and his first book, Warland on the Eastern
Front, Culture, National Identity and German Occupation in the First World War, was published
in 2000.
In 2003, he was the recipient of the Excellence in Teaching Award for his outstanding classes
on such subjects as Nazi Germany, World War I and Utopian Thought.
Professor Lulavichas prepared the course guide that comes with these lectures.
The course guide includes a detailed outline of each lecture, a glossary, a timeline, biographical
notes, maps, and an annotated bibliography.
To get the most out of this course, you may find it useful to follow along with the outlines
or review them before or after each lecture.
Lecture 1, The Century's Initial Catastrophe
Welcome to this course on the First World War, the man-made catastrophe that launched
the 20th century on its violent course, and indeed a key event of modern times.
In this lecture, we will begin by presenting the main themes of the course, beginning with
the crucial concept of total war, as many historians consider the First World War the
first example of this modern phenomenon.
Total war is a phrase used to describe not merely a contest between professional armies
on the battlefield, but rather represents something far vaster, a clash in entire societies
mobilized for total victory, including their economies, their political establishments,
the intellectual life of a society, all of the passions and feelings, emotions, and convictions
of an entire population.
Our other important themes will include the role that ideology and fervent beliefs had
in determining the war's course and its conduct, also the meanings that were ascribed to the
war as it was going on, as well as in its aftermath, and we'll examine here great contrasts
in how the war was understood, as well the shock of new experiences, a continual process
of the shock of the new, and a steady process of brutalization, and finally the implications
of this great war for our civilization and for our own times.
It's necessary, thus, to engage in a very difficult, but nonetheless essential task
of historical imagination, to seek to envision the war in its totality.
This is in many ways a very difficult task that faces us.
We're removed from the war by a distance of nearly a century.
The war itself, to contemporaries, was of such a scale and of such novelty that they called
it the Great War to express something of its all-encompassing nature.
And then finally, another reason why it's difficult for us to envision the war in its
totality is because that war has done so much to shape our modern world, as we'll see in
coming lectures.
One way, however, to begin the task of envisioning the experience of the war is to consider book
and scenes of that conflict, scenes accompanying its start as well as its end, that say much
to us about the mixed nature of experiences in the First World War, some of its ambiguities,
and its diversity.
In August of 1914, the war began, and it did so with a break at long last to tension that
had gripped many Europeans.
In August of 1914, with the declarations of war, that tension at last broke and a remarkable
emotional reaction set in.
Vast cheering crowds throughout the capitals of Europe welcomed the war.
In London, in Paris, in Berlin, in St. Petersburg, crowds gathered to sing national anthems,
to wave national flags, to cheer, and to volunteer for the conflict.
This event, this emotional reaction, came to be called the August Madness, and for many
was an unforgettable experience.
At the same time, as you had these vast celebrations, however, there were also contrary phenomena—quiet
leave-takings as soldiers left for the front, well aware that they might not return, individual
foreboding for not everyone cheered, not everyone celebrated, and many understood the suffering
that war would bring, if not ultimately its scale.
And then finally, there's also the case of ethnic minorities in the multinational empires
of Europe.
The Poles, for instance, divided between three empires who well understood that it was not
their national cause that they would be asked to sacrifice and die for, but rather that
of a foreign regime.
At the end of the war, four years later, in November of 1918, as the guns last fell silent,
as opposed to the tremendous celebration of four years previously now quiet reigned, an
unnatural stillness settled on the cemeteries and the battlefields that had been the site
of the suffering of four years previous.
At the same time, however, in a contrary phenomenon, elsewhere in Europe, especially in Eastern
Europe, there emerged new nations from the wreckage of empire and crowds celebrated there,
the message of national rebirth and independence.
These scenes, bookending the conflict, suggest something of its diversity and its complexity.
Another challenge for us is to try to even take in the magnitude of the war's scale,
one of the reasons why contemporaries called it the Great War.
US armies were mobilized on a scale that simply had been unimaginable hitherto.
An estimated 70 million soldiers participated in the war worldwide, and of them over 9 million
would be killed.
To give some sense of this otherwise astronomical figure, one might mention that, on average,
this works out to about 6,000 soldiers dying for every day of the war as it took its course.
At the same time, we need to mention that even these astronomical figures lack a total
precision.
The precise number of deaths and casualties will likely never be known exactly given
the disorder and the lack of certainty about these figures that dominated at the end of
the conflict.
Another question which historians are still debating today is that of civilian casualties.
Those numbers are not clear, but some estimates run to almost 6 million.
A further key aspect of this war that we need to try to assimilate or take aboard is its
identity as a world war.
World war was a term used at the time as well to express the magnitude of this Great War.
Contemporaries obviously were not yet calling it the First World War, even the most pessimistic
couldn't expect that this would be the first in a series of conflicts.
Nonetheless, the concept itself took on an important dimension.
Earlier wars, such as the Seven Years War of the 18th century, the Napoleonic wars of
the early 19th century, had had a global dimension, but in some sense this war had an even more
extended global aspect.
And one reason for this was the extent of 19th century imperialism spreading the conflict
around the globe.
If our largest undertaking in this course is to try to take in some of the reality of
this conflict and its totality, we want also to outline some of the aims of the course
as we proceed.
We'll be presenting not only a chronological narrative, and we certainly will be doing
that as well, we'll also be combining this with a thematic approach, taking a moment
now and again to really focus in on particular themes and topics of crucial importance.
At the same time as we'll be covering military history, we'll also be seeking to include
in our survey cultural, social, and political aspects of the conflict as well.
We'll also be trying to present a narrative that's balanced between the different war
fronts, rather than being, as is sometimes the case, almost exclusively focused on the
more familiar and riveting scenes of the western front.
We need now to outline some of the main themes of the course, and these are essentially five.
The first one concerns the totality of war, defining total war as a concept.
Total war was a term that was coined and used during the war itself in an attempt to sum
up what contemporaries felt was the all-encompassing nature of this modern industrial conflict.
This new kind of war demanded total mobilization of mass armies, economies, societies, and
the hearts of minds of people in the war, not merely soldiers on the battlefield.
In this sense, this was not merely a war determined by government cabinets and elites, but in
a very real sense, a people's war.
And certain implications flowed from the totality of this new conflict.
Increasingly, the stakes of total war were seen as total as well.
Not merely an adjustment of competitive advantage as a result of battles or of territorial loss
or gain, but total victory or total defeat would become the final outcome, not compromise.
This long grinding process of total war also would not bring quick victory, but the winner,
in fact, would be the last one standing after a long drawn-out process of attrition.
Total war had other important implications as well.
Because not only soldiers were involved, but also civilians, civilians took on a new importance.
They too were mobilized to work for their country's victory on what came to be called
the home front.
This is a marvelously expressive phrase that really captures a key aspect of total war.
And as a result of this new importance, civilians were increasingly the targets of violence
as well.
Very clearly, total war as a modern industrial conflict would also have a crucial economic
dimension as victory would not be found on the battlefield alone.
And thus economic weapons, like the naval blockade of Germany to deny enemy resources,
was an obvious tool.
The enormous demands and strains of this phenomenon of total war would also tear at
all of the societies engaged in the conflict.
And these strains in society could take many different forms.
Gaps could grow between the soldiers in the trenches, the civilians on the home front,
with incomprehension growing between these parties, and alienation from the government
seeking to fight the war to a successful conclusion.
All too often, social tensions could also lead to the search for scapegoats in minorities
in one's own midst.
Though the term total war was new and was used during the First World War itself, it
actually really came into its own in popular usage after the war.
As participants, contemporaries who had survived the conflict tried to think out the implications
of what they had lived through.
And it's unfortunately a fact that the concept of total war in part came into its own because
it was used by those who were already thinking about the next war and preparing for it, World
War II.
The experience of total war also affected political movements that in a sense arose out
of the ruins of that conflict.
These radical political movements were often called totalitarian because of their total
claims upon people and societies.
These included communism in Soviet Russia, fascism in Italy, and Nazism in Hitler's
Germany.
The ambitions of these movements, however different their ideologies were, were often
rooted in the experience of the Great War.
Their aims were to produce completely mobilized societies acting in unison and in ideological
struggle.
The second major theme that we'll be returning to over the course of this course is the neglected
role of ideology.
The First World War has often been depicted by historians as a conflict over geopolitics,
the balance of power and political issues, as opposed to the Second World War, which
is seen as much more ideological, a complicated contest between democracies, Nazism, and
the Soviet Union.
In fact, this juxtaposition is overdrawn.
Ideas and beliefs clearly played a crucial role throughout World War I and need to be
understood.
Some historians today are stressing this in their scholarship.
They're urging us to conceptualize the context of the First World War as a distinct war culture
which developed over the course of the conflict and which had a very serious ideological dimension.
The eagerness with which the war was met, the eagerness with which the war elicited,
was afterwards, they argue, willfully forgotten in a narrative of disillusionment.
Given such hopes and emotions from the very beginning of the war, what changes might follow?
Our next major theme is that of the meanings assigned to the war.
How was the war understood by those who participated in it and remembered it afterwards?
It's crucial to acknowledge one central point.
In the experience of contemporaries, we might say that there wasn't merely one First World
War, but rather a multiplicity of wars.
This is something we'll be returning to in our lectures.
The war on the Western Front was very different from that of the Eastern Front or the other
fronts, and thus all of these different experiences need to be taken into account.
Western memory of the Great War is very different from that that is dominant in Eastern Europe
in the 20th century.
The memory of Western Europeans of the Great War tended to focus in the decades after that
conflict on senseless sacrifice, on the bloody extinction of an entire generation of youth,
for what?
By contrast, a very different set of meanings were assigned to the Great War in Eastern
Europe in its aftermath.
In newly independent nation states, by contrast, in Eastern Europe, the Great War was seen
not as senseless or meaningless, but instead as the very exemplar of a purposeful event
producing national independence in a baptism of fire.
And likewise, in a related and paradoxical reversal, some of these contrasts reverberate
later in the 20th century.
In Western Europe, World War II is often regarded as the Good War.
The perspective in Eastern Europe on the Second World War is much more ambivalent.
By contrast, their Nazi rule was replaced by decades of communist control and the narrative
is not simply one of liberation.
The next major theme is the process of repeated shocks of new experiences that needed to be
assimilated or taken aboard, culminating in an overall and prolonged process of brutalization.
The war presented an unceasing series of novelties that, unfortunately, later became increasingly
ordinary and feature in our own times.
These included the use of vast new technologically sophisticated weapons systems, including tanks,
airplanes, as well as a dreadful weapon, poison gas.
These included new approaches to war that targeted civilians.
They included also the devastating modern phenomenon of genocide, including the Armenian
massacres in the Ottoman Empire that we'll be discussing in a later lecture.
It also expanded the powers of the state and created new strategies for dealing with populations
in what came to be called population policy.
Ultimately, though extremely difficult to measure, many contemporaries, especially the
more sensitive and thoughtful ones, felt that they were living through a process of
brutalization in which the sensibilities of ordinary individuals as well as societies
were in a sense hardening and the value of human life was being altered and downgraded.
The war thus functioned as a hinge of violence in modern history, preparing greater horrors
to come.
Our last major theme of the course are the implications of the Great War in the largest
sense, because the First World War has left its mark on us in this day in ways both small
as well as large.
Its traces indeed are to be found in our language today.
These include phrases that we utter perhaps in the workplace about going into the trenches
or fighting, slogging it out in the trenches.
Another phrase is that of a no man's land, which crops up in our everyday language as
well, which originally designated those territories located between the trench lines, which represented
the central area of combat.
And then a phrase also harking back to the First World War, the phrase going over the
top, which represented in fact the notion of a frontal attack of troops leaping up out
of the trenches heading out across no man's land in order to engage in, it was hoped,
a victorious assault on the enemy's side.
These are traces left in our language.
Other objects that to us are quite ordinary also are rooted in the experience of the First
World War.
These include mundane objects like wristwatches.
Indeed in the 19th century a proper gentleman would wear a pocket watch rather than a wristwatch.
But in the trenches of the First World War the use of wristwatches in order to readily
coordinate attacks going over the top at a precisely predetermined and planned time produced
the popularity of the wristwatch replacing pocket watches.
And trench coats still worn today are very much artifacts of that time and that place.
An ordinary phenomenon that we experience twice a year, that of daylight savings time,
the transition in how we lead our lives on an ordinary schedule harkens back to the First
World War.
As nations mobilizing for total conflict the state would determine when it was necessary
to change our experience of time itself in order to prolong the working day.
At the most significant level the war also led to changes of really profound nature in
the status of the state, that's to say the government and the powers that it was willing
to claim and that individuals were willing to accept as claims.
A status of society changed as well in the calls that it could make on individuals and
then also the status of the individual himself or herself changed as a result of this vast
conflict as well.
Indeed some historians have argued on a very profound level that even our language changed
and we'll be discussing in later lectures this remarkable and provocative thesis that
the English language itself among others changed in the way certain words operated.
The argument gets made that after the searing disillusionment of the First World War the
words honor and duty for instance could never be spoken again without an element of irony.
This is a claim that we'll be examining in a later lecture.
At the same time paradoxically one of the outcomes of the First World War and even of
this alleged process of disillusionment was not a loss of faith but a renewed and even
more explosive political faith, the production of fierce new ideological politics in a new
age of belief.
The decades that followed the First World War were ones of extreme politics with ideological
choices in which individuals were not afforded the right to any kind of neutrality but instead
would have to make choices between opposed ideologies.
The growth of this extremism across the political spectrum ultimately culminated in a repetition
of the phenomenon of total war in the Second World War.
And the linkages between these two global conflicts are made clear in a very ordinary
way in some of the figures whom we'll encounter in the course of our lectures who played roles
in both the First World War and later in the Second World War.
These include the British politician and later leader Winston Churchill.
They include the young officer during the First World War Charles de Gaulle who would
later rally the French resistance cause.
They include an ordinary soldier who would later become the dictator of Nazi Germany
Adolf Hitler as well as another future dictator Benito Mussolini and many others.
The linkages between these two world wars are such that historians have begun to provocatively
suggest that it may very well be that we need to think not only of separate conflicts but
rather of an extended continuum of conflict of clash that we might need to think about
as a 30 years war of the 20th century rather than as distinct conflicts.
It's likely to be the case that as we recede in time from the experience of both world wars
from the perspective of those who come later these events will draw closer and closer and
the perspective will be altered for people in the future.
What was clearly recognized by contemporaries was that the First World War and then later
the Second World War seemingly normalized a massive brutalization of our shared civilization.
In a famous phrase still echoed by historians as nearly obligatory the American diplomat
and historian George Kennan described the First World War as the seminal catastrophe
of the 20th century.
What he meant by that was that the First World War had unleashed a whole series of processes
and dynamics that ultimately would set the 20th century on its destructive course.
In many ways as we'll be exploring in our course the First World War has shaped the
world we know today.
Many of its political borders, its regional conflicts, many of the perils, nightmares
and hopes that are with us still.
We'd like to briefly provide an overview of the individual lectures to see the trajectory
that our course will be taking.
In our first six lectures we will be examining the outbreak of the war after having provided
a overview of the context in which Europe and the world found itself in 1914 and immediately
before.
We will have examined the crisis and politics and culture.
We'll examine a still very lively debate about the causes of the war and we'll take a much
closer look at this riveting mass psychological phenomenon of the August Madness of 1914 immediately
before an unexpected breakdown in the war plans which were to bring, it was hoped, a
quick victory to the fighting sides.
In our following three lectures we'll examine the western front which has such an iconic
and clearly very important status as a site of modernity for our own times.
We'll examine the experience of what it was like to live and die in the trenches.
We'll examine the titanic battles that were fought on the western front and which brought
so little in terms of victory.
We'll then shift our attention to view other fronts and other dimensions of the war's
experience.
We'll examine what has been called the unknown war on the eastern front.
We'll examine the southern fronts and the Mediterranean as another crucial area of operations.
Our course then will turn for our next four lectures for an extended and careful look
at particular themes that span the fighting fronts as well as chronological scope.
We'll examine the war aims of the fighting powers, what it was that they were willing
to state that they were fighting for.
We'll also examine the experience bound up in war aims of occupations and its attempts
to seize territory.
We'll examine as well soldiers in their identity not merely as fighters but also as victims,
the dimensions of violence in the battlefield, what it meant physically, as well as the experience
that many soldiers shared in of captivity, of being prisoners.
We'll examine reactions to the war and its experience at the battlefront in the form of
stormtroopers, soldiers who exalted in the experience of war, and future dictators, Hitler
and Mussolini.
We then will examine also the total war of technology and trace a remarkable process
of ever accelerating advances in technological change with ever more destructive potential
realized.
Our next lectures will turn to examine other theaters of the war, the war in the air, and
the war at sea, as well as a lecture devoted entirely to the global reach and the scope
of the war.
Our next five lectures then will turn to examine the experience of the war at home, what it
meant for governments, societies and individuals as they mobilized for the conflict itself.
We'll examine the invention of the wartime state as vast new powers accrued to governments
mobilizing populations and economies for all-out victory.
We'll examine the remarkable and increasing sophistication of propaganda, the attempt
to motivate societies, hearts and minds for endurance as well as victory in the war.
We'll then examine more closely the experience of endurance and the stress that was very
much a part of the experience of the home fronts.
We'll examine the possibilities for dissent against the war and the limits placed upon
it.
And then in a special lecture we'll look more closely at the remarkable challenge that the
essentially the midpoint of the war represented in terms of a renewed tensing of energies
and a mustering of will to continue the fight from 1916 to 1917 on.
Our next lectures will be devoted then to examining some of the destructive consequences
of the strains of total war.
We'll devote a lecture to look more closely at how the First World War provided the context
for an act of modern genocide, the massacres against the Armenians in 1915 in the Ottoman
Empire.
A program of population policy tipped over into genocide, that's to say the killing of
a group of people not because of what they've done but rather because of who they are and
what they represent to those committing this crime.
We'll examine also the plethora of social and national revolts that erupted as a result
of the strains of war especially felt keenly by multinational empires unable to mobilize
effectively for the conflict itself.
Our next lectures then will turn to two world historical events that take place in 1917
and that truly as we've already suggested earlier in this lecture in some sense reverberate
through the rest of the 20th century.
In 1917 the Russian revolutions break out and the United States enters the war with
remarkable and important results.
We'll examine the complicated course of revolutionary events within Russia itself in 1917 with successive
changes of revolutionary regimes culminating in the coming to power of Lenin and the Bolsheviks
announcing a new world order on the lines of their communist ideology.
We'll also examine the other paired historical world historical event of 1917 America's
entry into the war also with an announced ideological goal of reshaping the world order
and with a very keen and important ideological charge.
We'll examine in detail not only the reasons for America's entry into the war but also
the experience of Americans in the war over there across the Atlantic as well as in wartime
America at home.
We'll then examine the remarkable and quick series of events in 1918 which brought an
end to the wartime efforts of the Central Powers, Germany, Austria, Hungary and Turkey.
We'll examine the emotions that attended the ending of the war in 1918, the collapse of
empires with remarkable rapidity and the achievement of national independence by many
independent states in Eastern Europe.
We will bring our course to a close by examining attempts at peacemaking in particular the
Versailles Treaty and the Paris Settlement as well as the aftershocks that followed the
war which didn't have a neat end but instead continued in a very real sense for years afterwards.
We'll examine also the echoes of the war in the form of monuments, memory, myth, as
well as conspiracy theories about the war and its meaning and as a result of the tremendous
experiences and devastation of the First World War the beginning of the rise of mass dictatorships
which would have everything to do with the unleashing of the Second World War.
In our very last lecture we'll examine the legacies of the Great War and indicate not
only how it changed the course of modern history but how it continues to affect us to this
very day.
