Lecture 2 Europe in 1914
In this lecture, entitled Europe in 1914, we'll be setting the stage for the explosion of the First World War in 1914
by examining the state of Europe and the world at large before the Cataclysm itself.
We'll be examining the states that would be the major players in the opening of the war itself
that were called by the very evocative name the Great Powers, and this was always capitalized,
capital G, capital B, the Great Powers, which were Great Britain, France, Germany, Austria, Hungary, and Russia,
the Great Powers of the European continent, as well as other contenders for Great Power status,
making a bid for that stature.
We'll examine the diplomatic history as well of their dynamic interaction,
and this is summed up in a concept which is crucial to diplomatic history, the concept of the balance of power.
The balance of power as a concept suggests that whenever in a multi-polar international system,
that's to say without one or two dominant players, but a multiplicity of players,
as a result of this phenomenon called the balance of power, one power which makes a bid to control all the others
or to displace the others will find itself faced with a coalition opposing it of other powers.
So a balance of power mechanism suggests that there will always be a complicated game of balancing,
of shifting coalitions against the bid of any one power to achieve total control.
We'll examine in particular with special reference to this concept of the balance of power,
the changes which were brought about in that balance of power dynamic by a new factor in European politics,
the emergence of the German Empire in the late 19th century, and the turmoil that this caused in the international system.
We'll also examine worldwide trends of worldwide imperialism, a growing arms race on land and at sea,
and also increasing international tensions which were moving Europe after a century of general peace towards a general war by 1914.
European society at the start of the new 20th century shared in a common civilization for all of the national differences,
there were nonetheless dialogues, a sense of shared values that were part of a self-confident European civilization.
Organized into separate nation states or multinational empires, Europeans for all of their national differences
owned national pride or nationalism in many ways recognized that they shared a common world view,
and this was underlined in the sense that Europeans had a right so that many of them felt to a special role in imperialism dominating non-Western peoples.
Within Western civilization, however, within the multiplicity of states and of countries and of ethnic groups,
some states, those known as the great powers, played a dominant role in international affairs.
The litmus test of a great power was whether it was capable of asserting its own will in international affairs without needing to seek the approval of another great power.
Other states which didn't fully have the status of being great powers in terms of international recognition certainly aspired to such a role.
Let's consider in turn the great powers.
We'll begin with the great power which was viewed as the conservative status quo dominant superpower of the 19th century, Great Britain.
Great Britain was very clearly an industrial and commercial power which had played an enormous role in the 19th century.
It had spearheaded that complicated process called the Industrial Revolution which had put production as well as economy on a new industrial basis,
and Britain also had won for itself over the decades and the centuries a world empire.
This world empire on which the British proudly stated the sun never set was of enormous extent,
by one estimate it covered some 20% of the world's entire inhabitable land surface.
It included the dominions of British settlers in Canada, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa.
It also included territories like India which was proudly claimed as the jewel of the British Empire,
and also earlier and older imperial possessions like Ireland which was always a perennial focus for unrest in Britain's own colonial backyard.
Britain's own population was 45 million and in its island fastness there was a empire that was dependent on trade.
Britain had made itself the preeminent naval power to protect access to its overseas possessions and to secure the sea lanes,
and the British preferred in this complicated game of the balance of power that we'll be talking more about in today's lecture,
they preferred to take the stance not of direct involvement in the affairs of the continent,
but rather to maintain what they proudly called splendid isolation, intervening in the affairs of the European continent only as necessary to preserve the balance of power.
Britain's political system was a constitutional monarchy and Britain at this point had a liberal government which was proud of the achievements of the British monarchy and the British Empire.
There was much to be proud of, a sense of preeminence in financial terms was among these factors, London was clearly the banking capital of the world,
and at the start of the 20th century the British looked back upon not only a record of imperial dominance, but also a sense of investment in the status quo,
a sense of being a conservative power which wanted to preserve its preeminence among other great powers.
At the same time however, as we turn to examine another great power, British supremacy had been challenged by a brash young contender in the game of the great powers, and that was Germany.
The German Empire had been created recently and it had been created by war.
It had been born of the war in 1870-1871 when the German Kingdom of Prussia had led German armies, its allies of other German states, to victory against France, considered the hereditary enemy.
As a result of this war, it was possible to establish a German Empire around Prussian leadership, which a tactic which was pursued and won by the so-called Iron Chancellor,
Otto von Bismarck, the leader of Prussian politics.
Otto von Bismarck was a peerless practitioner of realpolitik, a German phrase often translated in English as power politics.
As the chief servant of the royal family of Prussia, the Hohenzollerns, Bismarck carefully engineered German unification around a hard core of Prussian militarism in a succession of wars against Austria in 1866 and then against France,
sealing the establishment of the German Empire.
This new young Germany had become at a stroke in 1870-1871 the strongest power on the continent.
It was endowed with proud Prussian militarist traditions, it had an enormous and growing population of 65 million, and its booming economy likewise made it an industrial powerhouse in a new surge of industrial revolution.
The creation of this German Empire was of such importance to international affairs that contemporaries had to struggle with the question of how to come to terms with this new political fact.
Indeed, where earlier one had had essentially a power vacuum at the center of Europe, there was this new principle, this new factor in power politics.
Contemporaries at the time spoke of this unprecedented event as the German Revolution, and by calling it this, they were very clearly placing it on a par with the French Revolution at the end of the 18th century that had overturned the political order.
This, in international terms, was a fact that needed to be dealt with, and the German Revolution had produced what contemporaries called the German Question.
The German Question, which continued to haunt international politics through much of the 20th century, was essentially a way of asking what role would this new Germany play in European affairs?
Would it be an anchor of European stability, or would it be a factor for instability, chaos, and perhaps war?
Otto von Bismarck, an international politician of enormous sophistication, also had to deal with the German Question, and he dealt with it in part by trying to calm the potential fears of other great powers,
to ensure in part that Germany wouldn't face a hostile coalition of powers balancing off against its perceived threat.
He aimed to reassure the other great powers that Germany had only peaceful intentions.
Von Bismarck's principle was to present Germany at all junctures as a satisfied power that had what it wanted, that was satiated, and that now, after being a revolutionary factor in international politics, would become a conservative factor in international politics.
These cautious policies, these attempts to calm the fears, potential fears of neighbors, were simply too mild a policy prescription for the young emperor, the word in German is Kaiser, by the name of Wilhelm II, who ascended to the throne in 1888.
He objected to Bismarck's attempt to calm other powers and instead insisted on a far more energetic policy. He soon dismissed Bismarck in 1890 and set about crafting a far more assertive approach to international politics.
His slogan was announced with the words, full steam ahead, now under his control. Nobody was really sure exactly what the course would be, but it was clear that it would be fast and it would be aggressive.
A few words about this really remarkable personality of Wilhelm II would be in place here. He was, on the one hand, the descendant of a long and distinguished aristocratic line, the royal family of the House of Prussia, the family of Hohenzollern.
He was also, as it turns out, the grandson of Queen Victoria of Great Britain. This speaks volumes about the interrelated kinship networks between the royal families of Europe.
But Wilhelm II distinguished himself also by many other unfortunate characteristics. He was notoriously emotionally unstable. He was given to macho posturing and extremely aggressive language.
In famous newsreels of this period, his figure is always very quickly to be picked out from a crowd of aristocrats because he is the one who is gesturing with wide and dramatic, very aggressive gestures, even when engaged in making small talk with fellow aristocrats.
But according to historians who place a lot of store by personal psychology, Wilhelm II's physical infirmity, the fact that he was born with a withered arm as a result of a difficult birth process, according to some historians, goes some way towards explaining his posturing, his overcompensation in terms of aggressive militarism for what he perceived as a physical malady
that a warrior or warlord shouldn't have. His militarism was reflected in his love of resplendent uniforms and his militaristic language that often would produce a really characteristic talent for disaster.
Wilhelm II would often engage in incautious interviews with the international press, which would produce scandals that he then would have to retreat from.
One problem is that this intemperate man was also surrounded by figures at court who were not very helpful in taming some of his policies.
One famous case which made clear that he was surrounded by irresponsible individuals involved news leaking out at the start of the 20th century that at one point when Wilhelm II had to be cheered up from one of these public relations disasters he had unleashed,
some of his own generals dressed up as ballerinas and danced for him at court. One of those generals actually had a heart attack and fell dead while dancing for the emperor dressed as a ballerina,
and as news of this filtered out it was not very much calculated to reassure people that Germany's leadership was in firm and responsible hands.
Wilhelm II's policies were determined above all to win respect and status for Germany. In his words, Germany deserved its place in the sun.
And as a result he sanctioned an aggressive foreign policy that very shortly alienated many other of the great powers, precisely the thing that Bismarck had aimed to avoid.
Germany itself was a strange political creation. Though it had a parliament called the Reichstag, the empire was in fact an uneasy mix of constitutionalism and some democratic seeming elements on the one hand and on the other hand authoritarianism,
the personal rule of an unbalanced individual like Wilhelm II.
German domestic politics in fact were fragmented along class, regional and religious lines. So there was a certain volatility to German politics which further was exacerbated by the phenomenon of rapid, very thorough and late industrialization within Germany which brought social disruption.
This social disruption for German conservatives and German ruling elites was summed up in the figure of one new political force that many of them feared. This was the SPD.
The SPD, the initial stood for the Social Democratic Party of Germany, was a party that identified itself with the working classes.
Founded in 1875, the Social Democratic Party, the SPD, adhered to Marx's ideas of a revolution overcoming capitalism and ushering in an age of workers' control.
The SPD was a self-consciously revolutionary party. It was well organized and disciplined and became a model for other socialists worldwide including in the United States who sought to emulate this elder brother of the international socialist movement.
And to the horror of Germany's ruling elites, the SPD in the voting in 1912 became the largest party in Germany.
A sense of crisis was building from these political facts and Germany's established elites and German nationalists sought some way in which it might be possible to escape from these domestic problems.
There arose now a plethora of nationalist leagues pressing and endorsing Wilhelm II's demand for a more aggressive foreign policy, in some cases even outdoing his bellicose sentiments.
These included the Navy League, the Army League, the Colonial League, and the Pan-German League arguing that all Germans living around the world needed to together engage in a mission of national greatness.
They all agitated for a more assertive foreign policy in part as a way of escaping this sense of internal domestic crisis.
A mood of crisis and pessimism about the future haunted German elites and many historians argue affected the decisions made at the time of the outbreak of the Second World War.
Let's turn next to examine the case of what had been a dominant superpower, France.
France had been the superpower of Europe in the 18th century, but had suffered a crucial defeat later in the 19th century in its war against Prussia in 1870 to 1871.
Its defeat had led not only to a crisis of political morale within France itself, but also internationally had tended to downgrade the power status of France.
After that war, France remained anxious about its new neighbor, Germany. The German problem or the German question was existential for France.
France's own population of about 35 million was overshadowed by Germany's larger population.
Many French politicians also longed for the recovery of the lost provinces of Alsace and Lorraine with many French speakers that had been annexed by Germany after the French defeat in the Franco-Prussian War.
France itself was a republic beset, nonetheless, by serious internal divisions between different kinds of political orientations, conservatives, republicans, and socialists.
France also had a colonial empire where it sought in part to compensate for the loss to its prestige in Europe, and in almost a textbook case of the operation of the balance of power, a weakened France sought allies which might help it to oppose a future German threat.
We'll turn next to examine the enigmatic and huge outsize great power of the Russian Empire.
Russia to the east was an enormous and in many ways mysterious empire ruled by the Romanov dynasty spanning several continents, Europe as well as Asia.
With a huge population of 164 million as well as vast natural resources, the Russian Empire was vast in potential but still at present backward in terms of its industrial development compared to Central or Western Europe.
It was ruled over, not by a constitutional or democratic system, but rather by a tsar, an emperor, Nicholas II, who ruled over a traditional autocratic system that was already under strain.
Though certain accommodations had been made to introduce some elements of constitutionalism or more democratic government, the tsar, Nicholas II, took very seriously his own role as the personal ruler of these lands.
In particular, his reign was marked by two disasters which had overtaken the Russian Empire at the start of the 20th century in 1905.
Russia had been defeated in the 1904 to 1905 Russo-Japanese War, something that was unheard of, the defeat by a non-European power of a European great power.
And as a result of this humiliation and the crisis of that war, in 1905, Russia itself had been wracked by a revolution, the revolution of 1905, which very nearly brought the regime down within Russia itself.
In the years that followed, Russia sought to develop its vast potential both economically and militarily with ambitious reform programs.
But there was much ground to make up. The Russian peasantry, the serfs, had only been freed in 1861 and it lagged behind in agricultural as well as industrial development.
In part because of the repressiveness of Russia's political authorities, which tended to make revolutionaries out of people who otherwise might have been reformers,
a varied revolutionary movement within Russia grew up and envisioned the overthrow of the state and the establishment of a new system by terrorism if necessary.
On the peripheries of this Russian-dominated empire, there were also many dissatisfied nationalities that were not Russian.
These included the Poles, Lithuanians, Latvians, Estonians, Finns, and others who denounced Russia not as a glorious multinational empire, but rather as a prison of nations denying them their longed after national independence.
Paradoxically, the same system of the Tsarist empire presented itself outside with the nationalist ideology of Pan-Slavism as the patron of other Slavic nationalities and taking a leading role in the liberation of Slavic peoples not under Russian rule.
The other traditional empire that played a great power role was Austria-Hungary.
It was a venerable old empire under the Hopsburg Ruling House. This multinational state of 50 million had been presided over by the now aged Emperor Franz Josef from his capital in Vienna.
He had ruled since 1848 and had become so intensely identified with Austro-Hungarian legitimacy that many grew to worry about whether his passing with time might not undermine the empire's own existence.
The empire consisted of 12 major ethnic groups held together by dynastic tradition and power, not by one unified nationalism, a force that Austrian leaders, on the contrary, feared.
This older empire had been reorganized into the so-called dual monarchy of shared rule between the German-speaking Austrians and the Hungarian elites in 1867 after the Hopsburg empire had been defeated by Bismarck's Prussia in 1866.
The demands of dissatisfied ethnic groups, the challenges of underdeveloped industrialization, and the anxieties for the survival of the empire itself beset its leadership.
Geographically, the Balkans were an area of special concern to the empire to the south, both as a field of potential activity for themselves as well as a potential threat of nationalism to their rule.
In Austro-Hungary's precarious position, its uncertain chances for survival tended to force it into an ever closer and closer partnership with the imperial Germany.
Other powers that were not of great power status but nonetheless figured included the Ottoman Empire or Turkey.
This was often called the sick man of Europe because of its steady geopolitical decline, which contrasted in such dramatic terms with its glorious past as the once great Islamic Sultanate stretching from North Africa all the way to Persia in the east.
Ottoman Turkey's lagging development, nationalist revolts in its few remaining Balkan territories, and the ambitions of European powers to carve up its imperial holdings made its future especially uncertain.
How to deal with its expected demise was called by European politicians the Eastern question, how very polite, and in fact occupied European diplomats intensely.
In a last-ditch effort to save what remained of the Ottoman Empire in 1908, a so-called Young Turk nationalist revolutionary movement came to power with the aim of reviving the empire.
Turkey itself came increasingly under German influence with military advisors, railway projects, and council from that patron power.
Another contender for great power status was Italy. The Italian lands had been unified late, as Germany would later be, under the ruling house of Savoy from 1860.
With a population of 36 million, thus smaller than the other great powers, Italy had intense ambitions for great power status but within faced internal problems of underdevelopment and political disunity.
Italian nationalists also were keenly aware that territories that they still claimed, and they called them the irredenta or unredeemed lands, remained outside of Italy's geographic scope.
Austria-Hungary held these territories, and this was a source of friction between the great powers.
Colonial rivalries with France also created international animosity in Italian foreign relations.
Most certainly not a great power, but a regional power was the Kingdom of Serbia in the Balkans.
The Kingdom of Serbia was a proud Balkan state which had fought for and gained its independence from Ottoman rule over the course of the 19th century, but its ambitions were even larger.
They were to lead some day a Balkan League uniting the South Slavic-related peoples under Serbian patronage, and they enjoyed in this aim the support of Russia, a Slavic great power to the east, a big brother, which had signed an alliance with Serbia in 1903 and supported its aims.
There were also two remarkable powers that were bidding for great power status that were not European, and this is what made them special.
One of them was Japan. In a truly remarkable self-willed transformation from within, Japan had adopted western technology and aspects of political organization after the 1868 so-called Meiji Restoration.
Determined to imitate the Europeans and their successes, Japan also wanted to become an imperialist contender in the Pacific, and thus it went to war with China in 1894, with Russia in 1904 and beat that great power of Europe, and a next Korea in 1910 becoming an imperialist great power.
The final case of a great power emerging onto the scene was the United States. Separated by the Atlantic Ocean from European affairs, the United States did not figure prominently in great power politics.
Nonetheless, keen observers anticipated a future for it of significant proportions. Its industrial development was striking.
By the start of the 20th century, it had overtaken both Great Britain and Germany in steel production, a key measure of industrialization, and in military terms, while its army was small and its navy was growing, its potential power was quite significant.
We'll close with some observations about the notion of the balance of power at work in international relations. The balance of power is the name given to that dynamic interrelation and interplay of the great powers.
The concept signifies a balance between powers with no one power capable of totally dominating the others. If it were capable of doing so, it would have attained the status of what's called in political science or political philosophy, hegemon, with hegemonic or total power.
The balance of power concept suggests that whenever a contender for hegemonic power arises, all other powers will unite in coalitions to resist such a hegemon.
The operation of the balance of power is a long-standing factor in European politics. It was inaugurated after the 1648 Treaty of Westphalia ended the Titanic struggle of the Thirty Years War in Europe.
The 1648 Treaty of Westphalia crafted the balance of power not by design, but simply by recognizing sovereign states as political actors.
The Congress of Vienna of 1815, which brought to an end the Napoleonic Wars, by contrast formally institutionalized the idea of the balance of power as a principle of harmony and conservative solidarity under the guidance of the masterful Austrian diplomat Prince Clemens von Metternich.
The notion was that the balance of power was a good which had to be preserved through periodic conferences of the great powers that would avoid wars, but instead would settle problems among themselves and would institutionalize in a peaceful way the balance of power.
This system, which was called by the really marvelously evocative name of the Concert of Europe, that's to say the great powers acting in concert, lasted for decades and ensured nearly a century without larger general wars in Europe.
But it had started to break down in the course of the 19th century, especially with the Crimean War of 1854 to 1856, which pitted the great powers of Great Britain and France against Russia, and other wars obviously followed, including those of Bismarck and the wars of German unification.
Thus at the end of the 19th century and the start of the 20th century, the result was a more loose and competitive scene in international politics.
Whether equilibrium would be maintained through great power politics and the balance of power would depend to a great extent, as we've already suggested, on the role of the new Germany.
Other factors in international politics were also imperialism. A wave of high imperialism from the 1880s had led to a frantic scramble for colonies carving up Africa and Asia, with even smaller powers like Belgium getting involved in the act.
The key players here were Britain and France, who were particular colonial rivals. Britain was also worried about Russia's intentions in Central Asia. Germany, by contrast, and this irked Wilhelm II, had not participated actively in this colonial scramble because of Bismarck's policy of abstention.
Kaiser Wilhelm II would soon remove this restraint, and the result would be an increasing arms race in international politics. With growing tensions in imperialism, as well as a more aggressive German foreign policy from 1890, arms races resulted on land as well as at sea.
On the seas, Germany, under Wilhelm II's aggressive policy, built the world's second largest fleet, touching off a naval arms race with the world's largest fleet, Britain's. At vast expense, a new generation of so-called dreadnought battleships was launched, inaugurating a whole new stage of naval competition.
On land, meanwhile, mass armies were built up by France, Germany, and Russia. From 1890 to 1914, European armies doubled in size.
Hand in hand with increased numbers of men and equipment went increasingly carefully calibrated, minute planning for military operations at the start of the war. Railway timetables and speed were emphasized as the European great powers prepared for an apocalyptic conflict.
Many contemporaries recognized that Europe was potentially steering towards a general war, and the crisis in politics as well as in thought and culture that accompanied this mood of anticipation and anxiety will examine in our next lecture.
