Lecture 3 Towards Crisis in Politics and Culture
In this lecture, we'll be examining some of the deeper forces that were pushing a previously
coherent European civilization towards crisis and ultimately world war.
We'll examine, first of all, the distinctive ideas and mindsets of the day.
We'll turn them into examined politics, in which a new orientation towards public opinion,
the participation of masses in politics, and the role of those masses was strengthened.
We'll examine also disturbing sets of ideas like social Darwinist celebrations of the
survival of the fittest, that produced views of war not as a tragedy, but rather as a form
of hygiene for civilization.
Even trends in socialist thought, which otherwise rejected the disaster of war, could take on
apocalyptic tendencies in expectation of the final total revolution that would lead to
the coming of a blessed state without exploitation.
Last, we'll turn to examine some of the illusions of war and peace, misconceptions about the nature
of the conflict to come, and its alleged promises of glory and transcendence and heroism.
One of the key ideas that was of enormous significance in a shared European civilization
for all of its national differences was a certain confidence in the idea of progress.
European cultural confidence presented progress as the very crown to the achievements, the
self-evident superiority, as so Europeans claimed, of their civilization.
And indeed, in the process of reckoning up examples of this progress, there clearly had
been enormous visible gains in the field of the sciences, in medicine, and obviously in
terms of industry and productivity.
And if anything, these changes, this progress, as it was viewed, was speeding up.
A second wave of industrial advance from 1871, called the Second Industrial Revolution,
was bringing accelerating change and bringing new industrial materials, so that for instance
if the First Industrial Revolution had been, to a great extent, based on coal, the Second
Industrial Revolution already was focusing on the internal combustion engine, was based
on chemicals and recognizably more modern forms of technology.
Historians would probably be quick to point out that 1871 is a suspiciously exact date
for the beginning of the Second Industrial Revolution.
There was a moment here that we want to simply bring into focus, why 1871 for the beginning
of a new wave of industrialization?
Well, the date corresponds to the founding of a German empire in 1871 under Prussian
leadership that we've discussed in earlier lectures.
Very clearly, Germany was playing a leading role in the second wave of industrialization.
The First Industrial Revolution, as it's often called from the 18th century, had been based
in Great Britain, which had taken the leading role.
Now it seemed to some a worrying factor that Germany was taking the lead.
Science also lent prestige to social Darwinist thought and the notion of scientific racism.
That's to say, racism claiming to have the imprimatur of science, all of which undergirded
imperialist domination of non-western peoples by, so it was alleged, giving them a claim
to the rule of other races.
A proud symbol of technological progress, which turned into a troubling portent for
things to come, was the case of the great and proud transatlantic liner, the Titanic.
It was seen at its time as a tremendous technical accomplishment, which seemed to contemporaries
almost invulnerable, able to scorn the elements, and it was precisely this hubris about its
invulnerability that led it to hit an iceberg and to sink in 1912 with more than 1,500 passengers
killed.
This example from just before the outbreak of the First World War of technology and confidence
in the technology running ahead of understanding of its limitations or its liabilities in an
uncanny way would be repeated many times in World War I.
Among the distinctive ideas that were associated with progress and its promise was the key
concept or ideology of liberalism.
Liberalism was a self-confident ideology which identified its ideas and its prescriptions
with the promise of progress.
Also called classical liberalism, this ideology had its origins in enlightenment thought
of the 18th century and was strongly represented in the European middle classes who not coincidentally
identified themselves with the very progress of the enlightenment and of liberalism.
Classical liberalism can be summed up as a faith in personal freedom and individualism,
bringing progress.
Many prescriptions about politics and society and economics flowed for classical liberals
from this faith in the individual.
These included constitutional restraints to produce a limited state so that the government
would have to give a sphere or scope for individual freedoms and the free unfolding of one's
personality and one's talents.
In the economic realm, capitalism and free trade, the maximally unimpeded traffic of
goods and of ideas and of finance was held up as bringing the greatest common good for
all.
Progress, it was a judged, tended to grow out of a process of competition in the marketplace
of economics as well as ideas.
The best ideas would win out as a result of vigorous debate and argument.
Another tremendously important ideology at first closely identified with liberalism was
known as nationalism.
Nationalism in spite of many predictions of its upcoming demise is still very much with
us today in our own times and shows every sign of growing stronger.
It had undergone a process of evolution.
Nationalism had turned from its revolutionary and liberal origins at the start of the 19th
century to forms that increasingly could be chauvinistic and narrow, turning away from
its message of universal liberation.
It could often be used by nation states and government elites to reinforce the legitimacy
of their own authority and their own rule.
Nonetheless, nationalism, even at the start of the 20th century, still had the potential
to be a revolutionary force, especially in places where so-called submerged peoples clamored
for self-determination.
Liberal empires like Russia and Austria-Hungary certainly had many different ethnic groups
that didn't feel that they were represented by the authorities or by the government elites,
and in such places nationalism as a set of ideas and as a prescription for action could
be an explosive force, and it was truly feared by the rulers of those multi-ethnic empires
precisely for that reason.
One needs to think one's way into a mindset or a worldview in this period in which nationalism
seemed to be a self-evident, almost organically given form of identity.
By the later 19th century, there were remarkably current notions of hierarchies of peoples.
It was simply judge natural at the time that one could distinguish between peoples in terms
of their achievements and to, as it were, categorize or rate their civilizational achievements.
These notions of hierarchies of people also carried with it an undertone or a subtext
that could be quite threatening, depending on one's position in these hierarchies of
peoples.
The notion of there being peoples who were rising and growing in strength and vitality,
and other races that were declining or headed for weakness and innervation or maybe even
extinction was commonplace, and one most definitely in this period of nationalism wanted to belong
to the rising peoples rather than those on their way out.
In contrast to liberal ideologies, but in vigorous debate with them in a philosophical dialogue,
there is another ideology called conservatism, which had arisen in response to the challenges
of these bold new liberal ideas.
Conservatives resisted liberal ideologies, but over time they had started to incorporate
nationalist ideas when they could, and in the process of the 19th century, they had managed
to diffuse some of the revolutionary potential of nationalism by turning nationalism into
a support for their own regime or their party.
Now clearly neither liberals nor conservatives were monolithic groups who all felt the same
thing, and in terms of conservatism there were some really remarkable contrasts.
In Britain conservatism as an ideology took a specific form, later called evolutionary
conservatism, the notion that a society should be open to change and that indeed as a famous
formula went, change was the very principle of preservation.
On the continent by contrast, conservatives instead saw themselves as on the defensive
protecting aristocratic privilege and caste, especially if they belonged to multinational
empires threatened by nationalist ideas.
We need to add to this dynamic and often exciting mix of philosophical stances, a stance
which was self-consciously revolutionary and remained so.
That was socialism.
Karl Marx, a socialist thinker from Germany, had promulgated a new kind of socialism which
he announced was to overtake and to improve upon all of the earlier utopian socialisms
that had been promulgated in the course of the 19th century.
His version of scientific socialism which he announced at the middle of the 19th century
promised a scientific program for achieving an international worker's revolution which
would overthrow capitalism and its system of exploitation, establish the dictatorship
of the proletariat, the abolition of private property, and a classless utopia free of exploitation
with the fullest human development for all was said to follow.
As we've already commented in an earlier lecture, especially in Germany, this message
had tremendous force.
A powerful and disciplined political party, the Social Democratic Movement, grew up in
order to follow these prescriptions for scientific socialism.
And socialism in this period was seen as most definitely a fact in politics whether one
feared it or hoped for it.
Socialists lived in the expectation that they were on the right side of history and that
it was moving in the direction that Marx had prescribed, one that was leading to a climax
of historical proportions.
And this was made very clear in the anthem of their movement.
The nationalists had their national anthems.
The socialists, by contrast, had the international anthem known as the Internationale.
This anthem of the movement foretold in ringing tones the imminent final battle that would
lead to a comprehensive human liberation under the banner of socialism.
We need to turn next to examine the implications that these ideas would have for politics.
Politics in a time of change, a time of change in which the masses needed to be incorporated.
Since the French Revolution of 1789, politics had been fundamentally changed.
Politics had now come to imply the need for all regimes to appeal to the masses for legitimacy,
to appeal to the broader population, even if this was only on the level of rhetoric.
And even personal autocracies like that of the Russian Empire or of Imperial Germany nonetheless
tried to at least create the impression of popular monarchist fervor in support of their regime.
Now, it's obvious that this new infusion of the masses into politics, the increased participation
of larger groups and the need to appeal to them, certainly transformed the dynamics of
politics, made populist appeals and dynamism certainly more desirable and, as we'll be
seeing shortly, also could lead to an increased acceptance of conflict.
The ideologies of liberalism, nationalism, conservatism and even socialism that we've
outlined just so very briefly now could all implicitly be used to justify at least some
measure of the acceptance of competition or conflict as producing progress.
One reason for this was when one considered what the opposite alternative was.
The feared opposite of vigorous competition or conflict was seen by many people not as
a state of universal peace, but instead in line with thinking in terms of hierarchies
of rising or declining races as degeneration, de-civilization.
A besetting anxiety of the age was precisely this, that some vitality, some dynamism would
be lost.
And this in turn would affect views of the war.
Even on the part of liberals who hoped certainly that progress would be won through competition
in the marketplace peacefully and who denounced war as a destructive factor in politics nonetheless
had endorsed competition.
And the socialists, as we've already seen, even as they looked forward to the day when
the fundamental political reordering of the world would take place in line with their
ideas nonetheless looked forward to an explosive revolution, a conflict certainly in order
to bring this about.
As such ideas and acceptance of conflict changed views of war, we need to speak about another
allied phenomenon, that of militarism.
War was often seen at the close of the 19th century and the start of the 20th century
not exclusively in terms of being a man made tragedy, but often as something else in addition
as a test of national identity, whether a people had the requisite vitality that assured
their status as a rising race, as a test of national worth and cohesion.
Militarism one probably shouldn't consider a full fledged ideology in the sense that nationalism
or liberalism or conservatism were, rather militarism simply expressed the notion that
the values of the armed forces, their code of virtues, of obedience, of duty, of command,
of hierarchy were supreme over those of civilian society.
And as part and parcel of the growing arms races as a concomitant of the growing tension
in Europe, militarism could be seen in many European countries, not always dominant, but
nonetheless present as an option socially nonetheless.
Militarism however was especially identified with one country, where this word was to many
not a feature to be avoided, but on the contrary was seen as good and an old part of German
tradition and that was Germany.
Especially in its Prussian elite seemed a very embodiment of the values of militarism
and there was no better embodiment of this code of values than Kaiser Wilhelm II.
Historians who examine Germany have spoken of a process almost of refutalization taking
place in the course of the later 19th century.
They sometimes speak of a process of brutalization of the German middle classes and what they
mean by this is that German middle classes who otherwise would have been carriers of
liberal ideas often tended as a result of the ideas of militarism to try to imitate
the old established officer aristocracies of Prussian military tradition and German
military tradition.
These older officer aristocracies in the case of Prussia were known as the Junkers and the
middle classes valued their style and tried when they were able to imitate their older
traditional feudal ways.
To give just but one very vivid example, German university students in this day often would
appear and for the rest of their lives would appear with faces that were cross-hatched
and marked with dueling scars, long scars that would run from one side of the face to
the other and this was something that they didn't see as a disfigurement but on the contrary
were proud of.
It was a sign that they were sharing in a medieval tradition of dueling, that they were
men of honor and that they were capable of engaging in this military ritual.
Another example that made clear the popularity of these militarist ideas in large segments
of German society was the tremendous respect that was shown to reserve officers whose wearing
of uniforms whether in the classroom if they were professors or on special occasions emphasized
the status and the respect that the German military was accorded.
At the same time as we've already discussed in an earlier lecture, nationalist pressure
groups and leagues like the Army League, the Navy League or the Colonial League all demanded
aggressive foreign policy and in fact criticized even the Kaiser's government for not doing
enough in that regard and also clamored for increased military expenditures in a cycle
of militarism.
As we've already adverted, the person of Kaiser Wilhelm II was the perfect embodiment
of these trends and many people felt at the time that he somehow was in tune with the
spirit of the age.
His love of uniforms, parades, aggressive rhetoric and militarism seemed to symbolize
precisely this.
Now it needs nonetheless to be pointed out that not all Germans subscribe to these militarist
values.
This was not a monolithic emotion seizing an entire nation and in fact in particular the
social democrats out of their political convictions criticized militarism as unhealthy as a diversion
from a real program of fundamental political reform.
At the same time however, especially among Germany's elites and the same was true in
some other countries as well, war could appear to some as an escape, a way out of political
crisis or social stalemate in order to recover dynamism and vitality.
We need to turn to examine the question of how culture played in this volatile mix of
ideas and in this context we need to in particular focus on a disturbing trend which was not
the monopoly of any one country but on the contrary the closer one looks at sources from
the late 19th century, the more one sees it throughout western civilization, a trend
called social Darwinism.
Social Darwinism was the use of Charles Darwin's ideas about evolution and about how nature
moved through an evolutionary progress but instead turned into a political agenda, a
political agenda that dealt with humanity and with societies.
Social Darwinism used Darwin's ideas to praise the survival of the fittest and the struggle
for survival among individuals and nations.
Some social Darwinists celebrated war seeing it as a form of social hygiene which did away
with the confining claustrophobia of peacetime society.
They condemned peace as innervating and argued that war was a necessary test.
The social Darwinists represented simply the most extreme of these celebrations of war.
We want to examine now some of the misconceptions about the nature of modern war that were unfortunately
quite common in societies at the turn of the century.
War in popular culture was often thought of as likely to be short, fast, and glorious.
There were absurdly romanticized popular depictions in novels, in literature, in journalism which
seconded these ideas.
They praised clean death on the battlefield, heroism, an acid test of bravery.
At the same time, however, there certainly were many hints that future war in the 20th
century would in fact take on a very different aspect from these idealized depictions.
Even though historians sometimes emphasize the delusions about what the true nature of
war would be like, it needs to be said that a whole number of generals in fact at the
time, military professionals, had begun to suspect for particular reasons that future
war in fact would not take on these lines but rather be quite different.
Some of these lessons were slow to percolate.
Instances that were especially suggestive included the Russo-Japanese War of 1904 and
1905, or more remotely the American Civil War.
Both of these increasingly industrialized forms of conflict had seen phenomena that would
be once again evident in the First World War, the battle in the trenches, the devastating
impact of modern military technologies, and at least aspects of this phenomenon of total
war that we earlier had introduced.
In fact, one could even expand this discussion further to mention that the devastating toll
which imperialist conquests, the scramble for colonies in Africa or Asia, had taken on
native peoples had already suggested just how destructive modern warfare and modern weapons
could be.
But unfortunately, only racist condescension towards those native victims of European imperialism
obscured the dreadful lessons of the imperial conquests of non-European peoples.
A key moment which disturbed even the conquerors came in 1898 when British forces at the battle
of Omderman in Sudan had annihilated a far larger and extremely well-motivated Sudanese
force by using maximum guns, a form of a machine gun.
In touching naivete, the Europeans at the time calmed themselves that Europeans would
not use machine guns against fellow Europeans because this was intended to be only a weapon
for use against non-Western masses, and they would be dreadfully wrong as events would
show.
It was also expected, optimistically, that war might be restrained, and in fact the notion
of civilized warfare, an ironic phrase or term, spoke to these hopes.
The Geneva Conventions, which had been negotiated in 1864 and 1906, and the Hague Conventions
of 1899 and 1907 all represented an attempt to outline rules for what was called civilized
warfare, including protections for civilians and prisoners, the banning of some new weapons
like poison gas, all imperfect treaties, but nonetheless attempts to somehow rein in the
destructive potential of war itself.
Nonetheless, war was the object of both celebrations and fears in European culture.
In popular culture, especially in extensive speculative literature, we today would call
this science fiction, or pulp fiction, many novels forecast or considered what the next
war might be like, and some of them foretold carnage on a scale which might at least approach
the reality that later transpired.
But other movements, in terms of culture, art, and intellectual life, instead stressed
an irrationalist celebration of war.
In Italy, in a very famous case, a movement that called itself the Futurists in 1910 had
quite deliberately shocked the world with a manifesto, a manifesto of values that included
a celebration of war.
The Futurist manifesto praised technology, speed, danger, and war as an escape from a
boring, orderly world.
They argued that museums should be burned down, that old statues were infinitely boring
compared to the glory of a new racing car with all of its technology and with all of
its aggressive power, and they saw war as an example to fulfill some of their ideas.
The year before the outbreak of the First World War also brought another tremendously
significant cultural event.
In Paris in 1913, Stravinsky's ballet The Rights of Spring, a willfully primitivist and
energetic ballet, shocked the public with its novelty, its newness, and its theme matter,
which after all was that of a human sacrifice.
Anticipating in uncanny ways the vaster human sacrifice that was about to take place in
European society.
There were earlier philosophical ideas that could be drawn upon as well in this irrationalist
celebration.
The life philosophy of the German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche had challenged the order
and respectability of 19th century middle class society and many ideas of liberalism
as well.
Nietzsche had celebrated strength, the will to power, a sense of moral adventuring beyond
good and evil, with the goal of evolving someday a new kind of human being, the superman,
a term that we still use today, in German the Übermensch.
In Germany such ideas captured a generation that felt dissatisfied with the crisis state
of German politics as well as culture and who took aboard these ideas.
In particular a back to nature movement of hikers called Wunderfogel in Germany represented
in remarkable ways in anticipation of the hippie generation of the 1960s as they turned
away from a present day that they saw as commercialized and not idealistic and longed for a world
that somehow remade by idealism and generational revolt.
However misguidedly when war came in 1914 many of them would feel that their hour had
arrived.
To many it seemed that Europe was moving towards war, it wasn't clear when it would happen
or precisely how, but tensions certainly had been growing.
According to the eminent military historian John Keegan, turn of the century Europe was
pregnant with war.
In particular military planning had increased the likelihood of the destructive potential
of this war.
In its victory over France in 1870 to 1871 the Prussian and then later the German army
had seemingly demonstrated the key to military success on the battlefield.
Universal conscription, the nation at arms, draft in other words for everyone, large reserves
so that there would be manpower to throw into huge battles and, and this was crucial, planning
with scientific precision in order to achieve speedy mobilization.
The Germans seemed to have arrived at a recipe for victory and soon other great powers were
imitating them.
Military planning among all the great European powers grew ever more detailed, dominated
by that key symbol of industrialization, the railroad.
Modern railroad timetables, planning down to the minute for when what troop trains
would be crossing which bridges at what precise moment had become an art or a science.
Mobilization increasingly implied war as once these plans had been started they had
to continue unfolding lest they dissolve into chaos.
If speed was crucial this simply underlined the importance of being there to strike with
maximum force the first blow.
Germany's case was unique in one aspect in particular.
For Germany mobilization meant war.
The German army's secret plan, the Schlieffen plan sought to deal with a particular German
problem, the geopolitical challenge that Germany faced of having to fight a war probably on
both fronts, both in the east against Russia and in the west against France.
This plan had been crafted by the German chief of general staff from 1891 to 1905, General
Alfred von Schlieffen.
Its aim as a project was to find a way of knocking France out of the war within 42 days
by a sweeping movement of armies through neutral Belgium and Holland violating their neutrality,
plunging through northern France to encircle French armies and Paris and then after winning
against France German armies could turn to face the slower Russian enemy.
We need to observe about the Schlieffen plan that its disregard of political and diplomatic
realities, not least the invasion of neutral countries, made it clear that this was an
example of militarism, abstracted from the realities of politics.
The French had their plan, Plan 17, which projected a glorious frontal attack into Germany to
regain the lost provinces of Alsace and Lorraine, and Russia for its part also had plans for
an attack on Germany.
All of this was given further impetus by so-called Cult of the Offensive.
In a counterpoint to military planning and technocratic organization, military planners
also emphasized the spirit of the attack, the Cult of the Offensive.
Generals and officers argued that fiercely dedicated soldiers could overrun even far
larger forces as long as they had the requisite ferocity and morale, and thus military training
often emphasized direct attacks and bayonet charges.
In the French case, this crucial quality of spirit was even given a glorious name, Elen
Vital.
It implied an all-out extreme attack, which was necessary to compensate for a hard reality,
France's smaller population versus its German enemy.
Since the largest nation in Europe, France by 1914, could field only 60% of German potential
manpower, and thus it was clear that the argument for greater morale took on a special resonance.
A young officer by the name of Charles de Gaulle, later the leader of a recovered France, proclaimed
in 1913 the year before the war broke out, everywhere, always, one should have a single
idea to advance.
With Cult of the Offensive, this militaristic thinking, these trends in the culture represented
an explosive mixture, which would be ignited in the 1914 July crisis that we'll examine
in our next lecture.
