Lecture 5 The August Madness
In this lecture, we'll be turning away from the sort of high politics and diplomatic maneuverings
that we've discussed in our earlier lecture on the outbreak of the war, and turn instead
to the intriguing realm of mass psychology. We'll be examining the mysteries of a truly
strange event to our present-day sensibilities, the mysteries of the so-called August Madness,
that hysterical celebration in August of 1914 of the news of the outbreak of war in
European capitals, as crowds paraded in the streets and the squares with songs and flags,
while young men rushed to the volunteering stations to sign up for a role in the conflict.
Today, historians have started to question how widespread this emotional outburst really
was, and what it all meant. In this lecture, we'll analyze some of this new research and
assess the real variety of reactions to the start of the war, including the avowal of
domestic truces, which were supposed to summon up a sense of national unity, which, as it
turned out, would soon be breaking down, as well as other psychological reactions to the
news of war, paranoid waves of spy manias seeing conspiracies everywhere, and the growth
of anxieties about what was to come. Historians speak of the myth of the August Madness,
and it would be profitable here to stop and think about how we use the word myth. We don't
mean merely the event itself of the August Madness, those celebrations, but also how
it was mythologized, how it was dramatized and played up and used in propaganda for years
afterwards. When historians talk about myth, they thus mean not outright falsification
or lies, but rather by myth they mean powerfully shared conceptions that command belief in a
society and can motivate people in one direction or another. In this lecture, we'll be talking
about real events that happened, which were then depicted in certain ways, or mythologized
in certain ways, the events of late July and August of 1914, and were repeatedly invoked
again and again throughout the war when it became necessary to get energized again in
the fighting countries for the conflict, and these mythologized experiences also played
a very important role after the war in trying to understand what it all had meant. The scenes
themselves were compelling. Crowds gathered in the last days of July as the diplomatic
maneuverings and diplomatic news filtered in, they gathered around newspaper offices,
telegraph posts in order to share in the sense of these world historical events in the making.
In August of 1914, as the declarations of war rolled in, tremendous and compelling and
to our sensibility, strange scenes played themselves out. While we might today more
soberly consider war a disaster, an event not to be met with anything but grim foreboding,
at this time in August of 1914, the scenes were very different. Jubilant excitement played out
in the capitals of Europe. In the boulevards of Paris, crowds gathered and cheered and marched,
as they did in the squares of London, Vienna, and St. Petersburg. In Berlin,
along the main boulevard through the centre of the capital, the famous street unter den
Linden, crowds marched up and down on both sides, singing and moving between the royal castle at
the centre of the city and the parliament off to the side, in a patriotic celebration. In all
of these European capitals, crowds cheered, waved their national flags, sang patriotic songs,
and national anthems. Contemporaries who participated in these events were, they later
explained, celebrating a feeling of social unity, the sense that whatever might have divided them
earlier, whatever internal differences might have wracked the politics and the social divisions
of a country, were now in an instant swept away, swept away as part of a larger cause
and a larger mobilisation. German sociologists had earlier tried to understand how society
was to be conceived of, how social organisation was to be understood, and some of the terms that
German sociologists had come up with now were deployed to analyse these exalted feelings.
In sociological terms, society, what the German sociologist called Gesellschaft,
had been something artificial, something founded on a social contract and utility.
Supposedly, this society, or Gesellschaft, had now turned into something finer, something more
authentic, more real, true community, or Gemeinschaft, based not on how I might be of use to you and
vice versa, but rather on true solidarity, a true feeling of unity. Many nationalist hopes of
achieving a true inner unity of the nation, earlier frustrated by social or regional or
religious divisions, now were invested in using the opportunity of this emotion of the August
madness to cement their nationalist cohesion. Beyond this, contemporaries also pointed out
that in part this hysterical reaction was not only a positive emotion and a feeling of unity,
it was also something a little bit more elemental, the sense of hysterical relief
that at last followed upon the breaking of the growing feverish anxiety that had been
building for days, weeks, months, maybe even years previous. At the same time, for some individuals,
war could be felt as a redemption from the boredom or the quotidian nature of ordinary life,
or of a society that was not coming up to expectations. A famous British war poet,
Rupert Brooke, who later would be killed in the war, summed up some of these thoughts in
famous poems, which greeted the war as a moment where God had intervened in order to bring a
young generation to a moment of a high calling, and such expectations of heroism, of breaking
through ordinary life to horizons of glory and of drama certainly played a role for many.
At the same time, and here we speak, obviously, of mass psychology and its mysteries,
some individuals might simply be caught up in the mood of excitement without thinking through
what it was that they were hurtling towards collectively. Now, the mythologization of
these events would certainly play a very important role in years to come. These events,
real as they had been, we have newsreels and photographs and contemporary testimony
to illustrate this, the memory of these events would later be politically instrumentalized
in many different ways by many different political orientations in many different countries.
But nonetheless, a common touchstone was what some called the spirit of 1914. This exalted
emotion with which the war had been greeted. One of the main themes of our course that we pursue
is the notion of the First World War as a series of shocks of the new, a series of shocks of one
novelty succeeding upon another. And this would be a good moment to mention that the sort of mass
emotion and mass mobilization that the crowds represented in the August Madness really added
a new and dynamic element that many traditional politicians were quite concerned about and not
quite sure what to do with. The sort of mass enthusiasm, which later would become so very
important in sustaining total war, was here presented as a new and dynamic element for the
first time. Now historians have in more recent research started to look more closely at the
evidence that we have of the August Madness and its true dimensions. And recent historical research
has strongly qualified over large generalizations about the August Madness itself. One might say
that historians here are performing a role they often play of being spoil sports, of deconstructing
myths and legends. But in this case, it's important to point out that the enthusiasm,
contrary to what the mythological images would later be, that the enthusiasm, though strong,
was not universal. And it gripped certain elements of society more than others. How
how does more recent research suggest these events and the enthusiasm broke down?
Well historians have been careful to point out that enthusiasm was strongest in particular
segments of society, strongest among the middle class, strongest among the elites that identified
themselves with the government, especially strong among students, university students,
and especially strong also compared to the rest of the country in urban centers,
where obviously one could gather such massive crowds to participate in an event like the August
Madness. By contrast historians point out in rural areas or in frontier regions, which would be the
first to be hit probably in a territorial conflict, there were certainly more sober reactions
and much more in the nature of a quieter, more silent, worried anticipation about what the war
might bring. One might also add that some of the scurrying about and frenzied energy of the
August Madness was not merely preparing for war itself with enthusiasm, but was also an expression
of other anxieties. While some crowds celebrated the outbreak of the war with national songs,
other crowds rushed to the banks to withdraw their savings, and yet other crowds rushed to the
stores to stock up on staple goods before the inevitable rise in prices in a time of war.
Another qualification is that from the evidence that we have it seems that men, especially young
men, especially university students, were more strongly affected by this enthusiasm than women.
There was also at the same time this needs to be very carefully noted
considerable public opposition to the outbreak of war. So contrary to the exalted myth of the
spirit of 1914 gripping an entire society or entire societies and unifying them, in fact the
reaction was not monolithic. In many cases socialists were prominent among those who spoke up against
what they denounced as a war of capitalist exploitation in which the workers inevitably
would be among those hardest hit. And at the same time as crowds were gathering for nationalist
celebrations in Berlin, for instance, socialists were mustering their followers in Berlin as well
to march for peace. In fact, and this is often forgotten in the exalted mythology of the August
Madness, in fact in the center of Berlin on that same beautiful boulevard unter den Winden,
as nationalist crowds sang national anthems, they were joined by socialist crowds of protesters
who sang socialist songs and contemporary spoke indeed of a war of the songs that took place
on this boulevard in Berlin as contending crowds were matched one against the other.
Another qualification that needs to be registered is that ethnic minorities in the multinational
empires, especially of Austro-Hungary and of Russia, lack this sort of enthusiasm.
They felt alienated from the mobilization, in many cases, for war for the imperial cause.
In a book that is one of the great comic classics of world literature, unfortunately not as widely
known in English as it should be, Yaroslav Hasek's book The Good Soldier Shvak, a
figure of The Good Soldier Shvak, is by his very passivity and following of orders
a constant reproach to the attempt to mobilize the masses. He himself as a Czech soldier
in the comic classic, he himself lampoons the August Madness taking place around him by having
himself wheeled around in a wheelchair while shouting Long Live the Emperor and Long Live the
Austro-Hungarian Empire, making a farce of the entire venture. Among the historians who have
done yeoman work in really getting us a closer view of what the August Madness meant is the
historian Geoffrey Ferreira, who in really a masterful work of detective investigation
has reconstructed the events in Berlin themselves. And he provides us with one very important
fact that puts into perspective how we need to be cautious in our generalizations about the
August Madness. He notes that perhaps less than 1% of Berlin participated in those fabled first
mass gatherings of the August Madness. So clearly one needs to speak here of a range of reactions
in answer to the outbreak of the war. But we're left with this. After all of those qualifications,
this remarkable mass outburst and especially how it was used later were real and need further
investigation. We might further talk about the larger phenomenon of which the August Madness was
but the tip of the iceberg, the spontaneous mobilization of Europeans for war. Many intellectuals
and artists of many different countries have left testimonies to how they too were caught up in the
initial enthusiasm. And they're especially compelling in cases where people later turned
against the war but are honest enough to talk about the emotions they felt at the start.
These figures included the psychologist Sigmund Freud in the Austro-Hungarian Empire,
the great German historian Friedrich Meinecke, and the British poet Rupert Brooke, who I'd
mentioned some moments ago. The Austrian writer Stefan Zweig, though passionately anti-war,
still recalled these first hours of war as something rapturous, something special and out of
the ordinary. A key aspect, perhaps the key aspect, in this spontaneous mobilization of
populations for the cause of war was one key essential fact. All of the warring powers claimed
that they were going to war and acting in self-defense. And this deserves to be underlined.
One of the main themes of our course is the different meanings that were assigned to the war.
And here, quite simply, was a universal meaning in 1914 assigned to what it was all about.
The world war was about self-defense. Let's look a little more closely at some of the social
reactions which typified the response to the start of the war. A key notion of the August madness was
that it symbolized the greater reality of societies experiencing a perfected unity.
And this is a concept often summed up in the notion of an inner truce. In all of the competent
countries, domestic truces or inner truces were ceremoniously declared. All parties were supposed
to pledge to put aside their internal conflicts, their ideological quarrels at a time of emergency
when all had to rally to the national or imperial cause. These domestic truces were very important
in setting the tone at the start of the war, but they were not to last. In France, which had had a
famously fragmented politics, the Republic now declared a Union Sacré, a sacred union in which
all Frenchmen were to rally to the defense of the patrie, the fatherland, and to expunge the
humiliation of defeat against Germany back in the 1870s and to regain the lost provinces of Alsace
Lorraine. In Russia as well, imperial unity was invoked and even some disaffected minorities
felt themselves nonetheless able to participate in this domestic truce in the hope of gaining
greater autonomy and greater cultural rights after a victorious conclusion of the war.
In Germany, this inner truce was called the Burgfrieden, the Burgfrieden, and the term,
which has almost sort of a medieval resonance, quite deliberately tried to conjure up images of
the unanimity or the peace of a besieged castle. Burgfrieden quite literally means the
peace within a castle. The implication is one which is facing enemies on the outside.
Kaiser Wilhelm II was himself overwhelmed by the August Madness. In fact, and it's a real
remarkable testimony to the novelty of the August Madness and the self-mobilization of the crowds,
German politicians had been worried about how the news of war might be met, and some of them advised
the Kaiser to actually make himself scarce in the first hours of the declaration of war in case
sentiment turned against it. On the contrary, vast crowds came to the royal palace and demanded to
see their emperor. Kaiser Wilhelm II famously stepped out in front of these crowds and announced
that he no longer saw Germans of different parties or different religions, but saw only Germans,
only Germans, all united in their national identity, all needing to treat one another from
now on as brothers and as fellow fighters in the common cause. Swept up in the emotions of this
event, another truly remarkable circumstance played out. In the German parliament, the Reichstag,
it was necessary to vote for war credits to fund the war. The German Social Democratic Party
caught up in this enthusiasm, voted for the war. It authorized credits and revealed its own
German nationalism in this moment. This came as a real surprise to German political leaders.
There had actually been plans for fanning out and arresting the leaders of the social Democrats
if they protested actively against the war as they were expected to do, so their participation
in this nationalist mobilization came as something of a surprise as well. Also caught up in the
exalted mood of those days and weeks were groups within German society which had not fully been
allowed to participate in German nationalism. German Jews, as a minority who represented about
one percent of the population, participated in a very patriotic sense in this mood of nationalism,
even though they still continued to face social discrimination and anti-Semitism. As it would
turn out, Germany would be very much in need of this inner truce in the years to come, as the
British naval blockade would start to bite and grind down Germany's economy and painful sacrifices
would be required in the months and years ahead. Another reaction psychologically to the outbreak
of the war was not a sense of inner truce and inner unanimity but inner paranoia, a fevered and
frenzied examination of one's own society for elements that were considered subversive or burrowing
into the unity that had been established. Wartime societies showed a strong paranoia in these
hours of crisis and feared disruptive forces within. Now I just want to hint for some of our
coming lectures that this first instance of paranoia and anxiety about traitorous elements within
was the first worrying omen or portent of the singling out of minorities in later years
as to blame for defeat or for reverses on the battlefield. In these first days and weeks and
months of the war, one could see in all of the Cometan countries really absurd epidemics of spy
chases, a mania for denunciations which set in. In Germany there was even a word for this. It was
called spionitis meaning sort of a suffering from spy paranoia as there were absurd cases
even of German officers being suspected of being spies and arrested by local police. There was also
an attempt less dramatically to not only find putative spies within one's midst but also to
eliminate what were seen as disruptive cultural influences from the outside. Chauvinist enthusiasts
in many countries demanded a cleansing of the national language from enemy influence. In Germany
in particular French words were to be eliminated from the language even if that meant needing to
produce clunky German equivalents. But this was a trend to be seen in other countries as well. In
Russia for instance the German sounding name of the imperial capital St. Petersburg was renamed
Petrograd or Peter town or Peter city. Britain was not immune either. The British royal family
had to change its name from its originally very German name of the house of Saxe Coburg Götta
and now assuming instead the much more British sounding name of the family of Windsor. Signs on
shops especially if they bore foreign names of enemy nationality became targets throughout Europe
in a spontaneous mass mobilization against these symbols of outside influence. We come here to a
really crucial theme that of the spontaneous self-mobilization and enthusiasm for the war.
It really is a truism of research and propaganda it's self-evident in fact but still a valuable
insight to keep in mind that propaganda even when it's directed from above is most effective
when it builds on things that people already believe. In this case we might speak of the
August madness as a kind of self-propaganda of entire populations. An enormous and spontaneous
wave of testimonials which ordinary people give at first without governmental urging as to the
justice of their own nation's cause and their support for it. We come back to this key insight
that the universal claim of going to war in righteous self-defense would be an effective
rallying cry at the start of the war and the outpouring the spontaneous outpouring of support
for one's own national cause actually surprised the different governments that had entered the war.
The magnitude of this was truly remarkable just to mention one fact which which never ceases to
amaze and appall me. In the first months of the war more than a million war poems are counted
as having been published by German newspapers. More than a million war poems not ordered by the
government but spontaneously flowing from the pens of ordinary citizens many of them of just truly
astonishingly horrible quality but testifying nonetheless to the enthusiasm and self-mobilization
of a society. The governments at first surprised by this course events would later learn
in much more manipulative and scientific ways to harness this enthusiastic impulse
in systematic fashion. This self-mobilizing impulse would prove crucial over the next years
in sustaining the morale and determination of societies suffering under the strain and stress
of total war. In the context of this self-mobilization the churches and organized religion
played a very ambivalent role in this enthusiasm and one can understand the quandaries that the
churches faced. The quandary of the Catholic Church for instance was obvious as an international
institution with French Catholics and German Catholics and Polish Catholics fighting in the
different armies just for instance of the combatant powers. How was the church to speak clearly of
the necessity of peace and of neutrality? In the Protestant churches the problem was a little
different. The Protestant churches were much more nationally identified with the particular
countries in which they were based but how could they give their endorsement as representatives of
a religion proclaiming peace and humanity instead to the force of arms. In this case as well the
notion of a war of defense would provide the rhetorical opportunity for the churches to share
in the mobilization and the enthusiasm. I want to talk before concluding with the record of the
mobilization that we've been discussing by mentioning a key case that came as a great surprise but
nonetheless was of tremendous historical significance for the course of the war later as well as
20th century history and that was the unexpected in many cases surprising failure of international
socialism to react to the war in a fashion similar to what it had threatened it would.
Contrary to the expectations of many political observers and contrary in fact to its own promises
about what it would do the international socialist movement in the European countries in particular
which had earlier pledged to shut down capitalist wars not to participate in the sort of conflict
but instead to emphasize internationalist unity all of these promises broke down with the outbreak
of war and instead the socialist movement found itself unable to react in a unified way. Now this
ran completely contrary to earlier vows. In the 1907 Stuttgart conference the socialist
international that's to say the gathering of all of the different socialist parties of the world
had gathered and there had resolved in a solemn way that if the sort of capitalist war that many
felt was some ways in the future if it actually broke out it would be stopped. It would be stopped
by concerted and unified action by socialists everywhere and how this was to be done was left
a little bit vague but one suggestion which certainly worried conservative authorities
was that this might be done through the means of a general strike that's to say all workers
simply laying down their tools and stopping their machines and not participating simply
abstaining from the preparations for war. Now in practice these sort of earlier pronouncements
simply went by the board. In the initial enthusiasm for war in August of 1914 very many socialists not
all but very many discovered that their patriotism their identification with their own nations in
fact trumped many of the earlier ideological avowals. One might think of it in this way
French socialists discovered that they were French. German socialists discovered that though
they still prized their socialist ideas they were Germans as well. The national identity in some
sense had been rooted far more deeply than many had been aware of earlier. Not all socialists felt
this way and we want to focus on one particularly important and fateful example of a socialist
who reacted differently. Surprised by the outbreak of the war a Russian revolutionary belonging to
a faction of radical socialists called the Bolsheviks and we'll talk more about in later
lectures by the name of Vladimir Ilyich Ulyanov but better known by his revolutionary pseudonym of
Vladimir Lenin who was living in exile in the Austro-Hungarian Empire was simply disgusted by
what he saw as the total failure of the socialists to live up to their own ideas. Ironically in the
first opening stages of the war he was actually arrested by the authorities of the Austro-Hungarian
Empire as a suspected spy for the Russians. Nothing could have been further from the truth he
actually wanted to overthrow the empire. Lenin was able to leave for neutral Switzerland and there
he crafted a program for revolutionary action. He saw the war as nothing less than the final
crisis of capitalism and very unsentimentally preached a revolutionary message that the war
should be turned into a worldwide civil war of the working classes against the capitalists.
Nonetheless at this point in spite of Lenin's lone voice in the wilderness Europe was mobilizing.
The great powers mobilized volunteering stations were crowded jammed with young men who were sure
that they would be home by Christmas and whose great fear was that they might miss out on the
drama of the war itself. Twenty million men were mobilized throughout Europe and they
hurled forward into the great battles that we'll consider in our next lecture.
