Lecture 6 The Failed Gambles, War Plans Breakdown
In this lecture, we'll be examining how the extensive war plans of the fighting powers
broke down in practice.
One of the major themes that we're weaving through our course is that of a succession
of shocks of the new.
In some sense, in this lecture, we're covering a tremendously important shock, and that was
the failure of the gambles and the war plans with which the war had begun.
One might say that the opening stages of the war were marked on all sides by surprises,
shocks, and the collapse of established war plans.
This lecture aims to follow the logic of the plans of the great powers, especially the
key one, the German Schlieffen Plan, a bold blueprint for victory on two fronts, but with
disastrous political implications diplomatically because of the violation of neutrality of
Belgium, as well as the proud French Plan 17, which aimed to seize the initiative against
Germany and win a redemption of lost French territories, Al-Thassan Lorraine, which had
been taken from France after the Franco-Prussian War in the 1870s.
Next, we'll observe how these plans collapsed in practice and how they were replaced by
a desperate improvised defense of France, the miracle of the Marne River.
We'll examine the atrocities that accompanied the German invasion of Belgium and northern
France.
We'll examine the improvised race to the sea and an unexpected German victory in Eastern
Europe at the Titanic Battle of Tannenberg, all surprises.
First let's consider the plans in abstract.
The opening stages of the war were marked by tremendous violence, a tremendous clash
of those many mobilized armies, which produced surprises and unexpected reverses which left
commanders baffled and scrapped earlier war plans.
Six million men were rushed into the initial collisions of the war, trying to enact the
plans that had been produced in the abstract, and this is called the Battle of the Frontiers.
The Battle of the Frontiers raged from August 14th to September 6th of 1914, and it represented
ultimately the failure of prepared plans.
Some historians consider this the biggest battle in history involving as many soldiers
as it did.
German forces were directed by Helmut von Moltke the Younger.
French forces were commanded by General Joseph Joff, and the British expeditionary force
was under Sir John French.
We need to consider first of all the German Schlieffen plan as it was developed in the
abstract and as it was put into action.
The plan was developed long before the war itself as part of this extensive military
planning precision of preparations that we've already discussed in an earlier lecture.
The man who had crafted it was the German General Chief of Staff, General Alfred von
Schlieffen.
He was Chief of Staff from 1891 to 1905, and excelled at precisely this sort of careful
preparation and thinking in abstract terms about the military challenge which Germany's
geopolitical position represented.
In a word, Germany's geopolitical challenge was the possibility of war on two fronts simultaneously.
At the center of Europe, it might find itself forced to fight against both France in the
West and Russia in the East.
Schlieffen's plan was a sweeping bold conception for how to win victory in a two front war.
That was essentially by first very quickly destroying France, speed would be of the essence,
and then turning on the Russian great power which it was expected would be slower to mobilize
and more ponderous in its preparations for war.
The Schlieffen plan was very much a product of the sort of militarism that we've described
in an earlier lecture in that it tended to disregard the political implications of what
was regarded by Schlieffen essentially as a technical solution to a military problem.
In a word, it called for the violation of Belgian and Dutch neutrality, invading through
both of those countries, to achieve surprise in a vast attack on France.
A huge German force would come swinging through northern France after invading Belgium and
Holland, arcing around Paris in order to achieve decisive victory by timetable in about six
weeks.
It was hoped that Paris itself would be surrounded, French armies would be surrounded, the French
leadership would be surrounded, and this would represent a military masterpiece, a battle
of annihilation.
The Schlieffen plan's emphasis thus was on a huge concentration of force on the right
wing, that German movement which would come plunging through Belgium and Holland and through
northern France.
After von Schlieffen died, this plan was further worked on and altered, as military plans are,
by von Moltke, a successor.
Von Moltke changed certain aspects of the plan.
He didn't solve the political problem of violating neutrality, but lessened it by declining to
invade Holland.
Then he also took troops from the vast movement that was projected for the invasion of northern
France and instead drew off some of those troops to the eastern front and others for the defense
of the territory of Lorraine to the south.
Now debate continues today concerning a key question, whether the plan was even, in fact,
possible.
Whether it could have been brought off in its original form or in the altered form that
Moltke later devised.
Military historians point out that the German troops were having tremendous demands made
of them.
In practice, as they marched the predetermined stretch of territory per day, they would out
distance their own slower moving supplies and artillery, and the demands included marching
20 to 30 miles a day and fighting through encountered resistance, which some military
historians see as completely unrealistic to begin with.
You'll note that I had mentioned that Schlieffen, the original architect of this plan, had actually
died before the First World War, the year previous, in 1913.
Nonetheless, his plan, though with alterations, was the one that was put into action, and it
sometimes said that in this sense a dead man had his finger on the trigger as the Schlieffen
plan was enacted.
We need to speak at the same time of a plan that would be ticking down at precisely the
same time as the Schlieffen plan was put into action, and that was the opposite plan, the
French plan 17.
The French plan, endorsed by the commander Joff, called for an all out attack, the cult
of the offensive would come into its own here, an all out attack into Germany to regain the
lost territories of Alsace-Lorraine with their French speakers, avenging the humiliating
defeat of 1871, and redeeming this French honor.
Stressing the cult of the offensive, the French plan 17 actually tended to underestimate German
reserves that could be deployed in the defense of these territories, and in a very real sense
actually played into the expectations of the Schlieffen plan.
By attacking to the south, it would ensure German planners hoped that their sweeping movement
would capture even more French troops.
In practice, however, as we'll see shortly, both plans broke down into disaster.
The French plan, which was launched on August 14th, broke against German defenses, Lorraine,
and suffered enormous losses of the very best officers and men as they sought to put
into action the cult of the offensive with disastrous consequences.
The fate of the Schlieffen plan looked to be proceeding a little bit more positively at
first, it seemed to be succeeding, but then broke down in what afterwards was called the
miracle of the Marne by French patriots, a truly remarkable moment of salvation and national
mobilization to expel the German invader.
On August 4th, German troops invaded Belgium.
They moved through Belgium, though encountering more resistance than they had expected, and
then plunged into France.
By early September 1914, they had reached the Marne River, some 20 miles from Paris,
and it said that German advanced troops could see the Eiffel Tower off in the distance.
The German advance, however, had been slowed, the Schlieffen plan running behind schedule
at crucial moments, the German advance had been hampered by fiercer Belgian resistance
that had been taken into account, as well as the destruction of railroads and other strategic
assets by the Belgians or the French, and also slowed by German anxieties about the
fear of snipers.
This was not entirely without some reason, in the sense that the anxiety about snipers
or guerrilla warfare looked back to an earlier encounter, the Franco-Prussian War of 1870
to 1871.
That war had devolved into a guerrilla conflict at times in its later stages, which indeed
had seen snipers picking off German soldiers.
This anxiety would not only slow the German advance, making them more careful, but would
also lead to atrocities that we'll be discussing later in this lecture against the civilian
population.
Nonetheless, there were remarkable and celebrated successes that gave a sense of optimism about
the enacting of the Schlieffen plan.
On August 7th, the main citadel of Liege in Belgium, a key strategic point that was supposed
to hold up the German advance, was captured.
It was captured by a younger officer who pulled up in his car and demanded its surrender,
which he received.
That younger officer was named Erich Ludendorff, and he later would play a very important role
in the German war effort that we'll be discussing in our later lectures.
Other German heavy guns were brought up to demolish other forts, and soon this resistance
was quelled.
This represented, it seemed to some, the triumph of military technology over old-style fortifications.
A success, it seemed, for the cult of the offensive.
As German armies approached Paris, the French government packed up and fled to Bordeaux.
Nonetheless, Paris was to be defended, and indeed the bridges of Paris were mined in
preparation for blowing them up in case the German troops actually reached the capital.
At the same time, another factor came into play, which had not been expected to come
into play quite as soon.
Contrary to German expectations, the British Expeditionary Force, as it was called, the
BEF, mobilized quickly and was thrown into battle in northern France.
The British forces moved forward and reached Mons, however, upon discovering that they
were overextended, and in peril of being simply overwhelmed by the German advance, both British
and French forces moved back in a fast retreat, seeking a place to make a concerted stand.
In the process of the German advance, as the Schlieffen Plan continued to move through
the stages of its prospective sections, it was discovered that a gap opened up between
the advancing German armies, between the First Army under General von Kluck and the
Second Army under General von Bulau.
This came to be a concern, and the result was that the German armies moved closer together.
The German armies, in an alteration of the plan, thus did not come around Paris to encircle
it, but instead began their inward turn that had been projected for the Schlieffen Plan
Further east, and the result strategically was that the German armies had left their
flanks exposed to Paris itself, not expecting that Paris would be the site of considerable
resistance or military peril.
This was the opportunity which the Allies had been waiting for.
French and British forces counterattacked on the Marne River from September 6th to the
10th of 1914.
They were aided in this by a heroic and legendary effort, which was celebrated ever afterwards
as hundreds of taxicabs, 600 of them to be precise, brought troops that had been stationed
in Paris from Paris itself all the way out to the battlefield, shuttling these men back
and forth to get them to the places where they needed to be for the counterattack.
Now clearly the taxicabs and their forces were not the sole decisive element here, but
it certainly gave a sense of the heroism that was involved in this mobilization to expel
the invader.
Following an order from Colonel Hench, German forces fell back to the Enne River and began
to dig in.
This was a crucial moment.
It was an admission that the Schlieffen Plan had not ultimately succeeded.
It was also the beginning of trench warfare.
Those these were shallow trenches, ditches essentially dug into the ground only several
feet.
They had very important implications for the conduct of war.
The German forces here could establish themselves and hold off the attackers, the Allied side,
and the war of the trenches now meant that shovel had become a crucial weapon in this
conflict.
We need now to consider some of the outcomes that this first failure of the military plans
had represented, in addition of course to the massive losses that they implied.
The Schlieffen Plan had failed.
Germany now would face the very geopolitical nightmare that the Schlieffen Plan had been
intended to deal with, the reality, the challenge of fighting war on many fronts.
As a result of this failure, on September 14, 1914, Moltke was replaced by the Minister
of War, General Erich von Falkenhayn, as the Chief of German General Staff.
Falkenhayn would now face the challenge of improvising a solution for a war that had
begun in ways that were not anticipated.
From October to November of 1914, this next stage was called the Race to the Sea.
It conjures up images of the Germans, as well as the French and the British, plunging
northwards now in order to reach the British Channel to secure strategic positions.
But this name, the Race to the Sea, which is stuck, nonetheless is actually something
of a misnomer, because it wasn't so much a race to the sea as a succession of attempts
to turn the flank of the other side, until ultimately, without a decision, the Front
simply reached the English Channel and the North Sea.
The Antwerp, an important port, had fallen on October 11.
As part of this Race to the Sea, the first battle of Ypres, which British soldiers gleefully
mispronouncing the name of the place called Wipers for the rest of the war, took place
on October 18 to November 22, British forces repelled German attacks and dug in as well.
With the Easter River, Belgians used natural forces in order to hold off the Germans.
They simply opened the sluices to the canals and flooded the battlefield, producing a nearly
impenetrable barrier.
Failed French winter offensives in the Champagne region followed, but ultimately were not able
to break through the growing stasis of trench warfare.
You need to take a step backwards to examine a phenomenon that was playing itself out at
the same time as the German invasion of Belgium and northern France, one that would have enormous
significance in terms of political terms, in terms of international public opinion,
and the like.
This was the vexed and debated question of German atrocities in this invasion of 1914.
The German advance through Belgium and northern France, as we now know because of careful
historical research, was in fact marked by atrocities, which were disastrous for German
standing in international world opinion.
German forces, as they moved forward into unknown territory, were on occasion panicked
by the prospect of feared civilian resistance and suspected snipers, but there was something
else at work as well.
The German military often saw tactics that we today would call terror as a useful way
of quelling even potential civilian resistance, which its own philosophy of war saw as fundamentally
illegitimate and illegal.
War should be left to professionals rather than a mobilized nation at arms with civilian
resistance was the opinion of the German military professionals.
Nonetheless, confusion and chaos, what was often called the fog of war, also played a
role as confused incidents could lead to atrocities.
Examples of this could be, as follows, German troops moving into an enemy village or a city
might actually encounter friendly fire as fellow troops mistook them for enemy forces,
and the result could very well be that this would be mistaken for sniper fire.
The Germans on occasion would find that shots were coming from somewhere, it wasn't clear
from where, and the cry would go up from the German troops shouting in German, Man hat
geschossen.
It's a very interesting passive construction.
One has shot at us.
And what was clear from this statement was that it wasn't entirely clear to the soldiers
themselves who was doing the shooting, but increasingly it was suspected that civilian
resistors, people not in uniform, fighting in guerrilla fashion, were the ones doing
the shooting.
The chaos could further be increased and made lethal by the presence of alcohol on the
battlefield.
As troops moved forward, human nature being what it was, on occasion alcohol would be
looted and the result would be that drunken troops might be even more prone to such misunderstandings
or miscalculations.
Recent research, which painstakingly has tried to exactly reconstruct what happened where
in these first stages of the invasion of Belgium and France, has shown that German troops
in fact killed over 6,000 civilians in Belgium as well as northern France, taking them to
be suspected guerrilla fighters or in the form of reprisals against resistance.
And this number of victims, civilian victims included men, women and children.
Another very famous and indeed notorious instance of these atrocities took place in the Belgian
university city of Louvain, often considered the Oxford of Belgium.
In this university city of Louvain, shots broke out and German troops responded with
reprisals.
The library, the famous library of Louvain as well as much of the city, were burned on
August 25th to the 28th, 1914 and hundreds of civilians were killed in the process.
In another instance of the damage of cultural property, cultural monuments that would later
be trumpeted as an example of German barbarism, the cathedral at Reims was shelled on September
19th, 1914.
It was instances like this that were deployed to tremendous propaganda effect by the allies
in the initial stages of the war as they argued that the Germans had shown themselves to be
barbarians or Huns as they were often called the enemies of civilization as shown by their
disregard for culture, for monuments, as well as for civilian life.
A really remarkable case of this are the many rumors that spread that German troops
had systematically, as a way of showing German beastliness or frightfulness, had actually
been cutting off the hands of Belgian children as a way of discouraging resistance.
As it turned out upon closer investigation, there don't seem to be cases of this that
actually were recorded, but nonetheless the rumor was believed.
Another rumor that circulated was that priests or other civilians had been used as clappers
of church, inside church bells as another instance of atrocities against civilians.
Now, oddly enough, as recent historical research shows, this dialectic of true instances of
atrocities being followed by the proliferation of what seemed to be believable rumors about
the enemy's atrocities ultimately produced a strange effect that came into play later
in the 20th century.
Later in the war, as disbelief grew in such rumors, the true atrocities also were considered
more skeptically and, to a great extent, were considered later not to have taken place.
In fact, as recent historical research has shown, they certainly had.
In a sort of bitter irony in the Second World War, when rumors started to filter out about
the Nazi's genocidal policies of the Holocaust, these were on occasion disbelieved or not
taken aboard precisely because they were seen as propaganda of the sort that had been denounced
in the First World War in a tragic misunderstanding.
While the plans for victory in the West had collapsed for the Germans, they did encounter
surprise victories in the East.
Ironically, in a turn of events that hadn't been anticipated, victories were won on the
Eastern Front after initial disasters by the German armies.
Germany's Eastern territories had been imperiled at the start of the war because Russian armies
moved more quickly than had been expected in order to invade Germany to aid their French
ally, to draw off German forces by invading East Prussia as well as moving against Austria.
As part of the Schlieffen Plan, East Prussia had been left lightly guarded in a calculated
risk in order to shift as many troops as possible over to the Western Front.
This calculation looked like it was about to turn into a disaster because Russian armies
occupied German territory.
This was the only truly large-scale invasion of German territory during the First World
War and would represent a very traumatic experience.
German military commanders in East Prussia panicked and prepared for a mass retreat.
In order to stiffen the resolve of these forces, two new generals were sent to East Prussia
as replacements.
One of them was an elderly general by the name of Paul von Hindenburg, the descendant
of many generations of East Prussian nobility, and attached to him as his chief of staff
was the young hotshot officer, Eric Ludendorff, who had helped in the capture of the Citadel
of Liege.
Together with Lieutenant Colonel Max Hofmann, these generals crafted a vast victory against
Russian armies at the Battle of Tannenberg on August 26th to the 30th of 1914, even as
the Schlieffen Plan was playing itself out on the Western Front.
Hindenburg and Ludendorff were hailed as nothing less than the saviors of East Prussia and
of Germany.
They had beaten back larger Russian forces and had become German war heroes.
Later in the war, as we'll see in the following lecture, they essentially would become the
war dictators of Germany, building on the enormous popularity that they had won as a
result of this victory of the Battle of Tannenberg.
But nonetheless, there were some harsh truths that needed to be confronted, even the tremendous
victory of the Battle of Tannenberg, even the remarkable decisive result that had been
won there, even the masses of Russian prisoners of war and of artillery that were captured
as a result of this war could not hide certain very harsh and realistic truths.
German victory on the Eastern Front, welcome as it was, unplanned as it was, could not hide
the failure of the initial plans for the war and the West.
Russia, as it turned out, at great cost to its own resources, had made a vast contribution
to the French war effort by drawing away troops from the Schlieffen Plan in a sacrifice that
was quite deliberate.
We need to consider a verdict, then, of what the failure of these war plans ultimately implied.
With the failure of the war plans, the war would take on increasingly unfamiliar forms
and patterns, ones that had not been planned for.
One might say that improvisation would now rule the day.
In a larger sense, however, historians are still debating the significance of these failed
plans, and in particular, the Schlieffen Plan's failed gamble for achieving an answer to the
geopolitical challenge of fighting a war on two fronts.
Some historians actually believe that in a very real sense, by the fall of 1914, Germany
and its ally Austria-Hungary had already lost the First World War in a strategic sense.
They would now face a long war on many fronts, and increasingly, in a battle, rather a total
war, a battle of attrition of resources, they were outmatched.
In economic terms, the central powers, that's to say Germany and Austria-Hungary, were seriously
outmatched by the Allies, by Great Britain, France, and the Russian Empire, in what would
now be a drawn-out industrial war.
And at the same time, to make matters worse, the British naval blockade, that we'll be
discussing in more detail later, threatened to choke the central powers in their embattled
economic position.
Very clearly, even the welcome victory on the Eastern Front at Tannenberg was a tactical
victory that might not alter the overall strategic equation.
Ultimately, the unfamiliarity of the forms of war that would now evolve after the failed
plans would have devastating results in practice.
The learning curve was one that would be counted in vast casualties.
We've encountered in the course of this lecture the key question of how expectations with
which the Great Powers had entered the war were ultimately frustrated and were not put
into effect.
The result that would follow would be the need to improvise or reinvent in a series of
shocks of the new, the art of war itself.
And what this improvisation, this costly improvisation would look like on the Western
Front in particular, we'll be examining in our next lecture.
