Lecture 7, The Western Front Experience
In this lecture, we'll be examining or beginning our examination of the Western Front.
In essence, in this lecture, we'll be exploring what it was that followed after the failure of the plans for the start of the war in the West.
The Western Front, contrary to all earlier expectations, was soon frozen into immobile frontlines hundreds of miles long
that saw static trench warfare rather than glorious charges and war of movement
and degenerated into a horrific slaughter resulting from attempts to break this deadlock.
We'll outline the reasons for this crucial phenomenon which contemporaries only slowly came to understand and they did so at great price.
This key dynamic was the superiority of the defensive position in this war due to questions of military technology that we'll look at more closely in today's lecture.
Despite the ways in which recent wars had hinted at this development, commanders in World War I nonetheless showed on occasion appalling in comprehension
of the reality that was unfolding before them and at first sought through ever larger frontal attacks to overcome this challenge.
In their mental world, the tantalizing prospect of a breakthrough that would finally allow sweeping offensives and glorious cavalry charges was a great prize
but this never came. We will survey the horrific record of these initial attacks as the reality of trench warfare was slowly being assimilated
and the psychology behind them including a particular and very telling instance the 1914 Battle of Langomark and all that it implied about the war.
First we need to understand how it was that the deadlock was established. It was or at least should have been clear that by the winter of 1914 to 1915
deadlock in a very real sense had descended onto the western front. The western front now stretched for some 500 miles all the way from the Swiss border, the Alps,
through France to the English Channel in parallel lines, the British and the French held lines in the west and the German lines to the east.
The western front experience that unfolded there, though little understood at first, has left a decisive imprint on modern consciousness.
It indeed is often almost synonymous with collective memory of the World War, at least in the west. Though the form of this war with its fortifications, its trenches, its dugouts was unfamiliar,
there were probably instances that should have suggested that this might be a reality that came before. These included the American Civil War from 1861 to 1865
or even the more recent Russo-Japanese War of 1904 to 1905, both of which had already anticipated some of these traits of modern industrial war and the importance of fortifications or the defensive.
Attempts to break the deadlock that had descended upon the western front also produced vigorous debate on all sides about where decisive victory could be won given this deadlocked situation.
Curiously enough, both among the Allies, that's to say France, Britain and Russia, and on the other side, on the part of their enemies, the Central Powers, the Germans and the Austro-Hungarians,
there emerged different schools of thought that had the same names, Westerners and Easterners. In both cases, these camps championed very different solutions for where war might be won.
The world of the trenches soon took on a reality as a world apart. A surreal, unreal existence was to be found there. The trench landscape was marked by increasingly elaborate earthworks and fortifications,
and indeed those first initial trenches that we talked about from 1914's, shallow dugouts, were now replaced by ever more elaborate building.
But in the process of this fortification, the role of technology was a fascinating one. The simple product of barbed wire, a very ordinary form of technology that had helped in the cultivation of the American West,
here played a very important role in fortifications. Between the barbed wire barriers, between the trenches on either side, between these opposing fortifications lay a very special and strange territory called No Man's Land.
No Man's Land, which as the name implied meant that it was owned by no one, belonged to neither side, represented the focus of attacks on either side. It was an area that was pockmarked with shell holes, with the remains of trench fortifications, and ultimately with dead bodies as well.
Usually this territory was about some 275 yards across, but in some places the trenches of the enemy sides could lie much closer to one another, in other cases much further apart.
Nonetheless, smaller trenches were continually being dug into the No Man's Land in a sort of probing action, and their purposes, the purposes of these smaller trenches were for observation, for communication, for scouting, or even for preparing attacks that would be launched against the opposite side.
The trench lines themselves represented a crucial feature of this us versus them geography that was omnipresent on the western front. The front lines on either side increasingly were dug in zigzag patterns, which had the specific aim of not allowing free fields of fire by enemy troops that might surge into the opposed trenches.
They would have to instead more laboriously conquer those fortifications. It also meant that explosions of shells, for instance, would be deadened in their impact rather than simply hurtling down channels that the trenches might represent.
The trenches themselves also were, as they were increasingly elaborated and built up, provided with wooden boards that covered the bottom of the trench.
This was a necessity as photographs from the period can make abundantly clear precisely because in this wet soil, in areas with little drainage, water would gather at the bottom of the trenches, and thus they would represent an unhealthy and very wet environment as well.
The wooden boards covering this wetness would allow at least for a little bit of comfort and security.
In addition, each trench would have a special so-called fire step, a board that allowed soldiers to stand up higher and to observe or to shoot at the enemy from the comparative safety of their trench.
The trench lines were also punctuated by machine gun nests, mortar batteries, and, as the lines grew ever more elaborate, concrete pillboxes or bunkers as well.
Behind the front line, that's to say, the very furthest fortifications, were many other lines that extended to the rear.
These were support lines so that in the case of an attack or even of the enemy breaking through the trenches, it would be possible for troops who had been waiting in readiness as reinforcements to be moved up.
Reserve lines as well as retreat lines if necessary so that soldiers could surge back to a second line of defenses in order to defend these newer positions of retreat.
Now, as one can well imagine, the complexity of these trench layouts was such that maps or guides, people who would serve to direct the movement of troops,
were necessary in order to even allow troops to navigate through this confusing geography, and indeed many of these trenches could look very alike.
Getting lost in them was a perennial reality as well.
Behind the lines, as increased fortification took place, bunkers were built up.
These bunkers were intended to house up to a dozen men who thus could be shuttled as necessary to wherever they might be required in the front lines.
The bunkers were attempted, at least, to reinforce them with concrete or with other fortifications, but the reality was that a direct hit from heavy artillery would, of necessity, endanger even men in such fortifications.
Yet further still behind these lines, in yet more placements, were heavy artillery positions.
These heavy artillery positions were used to bombard the enemy side and to target the artillery of the other side as well in what amounted to artillery duels taking place over no man's land and over the opposed trenches.
It hardly needs saying that soldiers who were stationed in these front lines had an existence that was horrific to contemplate.
Soldiers in the front lines were constantly exposed to the weather.
The trenches, as we've already mentioned, were often wet, and in particular times of year could be flooded.
Snow was certainly a reality in the winter, and in spring and fall mud would make it very difficult to move across the landscape or even one's own trenches.
Increasingly soldiers who were positioned or stationed in the trenches took on the aspect of nearly primitive people in their state of filth as well as disarray.
Within the trenches, in this unhealthy environment, one marked by decay and putrification, rats and vermin proliferated and added to the horrors of this existence.
The existence in the trenches as such was, according to soldiers who survived this experience, marked by vast stretches of boredom, at times punctuated by intense moments of terror and horror, an existence that they often summed up as not being human at all.
Further, this environment obviously was tremendously dangerous as well, because gunfire as well as artillery traversed the landscape.
A crucial role here was played in by an object, a machine in fact, that really I think is synonymous as a terribly eloquent symbol of the industrial nature of this war, and that was the machine gun.
The machine gun, the very name, signifies the ability to industrially produce mass death as a result of automated fire.
Machine guns, that's to say guns that would spew fire at a steady rate with a pull of the trigger, not requiring repeated aiming or repeated firing of the mechanism, had already been developed in the 19th century, in the 1880s.
And these had a range of more than a thousand yards, and they fired 600 rounds per minute, many times more than a trained marksman could.
One machine gun crew could hold off masses of enemies, many times larger, simply by deploying this mechanized technology.
In fact, the machine gun had often been celebrated as the ideal weapon for colonial warfare.
It was seen as a vital demonstration of the technological superiority of Europeans over non-European peoples, and naively, it had been assumed in the past this weapon would not be deployed by civilized peoples and quotation marks against other in quotation marks civilized peoples,
but as soon as it was deployed to such destructive effect in the first stages of the First World War, it became clear that many more of these machine guns would need to be used, and they were ordered.
Another technology that was crucial was the new form of artillery that was recoilless.
That means that this was artillery which would not, after every firing, be jolted out of its position by the recoil of the gun as the missile was launched, but rather it would absorb the shock of the explosion of the shell as it took its trajectory,
and would not need to be recited or recalibrated in order to fire at the positions that originally had been aimed at.
This increased rates of fire and allowed later in the war ever more precise artillery attacks to be planned as well as put into effect.
Another disastrous new technological advance that was put to murderous effect was poison gas.
On April 22, 1915, German forces first used poison gas at Ypres.
These yellowish-green clouds of poison gas inaugurated a general gas warfare, because in a dialectic, the Allied side, which at first had been the victims of this warfare, soon would respond in kind with new and improved chemical weapons as well.
We'll be speaking more in a later lecture about the horrors and nature of gas warfare.
The soldiers themselves trapped in this environment felt that their status as individuals, as human beings, was changing.
Many of them record that they themselves were becoming increasingly anonymous.
Individual heroism seemed obsolete, ridiculous almost, in the context of an industrial war in which shells and artillery and machine guns mattered much more than an individual's personal heroism, bravery, or motivation.
A farewell to chivalry is a phrase that was sometimes used to describe this final parting of the ways with the illusions with which the war had begun.
This trend of the acutely felt dehumanization of soldiers themselves and a divorce from earlier ideas of heroism and of chivalry was probably best illustrated by the changes in uniform that were taking place of necessity in this new form of warfare,
where earlier resplendent uniforms in bright colors with glittering badges and plumed hats had been the order of the day, now by contrast uniforms in dull earth tones and camouflage colors, as well as the ubiquitous steel helmets that made almost all soldiers look alike, whether they were officers or enlisted, now were the order of the day.
In the language of the soldiers themselves, some of this dehumanization could be felt as well, the ordinary soldiers' dislike of big words like heroism or of causes and duty instead was replaced by a simpler struggle for survival and a feeling of obligation towards one's comrades in the trenches.
A key dynamic that was at work here that we need to understand in order to fully appreciate what it was that was taking place in these first attempts to deal with trench warfare was the primacy of the defensive.
The key fact of this new warfare in military historical terms was the strength of the defensive side, those who were doing the defending, who were being attacked on the battlefield for technical reasons.
This phenomenon, the primacy of the defensive, the fact that soldiers in trenches trying to ward off an attack would be stronger than those attacking, was only slowly discovered and understood in practice.
One reason for this is because the new reality totally contradicted the ruling military doctrine of the cult of the offensive, whereby the more motivated and more spirited attackers would always overrun more cowardly defenders, so the theory had gone.
As a result, mass attacks often turned into mass occurs, as the defenders, it turned out, enjoyed tremendous advantages.
Let's try to follow through what a typical attack in all of its horror would have looked like, at least in brief outline, to make clear this phenomenon.
First, a massive artillery barrage, that's to say a volley of artillery fire fired by a whole bank or group of artillery or cannon, would be fired in unison, all at once with a particular goal.
A massive artillery barrage would be unleashed, planned in advance, the intent of which was to cut the barbed wire of the enemy side, destroy the defenses, and as the phrase went, to soften up the enemy defenders, leaving them in a state of shock, which would allow them to be easily overrun by the attacking side, so the theory went.
In practice, this barrage very often did not cut the wire, if the defenders' trenches were deep enough, the shells would not destroy all of the defenses, and the barrage would have another devastating side effect, the barrage would actually signal to the defenders where the attacker was planning to attack.
The element of surprise was lost in the long, pounding, prolonged barrages, allowing the defender time to move up reserves or reinforcements to the support or reserve trenches.
After the barrage had lifted, once it had ended, attacking troops would be ordered to, as the phrase went, go over the top. That's to say, to leap up from the firing step out of their trenches to advance with fixed bayonets and with cheers through no man's land and into the enemy trenches, which now allegedly were ripe for the taking.
However, another side effect of the previous barrage that was supposed to make the attack easier now came into play. The barrage had pounded the ground of the defending side, it had torn up much of no man's land, it made it difficult to advance and even easier to lose one's way than it might have been otherwise,
and it scarcely needs to be added that in the process, friendly fire from one's own artillery trying to support attacking troops could also be a danger to the attackers.
In practice, thus, barrages often had not accomplished what they were supposed to do. Wire remained uncut and soldiers would be caught on the wire.
The defenders would then, once the barrage had lifted, know that this was the right time to emerge from their deep bunkers to set up their machine guns and to mow down the lines of attackers as they advanced now entirely visible and vulnerable against the defending trenches.
At the Battle of the Somme that we'll be talking more about in a later lecture, German machine gunners, it was timed, could be back in position after a barrage had lifted from their bunkers and into readiness to fire in less than three minutes, more than enough time to encounter the attackers with deadly fire.
Even if an attack should achieve breakthrough and a hole should be punched in the lines of the trenches of the defender, nonetheless, reserves had more than likely already been moved up by the defender and the attacker would not be in a prime position to exploit this opportunity.
The reserves of the attacking side would encounter the same difficulty in moving forward quickly and thus often could not move fast enough to exploit the gap that had been created if it had been created.
By contrast, the defending side could always use the railways behind its own lines out of the range of the attackers' artillery to bring up ever more troops as reinforcements.
By contrast, the attackers were advancing slowly on foot through no man's land.
The noted British historian AJP Taylor remarked in a very compelling way with a wonderful coinage on the contrasts that this form of battle represented.
The troops could arrive very quickly at the front, but once they were to move forward in attack, their progress slowed to a very, very slow pace.
Fundamentally, according to AJP Taylor, the challenge was this, quote, defense was mechanized and attack was not, end quote.
Soldiers, once they had reached the front, once they had reached no man's land, would move just as slowly as soldiers had ever done in earlier ages.
The general's response, however, on both sides to this quandary, this challenge, this insoluble problem was to increase the mass of the attack,
to increase the size of the force that was deployed, preceded by ever larger and heavier barrages.
Bigger was to be better.
We need to survey, then, the record of these frontal attacks.
For two years after the start of the First World War, many generals tended to show appalling and comprehension of this new reality.
Some were wrestling with a problem, but many instead held on to their persistent dream of a decisive breakthrough,
of soldiers moving forward at a rapid pace, of cavalry finally coming into their own,
and many of these generals in fact had been trained as cavalry officers and had a soft spot for this particular arm of the military.
The offensive spirit's notion, the cult of the offensive, continued to be a mantra in these renewed frontal attacks.
The British, in fact, even had a special instructor who traveled among the troops preaching the virtues of the bayonet charge.
Another way in which soldiers were encouraged to really get into the cult of the offensive, also on the British side,
was the tradition of kicking off attacks by quite literally kicking a football across no man's land in order to mark the start
of a sporting and very gamesman-like attack on the enemy.
The frontal attacks at the start of the war took a devastating toll on all sides,
but we want to examine one in particular in a little more detail, and that's the case of the Battle of Langemark,
which grew into a legend for the Germans.
Langemark, in Flanders, near Eep, became the site of a creation of a German nationalist myth which centered on a disaster,
on a failure, a failed attack in November 1914, when poorly trained volunteers had been thrown against British trenches,
and in the process took some 41,000 casualties.
The myth grew up once a German army dispatch was produced.
On November 11, 1914, an army news bulletin was published that wrote of young German units attacking enemy lines while it was said
singing the German national anthem, Germany, Germany above all.
This myth, later elaborated in German wartime propaganda, claimed that German students,
and especially the Wunderfogel hiking idealists with Schiller and Goethe and Nietzsche in their backpacks supposedly,
had shown their typical sublime spirit of self-sacrifice by attacking even when the odds were hopeless.
A soldier, an ordinary soldier by the name of Adolf Hitler, claimed later that he had witnessed this attack
and had seen a new spirit forged there.
Ominously in his memoir, he wrote that this was the beginning of something new.
After the war, he would create a party around the ideas of war forging a renewed race.
But the myth of Langemark in many ways does not bear closer examination.
So much of it was crafted or mythologized.
The encounter actually wasn't fought at Langemark, but instead fought at a place named Beschott,
which didn't sound quite as Germanic or legendary as Langemark, so another name was chosen.
And it's estimated that only 18% of the regiments that went forward in this self-sacrificing and vain way were actually student volunteers.
Though in propaganda, they were all turned into young student idealists.
Not everyone was taken in by this myth.
Those who were more skeptical of it instead spoke of the Kindermord of Langemark,
the slaughter of the innocents, where young men had been sent to their death for nothing.
The event certainly did show the actual magnitude of losses.
It's estimated that only a third of those German young student,
Wunderfogel, hiking enthusiasts returned from the war.
Similarly, on all sides, officers experienced especially high casualty rates in leading the frontal attacks.
It transpired at the start of the war that the flash of an officer's sword or saber,
that he rallied troops towards an attack or led them, made him an excellent target for snipers on the opposing side.
At the Battle of the Somme, it's estimated that officers took six times the ordinary rate of casualties as enlisted men did.
Nonetheless, the notion of a shared front community growing out of these terrible experiences was a potent idea.
We want to survey, in a little more detail, the 1915 Allied Offensives on the Western Front and their failures.
Because the Allies, as opposed to the Germans on the Western Fronts, felt a special urgency in recapturing lost ground.
In particular, the French, whose own territory, own homeland, was occupied,
and also to help relieve the Russians for whom the war was not going well in 1915,
as we'll see in a future lecture on the Eastern Front.
The start of the war produced extremely costly engagements at the start on the Western Front,
with the French Army taking a million casualties in the first five months of the war.
And then, in 1915, more French soldiers were killed in disastrous attacks,
even than in the terrible battle of Verdun in 1916 that we'll be discussing in a later lecture.
A long series of attempted attacks yielded disastrous results.
The Battle of Artois on December 17th to the 29th of 1914.
It viewed French attacks in February and March of 1915 in Champagne.
The French attack on Saint-Michel in April.
The Second Battle of Artois from May 4th to June 18th, 1915.
The Third Battle of Artois from September 25th to October 14th, 1915.
We see, in essence, here the same territories being fought over again and again.
In 1915, the French had suffered nearly a third of a million casualties.
In the British attack at Nus Chapelle on March 10th, 1915,
and the attack at Los in late September of 1915,
breaches were created in the German lines,
but could not be exploited before the front, once again, froze into stalemate.
As a result of these disappointments,
in December of 1915, General Douglas Haig replaced General French as commander-in-chief of the Army in France,
and remained in this position until the end of the war.
A key question, given this sense of stalemate and futility,
and sense of the sacrifice, is how soldiers were able to endure this sort of existence.
How they were able to tolerate their own lies being placed at stake,
as generals, as leaders sought to improvise,
and deal with the new realities of trench warfare,
and the war on the Western Front so unfamiliar, unexpected,
and nonetheless now being put into practice at the cost of great many lives.
Ultimately, this was a question soldiers would answer with their own day-to-day existence
and survival in the trenches,
a topic that we'll be considering in our next lecture.
