But your ape, life and death in the trenches.
In this lecture, we'll be examining aspects of life and death in the trenches of the Western
Front.
The trench landscape of the Western Front has clearly been imprinted on our collective
memory as a crucial site of modernity.
They're for many people synonymous with the First World War as a whole, though obviously
the wars we'll be discussing is far vaster and more diverse, but nonetheless they seem
to capture an essential truth about the war.
They are vivid symbols of how this industrial conflict stripped soldiers of a sense of human
agency and human freedom and instead mocked any concept of heroism or individuality.
In this lecture, we'll seek to provide a detailed overview of the trench landscape from the
perspective of ordinary soldiers.
Clearly it wouldn't even be possible to approach the horrors as they were lived in reality,
but we'll try to understand certain aspects of this surreal situation, the increasingly
elaborate fortifications, the omnipresence of death, the different national styles of
trench construction, the distinctive codes of behavior and ethos that evolved in the
trenches, including between enemies, events such as the informal truces of the live and
let live system, or the remarkable scenes of the Christmas fraternizations between the
opposing sides in 1914, and an elaborate and vast world of superstition and myth that grew
out of the trench experience.
I stated a moment ago that the trenches were a crucial site of modernity imprinted on western
collective imagination.
I think that clearly the trench landscape has left its impact on western art and literature,
both high and low, both elite and popular.
One needs to think just for instance of the Peanuts cartoon series and Snoopy as a fighter
ace crawling his way through the trenches, something that requires no explanation to
a reader of the cartoon, or the appearance of the trenches in British comedy series like
Monty Python.
These are less serious examples, but at the same time, our language itself has retained
expressions that come from this unreal world of the trenches, expressions which some people
use in the workplace for instance, or in the context of popular sports, without understanding
precisely where these terms come from.
These include words like over the top, meaning the act of attacking out of the trenches, or
even speak of being in the trenches during the work week as a time where one is fully
engaged, or speak of no man's land, a territory not held by any side.
In literature and in the arts, the traces are significant.
In poems and prose by writers such as Robert Graves, or Eric Maria Remark, who wrote the
classic All Quiet on the Western Front, or T. S. Eliot, who wrote The Wasteland, which
presents the trench landscape with scurrying masses as a very symbol of modernity, all
of these writers have recorded the impact and the shock of the world of the trenches
and what it represented.
Important examples, which one certainly could read at one's leisure, of poetry that does
the same thing, that captures some elemental truths about the experience of the Western
Front include bitter poems by Wilfred Owens and Siegfried Sassoon.
In a poem entitled Anthem for Doomed Youth, Wilfred Owen wrote, and essentially the title
says it all, of a time of parting, a time with the lights going out on an entire generation
being sacrificed, and the implicit question is for what?
Siegfried Sassoon's poem entitled Mortarsly They speaks at first with the voice of a bishop,
a bishop who is describing the young men in the trenches, describing the young men at
war and how they will most certainly be transformed in a spiritual sense, the bishop argues by
the sublime experience of the test of war and its moral importance.
The poem bitterly closes with the observation that yes, indeed, many young men will have
changed as a result of the war, as they have lost legs, arms, and have been mutilated as
a result.
The trenches as a whole thus, I would argue, are a crucial site for modernity indeed because
they are a vivid symbol for the loss of human agency, radically diminished individual importance
and individual heroism against a backdrop of anonymous industrial forces, the destructive
power of technology, and compulsions larger than those of an individual's motivation.
Detailed description of the trenches themselves, obviously, that we'll speak to in a moment,
can only begin to approximate the full impact of the lived reality, but it's nonetheless
necessary to try to form a mental picture of them.
Life in the trenches was enveloped in what the German philosopher of war, Carl von Klausowitz,
has called the fog of war, meaning the uncertainties, the lack of perspective, the lack of clarity
on where one is and what's going around one.
Life in the trenches, by definition, as a subterranean form of existence, obscured a
clear or panoramic view of the battlefield as a whole.
Soldiers who existed in this unreal landscape could very clearly not have endured long,
unbroken service in the trenches, so instead of necessity, rotation systems were created
in which soldiers would be moved into trench duty and then after they had survived, if
they had survived, were moved out once again.
Typically, a soldier might spend one week of each month in the front lines, and then
after the intense horror of that experience, one week further back in the reserve trenches,
and then the remainder of the time behind the lines or in rear areas, or if one was
especially lucky on vacation at home.
The daily routine of the trenches had its own rhythm, its own rituals that needed to be
observed.
The daily routine began before dawn.
Before dawn, preparations would be made to repel an attack, which was likely to come
at precisely this first glimmer of light.
The name given to this ritual of preparing for an attack was Stan II, and this is from
an archaic term of military art, but to stand to arms meaning to prepare for an imminent
assault.
The Stan II represented the moment when soldiers, often groggy from the night and from lack
of sleep, would be roused to stand at the fire step of the trench and to see whether an attack
might be coming.
If it didn't, then the day took its ordinary round.
This included breakfast, inspections, sentry duty, repairing trenches and bunkers, a seemingly
never-ending task, and then later another meal.
Nightfall also would bring the possibility of an attack, and thus, soldiers had to be
on the ready once again.
What this should make clear, by the way, is the constant presence of insomnia, a chronic
lack of sleep, which became a permanent feature of the trench existence.
The trenches also produced their own maladies.
This included diseases that had names essentially given to them as a result of the experience
of the trenches, like trench foot or trench fever.
Trench foot was the name given to a form of frostbite that distinctively could be acquired
by standing in the water-filled and water-logged bottom of the trenches, while trench fever
represented an infection carried by the vermin and the lice that were a part of the ordinary
life of soldiers as well.
One might mention as well the phenomenon of shell shock, that's to say the psychological
impact of the constant horrors and the strain of combat and of existence in the trenches,
which we'll be discussing in more detail in a later lecture.
Very clearly, a disturbing feature of this existence was the omnipresence of death.
Soldiers were often in close proximity to death, to the remains of bodies, decay, infestations
of rats, as well as the reality of having lost close friends.
In no man's land, the bodies' weather of enemies or of one's own might very well be
lying out in the open for all to see, but still too perilous to be reached and recovered
for burial.
Even in cases where bodies were buried, the bombardments, the barrages of artillery could
churn up the soil where those bodies had been either buried or had been lost in the mud,
and thus bodies might reappear after a period of being buried, a horror revealed for all
to see.
The soldiers at the same time would throw themselves into the tasks of building these
trenches as it was an existential matter of importance.
And oddly enough, contemporaries recorded that national styles of trench building emerged.
This smacks very much of 19th century generalizations about national character, but it speaks a lot
also to the self-understanding of soldiers as they celebrated their distinctively different
styles of building these important fortifications.
The British were in some cases proud of the fact that their trenches were less elaborate
and less carefully tended than those, let's say, of the Germans.
By contrast, it was argued the British were still hoping for that breakthrough, that decisive
assault that would lead them into the heart of Germany, and thus there wasn't any point
in getting too bogged down in domesticity.
At the same time, even British forces weren't willing to give up entirely on domesticity,
and thus the names that they gave for their trenches in this complicated landscape of avenues
and of front lines included names that were familiar, a trench might be named Piccadilly
or the Strand or Hyde Park, a way of evoking home even in this unreal environment.
The British also were well supplied.
The cans of tinned beef that the British had became especially sought after by German raiding
parties as a special delicacy, and as we'll see in later lectures, as the war turned economically
against the Central Powers, German raiding parties especially enjoyed successes in which
they'd be able to carry off much food and supplies from the better equipped British trenches.
For their part, German propagandists celebrated what they took to be the virtues embodied
in German trenches.
These were ones that were carefully designed with an eye to domesticity, civilization,
elaborately cared for, and with the comforts, insofar as this was possible, of home, with
mirrors on the wall, wash basins, and everywhere what was taken to be a national characteristic,
cleanliness and order.
Trying to cope with this environment was obviously an enormously complex and challenging
psychological task.
Just consider the following question.
For soldiers who were able to go home on leave, would the proximity of one's family or home
town or home lands, would that make it easier to cope or more difficult to cope with a trench
landscape?
The very proximity of home could be a bizarre counterpoint to the horrors on a daily basis
experienced in the trenches.
To give but one example that was ready to mind for British soldiers, there one was in the
trenches of Northern France, and yet one might very well be receiving with only the short
delay one's home town newspaper from Britain, perhaps from London.
From London also came special care packages.
From proximity, an example would be that of Fortnum and Mason or Harrod's, both famous
department stores that specialize in care packages for the troops fighting at the front,
and apparently fruit cakes were especially suitable in this regard.
Would this proximity make one long even more to be out of the trenches?
Would the disjuncture, the radical difference between the normalcy of home existence and
the new normalcy of the trenches be too much to bear psychologically?
This is a process which had no clear answer.
Rather, the letters and the diaries written by soldiers who survived the experience of
the trenches yield rich historical sources.
But historians point out that these were often the more literate and thoughtful soldiers
who were recording their experience.
Very many instead would have to cope in a way that was far less eloquent, but nonetheless
part of a strategy for survival.
Survival strategies could include grim, downright dark humor which tried to deal with horrifying
scenes.
And there's one in particular as an example that has remained with me still that I think
sums this up perfectly.
In the British lines at the salient at Ypres, British soldiers would, upon going out to
the trenches or returning from the trenches, would pass one spot in the fortifications
of the trench landscape.
And as a result of bombardment or of the movement of earth, a common reality in the
trench landscape, at first they were horrified to see an arm sticking out from the trench
wall.
The remains of a fellow fighter, perhaps a British man, perhaps not, sticking out from
the wall exposed for all to see.
One way of dealing with this horrific, mind-boggling sight was simply to respond to it with humor
which soldiers did.
They gave the possessor of this arm the nickname Jack and would shake the hand as they moved
out for good luck saying, hello Jack.
And then upon returning would shake the hand again, once again a ritual of superstition
which supposedly was to ensure one's good fortune and survival and yet also represented
grim humor trying to deal with the accumulated horror.
There were other ways in which soldiers also were urged to find a voice for themselves
and express at least aspects of their condition.
These included a strange artifact of the First World War which is marvelously expressive
and fascinating to read today, trench newspapers.
These included publications that ordinary men, sometimes under the tutelage of their
officers, were encouraged to produce as a way of perhaps humorously summing up and coping
with life in the trenches and these existed on the side of the central powers as well
as the allies as did also front theaters, so-called front theaters or even front cinemas where
movies were shown which tried to offer some diversion from the reality of warfare.
These could obviously be primitive affairs on occasion.
One special challenge was producing plays or romantic comedies without the presence of
women actors but the soldiers improvised in this regard as well.
One German reviewer of military front theater even argued that it was a virtue to have these
primitive conditions because this most closely resembled the conditions of Shakespeare's
own time before technology and other aspects of modern stagecraft had diluted an original
and vital art form.
Ultimately, the soldiers' language as well as we've mentioned before changed and the
literary historian Paul Fussell makes a compelling argument that the ironies, the sense of helplessness
within the war, changed the English language forever so that soldiers no longer could be
uttering as he argues we too cannot, could no longer utter words like duty or honor or
glory without an ironic tinge.
Another element of coping which was most definitely not allowed, most definitely a matter of improvisation
and of unofficial understanding was the so-called live and let live system.
The live and let live system was an informal truce that might be worked out often with
great difficulty and ambiguity between enemy sides and trenches.
Now very clearly we've been talking about the horrific slaughter of frontal attacks and
the dreadful record of the first years of the war but it needs to be kept in mind that
not all sectors, not all areas of the front, not all military theaters were equally murderous.
Some in fact were quieter sectors and these were much sought after as one might pass there
an existence which while not without threat was nonetheless not quite as deadly as that
of the more fought over sectors of the front lines.
It was precisely in such quieter areas that in the name of simply living and letting live
informal truces evolved between enemies on opposing sides and these could range from
the really quite ordinary to the tremendously elaborate and well thought out.
Live and let live systems could include conventions that were worked out spontaneously of not
attacking at certain times, not attacking let's say during breakfast because everyone
after all needed this first meal of the day, a convention perhaps of not attacking during
religious holidays, a convention perhaps in quieter sectors where there was no need for
a constant antagonism of even resisting the temptation of aiming at latrines or at isolated
men walking about on the other side so that snipers in the name of keeping the peace would
refrain from shooting at such easy targets.
The same could be true in no man's land.
Soldiers might be careful to make a lot of noise as they were on patrol in no man's land
at night in order to give plenty of warning to an enemy scouting party that they were
close by to avoid an unnecessary and ultimately futile mutual slaughter.
At the same time such arrangements which could include not pretending not to see one another
in no man's land as one repaired fortifications or repaired breaks in the barbed wire very
clearly would infuriate commanders if they learned of them and these were forbidden again
and again.
The most crucial case of this sort of informal truce and the most famous, the most riveting
in human terms was the Christmas fraternization of 1914, the first Christmas of the First
World War, where the most dramatic instances of informal truces took place on the western
front.
It all started with a simple gesture.
Especially from the German lines apparently, soldiers put up Christmas trees and especially
from the British lines soldiers were shocked to see Christmas trees appearing with lights
twinkling off in the distance and then starting to hear the sound of Christmas hymns being
sung by the German side.
After first suspecting an attack or some subterfuge this might be joined by a British response
of singing or some other greeting or welcome.
Soon meetings and games in no man's land were arranged, food was traded, photographs
were taken, signatures exchanged as mementos of this remarkable experience and at least
in this Christmas season, at least for the short space, a truce had descended and good
will by contrast was visible.
The truce however, even during this Christmas 1914, it needs to be noted, did not obtain
everywhere.
It turns out that the truces were far likelier to break out between the British and Germans
than they were between the so-called hereditary enemies, the French and the Germans.
It was also the case that some kinds of German troops, especially the highly motivated and
disciplined Prussian troops, were far less likely to engage in an informal truce.
Nonetheless, generals on both sides were furious at the news of the Christmas truce.
They tried to censor news of its existence and did effectively shut down any recurrence
on a similar scale of such a phenomenon.
It worried them as to what it might portend about the morale and the conviction of their
own troops.
Finally, a fascinating area to discuss is the superstitions, the entire world of myth
and of ritual, of irrational mystical gestures that grew up in this bizarre trench landscape.
These irrational gestures were, in a very touching way, we can understand, attempts
to cope with the situation of helplessness.
The war evolved its own folklore as making sense, an attempt to make sense of an otherwise
mad world.
This ritual clearly was an attempt psychologically to reassert some measure of control in a situation
in which soldiers were without it.
Ordinary soldiers might prize amulets, that's to say special lucky charms that were to them
a protecting force.
Some soldiers believed that through a kind of self-hypnosis they could make themselves
invulnerable to bullets.
And indeed, myths grew up about things that you should avoid doing so as not to be wounded
or killed in the war, taboos, some of which persisted long after the war itself.
It used to be a long-standing superstition, this is probably vanished now, but that one
should never light three cigarettes in a row with one match, even if friends were sharing
a smoke.
And the reason for that had everything to do with the reality of the trenches.
On the opposite side, if a sniper was watching, the sniper would, with the first cigarette,
see the match being lit, with the second cigarette being lit from the same match would take aim,
and with the third would fire, killing the third in the series, a ritual which had its
grounding in the trench world.
More elaborate legends also took on a life of their own.
In 1914, at the Battle of Mons, when British forces had retreated hastily before the German
onslaught, a legend grew up that angels or medieval archers had stepped out of the clouds,
a shining presence, and had come to the rescue of the British troops against the pursuing
Germans.
The reason is it turns out why this myth grew up came from a short story that had fantasized
about medieval archers of the British wars on the continent coming to the aid of British
soldiers in the Great War.
The writer of this short story afterwards tried to sort of do a time out and to convince
people that, no, no, this never actually happened, it was just a short story of his invention,
but he was shouted down, it was unpatriotic, it seemed to call it into question.
At the Somme, a statue and a damaged church of the Virgin Mary took on a very special,
superstitious significance.
This statue of the Virgin Mary held up a child, probably the Christ child, at the top of a
church steeple, but it had been damaged in the course of the conflict itself, and the
statue was essentially poised to topple over.
It was at an angle parallel to the ground.
And this was a bizarre sight that many soldiers saw on their way to the front.
The legend grew up that when that statue finally fell, the war would end.
This superstition, unfortunately, was not one that came to pass.
The statue did fall, and the war continued nonetheless.
There were also other rumors that were marvelously expressive, but don't appear to have any basis
in a concrete reality.
One of those rumors was that of the so-called German corpse factory.
The myth suggested that the Germans were running so low on supplies, including fats, that they
were rendering human bodies in factories that were intended to recycle this human material.
Though this myth didn't have truth to it, sometimes it was attributed to the British
as well, that they had a similar installation, it certainly expressed some deeper intuition
about how humans were raw material for this war.
Another rumor, which apparently was without basis in reality, was that one that appeared
again and again was that of the crucified Canadian.
The Germans had allegedly crucified in plain view a Canadian prisoner of war above their
trenches so that the opposed British side could view his torment in full detail.
Very clearly, once again, even a myth without a basis in reality apparently expressed certain
deeper existential truths about the terrors of war and the way in which all soldiers were
being crucified by this experience.
The religious imagery that's behind much of this superstition is obvious as well.
One of the most powerful myths that grew up as a consequence of this experience was that
of the trench community.
The intensity of the experience of soldiers at the front did in fact produce in many soldiers
a loyalty that focused not on the big words that were often scorned, concepts like loyalty
and duty, but instead a more intense personal obligation felt towards comrades and once
immediate group once fellow soldiers.
This has been observed by psychologists as well as a very key element of the psychology
of warfare.
But the mythologizing of this notion of a trench community went beyond much of this.
The propagandists on all sides and some soldiers themselves asserted that front soldiers who
had existed in the trenches, who had fought in the trenches, had actually been changed
in a moral or spiritual way by their experiences.
The argument ran that they had been welded into a true trench community, that something
wonderful had happened out in the trenches, that what earlier had been fragmented groupings
of people from different parts of their nation state or their empire were now somehow coalescing
into one, with a melting away supposedly of class differences, differences of religion
or confession, differences of region, producing a perfected national community, true community
which shared property in common, shared peril, shared sacrifice.
This notion of a trench community was not without a potentially subversive edge because
it accented the dignity and the cohesion of ordinary soldiers.
It was argued that distinctions and hierarchies had been broken down in the common peril of
the trenches.
Hatred of officers in particular, those men behind the lines who were directing the senseless
slaughter, could grow up and be a cement for the trench community as it was mythologized.
Resentment of the home front could also become a factor.
People at home, it was argued, didn't understand what it was really like.
All of this could lead, finally, to a strange and unintended psychological consequence,
a feeling sometimes of kinship with the enemies on the other side in the opposed trenches.
It was argued, indeed, that enemy soldiers from the trenches on either side had, as a
result of the searing experience, more in common with one another than they did with
their officers, generals, or the home front.
A gap of experience could lead to alienation from civilian life at home, as well as authority.
And a mythology of a new man and a new community forged in the trenches would have important
political potential.
Let me leave you with one last myth that I think was marvelously expressive about this
notion of a trench community.
A myth grew up that in no man's land, between the trenches, there existed another army.
An army that was independent.
An entire regiment, an entire grouping of deserters from both sides who refused to fight in the
war, but instead survived in hidden lines, hidden bunkers in no man's land.
This myth, this dream of soldiers becoming once again in control of their destinies in
however limited a way, speaks volumes of the helplessness of the reality of the world of
the trenches.
