Lecture 9 The Great Battles of Attrition
In this lecture, we'll be examining the great battles that dominated the western front from
1916 to 1917, already different in their character from the attacks that had marked the opening
stages of the war in the west.
In part, this was as a result of an evolution.
Once the new and distinctive dynamics of industrial war had slowly been recognized, including
the inherent strength of the defensive side we've discussed in an earlier lecture due
to the state of the technology of the time, they're followed in 1916 to 1917 a series
of huge battles of attrition that involved masses of men, some five million, in a hitherto
unprecedented scale of battle on the western front.
These battles were intended to grind down the enemy's side and to tip the balance towards
victory, but ultimately they too yielded little result beyond mass death and suffering.
We'll examine in turn the months-long titanic battles of Verdun and Somme in 1916, and in
1917 the French Champagne offensive and the British experience at the third battle of
Ypres, also called Passchendaele.
The lecture today will examine the guiding ideas behind the launching of these failed
offensives, and how the battles themselves could eventually take on a life of their own
actually escaping the initial premises of their planners.
The battles increasingly came to be invested with a dogged irrational national pride and
took on enormous symbolic significance, which made it impossible to disengage at a time
when it might have been rational to do so.
We want to examine the commonalities, the shared features that marked the realities
of these battles.
Both the Allies in the west, the French and the British, and the Germans, had planned
decisive battles on the western front.
These turned into disasters of attrition, which is a term that we need to actually define.
Attrition means a slow grinding down or draining of the enemy's forces, a wearing down of
the enemy's side rather than the scoring of a decisive victory.
And attrition was to be a phenomenon seen throughout total war as an experience.
The mass battles that we'll be discussing in this lecture really in a sense had a logic
of their own that soon slipped away from the rational control of the leaders revealing
their lack of control of the events on the battlefield due both to the lack of effective
communications as well as their wrestling with the problem of how a battle of this nature
should be fought.
In addition, back on the home front, these battles became vivid symbols of national pride
and assumed such significance that it was impossible to step away from them.
These battles revealed, again, or underlined a phenomenon that we've spoken about in an
earlier lecture, the strength of the defensive side.
They also revealed the general's inability to understand how to employ new technology
to break the stalemate.
They eventually would be able to do so late in the war, but at this stage the learning
curve was still on its way up.
It also revealed the growing callousness of many commanders towards the expenditure of
lives.
And it also revealed another phenomenon which was, in psychological terms, also unexpected.
The ability of ordinary soldiers to somehow keep on fighting and to endure these dreadful
conditions.
First, let's turn to the Battle of Verdun.
This titanic battle between the Germans and the French in 1916 very vividly illustrated
the futility and the destructive power of this new war.
It was a lesson that unfortunately also was slow to be learned.
This lesson was repeated at the Somme soon afterwards.
Verdun has taken on enormous significance in the memory of Germans and French, and the
events themselves were of a scale that was truly striking.
The German General Falkenhayn, who had taken over from General von Moltke at the start
of the war, had already started to rethink the approach towards the fighting of the war
as a result of the disastrous first encounters of the first years.
Falkenhayn thought in strategic terms that Britain was truly the decisive enemy.
If France, the main ally of Britain, could be knocked out of the war, then Britain, in
a sense, would have no choice but to make peace as well, and Germany would have won
a decisive victory.
His key challenge then was the question of how to knock France out of the war.
And the answer that he arrived at was by grinding down the French manpower reserves.
Falkenhayn's plans aimed, as he put it, to bleed the French army white.
If they could be lured into a battle, the French would have to commit their reserves
again and again, and eventually, by being drawn into a blood mill, would find themselves
at some point without reinforcements and unable to continue the fight.
To mark the decisive nature of this battle that he hoped for, Falkenhayn named this operation
in German Gericht.
The word means judgment.
Operation judgment focused on a historic fortress city in the disputed lands on the German and
French border.
This was the historic fortress city of Verdun, a fortress complex that had first been established
in the days of Louis XIV, the Sun King, but now had been built up into an enormous fortification
to forestall a renewed German invasion, such as been seen in the Franco-Prussian War of
the 1870s, and Verdun was considered to be almost untakable, almost invulnerable to enemy
attack.
Verdun itself was surrounded by 19 forts of the most modern fortification, and dominating
these other forts was a fort named Fort Duomo.
It was precisely because of both the military as well as symbolic significance of this supposedly
impregnable fortress complex that Falkenhayn chose to target Verdun above all.
The entire point of this operation was to create a salient.
The definition of a salient is a territory in a front line that juts out into enemy territory.
That's to say, essentially a peninsula of military territory that is confronted on three
sides by enemy forces.
The whole point, thus in other words, was to draw the French into a battle for the salient
of Verdun, a salient that the Germans didn't even need to actually take.
They could surround it almost entirely and then expect French defenders to keep pouring
in in order to make sure that the salient was not taken.
But Falkenhayn's observation that the point of this battle was not to capture Verdun,
but instead to stage a massive battle on this spot was on occasion either not understood
or forgotten by German commanders and in some sense changed the character of the battle
that he had at first planned.
On the first day of the Battle of Verdun, February 21st, 1916, a massive, huge bombardment
by German cannon began.
German guns fired a million shells that first day, dropping 20 tons of shells per acre.
The bombardments were enormous.
It's estimated, at least by one estimate, that some 60 million shells would fall on
Verdun in the course of the entire battle.
It was said that men could go mad under the impact of the long, long bombardments.
And then German forces moved forward.
On February 25th, German troops actually captured Fort Duomo in a striking and sudden raid.
As Falkenhayn had planned and anticipated, the French felt that they could not sacrifice
Verdun.
Instead, they prepared for a dogged and determined national defense of this symbolically significant
spot.
The man who was brought into command, the French forces, was General Philippe Petain.
Petain was brought in to lead the defense effort, and he was in some sense the ideal
man for this task.
Because where so many other French military leaders had become devoted disciples of the
cult of the offensive, Petain was almost alone in emphasizing the importance of the defensive
side, and having thought through some of the aspects of a defense that truly could be effective.
Petain understood that this experience of the defense of Verdun would have to be handled
in a way that maximally spared his soldiers.
Petain for this purpose set up a rotation system, which moved troops through the battle,
cycling them in and out, so that you would not have the same exhausted troops trying
to hold the territory for weeks on end.
It was estimated that soldiers would spend a maximum of two weeks in what came to be
called the hell of Verdun.
And if they were able to look forward to the end of this time, they knew that at the end
of that period, they would be cycled out, and relief would finally come.
It's estimated that some three-quarters of the entire French army was rotated through
this meat grinder of a battle, ensuring that many French soldiers had shared in the experience
of the Battle of Verdun.
From Paris itself, troops were moved out through the eastern railway station, the Gardel Est,
which still by the way to this very day bears under the name of the train station the destination
name of Verdun, marking this symbolically significant battle still held in memory.
They would then be moved up to Verdun, and they would enter into its hellish experience.
It was said afterwards that soldiers who moved away from the battle after having been relieved
had a particular stare, a particular abstraction, a particular lost look in their eyes that allowed
veterans of Verdun ever afterwards to identify one another, even without words.
The supply of Verdun, this salient, this peninsula of French territory, was ensured through a
heroic effort that took place along the Sacred Road, as it was called.
A thin road where 3,000 trucks rode in and rode out daily under constant fire, one every
14 seconds in order to provide the military and food supplies necessary for the troops.
Pétain, with his own firmness of character, rallied the French defenders, vowing in a
famous phrase, they shall not pass.
This battle itself, with its enormous expenditure of material and its horrific conditions, soon
fragmented into many smaller encounters, and it was in one of these in March that the young
officer by the name of Charles de Gaulle, who later in World War II had become a leader
of the French resistance, was captured by the Germans in this encounter.
The battle itself seemed to lose coherence, no longer were there clear trench lines, but
instead soldiers fought from foxholes, or moved forward by jumping from bomb crater
to bomb crater. In May of the year, Georges Robert Nivelle
replaced Pétain in charge of Verdun, and led the effort from there on in. The battle's
high point was over after June of 1916. In part, the Somme Offensive, which the British
were spearheading at this point, opening in July, drew off German resources from Verdun
and gave some relief. The battle itself, after months' duration, finally drew to a close
in November of 1916, as the French very proudly recaptured the forts that they had lost to
the Germans from October to December of 1916. And we might then ask, what was the outcome
of this experience? Over ten months of inconclusive combat, the casualties had been enormous.
It's estimated, and the numbers are still debated and still not entirely clear to this
very day, but we get at least a sense of magnitude, the casualties were 700,000 French and German
casualties, nearly even. It's estimated that the French, although this is a matter of debate
as well, that the French casualties were slightly higher than those of the German side. Of these
number of casualties, that's to say, men wounded as well as dead, it's estimated that
about 300,000, that's to say a third of a million nearly, were killed, which amounts
statistically to about one death for every minute of the Battle of Verdun. The Battle
of Verdun, which had been so carefully crafted and thought through at its inception, at least,
by Falkenhayn, the German general, was arguably the only offensive of the war where the offensive
side marginally took a smaller toll than the defensive side did. But in a larger sense,
Falkenhayn's gamble had failed. He had succeeded in bleeding the French army white, and the
French army indeed was exhausted as a result of this experience, but to a great extent,
so too was the German army in spite of its greater potential manpower reserves. The toll
for the French had been enormous, and thus it's obvious why this battle remains a touchstone
of French national identity and collective memory to this very day. About 10% of all
of the French war dead were from the Battle of Verdun, and throughout the war as a whole,
just summing up the entire losses that this implied, one out of every two Frenchmen of
the age between 20 and 30 years was killed, the loss of a generation. The French army's
offensive capacities were shattered as a result of the experience of the defense of Verdun,
and this experience, the failures of the battle and the defense of Verdun initially led to
changes in military leadership positions in France, and the experience of Verdun also
led to changes in military positions and leadership in Germany as well. On August 29th in 1916,
in Germany, General Hindenburg, the hero of the fighting on the Eastern Front that we'll
be talking about in a coming lecture, replaced Falkenhayn as the German commander-in-chief,
bringing with him his talented quartermaster general, Eric Ludendorff, and we'll be speaking
much more about these men who became war dictators of Germany in the years that followed.
In France, in December of 1916, General Nivelle, a new and confident officer, replaced Joff
as commander-in-chief of the army. In all of this experience, Peton's reputation had
soared. He came to be identified with a more humane and a more caring approach to the French
soldiers who had made such sacrifices in the defense of Verdun, and he was elevated to
the honored position of Marshal of France. It was a bitter irony yet in store in Peton's
own biography, because this man who came to be a great national hero of the French in
the war against the Germans later during World War II would head a collaborationist regime
that cooperated with the Nazis, betraying the earlier national honors that he had been
accorded. I'd like to say a word about the aftermath of the Battle of Verdun, because
even those who visit Verdun today are still struck by the amazing traces that remain in
the landscape itself, testifying to the elemental force of this battle of materiel. It's very
difficult to describe in words. It's almost something one has to actually see to take
aboard the landscape so many years afterwards of the battlefield, which remains to this
very day still cratered and pockmarked in really vivid and unnatural ways by the impact
of shell explosions. And indeed, very many shells still lie, not diffused, still active
many of them in this poisoned landscape. An estimated 12 million of such unexploded shells
still lies in the Verdun area. They're still being found, and hundreds of diffusers have
died over the decades afterwards. Parts of Verdun where villages once stood were never
rebuilt again, and trenches can still be seen in the area as well, along with tremendous
and extensive graves and monuments to the battle. The Battle of Verdun also had other
implications that carried on into the future. One of the French defenders of Verdun, André
Maginot, later became France's interwar minister of war between the World Wars. Named after
him was an extensive fortification line called the Maginot Line, which was intended to make
much more determined and rational the sort of defense that Maginot himself had lived
through during Verdun, but the hopes that were vested in this fortification line were
in vain as Hitler's armies would eventually simply overcome this obstacle. Verdun remains
to this very day a hallowed ground with visitors and school groups traveling to this area,
and indeed there are shrines that sum up its national and its human significance, shrines
like the famous Bayonet Trench and the legends that surround it that we'll be talking about
towards the end of our course when we address how the war itself was memorialized. In quick
succession, indeed before the Battle of Verdun had ended, the Battle of the Somme began.
The great offensive on the Somme had been long planned as a joint allied operation with
the French and the British cooperating together in an assault on the German lines. The defense
of Verdun ended up drawing off French forces that had been intended to be committed for
the Battle of Verdun, and this left the British to take the lead. This was a case where earlier
planning would play a fateful role now that the reality had changed. The territory that
had been chosen for the attack on the Somme was in fact chosen for a specific reason.
It was an area where the British and the French could cooperate together. That was its attraction,
that was the reason it had been chosen. In another sense, however, now that the French
were increasingly not able to participate in the measure that earlier had been promised,
this territory revealed itself as being in other ways quite unsuitable because the Germans
held the strategic heights and thus the attack was, in that sense, not as efficient as it
had been hoped for before. The British forces now took the lead under the command of Sir
Douglas Haig. The first day opened with disaster. After an intense bombardment lasting five
days of the German lines, which had been intended to cut the barbed wire and to destroy the
machine gun emplacements and the bunkers of German defenders, British troops were sent
forward on July 1st, 1916 against the German lines. The expectation of Haig and other commanders
was that a breakthrough and a fast advance would follow once the lines had been broken.
So British soldiers often carried about 70 pounds of equipment slowing their progress
as they moved forward against the German lines. The chalky ground of this area had allowed
the Germans, in fact, to dig far deeper fortifications and bunkers than might otherwise have been
the case, and machine gunners who had simply been lying in relative safety in these deep
bunkers now emerged to mow down the British as they moved forward in long lines. On that
first day of the Battle of the Somme, there were 60,000 British casualties, 20,000 of
them dead immediately. This was the greatest loss in one day of any army during the First
World War, and four months of such battle continued. Further assaults also failed, including
a quixotic cavalry charge which soon broke down in the cratered ground and before the
German guns. British tanks were put into use as well on September 15th, 1916, but they
weren't there in sufficient numbers to really create a decisive result. Overall, by November
of 1916, the British forces had won about 7 miles at the cost of 400,000 British casualties.
Throughout the battle as a whole, over one million casualties were counted for the British,
French, and the Germans. Sir Douglas Hague's reputation was battered by this battle. He's
remained an intensely controversial figure ever since, and soldiers referred to the Somme
in particular as Hague's great fowl-up. More bitter soldiers tended to use a stronger word,
also starting with F, for the great fowl-up. The next battle that we turn our attention
to came in the spring of 1917, the offensive on the Champagne. General Nevelle had planned
a great French-led offensive combining force and massive attack, and he promised great
and immediate results that were to follow. However, German countermeasures complicated
the planned offensive. In some sense, German tactical thinking in this regard got in ahead
of the Allied military planning. General Ludendorff strengthened the German trench lines and started
a systematic and quiet withdrawal of German forces about on the average 25 miles back
from the line that they had been occupying at this point, back to a systematically prepared
and far better fortified line of defenses about 25 miles back called the Siegfried line by
the Germans after a German mythic hero of the Sagas. The Allies called this the Hindenburg
line in February and March of 1917. This was not a retreat out of weakness, it was rather
a strategic withdrawal to far better fortified and held positions. In the process, the Germans
subjected the areas that they were about to give up to what is called scorched earth policies,
leaving them entirely devastated so they could be of no use to the Allies and so that their
advance would be hampered, leaving essentially a desert of destroyed villages, poisoned wells,
exploded bridges and destroyed roads, and in the process they deported some hundred thousand
civilians. Nonetheless, in spite of this unexpected withdrawal of the Germans, the Nevelle offensive
began with a battle of Arras on April 9th, 1917. Vimy Ridge was taken by Canadian troops
and the battle seemed to start well in this regard, but the French attack in the Champagne
region was a disaster which paradoxically was worsened by the extravagant expectations
that Nevelle had created of finally achieving by mass and violence of approach a breakthrough
at long last. As a result of these disappointments, in late April, mutinies broke out among the
French troops. Ordinary French soldiers refused to move up to the front and refused to attack.
They protested what they saw as the meaningless sacrifice of their lives for nothing. And
they used a very interesting phrase to describe what it was that they were doing. They called
themselves strikers, men who were striking in protest as how the war was being conducted.
And we're going to speak a lot more in a coming lecture when we talk about dissent about
these mutinies because they're very revealing in fact of the sentiments of ordinary soldiers
who had endured so long, had endured the battle of Verdun, had endured other encounters, but
now finally, as they put it, were going on strike. General Nevelle, whose reputation
was destroyed by these failures, was replaced as commander in chief by General Petain, the
hero of Verdun who had vowed that the Germans would not pass on May 15, 1917.
Petain now used some of the charisma, some of the image that had been built up around
him as a result of the defense of Verdun to restore order. He did so by a combination
of severe discipline on occasion, as well as the assurance that policies would change
and that French soldiers would not be sent to their deaths uselessly in renewed offensives
of this variety. An order was restored, the mutinies and the military strike were put
down, but nonetheless, very revealingly, it was clear that the French army's offensive
capacity, in order to mount huge offensives of the sort that had been attempted, finally
was spent.
The last of the titanic battles that we'd like to consider under the category of the
great battles of attrition is the third battle of Ypres, the very name the third battle suggests
just how much some of this ground was fought over again and again and again, that's known
especially to the British by the evocative name of Passchendaele after a village that
featured prominently in this battle. In late July of 1917, General Hague, even after the
failures of earlier offensive, now launched another British offensive in Flanders, the
third battle of Ypres. The hopes for the battle were heightened by the use of unprecedented
technological intensity in an event that was really quite striking. This was the quite
deliberate and careful and slow mining of a strategic area that the Germans had held,
the so-called Messine Ridge. British troops had undermined this ridge, which was a strategically
significant location, and had packed it full of explosives, a million tons in fact, in order
to prepare for a surprise explosion, a blowing up of this ridge in order to inaugurate the
attack. And this explosion of Messine Ridge took place on June 7th, 1917. The explosion
was of such intensity that it was felt in London, far, far away. But the results of
this initial breakthrough yielded only about two miles advance, and this turned out to be
while, nonetheless, a good omen of the possibility of breaking through not nearly what had been
hoped for as a result. In some sense, military planners themselves had been deceived by their
maps. The maps that's been argued by military historians deceptively showed promising positions,
but what was neglected was the quality of the ground, which would prove to be very wet
and muddy. And in fact, seas of mud are especially symbolic of the entire experience of
Passchendaele. That's not how General Hague saw it at first. He had high hopes of breaking
through into open Belgian territory, punching through the German lines, reaching the port
of Austin, and beginning an advance into Germany itself. The attack began on July 31st, 1917,
and rains that rained down in this period quickly turned the ground into, quite literally,
oceans of mud and wet. Tanks that were sent forward quite literally sank into this mud
and disappeared. The last attacks of this drawn out battle took place on November 6th, 1917,
and they at last reached the village of Passchendaele. The result of this battle was a British
gain of five miles. Some staff officers, who had been involved in the planning of the battle
itself, later bitterly repented the entire venture, which had cost the British 325,000
casualties. There's one anecdote in particular that to me sums up in a very bitter way the
regret and the illusions, the lack of understanding that some of these officers had shown, which
one of Hague's subordinates went to the front to see the battlefield after, in quotation
marks, the British victory. He went to the front and seeing the mud that trapped his
car as they drove forward into the areas that had been fought over, he actually with amazement
looked out over the muddy landscape and broke into tears and exclaimed, Good God, did we
really send men forward to fight in that? The outcomes of these battles were ambiguous.
What was clear was that they were synonymous with the senseless mass death of the Great
War and the search for other ways of breaking the deadlock, the stalemate would continue,
whether through technology, the opening of other fronts, gaining of other allies or subverting
the enemy in other ways, the fighting on other fronts will consider in our next lectures.
