Lecture 11 – The Southern Fronts
In this lecture we'll be examining what one might call the Southern Fronts, the battles
around the Mediterranean, the battles involving Turkey, Italy, and the Balkans. We'll examine
the factors that made victory, or a decisive victory, elusive in this theater of war as
well as on the other fronts. Turkish entry into the war expanded its scope. We'll discuss
the Allied landings in Gallipoli in 1915, which attempted to strategically revolutionize
the situation, but which were repulsed by the Turks in a campaign that involved a million
men on all sides. We'll examine the way in which Italy at first stayed out of the general
war following a policy of sacred egoism, as it was called by Italian politicians, and we'll
observe how secret diplomacy and promises of territorial gains finally would bring Italy
into the war on the Allied side as a result of the secret Treaty of London of 1915. We'll
examine the hybrid forms of warfare that evolved as a result, the alpine high altitude fighting
in the mountain ranges between Austria-Hungary and Italy, and the twelve battles of the Asonzo.
We'll examine how Germany and Austria-Hungary succeeded in overrunning Serbia and Romania,
and we'll finally take a closer look at an attempt to find a backdoor in terms of the Southern
Fronts, the 1915 Allied expedition to Salonica, Greece, and the reasons why it proved indecisive.
We'll begin by examining the widening of the war with Turkish entry. The war took on a southern
dimension by the addition of operations in the Ottoman Empire or Turkey, warfare in Italy,
and operations around the Mediterranean. Turkey joined the Central Powers by a secret Treaty
of August 2nd 1914, but was slower to join the active fighting. The Young Turk movement, the
nationalist movement for inner renewal that had gained steam in the Empire and had controlled it
since 1909, led by Enver Pasha, had sympathized with Germany and increasingly come under the
influence of German advisors and German politicians. The entry of Turkey into the war came when two
German battleships, which were in essence given to the Turkish Navy and their soldiers changed out
for German sailors, replacing their uniforms with Turkish ones and hoisting the Turkish flag,
when these two battleships, the Göben and the Breslau, moved into the Black Sea and began
shelling the Russian port of Odessa in October 1914. The result confused the Allies, who still
thought that diplomatically they might have a chance to keep the Ottoman Empire out of the war,
but on November of 1914 the Allies too declared war on Turkey. As a result, operations would now
spread around the territories of the Turkish Empire in the Mediterranean and in the Middle East.
A key place or geopolitical location, which in this regard took on tremendous importance,
was the Dardanelles. The Dardanelles represents essentially where one might say Asia and Europe
meet. They are the straits which join the Black Sea and the Mediterranean, and as such they are a
crucial strategic location, especially for the Russians, because for the Russians this was also a
channel of trade. A third of Russian exports went through the Dardanelles and the Dardanelles had
been a long-standing coveted place that the Russian policymakers over generations had
sought to control so that they might have this crucial strategic location in their own control.
In the context of this renewed war effort, Great Britain, which over generations had sought to
frustrate Russian ambitions to seize the Dardanelles, now in essence discarded this earlier constant
aim of its diplomacy and promised Russia the Dardanelles as a gain of the war if it came to
a successful conclusion. The stakes were thus high and growing higher. Turkey, for its part,
launched an attack on the Russian Empire in the Caucasus mountain range. Some Turkish politicians,
especially the nationalistic young Turks, envisioned as a result of victory in this war and the defeat
of the Russian Empire, the possibility of carving out a great new empire that might replace the
rickety Ottoman Empire, a new empire on a national basis. It would be what they called a Panterranean
Empire, meaning a Pan-Turkish Empire uniting all of the different speakers of Turkic languages
and extending far into territories at that point owned by the Russian Empire in Central Asia,
a vast new basis of a powerful state. Nonetheless, their ambitions were frustrated because the Turkish
winter campaign of 1914 to 1915 into the Caucasus mountain ranges and their snowy valleys and peaks
turned into a huge disaster. Untold numbers of Turkish soldiers froze to death as a result of
poor provisioning and communications and it's estimated that only 13 percent of the attacking
force survived this assault. In the wake of this disaster, in the spring of 1915, Russian forces
now moved over into the attack and moved down from the Caucasus into the territories of the
Turkish Empire into the Anatolian lands. There, in a turn of events that would be, as it turns out,
quite significant later, they were welcomed by some ethnic minorities in these areas owned by
the Ottoman Empire as liberators. Some of these groups were Armenians. The Armenians are an ethnic
group different from the Turks. They were also Christian in background and some felt that Russian
rule would finally allow them a freer exercise of their religion and their culture. Turkish forces
also opened another front by making attempts to attack the Suez Canal, which tremendously worried
the British forces in Egypt. The Suez Canal, we need to recall, was essentially a lifeline for
the British Empire to connect to its possession, the jewel in the crown, the Indian lands through
the Suez Canal. A final attempt at opening of a new ideological front, one might even say a religious
front, came on November 14 when the Turkish Sultan, in his capacity as the Caliph, as the protector,
the religious protector of the holy city of Mecca and protector of Muslims, declared holy war or
jihad. He'd announced that it was the duty of all Muslims around the world to fight against the
imperialist powers of Britain, France and Russia, and his hope was to set ablaze the many Muslim
populations under British rule in India and Egypt, those under French rule in Africa and Northern
Africa and in Central Asia against Russian rule. The reality was that though this message was full
of fire and of passion, it had very little resonance in fact, but it showed that many
different factors were at play in this conflict. We need to turn now to a tremendously riveting
example of an expedition which proceeded with high hopes, could certainly have made
an enormous difference in the conflict as a whole, but which ended in a disaster,
and this is the famous Gallipoli campaign. The Gallipoli campaign proceeded as a result of
a tremendous ambition. Now that Ottoman Turkey had entered the war and the gardenels were closed
as a result, communication with Russia had become more difficult. It was still possible to communicate
through the northern sea lanes, but it had become far harder to keep up communications and trade.
To relieve Russia in this more difficult position, the western allies, the British and the French,
crafted plans that would knock Ottoman Turkey out of the war, seize the gardenels and perhaps
even open up the possibility of a backdoor to fight the central powers, Germany and Austria-Hungary,
by invading through the Balkans and perhaps invading Austria-Hungary, carrying the war,
in other words, right into the heart of enemy territory. The key to all of this was to gain a
foothold close to the gardenels, and thus the plan began with the notion of a landing in Gallipoli,
the peninsula at the tip of the Dardanelles Straits. Once a landing had been achieved there,
it was hoped that allied armies might be able to then move up to invade the rest of Turkish
territory, occupy the capital of Constantinople to the northeast, and be in a position to
strategically change the outcome of the war. This plan was championed on the part of both the British
and the French by those people who were called Easterners. Those who in the debate about how
best to fight the war were convinced that there were other options in addition to slugging it out
on the western front, and they proposed the attack upon Gallipoli, the opening up of the
Dardanelles, the seizure of this territory as perhaps the decisive key to victory in the war.
Among those champions was a man who would later play a very important role in world history,
the British First Lord of the Admiralty, Winston Churchill. The Gallipoli plan might very well,
if it had succeeded in one of these great what-ifs, one of the hypotheticals of the conflict,
might very well have changed the outcome of this conflict, and indeed military historians who admire
the sort of breadth of vision and ambition that the Gallipoli plan represented have sometimes called
the Gallipoli campaign the only true strategic idea of the war, the only truly revolutionary
notion that might have changed its outcome. Unfortunately, bold as the plan was, and high
as the stakes were, the practice fell far short. Efforts to force the straits by battleships
failed, and in fact these first attacks ended up alerting Turkish forces that something larger
was coming. The element of surprise was lost. Turkish forces which earlier had not been in
force in some of the areas that might have formed the target for a successful landing
were now alerted to the fact that an attack was coming. They began to fortify, to build trenches,
and to mass in great numbers to repel an assault that they now understood was coming.
They did so under the leadership of Otto Liman von Sanders, the German commander of a Turkish army
which was defending Gallipoli. The major landing, which unfortunately now had been,
advance warning had been given of it to the Turks, the major landing began on April 25th,
1915. French and British forces by sea mounted an invasion and landed at Cape Helis and Australian
and New Zealand troops, popularly known as ANZAC units, landed at ANZAC Cove. They landed successfully,
but due to confused orders and just the confusion of the situation itself, a lack of a sense of
urgency on the part of commanders, we now see with perfect hindsight, an initial window of opportunity
to turn these landings into expanded beach heads and to really secure a position, this opportunity
was squandered. The Allied forces now discovered that Turkish troops were shooting down at them
from positions atop the cliffs where they had dug in, and the Allied forces faced the obvious
situation of having no alternative but to dig in themselves to create trenches and to fight it out.
In a bizarre set of circumstances, a bizarre set of events, the result was that here at Gallipoli
one very nearly recreated the stasis, the deadlock, the trench warfare of the western front,
but in hot, miserable conditions. Among the Turkish troops who were organizing the defense
atop the cliffs and throwing back repeated attempts by the Allies to take the heights
was a young officer, a young man by the name of Mustafa Kemal, who later under the name of Ataturk
would become the leader of a new revived nationalist Turkey that emerged after the
First World War out of the ruins of the Ottoman Empire was leading this defense.
He too was a determined young Turk and he was doing his part in the national defense.
The entire dynamics of the long drawn out campaign, which left Allied forces essentially
stranded at their initial beach heads, unable to expand them, unable to advance, once again
provided a demonstration, if such a demonstration was needed, of the advantages of the defensive side
that we've already talked about in an earlier lecture on the dynamics of the western front.
The British commander of this operation, Sir Ian Hamilton, renewed assaults in August of 1915
and new landings took place at Suvla Bay to the north of the initial landing spots,
but these two did not succeed and news of the disaster started to filter back to Britain.
When it did so, Hamilton was removed and through December troops were withdrawn,
quietly and in secret. Through subterfuge, through successful attempts to fool the Turkish forces
into thinking that the Allied troops were still there in strength, the evacuation operation
in such complete contrast to the landings and the invasion itself was remarkably successful
and was finished by January 9th, 1916. But what of the outcome? What of the results that
followed upon such ambitions for what this operation was supposed to bring? It's estimated
that some 200,000 Allied men died in this futile expedition. The fighting had been of an enormous
scale reflecting the stakes. It had involved a million men on both sides and the question now
arose who was to blame? One man in particular who on the British side was blamed for having supported
this venture to begin with was Winston Churchill. He was disgraced, he was blamed for this misadventure,
having supported it to begin with and lost his position. Later, during the Second World War,
he would go on to become the determined leader of the British war effort in the Second World War,
but it would take his political career a long time to recover from this fatal association
with the disaster of the invasion of Gallipoli. The Anzac troops, the Australian and New Zealand
forces who had been shipped to participate in this fighting had suffered enormous losses,
and this was but of a peace with their tremendous sacrifices in the war as a whole.
During the war, they took its estimated 62% casualties. The Gallipoli disaster, however,
took on a special significance in the collective memory of Australians as well as New Zealanders
of their participation in the First World War. The Gallipoli disaster came to be considered
the founding experience of an independent Australian identity and New Zealand identity as well.
The notion was that in this act of sacrifice, Australians and New Zealanders had shown themselves
to be loyal sons of empire, yes, but also sticking together as comrades and as friends
had revealed themselves to already be new nations that had a right to independence and a separate
identity as well. Anzac Day, April 25th of every year, is still celebrated as a marker of precisely
this searing experience in Australia. What this failure also made clear was that ultimately,
this had not proved to be the backdoor, the decisive strategic outcome, the failure made
clear the decision would have to be reached elsewhere, probably on the western front.
We want to pursue now events happening further west in the Mediterranean,
and that is Italian participation in the war. When the First World War had broken out, Italy
had announced that it was not bound to its obligations to the central powers as a result
of the earlier triple alliance that it had participated in, and instead, Prime Minister
Antonio Salandra insisted that Italy would follow what he called sacred egoism,
a defense of its own interests, and a waiting to see which side it might ultimately make most
sense to adhere to. What resulted was perhaps a not very noble performance as a bidding war
grew up on both sides, by the central powers, that's to say Germany and Austria-Hungary,
and by the Allies, France, Great Britain and Russia, for the prize of Italian participation
or neutrality. In this auction for Italian participation, the Allies ultimately were
the winners, and the reason for this in retrospect was quite obvious. On the one hand, precisely
because the Italians coveted territory which was held by Austria-Hungary, Austria-Hungary
and Germany were not in a position to offer nearly as much or weren't willing to offer
nearly as much as the Allies could. The Allies were in this position of being able to promise
enemy territory at the expense of their foes, and thus could be far more expansive, far more
generous, and ultimately won this competition. But the diplomacy had proceeded in secret,
precisely I think because so many diplomats felt that the terms, if they became public, would just
seem unseemly to too many people. The result was the signing of the secret Treaty of London
between the Allies and Italy. This was signed on April 26, 1915, and the promises, while not
very noble or idealistic, were extensive. Italy was promised ethnically Italian areas, those
places that were considered by Italian nationalists to be irredenta, the unredeemed ethnic territories
where Italian speakers lived that were still under Austro-Hungarian rule in Trentino and Trieste,
but also larger holdings of mixed population where fewer Italians might live, larger gains in Tyrol,
in the mountainous areas, and the Dalmatian coast, and perhaps even new, generous, colonial gains
in places like Asia Minor currently held by the Ottoman Empire. Many of these promises profess
the more exalted Allied war aims of fighting for civilization and for the right of small nations
that we'll be discussing in a later lecture about war aims, but these secret promises would come
back to haunt the Allies. They would later be a liability in public relations terms when the
terms became clear. Nonetheless, with these new gains, Italy now prepared to enter into the war.
On May 23, 1915, Italy declared war on Austria-Hungary. Italian nationalists and figures who praised war
like the Romantic poet Gabriel de Nuncio and futurist artists who had celebrated war as a form of
necessary social hygiene and adventure all celebrated this arrival at last of Italian
participation. Not all Italians felt so, but certainly these nationalists celebrated what
one might call a delayed August madness. The war experience of Italians that soon followed
probably quell some of that celebration. Though Italian participation was thought to be a prize
by the Allies who had bid so much for it, Italy in fact would soon discover that its fortunes in
the war were not nearly so positive, and it would soon require Allied assistance. The Italian commander
Count Luigi Cadorna soon threw a million men into battle against Austria-Hungary on two fronts,
toward the Alpine areas bordering Italy in the north, Trentino and towards Trieste across the
Isonzo River to the east. In eleven battles, eleven battles on one spot on the Isonzo River,
Italian forces attacked again and again and again, and yet were unable to break through enemy trenches.
In 1916, the Italians took half a million casualties. A new kind of fighting also evolved
in the Alps, and one of the themes of our course is the shock of the new, and in this case this
high altitude fighting represented novelty in military history. Guns and artillery had to
be hauled up by pulleys to high vantage points dominating Alpine vistas. In this battle, glaciers
could be turned into fortifications, and in fact fighting took place on glaciers. Trenches and
tunnels were built through the ice of glaciers in what came to be called by Italian forces
the white war up in the snowy Alps, a war that for all of its modernity nonetheless could take
primitive forms. When rifles froze, soldiers would be reduced to throwing rocks at one another
in this high Alpine frozen fighting. The Italian war effort took most definitely a turn for the
worse with a great disaster, the defeat at Caporetto. In fall of 1917, German troops had been
moved in to reinforce and help the Austro-Hungarians, something that was happening with increasing
frequency as the Austro-Hungarian war effort faltered. Among those special troops who were
moved in to help was a soldier who would later become a famous commander in World War II,
Erwin Rummel, who had become famous as the Desert Fox of the German-African forces in World War II.
He and other German troops together with the Austro-Hungarians attacked the Italian lines,
and in the Battle of Caporetto in October of 1917, often called the 12th battle of the Asonzo,
the Italian lines broke. A massive retreat set in, and it was only halted at last some distance away
at the Piave River north of Venice. Entire Italian units simply surrendered. The Italians lost half
a million casualties and a quarter million Italian prisoners were taken, testifying to a final breaking
of morale. Ernest Hemingway's famous novel A Farewell to Arms talks precisely about this
retreat, even though Hemingway himself had not experienced that he arrived in the area six months
later, it was very clear that the trauma of this experience was still present at the time.
The retreat was halted as Italian forces finally regrouped 90 miles west of their initial positions
at the Piave River to stand and defend the beautiful city of Venice. After this defeat,
General Cadorna was replaced as commander-in-chief by General Armando Díaz, who didn't attempt any
more foolhardy offensives and instead stood, and the crisis passed. Meanwhile, matters were
turning worse, it seemed, for the Allied forces in other locations in the Balkans. Bulgaria had
joined the central powers on September 6, 1915, in part because of promises made to it by Germany
and Austria-Hungary of winning Serbian territory. The conquest of Serbia would not only finally
settle the score that the Austro-Hungarians had initiated the conflict with, but also would ensure
lines of communication open with the Turkish ally of the central powers. In the winter of 1915,
German, Austro-Hungarian, and Bulgarian armies finally overran Serbia in the course of two months.
The capital Belgrade was captured in January of 1916. The central powers also invaded Montenegro
and moved into Albania. An allied expedition which tried to come to the aid of Serbia
found itself trapped in Salonica in Greece. In a dramatic and costly retreat, what's still
remembered by Serbians as the Great Retreat, the Serbian army and the Serbian government
and the Serbian king marched across the Albanian mountains through the harsh terrain and attacked
by local forces finally reaching the Adriatic Sea where they were evacuated by allied navies.
It's estimated that in this horrendous retreat Serbia lost tremendous casualties and in the
campaign as a whole it lost the sixth of its population. Prematurely impressed by Russian
successes in the Brusilov Offensive that we had mentioned in our previous lecture on the Eastern
Front, Romania had, as it turns out with remarkably bad timing, entered the war on the allied side
in August of 1916, hoping that it might gain territory held by Austria-Hungary in Transylvania,
in particular, where Romanians lived as a minority. Romania itself, however, rather than gaining
these contested territories, found itself invaded a week later by the central powers.
By December of 1916, the central powers with General Falkenhayn, who earlier had commanded
the entire German war effort and who now had been demoted to a regional command after General
Hindenburg and Ludendorff had achieved the supreme command in Germany as a whole, vindicated his
military talents by helping in the conquest of Romania. Romanian oil and agricultural resources
now fell to the central powers and in terms of economic warfare this turned out to be a
significant gain. This was a case also where the action of secret agents turned out to be of
importance as well because British secret agents set about sabotaging the oil fields of Romania
immediately before they fell into the hands of the central powers. They set the oil fields on fire
and the result was that at least some of these natural resources were lost for the German forces.
Finally, we turn to the disappointment of Salonica. The Allies had sought to aid Serbia in its
embattled position by sending in a military force through neutral Greece. Notice, please, the irony
of this situation. Britain and France, among their war aims, had denounced German violation of
Belgian neutrality. In this case, though they weren't explicit about it and tried to veil it,
another neutral country was finding its neutrality infringed upon. Allied forces were moved to Greece
by October of 1915, something that was quite controversial within Greece and Greek politics
itself. The Greek Prime Minister, Eleuterios Venetselos, cooperated with the Allies in this
venture, but because of the frustration and the displeasure of his king, was soon deposed.
Venetselos, however, even after he was removed as Prime Minister, gathered opposition forces
around himself and set up a rival government opposed to King Constantine, who was more pro-German,
who was finally forced to abdicate as a result of this pressure. As a result of this tremendously
complicated maneuvering of internal politics within Greece and Allied pressure from the outside,
including something that many Greeks really resented, an Allied blockade of Greece to bring it
to its senses from their political perspective. At long last, Greece joined the Allies as a power,
though not very enthusiastically, in June of 1917. However, even as forces had been poured into
Salonica in preparation for a mission to relieve Serbia, the results were disappointing. These
forces were unable to break through the Bulgarian lines to the north that now were making common
cause with essential powers. And the result was that even though many forces had been poured into
Salonica in order to aid this Balkan expedition, the result was that half a million Allied soldiers
now found themselves trapped, idle, without a job, without an immediate military use.
The Germans felt that Salonica was a grand joke, and they derisively called Salonica in effect
the largest internment camp that the Central Powers had. The result was that this promise,
this lure of finding a way to open another front that might have plunged into the Central Powers
from below from what Winston Churchill would later call the soft underbelly of Europe
in the Southern Front had been frustrated. The decision would have to come elsewhere,
and in part that decision would come through a clearer articulation of what was at stake of the
war in terms of war aims that we'll be discussing in our next lecture.
