Lecture 12 War Ames and Occupations
In this lecture, we'll be examining war aims and the experience of occupation.
And it might be best to start with just a brief explanation of why it makes sense
to view these two larger themes in conjunction, together with one another.
Well, in short, war aims were often about occupation,
whether wanting to see one's own national soil freed of foreign occupation
or the coveting of territory that was seen as necessary for national sovereignty on the other hand.
We might ask, in particular, why it is that it would be appropriate in this lecture
to talk about war aims when we've already been discussing a considerable narrative
of the history of the war itself.
And the short answer to this is that the war aims themselves changed over time.
And it's truly fascinating to observe precisely the dynamics by which those war aims changed
in response to the needs of public relations,
as it became ever more important to explain to a public why it was that such sacrifices were necessary
and how the pressure of events themselves could alter war aims as well.
This lecture first discusses the historical debates concerning the war aims of the combatant powers.
What goals did the allies and central powers pursue from the outset of the war
and how did those goals change and evolve during the course of the conflict?
Very often, occupations were involved precisely because the experience of occupation could shape war aims
and thus will next turn to examine the experience of foreign military occupation,
how it affected civilian populations, how it included forced labor, deportations,
attempts at ethnic manipulation, and often very harsh economic exploitation.
This lecture will survey the brief Russian occupation of German territory of East Prussia
and Austro-Hungarian Galicia at the start of the war
and then the much longer German control of occupied Belgium and northern France,
a little more detail added about the atrocities which accompanied their initial seizure,
and the central powers rule over Eastern Europe, in Poland, the Baltic region, Romania, and Serbia.
Prolonged warfare in particular demanded that the warring powers articulate their war aims
and the purpose of what it was that populations were fighting for
in a way that went beyond the initial rallying to a war of self-defense.
In our discussion in this course about meanings assigned to the war,
we'll recall that the notion of fighting for the defense of the fatherland or of one's home country
had been the initial universal motivator at the start of the war in 1914,
but as the war dragged on, it would increasingly be necessary to somehow give voice to larger purposes,
larger causes, some transcendent meaning that would justify the horrors of the war as they continued.
Even among allies, however, even among those who were fighting side by side,
either in the central powers or the allied powers, individual war aims might not always correspond,
even among friendly countries, and they could threaten the cohesion and the unity of a warring side.
In the second case, as we'll see in today's lecture, the war aims could also change under the pressure of circumstances
or a dynamic process that continued as the war itself went along that we'll see operating almost biologic of its own.
Let's start by examining the war aims of the allied powers and then later turn to those of the central powers.
The allied powers had, from the very start, committed themselves to a common agenda.
It would still have to be fleshed out, still have to be set down in detail,
but from the very beginning, they committed themselves to a common cause.
The Treaty of London of September 1914, not to be confused with the secret Treaty of London which brought Italy into the war later,
but the September 1914 Treaty of London right at the start of the war committed the allies, France, Russia and Britain,
not to sign a separate peace with the central powers.
They would all work towards and fight towards that peace and would dictate it together,
rather than making a separate peace which eventually defeated Russia finds itself forced to do.
The individual war aims of these countries were different, even though they might correspond in the larger perspective.
The French war aims were seen as very basic and existential.
France had been invaded.
France had been invaded by Germany.
Germany was to be expelled from French territory.
Beyond this, the long dream of regaining the lost provinces of Alsace and Lorraine,
which had been taken from a defeated France by Germany after 1871, would at long last be regained.
They would return to France.
And precisely because the treacherous attack of 1914 had revealed French vulnerabilities,
it was the essential French war aims ran that a future Germany should be weakened,
somehow weakened to the point where it could not again threaten France as it had in two wars in quick succession.
French war aims also came to envision colonial gains in Africa or the Middle East at the expense of Ottoman Turkey.
So there were other larger territorial and geopolitical issues involved,
but in the French case it was above all the war of national defense and the regaining of national territory that took priority.
Russian war aims were distinct.
They included plans for an expanded Russian Empire.
Plans for an expanded Poland.
Poland had been divided up among three empires,
Prussia and Austria and Russia at the end of the 18th century.
So Poland, which had been wiped off the map, had been divided up.
The war aim of Russia was now to reunite this lost unity, not out of solicitousness for Polish independence, far from it,
but instead to reunite this unit at the expense of Germany and Austria-Hungary, who would lose their Polish provinces.
Instead it would all come under Russian control and Russia itself would be expanded as an empire.
And then there was the fulfillment of a long-standing dream that we've already mentioned in our previous lecture,
the long-standing ambition of controlling the Dardanelles,
the straits that allow access between the Black Sea and the Mediterranean,
essential for Russian trade as well as the projection of military power,
the control as well of the great capital of Constantinople with all of its imperial associations.
British war aims were different.
British war aims centered on the restoration of the balance of power on the continent.
British politicians were well aware of what it would mean if Imperial Germany crushed France and retained Belgium,
Germany would now be a hegemon on the continent and was sure to threaten Britain in a geopolitical way that wouldn't have been possible before.
The restoration of the balance of power on the continent, however, while a very realistic geopolitical goal,
was hardly the sort of thing that would set hearts aflame.
And thus this particular goal of the achieving of the balance of power or restoration of the balance of power
was couched in more idealistic and liberal terms.
The slogans went up of a defense of international law,
a defense of the neutrality and the rights of small nations like Belgium.
This was a way of rephrasing, though more idealistically, the concept of restoring a balance of power.
A small nation like Belgium across the English Channel represented security for Britain.
If those territories instead were under the control of a great and aggressive power like Imperial Germany, this would represent a threat.
Britain also not only pursued this long-standing diplomatic goal of ensuring a balance of power on the continent,
Great Britain had functioned as a balancer of the balance of power in centuries previous,
it also pursued another traditional strategy of British politics.
The aim was to not only restore the European balance of power,
but perhaps also gain colonies or an aggrandizement of Imperial territory on the peripheries of this conflict as well.
A traditional long-standing aim.
We've mentioned already in a previous lecture, Italy's pursuit of its war aims.
These had been defined by its policy of sacred egoism that kept it out of the war at first.
And then the secret treaty of London of 1915 had outlined Italy's demands for territory at the expense of Austria-Hungary
along the Adriatic and ambitious expanded colonial holdings in Asia Minor as well.
Very clearly the forces of imperialism that had reigned in the latter part of the 19th century were alive and well.
Let's turn now to an examination of the goals of the central powers by contrast.
As Germany increasingly dominated the unequal partnership of the central powers,
as it increasingly was the dominant in the pair of Germany and Austria-Hungary, its war aims took priority.
The war aims of Austria-Hungary by contrast were at times quite vague, contradictory,
and increasingly they became more and more basic, simply surviving as a state.
This became increasingly the overriding goal.
Now, certainly Austria-Hungary had entered the war with the determination to settle accounts with Serbia.
Serbia was to be reduced in power and in terms of public relations, it was to be demonstrated by Austro-Hungarian victory
that Austria-Hungary as an empire, as a state, as a, as a Habsburg dynasty was certainly still a going concern.
But beyond this, things became very problematic.
Did Austria-Hungary want more territory?
Did it want, for instance, to include or annex or occupy Serbia itself and incorporate it into its empire?
On the contrary, annexations or occupations and enlargement of imperial territory, in fact, were intensely problematic.
Because including more people with more ethnic diversity in what already was a tremendously complex and diverse empire
of 12 major ethnic groups would simply complicate matters further and perhaps make the empire finally unworkable politically.
In particular, in the Austro-Hungarian partnership, the Hungarians as a ruling elite in particular resisted
any addition of other peoples, in particular Slavic peoples, to an expanded empire
as they felt that this would only dilute their own share of power and would endanger the empire as a whole.
If Austria-Hungary's war aims thus were ambiguous and uncertain and increasingly basic, reduced to just surviving in some fashion,
Germany's war aims were quite expansive.
Germany's war aims included significant gains in Western and Eastern Europe and increasingly questions turned on how expansive,
just how large should these gains be.
In particular, historians have spent a lot of time debating, ever since the Fisher debate of the 1960s that we had outlined
in an earlier lecture about the causes of the First World War, just how extensive those war aims were.
Historians have focused their debate on a document, the so-called September program of 1914,
which was outlined by Chancellor Beitmann-Holweg of Germany, which set out initial war aims.
These essentially dealt with security and expanded borders for Germany in the West and in the East.
Historians have spent a lot of time debating precisely whether this was intended as a thought experiment of what might be possible
or whether these were minimal demands which would later grow
or whether this was an attempt to strike a compromise between different political factions.
Ultimately, however, German war aims were elaborated and in later years grew in size and scope.
In Eastern Europe, Poland was to come under German control with a border strip
that was to be carved from this territory to give Germany strategic security as a buffer zone in essence.
This, to many historians, struck a very ominous note because that border strip was to be emptied
of its Polish and Jewish populations who were to be expelled in order to provide an empty area
for German settlement and ethnic redrawing of borders.
In some sense, this was a, one could say, a beginning of an extremely tragic trend in the 20th century
of the wholesale movement and expulsion of peoples.
Russia itself was to be politically weakened and territorially pushed back in Eastern Europe,
maybe even pushed back out of Eastern Europe.
The annexationist plans of the most rabid German nationalists also called for control over the Baltic countries
that belonged to the Tsarist Empire at this point, Lithuania, Latvia, and Estonia.
The latter, too, had ruling classes that were ethnically German and thus it was hoped
might more readily come under German control.
In Western Europe, nationalist annexationists demanded a whole shopping list of territories,
Luxembourg, territory in Belgium, northern France, industrial areas, coal mines,
all of which it was announced was necessary strategically.
In some cases, some of these annexations were already thinking about the next war.
An important concept in German war aims, as they were articulated, as they were debated and thought about,
was the notion of constructing a unit called Mitteläuropa, or Central Europe, around Germany.
Mitteläuropa, or Central Europe, would be, in essence, a continental economic union
dominated economically and politically by a powerful Germany at its center.
Now there are those commentators with a wicked sense of humor who like to suggest that the European Union today
could be described in very similar terms, but it's obvious that Prussian militarism
gave a very distinctive flavor to this particular plan for German domination of Europe.
The British naval blockade of Germany that was starting to bite and to threaten to strangle
Germany's modern economy in strategic terms, that we'll talk more about in a later lecture,
gave added appeal to the notion of Germany becoming the center of a free trade area,
an integrated economic area that would allow it to be self-sufficient.
The war aims of some German nationalists and some military figures went beyond this as well,
to include expanded colonial gains as well.
Gains in Africa, where it was suggested that, for the purposes of symmetry perhaps,
one could establish a Middle Africa, a Central Africa under German control,
as a counterpart to the domination of the European continent, too.
In some sense, the war aims were seen as a chance to make up for the emissions of the pre-war years,
the way in which Germany had been left out of the scramble of colonies might now be made good
by energetic policy in the present.
The Fisher debate among historians from the 1960s that we described in an earlier lecture
was in part so explosive, in part so prone to great passions on the part of those who were engaged in the debate,
in part because Fisher suggested that there were long-range continuities revealed in German war aims.
Fritz Fisher had argued that there was a continuity of German war aims from World War I to World War II.
He argued that there were suggestive linkages between the aims of World War I to those later espoused
by the radical racist Nazis, and this was very clearly a significant historical assertion.
However, within the German government itself at the time, it was clear that these debates
that took place over war aims were just that. They were debates. There was no one monolithic opinion.
In fact, the German government itself worried that far too open discussion of war aims,
and especially the extremist war aims of ultra-nationalists, might very well represent a social danger.
The presenting of Germany as fighting a war no longer of defense, but of expansive territorial gains
might very well start to break down the Burgfrieden, the internal truce that had played such an important role
in cementing German determination back in 1914, and attempts were made in the first years of the war
to silence or even to censor debate over war aims.
A crucial dynamic that we'll be examining later in the course as well is how war aims could evolve and change.
One example of this was the way in which the British and the French, in part to encourage their Russian ally
who had experienced such setbacks in the first years of the war, the British and the French agreed in March of 1915
to Russian demands for Constantinople and the Dardanelles.
And especially in the case of traditional British diplomacy, this represented really an apocal shift,
a truly profound change in traditional diplomatic patterns and conventions the British as a sea power
had long resisted any such control of the Dardanelles and now, under the pressure of war,
under the pressure of the demands of the moment, changed this long-standing tradition.
Another example of how the pressure of war itself might change war aims came with the central powers
and the question of what future lay ahead for Poland.
Germany and Austria-Hungary could not decide among themselves readily on this question.
The Germans already were articulating the notion of a German-controlled Poland.
Austria-Hungary suggested that since they already had Poles, they might very well be able to incorporate more of them
into a new unit within the Austro-Hungarian Empire.
At the same time, there were conservatives, especially in Germany, who worried that Poland
should simply not be incorporated into an expanded German Empire and thus dilute the purity
or the homogeneity of the German imperial population, but instead should simply be given back to Russia,
wholesale, in order to not even have to deal with this problem of multi-ethnic populations.
Under the pressure of war, however, a new plan was put into action.
Some German policymakers would urge that Poles could be one for the side of the central powers
to fight as allies or subordinates, something that we'll explore in a moment, a little bit further.
And then finally, in a fascinating and perverse process, one could see how some German annexationists,
even as the war continued, and in some cases recognized that we started to turn against Germany,
some German annexationists would actually increase their demands rather than scaling them back,
because they argued that precisely the fact that the war was not going well or was not being won
conclusively proved the need for larger gains once the war was brought to a successful conclusion.
Almost by an internal logic that had little to do with rationality anymore,
war aims could grow more expansive precisely as the passions of war increased.
Let's move to a consideration of occupations as these figured off and among war aims.
In general, occupations of enemy territory increasingly brought home total war as a lived reality to civilian populations.
In occupation, civilians were exposed to mistreatment, deportation, forced labor, atrocities,
and other trends that would intensify in the next total war, World War II.
At the same time, in longer occupations, complex forms of social interaction or coexistence
could also grow up between occupiers and occupied, in some cases including what later was called collaboration.
We'll start with the brief Russian occupations of territory of the Central Powers.
The brief Russian occupation of East Prussia in 1914 to 1915 traumatized the population of Germany
and was marked by some sporadic brutalities.
The Russian occupation of the territory of Galicia, owned by the Austro-Hungarian Empire from 1914 to 1915,
actually saw pogroms against Jews and the deportations of civilians as Russian authorities pursued larger plans
for after the war incorporating this area into the Russian Empire.
In both of these cases, as Russian forces withdrew, scorched earth policies in retreat would take a further toll.
A truly classic case of occupation came in occupied Belgium under German control.
The initial invasion of Belgium was marked by German atrocities that we have mentioned in earlier lecture.
The fear of these events and later brutality and harshness of occupation
led some 800,000 Belgians to flee their homeland and to live for the rest of the war as refugees
or displaced persons in France, Britain, or Holland.
The new measures, some of them very harsh, that the occupiers took started with the necessity of cordoning off the area
so that such escape no longer became possible.
An electrified fence was set up, which in uncanny ways almost anticipates the Berlin Wall later in the century.
This electrified border represented current of 2000 volts surging across wires on the border between Belgium and Holland
and more than 2000 people died trying to cross it out of desperation in the course of the war.
Economic exploitation through requisitions of material and forced labor of Belgians was also intense.
German attempts to manipulate and to divide the society by splitting into Flemish or Wallonian segments
of Belgian society breaking along language lines failed.
Occupied France represented another area of occupation in the West.
German atrocities there had also taken place at the start of the invasion of 1914 and had established a pattern of brutality.
Ten French departments, as these regions were called, fell under German control.
Under an occupation that was similar to that of Belgium in terms of its intensity and exploitation,
the French under German occupation suffered what one might call a double agony,
foreign rule and isolation from their own home country of which they couldn't receive news or communicate with readily.
Eastern Europe under the Central Powers was also an important area of military occupation.
Poles living under three empires at the start of the war, Austria, Hungary, Germany and Russia,
found themselves, at the start of the war, forced to fight on opposite sides.
Consider the agony of thinking that one's ethnic cousins might very well be across the front lines shooting at one another.
It's estimated that one and a half million Poles served in all the different armies of Eastern Europe.
The Congress of Poland had been accompanied by the destruction of towns and civilian centers of Kaliś and Częstochowa.
One under occupation had divided into two governments, one under the Germans, the other under the Austro-Hungarians,
who finally, at long last, agreed as part of a plan to exploit Poland's manpower to establish a Polish kingdom in November of 1916.
The German command, in particular Ludendorff, hoped to be able to muster a Polish army to fight for the Central Powers,
but the result was disappointing.
Polish political leaders, who were being invited by the Germans to fight against Russia,
were themselves divided on which side to favor in the war, much dependent on who they thought would win.
A socialist leader, later leader of Poland itself, after it regained its independence,
Joseph Piłsudski, at first cooperated with the Austro-Hungarians in creating Polish legions.
But once it was clear that the Germans aimed to subordinate them to their control,
he resisted and was imprisoned by the Germans in 1917.
A representative of a different political faction took a different view.
Roman Dmowski, the leader of the National Democratic Party, a nationalist and more ethnically based group,
favored the Western allies, and with a famous pianist Ignacy Paderewski,
promoted the Polish cause in the West and won sympathy for Polish independence.
In the territory of the Baltic countries and Belarus, a German military colony called Oberost was established.
In this strange military utopia, ambitions for control of ethnic populations
and cultural and ethnic manipulation took on vast proportions.
German views of Eastern Europe were conditioned by and changed as a result of these experiences.
German soldiers saw just how devastated the region was by scorched earth policy, disease.
They were often disoriented by the ethnic variety of these regions
and the disorganization and backwardness as they sought of this region,
which they often called by the word unklu tule, which scarcely needs translation, an absence of culture.
These areas, some German planners hoped, could be redeemed by a German cultural mission of bringing civilization.
The flip side of this allegedly generous cultural cultivation were harsh policies of economic control
and requisition that ultimately tended to alienate the native populations under foreign rule.
The Central Powers also occupied most of Romania in the winter of 1916
after Romania had ill-advisedly entered the First World War with splendidly bad timing
and Romania became a German economic colony yielding food and oil for the war effort of the Central Powers.
Serbian civilians, for their part, also suffered tremendously in the successive invasions by the Central Powers
and the country once conquered was divided into Bulgarian and Austro-Hungarian zones
and armed resistance by guerrilla groups of determined Serbian fighters was seen there in this region as well.
We'd like to conclude by surveying a, in many ways, more positive part of the record of life under military occupation.
What we mean here, in particular, international relief efforts that aimed to aid those civilians
who were living under the rigors of military occupation and economic exploitation.
International efforts focused, first of all, from neutral powers to bring relief and food to Belgium.
Poor little Belgium, brave little Belgium as it was called, a victim of the start of the First World War,
had mustered tremendous sympathy as a result of its suffering.
And now a volunteer effort was underway to aid the Belgian civilian populations under German military occupation.
This, of course, also raised very serious political and perhaps even ethical issues.
If outside food aid was to flow into Belgium at a time when the Germans were exploiting Belgium economically,
wouldn't this indirectly, given the realities of total war and its all-encompassing nature,
indirectly help the German war effort?
The result was an attempt to very carefully calibrate international aid and to be scrupulously neutral in its disbursement
and very careful and sensitive diplomatically in allowing aid to flow into these ravaged areas.
The right man for the job was an American engineer who had trained at Stanford,
who was perhaps the ultimate embodiment at this time of an American can-do attitude.
He was an American engineer of great managerial talents, Herbert Hoover,
who later had an unfortunate career as America's president at a time of economic crisis during the Great Depression.
But Herbert Hoover at this time was recognized for his managerial talents
and put in charge of coordinating the so-called Commission for the Relief in Belgium, the CRB.
This organization with food aid aimed to feed 10 million people in Belgium,
these and other efforts during the course of the war brought to poor little Belgium
more than 3 million tons of food aid, and while it didn't certainly obviate all hunger,
it clearly made the difference in the margin of survival to a great many people.
War-torn areas in Eastern Europe, by contrast, were much harder to bring assistance to
given their geographic remove, but efforts of the sort that had been pioneered in Belgium
were expanded there as well at the end of the war by the American Relief Administration under Hoover too.
We've seen in this lecture some of the human consequences of war aims as well as the phenomenon of military occupation
will be turning to the question of the human dimension of soldier suffering,
whether as victims on the battlefield, whether as prisoners of war in our next lecture.
Thank you.
