Lecture 14 – Stormtroopers and Future Dictators
While in our previous lecture we discussed some of the aspects of the intensity of human
suffering and violence inflicted upon soldiers' bodies and the horrors of those experiences,
in this lecture we encounter another no less disturbing phenomenon, the opposite one in
fact of the suffering that we've detailed, will be discussing people who enjoyed the
war too much.
From attempts to break the immobility of trench warfare that we've described in earlier
lectures out of that challenge of how to start achieving the breakthrough that had been
longed for so much, there arose a new model of soldier, a new concept of what the soldier
should be and should do, and such soldiers were seen on all sides with a name that stuck
to them as the one that the Germans used, Stormtroopers.
Stormtroopers were particular, highly motivated soldiers who were deployed on all sides in
this conflict, who used shock tactics that were new and had been developed by them, and
stealthy raids across no man's land to the opposite trenches to achieve surprise against
the enemy.
In the process many of these soldiers felt themselves to be inventing or reinventing
the possibility of individual heroism that other soldiers had lost in the trenches.
Some styled themselves new princes of the trenches, and they grew habituated to the
trench landscape and the trench existence with all of its horrors to a degree that's
highly disturbing.
We also will examine in this lecture the records of some other men who enjoyed the war too
much.
The future dictators, Benito Mussolini and Adolf Hitler, who were not Stormtroopers
themselves but shared some of this enjoyment of the conflict, will investigate how their
experiences helped to start to shape their later careers of destruction.
On all sides, even during the horrors of the static trench warfare itself, there emerged
soldiers who simply found themselves not so much disturbed by this kind of warfare but
rather enjoying it and growing used to it.
We might ask ourselves how such soldiers would readjust to a peacetime existence.
The answer is not easily, if at all.
In fact, having come of age in the trenches or come of age on the battlefield, many of
these soldiers would seek to replicate their experiences in the world of politics or in
society after the war.
Soldiers who on occasion felt themselves liking this experience would engage in what others
considered foolhardy raids across the trenches.
And in the case of British soldiers, it was often complained that junior officers sought
to outdo one another in such raids, such adventuring.
But the model of this sort of enjoying of the adventure of trench warfare was first institutionalized
in a really systematic way by the Germans under the name of Stormtroopers.
This type of assault fighter was developed really as a way of dealing with that stalemate,
an immobility of trench warfare, and to achieve breakthrough using new shock tactics.
And even though all major competence in the war ended up with units or branches of fighters
of this variety, at first this was a German innovation in a formal sense.
We use in English the word stormtrooper, the Germans call them Sturmtropen, literally
stormtroops, or Stostruppen, meaning shock troops.
And these were developed from around March of 1915.
Military historians are still arguing about precisely where this formal designation and
training arises, but it would clearly grow to be of great significance on the western
front.
And indeed German tactics there took on such excesses that they were adopted also by the
Allies who were developing similar notions at the same time themselves.
General Ludendorff, who would be reshaping the German war effort once he and Hindenburg
came to the high command in 1916, had originally been so taken with the notion of this new
kind of fighter that he intended originally that German troops should all be reshaped
on the model of the stormtroopers.
And indeed he would seek to use them to the utmost, to the extreme, in the spring offensive
of 1918, the last gasp, in other words, of the German war effort that we'll be considering
in a lecture later in this course in more detail.
The stormtroopers relied not on the frontal attacks that had proven to be so disastrous
at the start of the war, but instead on new and far more flexible tactics of infiltration
and mobility.
These flexible tactics emphasized commando raids across no man's land, scouting expeditions,
daring attacks against the enemy's trenches with the specific purpose of capturing prisoners
who would be bundled back and brought back to the German lines in order to be interrogated
and pumped for information.
The tactics also emphasized not just speed, but also lethal hand-to-hand combat.
These stormtroopers would not seek to overwhelm the enemy in a frontal way, but rather were
especially trained to aim for weak spots, or if they were attacking to push forward regardless
of the obstacles that they met by simply moving around strong points, or if they encountered
strong opposition simply getting around it and continuing the attack.
The aim of the stormtroopers thus, in a very real sense, was to change the equation that
had settled on to trench warfare from its very beginning of the strength of the defensive.
Quite to the contrary, their aim was to regain the speed and the mobility and maneuverability
that had been lost in the stalemate and deadlock of trench warfare.
And for this very reason, military historians, in particular the historian Keegan, have argued
that in some sense the stormtroopers were a more low-tech anticipation of a later trend
of World War II, the concept of Blitzkrieg, as it's called in German, or lightning warfare,
which sought to use technology, in particular tanks and military aircraft, to break through
enemy lines and to achieve speed and surprise and mobility.
These were men who were intended to do this at first, but later these tactics would be
elaborated using much greater technologies.
Nonetheless, the stormtroopers were outfitted with equipment that represented for its time
technological advances.
Their weaponry included more sophisticated automatic rifles, light machine guns, flamethrowers,
grenades, and a far less high-tech variety, weapons including daggers, axes, and maces,
to allow them to deal with hand-to-hand combat with a minimum of noise in the enemy trenches.
Indeed, one way one could spot stormtroopers was from distinctive items of their uniform
that allowed them to deploy some of these weapons quickly.
Hand grenades, for instance, would be worn in sling pouches for easy use and quick deployment
in trench warfare.
In the German army, these units were made up of men who were young under the age of 25.
It was also specified that they should be unmarried so that their sense of familial obligation
wouldn't interfere with the daring due that was expected of them.
They were to have good sports records, and in addition to all of this, some undefinable
quality of aggression and a certain enjoyment of the war itself.
These stormtrooper units would then not simply be stationed in the trenches and left there
for periods of time, but rather would be deployed selectively for particular purposes wherever
they were most necessary in the front.
For this reason, the stormtrooper units who would be brought up by truck for special assaults
that had been planned in advance would sometimes be called flying units, precisely because
as flying units or flying squads, they would be moved around as was necessary for strategic
purposes in trench warfare.
These stormtroopers not only had special transportation to bring them to the front, but were also
much better equipped and had much better food and provisions than regular troops.
It was for reasons such as this that many ordinary soldiers actually quite resented
the stormtroopers and saw them as a very disturbing phenomenon.
Only reason why they would often be resented in particular was because their very presence,
their very appearance brought up by truck for a daring nighttime raid against the enemy
side could very well destroy some of those informal truces, the so-called live and let-live
arrangements that we talked about in an earlier lecture about the experience of the Western
Front, the agreements that had been worked out informally by enemies across the trench
lines not to fire on one another, not to engage in attacks, but simply to live and let live.
Stormtroopers would break all of this up precisely because their task was to do so, was to decisively
break through the enemy lines.
The elite status of the stormtroopers was underlined by the different equipment that
they were given, as well as personalized, often very idiosyncratic uniforms that they
wore to show that they were of an entirely different breed.
We've been left with a particular and in many cases very eloquent, a very disturbing memoirs
of the experiences of the stormtroopers by a stormtrooper officer by the name of Ernst
Junger, who wrote a memoir of his experiences that became a bestseller immediately after
the war and was translated into English as well.
He wrote of his experiences in a book evocatively entitled The Storm of Steel.
The Storm of Steel, still available today as a searing account of the First World War,
was very different from such classics as All Quiet on the Western Front because Junger
celebrated the war.
He celebrated the aesthetics of violence, and he fairly wrote a hymn to the new model
of individual heroism embodied in the stormtrooper and, incidentally, in himself, he believed
as a stormtrooper officer.
Junger argued that the war had done something marvelous and mysterious.
It had hardened not all soldiers, but certain men, into men of steel.
The battle of materiel, the storms of steel, the bombardments, the horrors of trench warfare
had created, in essence, a new kind of human being.
Junger's background was fascinating.
He himself was a really intriguing character.
He was born in 1895, and before the First World War, he had actually run off to join
the French foreign legion.
He might very well have ended up on the other side, but for the fact that his family had
him brought back.
They had run off in search of adventure, and he soon would have his adventure fixed by
volunteering for the German army in 1914 as the war broke out.
Junger's service was truly remarkable.
He said to have been wounded 14 times in the course of his fighting on the Western Front.
He earned the highest decorations of the war from Germany's government, and afterwards,
in post-war fame, as a conservative nationalist writer, perhaps the conservative nationalist
writer of Germany's troubled experiment with democracy after the First World War.
Intriguingly enough, in spite of his glorification of violence, and in spite of the popularity
of his writings for obvious reasons among the Nazis, Junger actually looked down on them
and saw them as faintly distasteful because of their crudity, their low social status.
He tended instead to associate with people much more of his own background and aristocratic
outlook on life.
He associated with people who actually were involved in the July bomb plot against Hitler
of 1944, though he himself was apparently not actively involved in resistance.
He participated in World War II as well, again in the army, stationed in Paris.
Similar to our own times, Junger finally died in 1998 at the age of 102, so I'm not really
sure what the lesson of that hard living is, but it certainly was a long and eventful life.
This model, this successful model of the stormtrooper soldier, was imitated elsewhere.
An intriguing example of that imitation came in Italy.
In July of 1917, in some of the ferocious fighting that took place that we've described
in our earlier lecture on the southern fronts, Italian stormtrooper units were created and
they seemed to exult especially in a very special, almost operatic way in this role.
They were given the poetic name the arditi, the bold ones, the ones who are full of ardor
for fighting and they flaunted their devil may care attitude.
Now military historians somewhat spoil their reputation by arguing that they were not
nearly as effective as the German models, nonetheless they too, as was the case in
the German stormtroopers, were often resented by other soldiers because of their better
provisions and by what was seen as their cruelty and their love of violence.
Stormtroopers as such were celebrated for having regained, it was argued, a model of
heroism under dehumanized conditions and it was Junger who gave them the name, Princes
of the trenches, men who felt at home in war.
After the war, however, and this almost has sort of a grim inevitability, the glorification
of the stormtrooper as a kind of soldier would continue with dark political consequences.
The Nazis in particular would actually use the name of the stormtroopers for their own
street gangs of paramilitary thugs, calling them the Sturmabteilung or literally stormtroopers.
I want to turn now to discuss two men who were not stormtroopers themselves but who
shared in some of this psychological orientation of enjoying war too much.
One of them was at first a seemingly ordinary Italian soldier who would go on to be a dictator
of Italy, Benito Mussolini.
Benito Mussolini had been born in 1883 in poor circumstances in a difficult region of
Italy, the Romagna.
He was named by his father, who was a blacksmith and a socialist, after a famous Mexican revolutionary
Benito Juarez.
So Benito Mussolini in his very name carried some of the socialist convictions of his family.
He was expelled from school for his violent attitude.
He apparently stabbed a classmate in addition to other acts of violence and he led a slacker
existence afterwards going off to Switzerland to work at menial jobs as a migrant laborer.
Afterwards he claimed, given that Mussolini was not very reliable in many of his reminiscences,
but he claimed at least, though we can be skeptical about this, that while he was in
Switzerland he actually had met the revolutionary Lenin and one can only imagine what that scene
might have been like of these two important historical figures meeting in a Swiss café.
Whether it was true or not, upon returning to Italy Mussolini now pursued what at first
was a little bit more respectable career as a school teacher, but then also increasingly
became active in socialist politics as the editor of the socialist newspaper Avanti forward.
He was obviously carving out a position for himself as a young, ambitious leader of the
socialist movement in Italy and in particular espoused a radical brand of socialism, one
that didn't emphasize unionism or working for gradual political change, but instead
a radical socialism that included his belief that violence was the force that turned the
wheels of history in his phrase.
We've already discussed in an earlier lecture when we mentioned the growing tensions in
Europe before the First World War, the way in which aggression had been celebrated by
social Darwinists, and we'd also mentioned the quite distinct case, not related to social
Darwinism as such, of how even socialists might subscribe to a gospel of conflict, the notion
that social change, really radical social change could be achieved through an apocalyptic
conflict.
Mussolini used these ideas in his reaction to the outbreak of the First World War.
You'll recall that from our earlier discussions that Italy had stayed out of the First World
War initially, pursuing sacred egoism, as its politicians called it, that's to say the
waiting in the expectation of being able eventually to join the winning side.
In October of 1914, however, Mussolini, after a period of wrestling within himself with
the question of what was to be done, actually broke with the rest of his socialist comrades
who condemned the war as a capitalist war, one that was contrary to the interests of
Italian workers and of socialism.
Mussolini argued by contrast from October of 1914 that Italy should intervene in the war.
The war could be an opportunity for revolution and change.
Now, given the party line of the socialists in Italy at the time, this was heresy.
And Mussolini had taken a step that led to him being fired as editor of the socialist
newspaper Avanti and being expelled from the socialist movement.
But he now set up on his own.
He had supporters in this regard as he spread the message of Italy needing to enter the
war.
He was supported by secret funds that were funneled from the French government.
As one of the allies that are fighting in the war, the French had a vested interest in
trying to encourage a groundswell for Italian involvement on the side of the allies, which
is what Mussolini was suggesting, so that Italy might truly participate in this glorious
war on the allied side.
Italian industrialists helped him as well with such funding.
And in November of 1914, Mussolini, who had just been fired as the editor of the socialist
newspaper, founded a new newspaper with a new message, which agitated for Italian entry
into the war.
Mussolini also mobilized a pressure group called by the name of Fascio, which means a
bundle, a bundle of like-minded people, to make propaganda for Italian entry into the
war.
In 1915, Italy entered the war and Mussolini had his way.
But even this man, who was so very eager for Italy's entry into the war, himself did not
immediately join.
Mussolini was actually conscripted into the Italian army in September of 1915, and afterwards
given his usual unreliability, he claimed falsely that he had volunteered for the war
in enthusiasm.
Mussolini was sent to the Austrian front, and from what we know of the fragmentary evidence,
he performed his duties without any extraordinary distinction, and by war's end, had risen
in the ranks a little bit, had reached the rank of sergeant.
In February of 1917, however, in a training exercise, Mussolini was wounded when a grenade
thrower that he and some others were working on exploded.
They killed all the others around him, but this incident afterwards was mythologized
by the Fascists.
Mussolini later claimed that this had been one of the most beautiful experiences of his
entire life, nearly being killed by a grenade.
The Fascists afterwards would argue that it was not coincidental that Italy's war effort
had gone downhill after Mussolini had been wounded.
Nonetheless, discharged from the army in June of 1917 because of his wounds, Mussolini's
thoughts turned to dictatorship, to redeem his Hallyan failures, and he had a candidate
for dictator himself.
He planned a trenchocracy, that's to say, a rule by veterans of the Great War.
Mussolini would later share in the disappointment that many Italians had over Italy's fortunes
in the war, half a million dead, and ultimately disappointed territorial hopes.
And this would lead also to the founding of the Fascist movement.
In March of 1919, Mussolini forged a new political movement in Milan, gathering together
bands of veterans.
His political movement, powerfully shaped by the experience of war, came to be called
Fascism.
I want to turn now to discuss another seemingly ordinary soldier, this time an ordinary German
soldier of Austrian background, Adolf Hitler, and his career in the First World War.
Adolf Hitler had been born in Braunau in the Hapsburg Empire, not in Germany.
In 1889, to a middle-class family.
He was an unremarkable young man, a dreamer, a slacker, who dropped out of high school
to study art in Vienna in 1907.
Now we tend to this remove to perhaps romanticize aspects of Viennese cultural life.
We think of the beautiful waltzes, the balls, the avant-garde art of this period, but Vienna
had another side as well, and that's the side that Hitler shared in.
A bohemian netherworld with darker currents of Viennese life, anti-Semitism, populist
mass politics, chauvinist pan-German nationalism, and racialist thought, all of which Hitler
simply soaked up like a sponge, even as he slipped into a bohemian underworld.
To escape military service in the Hapsburg Army, which he condemned as an ethnic zoo,
Hitler moved to Germany.
Nonetheless, his reaction to war, when it at last came in August of 1914, was an ecstatic
one.
War at long last gave Hitler a sense of purpose, and he recalled it afterwards as the greatest
time of my life.
He participated in the August Madness in 1914 in the city of Munich, where he was at the
time, as a struggling artist.
In fact, a photographer years afterwards, on hearing that Hitler had been on that spot
celebrating the declaration of war, afterwards was actually able to find his face in a crowd
that he had photographed of that day, and Hitler, already wearing a ridiculous mustache, nonetheless,
as we see in that photograph, had a face that was glowing with enthusiasm and with a sense
of finally having met his destiny.
Hitler, who had avoided military service in the Hapsburg Army, now volunteered for service
in a Bavarian regiment and served for almost the entire war on the western front.
He claimed afterwards to have participated in that mythic battle experience of the Battle
of Langemark that we discussed earlier in an earlier lecture, that battle at the start
of the war in which, allegedly, young idealistic German students had gone forward in waves
after waves to their deaths, singing the German national anthem.
Hitler's job was the dangerous one of being a dispatch runner, that's to say jumping up
out of secure trenches and hustling across the landscape to carry messages, given the
otherwise unreliable state of communications at the time.
And in this dangerous task, he distinguished himself enough to win what was really quite
a rare decoration for someone of his lower rank, an Iron Cross first class.
It's a bitter irony that he was recommended for this decoration by a German Jewish officer.
Hitler, however, did not rise dramatically in the ranks, and what this suggests to many
historians is that some of Hitler's own superiors felt that his adjustment to trench warfare
might have been a little bit too thorough and too spooky in ways.
He seems not to have had very close friendships with other soldiers, even as he was enjoying
the war.
Hitler was then caught in a gas attack near the end of the war at EAP on October 13th
to 14th of 1918, and he was sent to a military hospital in the east of Germany in Passevac.
While he was there in hospital, he heard the news of Germany's defeat.
According to his own testimony, he experienced a mental breakdown and claimed to have had
visions at that moment, having gone blind but seeing supernatural visions, which revealed
to him that he had a personal calling to restore Germany's greatness.
And in words that later would take on a fateful significance, Hitler records in his memoirs
that at that moment he decided to become a politician.
He nonetheless would retain, even in his future political role, a conviction that had been
shaped by the war, that politics, essentially, in war, were a continuum, and that the war
itself had been an experience that he sought to recreate.
He did so in the movement that he shaped, a political movement called Nazism in Germany.
Looking ahead a little bit, and we'll talk more about this in later lectures, but after
the war itself, after German defeat, Hitler, seemingly aimless, and having grown so accustomed
to military life and military service, he remained in the army after the war was over.
But then he encountered a political movement that he joined and increasingly reshaped in
line with his own ideas.
This was a party that came to be called the National Socialist Party, or the Nazis for
short.
And Hitler would take a leadership role in this party and soon rise to prominence as
the leader of that movement as a whole.
In the process, Hitler very much admired another political leader, Benito Mussolini, and his
fascists, and many aspects of the Nazi party, in fact, were imitations of the fascist movement
itself.
Like the fascists, the Nazis were very strongly affected by the war experience.
As Hitler launched his political career, this obscure man presented himself rhetorically
in ways that had everything to do with the experience of the First World War.
In his rhetoric, in his speeches, in his whipping up into a frenzy of the followers
of the Nazi party, Hitler would often present himself rhetorically as a living representative
of all of the unknown trench soldiers of the First World War.
He would argue that just like other ordinary, unknown soldiers, he had special knowledge.
He had experienced the trench community that supposedly idealized a perfect form of social
organization that had been welded or forged in the trench existence itself.
The experience of war, he argued, had given him, as other soldiers, unique insight.
In the leadership cult that was quite deliberately cultivated about the person of Hitler by Hitler
himself as well as later Nazi propagandists, it was also claimed that the First World War
had, in a very decisive way, actually formed Hitler's effectiveness as a leader.
It's a commonplace that Hitler obviously had tremendous rhetorical skills and skills at
propaganda.
I will be speaking much more about propaganda in the First World War in a later lecture,
but it was claimed that Hitler's unique powers as an orator actually derived from the First
World War.
It was claimed by some propagandists that a mysterious alteration of Hitler's voice
of his vocal cords had supposedly taken place during the war itself as a result of being
gassed in the trenches.
The claim here was obvious, some sort of mystical transmutation, some transformation had taken
place during the course of the searing experience of the First World War that determined Hitler's
later political successes, and it was alleged gave those vocal cords that voice a compelling
almost mystical supernatural power.
Hitler would often claim to be channeling the wartime experience itself as he spoke
to the German people and offered them, so he claimed, horizons of glory ahead.
I think in a really compelling formulation, the preeminent biographer of Hitler, the historian
Ian Kershaw, concludes in a phrase that I'd like to quote that, the First World War made
Hitler possible, and we'll be examining in later lectures precisely how some radical
movements growing out of the First World War gained momentum among them the Nazis as a
result of this conflict itself.
We've examined in this lecture men and their psychology who came to enjoy the war too much.
We'll examine the interaction in our next lecture of the experience of human psychology
and the practice of war and a crucial set of novelties, the total war of technology.
