Lecture 15, The Total War of Technology
In this lecture, we'll have the opportunity to look more closely at the fascinating theme of the role of technology in Total War.
In line with one of the themes that we've been weaving through the course of the continuous shocks of the new,
this clearly is one prime example of how novelty would have to be dealt with and assimilated on a steady basis throughout the war,
the accelerating technological change and its accelerating destructive potential as well.
Clearly, a tremendously important and dynamic element of the Great War as an industrial war, as Total War,
was the role that technology would play within it.
The character of the First World War was symbolized by the impersonal steel helmets that were mass produced
to replace the glorious plume uniform caps, the industrially mass produced machine gun in turn, an instrument of mass death.
And in this lecture, we'll also examine the fascinating evolution of tanks as new forms of weaponry that sought to and eventually would
overcome the immobility of trench warfare, a perennial challenge of the fighting on the western front,
also the frightening use of a devastating weapon poison gas on the battlefield, submarines at sea,
and then also fascinating economic weapons, the use of ersatz or substitute materials synthesized for strategically vital purposes.
These examples of remarkably quickly accelerating scientific advance also illustrate a very important point,
the yoking of technological progress, those things that we're so proud of in modern life to the uses of Total War.
In this industrialized modern war, technology would play an important role as it evolved with startling rapidity,
and contemporaries understood this. David Lloyd George is quoted as speaking of the war of the engineers,
as being a crucial aspect of the entire conflict as a whole.
This war would be marked by technological races to imitate, if the other side invented at first,
a particular technology to improve upon it quickly, to adopt any innovations that the opposing side might have come up with,
in a constant race for the employment of this murderous technology.
In a fascinating phenomenon, this dizzying technological change would often be overlaid with reassuring older interpretive frameworks.
Now, that sounds very abstract, but one key example that we'll be exploring in our next lecture has to do with the Air War,
how the fighting of fighter aces in the skies was often depicted in terms of medieval chivalry.
Clearly, even modern technology could be shoehorned into older conceptions that gave people at least the sense that something recognizably familiar remained.
A phenomenon we'll explore in more detail in other cases as well.
Another fascinating dynamic to watch in the course of our discussion is how technology would impose its own dynamics on the war.
Technology very clearly had played a role in creating the stalemate of the trenches.
We've referred already in earlier lectures to the key concept of the primacy of the defensive.
The advantages of the defensive side had from the start of the war as those who were defending trenches clearly were in a better position than those who were exposed attacking them.
But this wasn't a universal rule that would apply at all times. Rather, it was the technology that had given the defensive its primacy.
By the war's end, and we'll observe this in later lectures as well,
technological change now seemed to be shifting the supremacy to the offensive side again in a swing of the pendulum.
So clearly, technology itself was not setting rules in stone, but instead was part of a dynamic process.
And this could also have devastating results for ethical systems.
What I mean by that is, as we'll see later, technological imperatives.
The imperative to be in there first with the most destructive technology the fastest could over time trump traditional moral considerations.
It could reconfigure codes of behavior as to what was humane and what was not and what was necessary in warfare.
This lecture will consider several archetypal examples of technological change.
Some other examples of technological change will discuss more elsewhere.
For instance, aircraft will be discussed in our next lecture on the air war.
And while we will discuss submarine warfare in today's lecture, we'll also address it in more detail later as well.
The first not very high tech but nonetheless very suggestive role of technology and of mass production took place in changes in the appearance of the soldiers themselves.
As steel helmets and drab uniforms became the order of the day.
This clearly was probably one of the most emblematic aspects of the war's industrial nature.
Earlier glorious plumed uniform caps such as been worn by the armies of the 19th century were now replaced by steel helmets.
Soldiers, as a result, now increasingly appeared interchangeable and anonymous.
And some of them even spoke of themselves as being merely workers in a huge war machine.
But there were compelling reasons for this change, dramatic as it was in aesthetic terms.
Some 85% of wounds as we've already mentioned earlier had resulted from exploding shells, shrapnel, little fragments of shell and explosive.
And thus greater protection was required for the soldiers than the traditional headgear had afforded.
In particular, the head and the neck needed to be shielded.
In the case, just of one example of traditional headgear, the German Spikes helmets that's so famous from the start of the war,
the Spiketopz Pickelhaube was the term in German, simply left the head and the neck too exposed.
And the Germans along with the other armies as well now adopted steel helmets that enclosed this vulnerable part of one's form.
In 1915, for instance, the French adopted new helmets that were called Adrien helmets.
And these soon became so popular that they were taken up by the Italians and by the Russians in some other Eastern European countries.
These Adrien helmets afforded more protection, though some soldiers complained that they made them look like firemen,
because they bore some resemblance to the design of firemen's helmets.
Shortly thereafter, the British came up with their own version of the steel helmet.
This was the so-called Brody helmet named after its inventor.
This form, interestingly enough, was modeled on a medieval helmet and, perhaps not accidentally,
evoked associations of the age of chivalry.
This is a key example of the theme I mentioned just a moment ago of new technology and novelty being understood in older terms
with all the reassuring effects that that could have.
The United States also adopted the British Brody helmet, and it would be worn for decades afterwards in the United States armed forces.
From 1916, German forces also moved to a steel helmet.
The German word literally was steel helmet, Stahlhelm, which also resembled 16th century designs worn by soldiers in Europe.
Once again, a fascinating phenomenon. On both sides, you had soldiers wearing designs that had pedigrees going back to the Middle Ages.
In the case of the German Stahlhelm or steel helmet, it also had other interesting features that were suggestive of the industrial nature of the war
and the challenges of the new trench warfare.
When one sees pictures of the German steel helmet, what's remarkable about it is that it also has on either side of the helmet over the temples of the soldier
heavy protruding metal lugs that are somewhat reminiscent of the bolts in Frankenstein's neck from horror movies.
These heavy protruding lugs on either side of the helmet were, on the one hand, intended to give ventilation,
but also potentially were supposed to allow for the attachment of additional heavy metal plates over the helmet itself to offer further protection to sentries or to machine gunners.
On occasion, some of the soldiers were even issued with chest plates that provided armor.
You saw repeatedly suggestions that soldiers could wear armor of a sort, and this was once again another example of that odd return to older forms.
In this case of the age of chivalry that were reassuring to modern sensibilities.
At the same time as steel helmets replaced the initial glorious plumage that had been featured in traditional armies,
so too the uniforms now changed their form.
Uniforms assumed drabber and muddier colors, and in general were plainer and simpler than they had been in the past,
quite decisively to attract less attention from snipers or soldiers on the opposing side.
This trend was not started by the First World War alone.
In fact, it had begun earlier after the Russo-Japanese War, but now it became universal.
Though in some cases there was reluctance to give up the old uniforms,
and in particular some proportion of the very heavy French casualties at the start of the war
can be attributed to the fact that their uniforms, sky blue tunics and bright red pants,
formed tremendously useful targets for the opposing side.
But perhaps more than any other technological artifact of the First World War,
there was one particular weapon that summed up more than any other the reality of this industrial technological mass-produced war.
And that was the machine gun.
The very name itself suggests the mechanized nature of this killing machine,
and indeed it was the perfect symbol for the deadliness of the industrialized battlefield.
The machine gun itself had been developed far earlier, it had been perfected,
though many people had worked on the notion of a machine gun that would fire automatically
without repeated necessary pullings of a trigger but was automated,
it had been perfected by an American inventor, Hiram Maxim, in 1884.
Now, traditionalists in the European armies had resisted the introduction of the machine gun.
Many of them probably felt subconsciously that their privileging of the cavalry and glorious cavalry charges
many of the officers had been trained in this most prestigious arm of the military services
that the machine gun would simply spell the end of the age of the cavalrymen
and would fundamentally transform war as they'd known it.
Many traditionalists scorned it as being only fit for use out in the colonies
and in imperial warfare for the slaughter of masses of natives,
as indeed had been the case, for instance, in the destructive battle of Umberman in the Sudan in 1898
when a small British force had wiped out a far larger Sudanese army
in spite of its ferocious and heroic attacks.
The machine gun, moreover, was made a crucial weapon in practice
in spite of the conservative resistance of traditional military elites in Europe
by the very logic of the war of attrition.
Total war itself made the machine gun a weapon that simply made sense
in both economic as well as tactical terms.
Just to give a crucial example of how this phenomenon worked,
one might mention that some of the most famous marksmen in the world
were the professional military men of the British army,
which at first had been very small before it was expanded in a process that we'll discuss
in a later lecture under the pressure of total war.
These military professionals were trained marksmen who were famous for being able to shoot 30 rounds a minute.
Now, compare this famed rate of fire with that of the machine gun.
A machine gun could deliver an intense rate of fire using belts of bullets
that were simply fed into the machine gun,
able to fire 600 rounds per minute at ranges of over 1,000 yards.
So compare that rate of 30 rounds per minute to the rate of 600 rounds per minute.
And just to further underline the point,
it should be mentioned that the operator of a machine gun didn't even need to be a skilled marksman.
Quite to the contrary, a machine gun could simply lay down a devastating field of fire.
And all that the machine gunner had to do,
barring jams of the belts of ammunition that were fed in,
was simply to swivel the machine gun on its mount.
And in order to lay down this devastating field of fire,
all that a machine gunner might have to do is not exercise great skill of aim,
but simply to tap the barrel to move it along the field of fire.
Tap, tap, tap could deliver murder in terms of a rate of fire.
The mechanized fire of a machine gun and the fact that one machine gun crew could hold off mass armies
once again reinforced the strength of the defensive side in the trenches.
And paradoxically, this new technology simply further bolstered the stalemate, the deadlock,
and the strength of the defending side that we've mentioned in earlier lectures.
Now, however, we should consider a technological innovation which would over time start to break down
that primacy of the defensive, that deadlock, and these were tanks.
A new weapon, given the code name at first of the tank in order to disguise what it truly was,
an armored battle wagon, and the name stuck nonetheless, this euphemism,
this new weapon, the tank, would eventually break through the trench stalemate.
But its importance and how it could best be used was only slowly recognized and learned,
which is natural given its novelty.
Now, people had earlier certainly thought about the notion of castles on wheels
or of battle wagons, Leonardo da Vinci's Renaissance man sketches certainly included such a plan as well.
But during the progress of this war, this was put into action.
An experimental British armed tractor was set up as a secret project,
and this project was supported by no less than Winston Churchill,
who was thinking of ideas as less fortunately Gallipoli,
which might be able to provide a key to reversing the stalemate or the deadlock.
These first armored tractors were not very reliable.
They were extremely prone to breakdown and problems,
and their speeds were not considerable.
They would roar along at about two to four miles per hour.
Ultimately, only in their first stages of development.
And a first few were used at the Somme in 1916,
not to decisive results because the numbers were not significant enough,
nor indeed was their use familiar enough for this purpose,
but they were ready for mass use by 1917.
And the breakthrough in this regard, using this new technology,
came at the Battle of Cambrai on November 20, 1917,
when British tanks were moved forward.
Over 400 British Mark IV tanks advanced and actually tore a hole in the German lines.
Their tank treads were able to simply move right over the trenches,
and though many certainly would break down,
they were able to achieve a remarkable result in practice.
The British forces advanced five miles as a result of tearing this hole in the German line,
and even though this advance of five miles by the standards of trench warfare
was tremendously dramatic,
reinforcements could not be brought up in time to turn this into a real decisive breakthrough.
The French also built tanks, but by contrast, the Germans purposely neglected them.
Instead, in a calculated decision, the industrial resources that were necessary
for the building of tanks were instead poured into the building of submarines,
as this was seen as a truly decisive form of weaponry.
By the war's end, when it became clear that the tank was going to make a difference,
the Germans who had first had mostly used captured tanks
and had outfitted them and repainted them with German insignia,
the Germans had started to attempt a tank program,
but only had 20 versus the hundreds of tanks that were on the Allied side available
by the end of the war.
And the military historian Keegan judges that Germany's inability to keep up
in the arms race of building tanks was one of the worst mistakes
made by German leadership during the war itself.
We need to turn now to a truly devastating and horrifying weapon
that was a tremendous shock to contemporaries themselves,
but illustrates with great eloquence, a dreadful eloquence
the technological imperatives of the destructive potential of industrialized war,
and this was poison gas.
Poison gas was an innovation of the First World War,
and unfortunately has been with us since as a reality.
It's been used in our own lifetimes in warfare, including the Iran-Iraq war of the 1980s.
Now, official opinion had already been aware of the dreadful danger
that this sort of warfare might represent,
and chemical warfare of this variety in fact had been forbidden by international convention,
but such conventions went by the board given the pressures of total war.
The use of gas warfare was pioneered by a remarkable German scientist
by the name of Fritz Haber.
Fritz Haber is often considered the father of chemical warfare,
which is an odd title to end up with.
He was really a remarkable man.
Fritz Haber was to the very core of his being a German-Jewish patriot,
a man who considered that his duty was to do everything that he could
in terms of his scientific acumen and his abilities to speed Germany to a decisive victory.
And parenthetically, I might note that this theme of the tremendously eager participation
and patriotic participation of German Jews in the war effort
is something that we'll be returning to at certain points during the lecture,
because when later in the 1930s German-Jewish patriots who had participated in the war
were defined by the Nazis as enemies of the German people,
it was a very bitter reversal for so many of them,
giving the lie to their earlier nationalism and patriotism.
Fritz Haber, in addition to being a German-Jewish patriot,
was a brilliant chemist who headed the very prestigious Kaiser Wilhelm Institute
in Berlin for chemical studies.
He would later win the Nobel Prize for some of his researches.
But Haber now turned his talents to the use of the resources of Germany's extensive chemical industry
to deploy the new weapon of gas warfare.
And indeed, he personally supervised the first mass attack that was mounted.
This gas attack came as a dreadful surprise to the Allies on the Western Front.
The Germans used the chlorine gas that had been produced on the Western Front on April 22nd, 1915.
And we might very well mark this as the beginning of modern chemical warfare.
On April 22nd, 1915, near Eep, at a place that should be familiar to us, the village of Langemark.
Langemark, you'll recall, the year previously in 1914,
had been the site of a since then legendary attack of supposed attack of German student idealists
who had gone to their deaths in waves of self-sacrifice singing Germany's national anthem.
And though this was a failure, it was celebrated in propaganda.
In this same spot at Langemark, Allied defenders ignored revelations of a coming attack
because news had filtered out that the Germans were about to test some terrible new weapon.
And the attack when it came was a dreadful one in terms of its surprise and its novelty.
Chlorine gas, as it penetrates the breathing system of a human being, poisons the windpipe and the lungs.
And the lungs soon fill up with fluid so that quite literally a victim drowns.
And precisely because this weapon was so new and the shock of its novelty so considerable,
only crude improvised countermeasures existed at first.
The attack surpassed the expectations of German planners.
In fact, ripped a four-mile gap into the Allied lines.
German commanders who were themselves startled by the effect that it had
had not prepared in advance sufficiently to actually exploit it.
The natural response should have been probably to pour in reinforcements quickly
and to use the opportunity to create a real breakthrough.
And some historians judge that if it had been exploited properly and deployed in greater mass,
the gas weapon, this devastating weapon could have achieved a breakthrough.
Fritz Haber certainly believed so and later he would complain that this chance
for perhaps winning the war at a stroke using this technology had been lost.
Now the use of gas once this dreadful news poured out was condemned by the Allies
and the Germans probably could never shake ever since the stigma that attached
their being the first to use this weapon.
The Allies condemned this as an act of German frightfulness.
But their response, given the imperatives of total war, couldn't be to abstain from this war.
Instead, they soon moved to replicate it.
By September 1915 they were producing their own gas and in a dialectic which would be repeated
throughout the war one side or another would take the technological lead in this gas warfare.
The British laboratories at a secret location at Porton Down,
where ever more sophisticated killing chemicals were developed,
as soon as employing a thousand scientists and any number of test animals to produce this dreadful weapon.
And the weapon evolved.
At first the use of gas warfare was very imprecise.
As it was released from tubes, it might very well waft back on one's own troops,
the side that had released it.
And soldiers on all sides grew to hate gas with a total ferocity,
whether it was their own use of gas or someone else's.
The use of gas masks also had a paradoxical result.
The use of gas masks further slowed down infantry, even further.
And the alarms that continually went up of gas attacks and the sirens and the clanging of bells
that went up and down the trenches further sapped energy that could have been used in the war itself.
So paradoxically poison gas which was supposed to break open the war and create a breakthrough
ultimately ended up contributing to the stalemate, paradoxically.
On December 19th, 1915, in precisely an example of this sort of acceleration,
the Germans deployed a new gas that was even more destructive, phosphine.
This was a gas with a deadly delayed action.
Next year, the Allies were using the same gas at the Battle of the Somme.
In July of 1917, the Germans introduced yet another gas, what came to be called mustard gas,
because of its peculiar mustard smell.
The technical term for it is dichlorothal sulfide,
which blistered the skin and attacked the throat and lungs.
The chemical also tended to linger in affected areas and on bodies of those who were dead.
Just recently on a trip to Verdun, I spoke with a tour guide there who mentioned that just recently
she had known of a woman who had picked up shells on the battlefield itself
and as a result had experienced poisoning of the skin and this is decades afterwards.
The gas was now also delivered by shelling rather than by more imprecise methods.
By 1918, 20 to 30% of all of the shells produced by all of the fighting powers contained gas rather than explosives.
An estimated 66 million gas shells were produced on all the fighting sides
and some 113,000 tons of chemicals were employed.
One can just imagine the environmental damage as well as the human damage.
By the end of the war, one in six casualties were from gas.
In total, it's estimated that about 90,000 people died from gas.
Of these, remarkably enough, 62% of the total were Russian soldiers on the eastern front, some 56,000 men.
Gas, in spite of these numbers that in the popular imagination are usually larger in terms of deaths,
nonetheless held a special horror, a special terror for soldiers who were exposed to it
precisely because the notion of strangulation essentially
or of drowning in one's own body carried such special horror.
Among those who were gassed was Adolf Hitler, who we spoke about in the last lecture.
During World War II, Hitler would avoid using poison gas
even though gas masks were often carried by soldiers in World War II just in case.
It's not precisely clear why Hitler avoided using gas.
Many historians suggest that it was not out of humanitarian motives
or out of pity for ordinary soldiers like himself who had experienced gassing.
He seems to have believed that the Allies would respond just as they had in the First World War
with new and improved gases, and he seems to have believed that they had nerve gas ready
which would have been destructive beyond what the Germans could answer technologically at that point.
A further outcome of some very recent research which is tremendously suggestive of this process of evolution as well
suggests that German forces may have been experimenting with biological warfare during the First World War
but not against human beings. Rather, it was directed against pack animals and horses being delivered to the Allied side.
It was suggested by some technological experts that one might think of the use of biological warfare,
the throwing of germs out over Britain, for instance, but apparently German authorities drew the line
and said this is unacceptable. What's fascinating to observe is how the drawing of lines changes over time.
Submarines and other weaponry also took on greater importance.
In naval warfare, instead of conventional surface ships, submarines and mines became preferred technology.
Submarines could not follow the earlier rules of naval warfare which included giving warnings before sinking
and thus crafted a new moral code in line with their technological capabilities.
Germany built 380 submarines during the war but their use, as we'll see in a later discussion, turned into a political disaster.
Other new weapons could include flamethrowers which were terrifying to those who were on the receiving end
but could be very dangerous to employ if the flamethrowers' reserves of fuel were hit as well as high explosives and massive new artillery.
Germany's famous Krupp works produced monster guns including the one nicknamed the Big Bertha after the daughter of the producer
and also long range artillery capable of firing over 70 miles.
Another tool of the war was the so-called Erzatz which is a German word meaning substitute or replacement or more bitterly fake.
As Britain's naval blockade of Germany that we'll be discussing in more detail really started to hit,
crucial imports of strategically important materials were lost, cut off.
Especially saltpeter from Chile for fertilizer and for explosives was no longer available.
The necessity was to somehow synthesize these materials and the development of substitute Erzatz materials
allowed Germany to continue the war long after it otherwise would have had to shut it down.
The process of fixing nitrogen from the air rather than needing to import the material from Chile was a crucial innovation
and without it Germany probably would have lost the war almost immediately.
The man who developed the technology to fix nitrogen from the air was that same scientist Fritz Haber
and when he won the Nobel Prize in 1918 it was precisely for this invention.
Other synthetic products included synthetic rubber and other crucial war materials.
The Germans also consumed Erzatz food products of very poor quality including war butter and notorious war bread.
By 1918 in Germany there were more than 11,000 Erzatz products, many of them a very dubious appeal.
The new weaponry also carried new implications.
These weapons as we already seen could seem to produce new moralities breaking through earlier taboos about what was acceptable.
At the same time many older forms of war remained.
Despite wireless communications for instance carrier pigeons were also held ready just in case the modern technology broke down
and even as transport was increasingly mechanized on the western front one and a half million horses were mobilized in this war as well
and it's estimated that a third of them might have died under fire from disease or from overwork.
In our next lecture we'll examine probably the archetypal instance of the role of technology in transforming the war, the air war.
