Lecture 60, Air War
After our previous consideration of the remarkable role of technology and its accelerating progress
in the context of total war, it's very appropriate for us to turn now to an examination of a
new kind of war, one quite literally that had to be pioneered and learned as it was
going on, the war in the air.
While the war in the air was not yet decisive in World War I, as it would assume tremendous
importance in World War II, it certainly was a frightening portent of what future conflicts
would hold, especially after this new weaponry had been pioneered and then perfected.
This lecture surveys the rapid improvement in early airplanes, will examine the growth
of the myth of the fighter ace as a legendary figure, but will also discuss ways in which
the lived reality of fighter aces in fact violated some of the heroism that surrounded
the legendary image, will examine how the fighter ace was treated as the knight of
a new order of chivalry, redeeming a model of heroism high above the muddy trenches and
contrast that with the lived reality.
We will also follow the evolution of ideas about how air war could be deployed, including
the beginnings of bombing from the air, which would later take such a toll of civilian life
in World War II.
We need first obviously to consider where the matter of flight stood before the war itself
began.
The potential utility and terror of airborne weapons had been well understood or anticipated
prior to 1914, if not yet fully put into effect.
After the first airplane flight of the Wright brothers in 1903 in Kitty Hawk, North Carolina,
many writers of speculative fiction, today we would say science fiction, imagined a coming
war in the future transformed by fighting in the skies.
Probably the most remarkable example of this was H. D. Wells' book, The War in the Air
from 1908.
In addition, balloons had certainly been used for observation in earlier conflicts and planes
too had started to be used in colonial warfare against non-western peoples.
Now the question arose how the use of air war would run in the first world war.
Experts had debated what model of aircraft would be more promising and this would be
worked out in practice as it turned out.
The question was whether lighter than air aircraft, that's to say dirigible or balloons
or heavier than air propelled aircraft like airplanes would be most useful.
The major powers had established air branches before 1914 and France had gone furthest in
this direction and had the most developed.
On all sides in the first world war there were about a thousand planes when the war
broke out and these numbers would increase exponentially in quick order.
In spite of earlier speculation such as in science fiction works and popular fiction
about the usefulness of planes in combat, in fact airplanes were mostly viewed by military
men at the start of the war as being mostly useful for the ordinary tasks of reconnaissance,
essentially replacing the earlier role of cavalry in determining where the enemy was
located and what movements were taking place.
Aircraft also it seemed could play a useful role as artillery observers or range finders.
And this certainly was part of the role that aircraft would play in the first world war.
But by a very interesting process of evolution a dynamic set in which increasingly changed
the nature of the role of at least some airplanes.
If observation was important it soon became important to eliminate the enemy's observers
and thus the way to air combat and individual dogfights, the stuff of legend of the fighter
races was at last opened.
And thus in a process very similar to the one that we outlined in many cases when we
earlier spoke of the total war of technology, the air war too would see an incredible rate
of advance and transformation and technological advantage could shift from one side to the
other with remarkable rapidity in the course of several months.
By the end of the war certainly a whole range of different planes was developed.
These included fighters, they included new types of planes like sea planes as well as
more long distance bombers.
New approaches to how air war was conducted were also tried out, long range bombing and
the use of aircraft carriers was also pioneered.
The air forces expanded enormously.
British air forces in 1914 had fewer than 300 officers, 300 officers and about 1800 men.
By 1918 four years later the British forces had over 27,000 officers and nearly 300,000
men working in different capacities of support as well as flying.
Competition of airplanes also of necessity exploded as the use of air war intensified.
By the war's end, just for example, French industries were building as many planes every
day as France had owned at the start of the war in 1914.
By contrast some countries less industrially developed like Austria, Hungary and Russia
were not able to keep up in this competition and fell behind.
New types of planes also proliferated as the result of experiments in new technologies.
Many of these were bi-planes but experiments with single and triple wing planes also grew.
Prominent models included the French Nupour and the Schwa, the British Sopwith Pup and
Sopwith Camel and the German Fokker Triplane.
Indeed as one drives on one's morning commute in our own times one might very well encounter
artifacts of these days.
What I mean by that is BMW cars.
Today's German car manufacturer BMW, the Bavarian Motor Works, during this period built plane
engines during the war and today still the logo of this company actually hints at those
origins showing an abstract image of a white propeller and a blue sky.
Photography which was an adjunct of the observation capacity of airplanes improved steadily as
well as did wireless technology towards the end of the war to allow planes to communicate
their observations to the ground.
Weaponry likewise also moved from the very primitive, that's to say opposed pilots shooting
at one another with pistols or with shotguns to much more elaborate and lethal weaponry
including mounted machine guns.
Now very obviously the question of how to deploy a machine gun on an airplane was a formidable
engineering problem at these times.
The danger was clear, a gunner who was too enthusiastic could end up shooting off his
own propeller and this obviously would result in disaster.
At first in an improvised fashion metal plates were mounted on the propellers so as to deflect
one's own bullets but this was not a panacea, problems could emerge here as well.
If a machine gun was firing and hit one of these metal plates upon the propeller well
the propeller was protected but what if the bullet ricocheted back towards the pilot or
another member of a crew.
At the same time repeated hits even of a metal clad propeller could certainly produce metal
fatigue and blow away the propeller at long last as well.
This engineering challenge was finally solved by a Dutch engineer who was working for the
Germans by the name of Antony Falker.
He produced a gear, an interrupter gear which synchronized the propeller with the firing
of the guns so that the bullets each time barring disastrous malfunction would be firing between
the propellers blades as the propeller propelled the plane through the air not endangering
the flyer and the gunner.
This invention which was remarkable for its time gave the Germans air superiority in the
west but it did so for less than a year.
Soon this innovation was imitated and replicated by the Allied side as well and here we see
an indication of a constant phenomenon that was at play throughout the conflict superiority
in the air precisely due to such technological advances or tactical advances shifted back
and forth from the Allied side that's to say the French and the British to the side
of the Germans on the western front in the war itself.
This showed the typical dynamic of technological races because each side's technological edge
would very quickly be imitated, reproduced or improved upon by the enemy.
In 1918 the last year of the war the uses of air power took a dramatic leap forward into
the practice of attack and long range bombing on the western front that will speak more
about bombing towards the end of today's lecture.
I want to proceed now to talk about some of the aura of heroism and of hero worship that
surrounded very quickly the figure of the fighter ace and indeed the term itself was
a word that was developed during the war to indicate a fighter pilot who had many kills
to his credit.
The myth of the fighter ace ran as follows, far above the muddy trenches, above the stalemate
and the deadlock where the poor devils, the infantry down below were slogging it out,
high up in the skies these airmen were seen as daredevils.
They were knights of the air.
They had managed to overcome the horrors of the trenches to recover a chivalric, a nobler
and cleaner form of warfare in the clouds and in the skies.
And this form of heroic warfare would allow an emphasis on the role of the individual.
The individual's heroism mattered for something.
Individual skill and chivalry could make a difference.
And we see in remarkable ways paralleling our earlier discussion of stormtroopers and
their alleged recovery of a personally heroic form of warfare even in the trenches that this
phenomenon was in some ways quite related.
In a paradox that we already have encountered in our discussion of the use of technology
in total war, we see here as well that modern technology could be combined with or fused
with a seeming revival of older traditions.
So too in this case over and over again, the fighter aces were celebrated as being knights
of the air, looking back to the earlier age of chivalry and the images that were associated
with this proliferated as well.
To give but one example, German planes were painted with iron crosses making them redolent
of earlier medieval times.
A powerful myth of the admired fighter ace was also used in propaganda as an example
of what one's own side could achieve with sufficient will, sufficient heroism and daring.
The fighter ace was even said to be a new physical type, a very interesting set of mythologized
images that soon accrued to the figure of the fighter ace.
In some ways resembling that, the figure of a motor car race driver, fighter aces were
said to all be thin, quick, extremely alert, possessed of a certain controlled nervousness
as well as total awareness of their surroundings.
Whether or not they actually had noble birth, they all supposedly shared a certain common
aristocratic bearing and nightliness, and they were all said, this was obviously an
idealized image, to value fair play and gamesmanship in combat.
It was said that fighter aces were in fact so noble that they respected even their enemies
and stories circulated, and certainly there were some cases to back this up, of dramatic
and noble gestures like fighter aces throwing wreaths down upon the graves of fallen foes
their own enemies whom they had shot down in order to show gestures of respect in spite
of the fact that these men were enemies.
Fighter ace heroes included many, but the prominent among them were British aces Edward
Manek and Alfred Ball, and especially the German Red Baron, as he was called, Manfred
von Richthofen in his famous Red Fighter plane, all of these men, as it turns out, were killed
in the war.
I want to speak a little in detail about Richthofen personally.
Richthofen scored the highest number of victories in the war, that's to say 80 kills, as they
were called, and he was decorated with Germany's highest medal, the Paul Le Merit.
It's a little bit of a paradox that Germany's highest decoration bore a title that was in
the language of the hereditary enemy, the French.
It was more popularly known as the Blue Max Medal, and what truly is striking is the way
in which the exploits of this so-called Red Baron were used for propaganda on both sides
in fact in a public relations campaign.
His enemies, the Allies, would depict him in propaganda as cruel and vicious in his
approaches.
There was an element of truth to that as well, but at the same time the Germans played him
up as an example of modern heroism.
He himself had been born in Germany's eastern provinces, where his aristocratic family hailed
from, from Breslau in fact, today in Poland.
Richthofen was, as the very name von Richthofen suggests, of noble birth.
He hailed from an old Prussian family that had become famous in serving Frederick the
Great in his wars of the 18th century, and as was accepted practice in these old aristocratic
families, Richthofen had first signed up for the cavalry, the very respected and traditional
branch of the prestigious armed forces.
Soon, however, as it became clear that the cavalry was not going to come in for its expected
share of glory in the course of the First World War, Richthofen instead entered the
air service in search of adventure and of fame, and he indeed would serve as a pilot
over that titanic battle of Verdun, the blood mill of Verdun below him, as it turns out
that we had discussed in an earlier lecture.
What's fascinating to observe is how Richthofen himself, in addition to the German propaganda
authorities, developed a legend around the figure of the Red Baron.
He was named the Red Baron because of his famous red plain, that he had actually painted
in these colors to set himself apart and to quite distinctively and in a taunting way
provoke his enemies by his very conspicuousness.
He developed another habit that became famous of commissioning a little silver cup to be
made with the date and the name of his kill, and as these kills mounted, so too did the
number of his silver cups.
Soon, Richthofen was competing against himself in trying to increase the number of his scores,
of his kills, which by the end of the war, close to the end of the war as he's killed,
had numbered 80.
At the same time, and this is what I meant earlier by the reality of the air war not
always matching these heroic myths, Richthofen, as he tried to increase his numbers of kills,
didn't always sally forth looking for the strongest of opponents.
He was not averse to chasing down slower planes or inexperienced enemy pilots in order to increase
his own personal record.
And contemporaries who knew him and admired him in many ways, nonetheless, were realistic
about his character.
They noted that he enjoyed this.
He saw it not only as a necessary evil, but as something in the nature of a game.
And even Richthofen's own brother, who was also a fighter ace, at one point called him
a butcher.
Richthofen preferred to think of it as gamesmanship, sportsmanship, something like hunting.
His enjoyment reminds us of similar phenomena among the stormtroopers, those men who enjoyed
war too much.
Richthofen, at 25, was made leader of a fighter wing.
Such were his skills.
And this fighter wing came to be called the Flying Circus because, just like stormtroopers
would be, it was shuttled around as necessary to the most crucial parts of the front.
He emphasized among his subordinates discipline.
He conducted debriefings after every mission to re-examine what had gone right and what
had gone wrong.
His powers of instruction were such that many of Germany's other fighter aces for the rest
of the war had in fact been his pupils.
But as the war dragged on, Richthofen changed psychologically.
A wound might have contributed to this in part.
As the war dragged on, he seems to have been thrown into a cycle of despair.
One in which he faced the impossible task of heightening his own legend.
He started to pursue that to him magical number of a hundred kills as a aim that he
sought to achieve, and yet it seemed clear to him that at some point this sort of existence
would have its end.
His own teacher, for instance, had died in a collision, a mid-air collision with one
of his own pilots, so even very skilled pilots could be brought down by accident.
And it didn't become clear to Richthofen until the very end that the price that he'd
have to pay would be his own life.
Indeed, in April of 1918, his own death took place, and the circumstances of that death
are in fact to this very day shrouded in mystery and debate.
It's unclear whether it was a Canadian pilot who was caught in a larger melee in the skies
who brought Richthofen's plane down, shooting him and killing him in the process, or whether
on the contrary, it was Australian troops stationed below who were firing on the airplanes
who ultimately were the ones who had brought this about.
And nonetheless, it's clear that his plane went down.
We will never know apparently precisely how.
And in a gesture that did accord with these mythologized versions of what it meant to
be a fighter ace, a full military funeral was organized for him with full military honors
by Australian pilots on enemy territory.
When Richthofen finally had gone down, pursuing his own legendary status and what ultimately
turned out to be a race to death, he was only 26 years old.
After Richthofen was killed in April of 1918, the last leader of his squad was a man who
would play an important historical role later in the 20th century.
At this point, he was still a trim, not as he later was in life, expansive fighter ace
Hermann Göring, who later became commander of the Nazi Air Force in World War II and
would be instrumental in the changes that took place in a devastating war in the air.
In reality, great dangers, as is obvious, accompanied the role of airmen who were often
imperiled by their own technology and its drawbacks or its flaws, as well as the enemy
and enemy fire.
Many accidents took place in training.
Training itself was often only several months long.
And in a very real sense, fighting in the air was so new that its tactics had to be invented
and improvised, and many of them indeed remarkably still form the basis for air war today.
British pilots experienced horrendous rates of casualty, about 50% in the course of the
entire war.
It also has to be mentioned that it might simply be stating the obvious, but that not
all pilots went on to be fighter aces.
It's estimated by one study that only about 5% of fighters acquired this status.
Many more were shot down by fighter aces before they had a chance to gain the necessary experience.
And in spite of the myth of lone heroism, of the duels and the skies that surrounded
the fighter aces, in fact, mass formations and mass battles were in fact increasingly
important and Richtofen's organization of a flying wing, the flying circus itself, made
that clear.
I want to turn now to examine a very important key case of continuity between this total
war, the First World War, and how aspects of its destruction were later perfected in
the Second World War, and indeed are still with us today.
And I mean by that in particular the beginnings of bombing, the beginnings of bombing.
Beyond the role of observation or fighting in the skies, the role of aircraft in bombing
was also pioneered in the First World War.
It wasn't brought to the later perfection, I use the phrase ironically, but certainly
it was pioneered in this sense.
At the start of the war, planes could throw grenades or small bombs, but by a certain
inevitability eventually planes were ever more outfitted with this equipment and soon
bombs weighing thousands of pounds could be dropped from planes.
The aim in this bombing was not only to damage the enemy's war effort behind the lines, but
also most certainly to create panic and demoralization.
And what this implied as well was an increasingly indiscriminate targeting of civilians as well.
The bombing, in spite of its tremendous inaccuracy at the start of the war, increasingly underlined
the totality of war as civilians would become the targets and victims of this war.
There were sporadic first uses of bombing, including a plane that flew over Paris and
dropped bombs there in 1914 and Belgian towns as well.
But a horrifying profile that loomed up in the skies of air war was that of the Zeppelin.
That is to say a airborne dirigible of enormous size and shadowed contours that the Germans
used in order to start bombing Great Britain in January of 1915.
These Zeppelins, as they were called, were hydrogen-borne dirigibles named after Count
Ferdinand von Zeppelin, a pioneer in this aircraft, who had built the first one in 1900.
Eleven of them were ready for use as the war began, but they proved very vulnerable to
enemy fire from the ground, even though they were capable of achieving significant altitudes.
They weren't always safe.
And also strong winds or bad weather was another thing that could really disrupt their plans.
They were cases of Zeppelins simply being blown away in the North Sea as a result of
strong winds.
During the war, 123 Zeppelins were used by the Germans, and almost 80 of them were shot
down or collapsed on their own due to technical problems.
The Zeppelins, however, certainly created terror.
They mounted more than 50 raids on Britain in the First World War.
Their major raids ended in 1916, not out of humanitarian concern, but because a new weapon
had been developed in order to fulfill the same task, it was hoped more efficiently.
They were replaced by long-range bombing planes, like the twin-engine Gotta bomber.
Alarm and panic in Britain increased, in part for a simple reason.
Great Britain felt that it had been immune from modern war on its own land.
The concept of splendid isolation had been a key concept, and now very clearly had broken
down.
The anxiety that would follow would be most significant, and this too was yet another
example of the shock of the new that had to be dealt with.
A concerted bombing campaign now began.
The German campaign with long-range bombers, the Gotta bombers, in 1917 to 1918 specifically
targeted London.
While the losses, especially when measured against the horrific record of the Second
World War, by this bombing campaign of about 1,400 people killed by bombing in Britain,
were not in any proportion to the later devastation of World War II, but nonetheless, the event
itself left a tremendous impact.
In London, anxieties grew on the part of workers about whether their factories would be bombed.
Morale certainly had taken a blow, and at night, thousands would sleep in the subway
stations in what they hoped would be underground security.
This is another case of scenes that are very familiar to us from the Second World War,
actually having at least a preview in a sense during World War I.
The impression that was created was very strong on all sides, and after the First World War,
one would sometimes hear among military thinkers and military planners repeated almost as
if it were a dictum or a law of war that, quote, the bomber always gets through.
The bomber always gets through.
This clearly wasn't entirely true because in tandem with the development of long-range
bombers, there most certainly already was the development of anti-aircraft positions,
hatchlights probing the skies in tandem with these anti-aircraft installations, but even
more crucially in sort of a dialectical process that we've already seen in more detail when
we discussed the growth of gas warfare and the evolution of gas warfare with both sides
surpassing one another in technological advance.
Although to here one could see an exchange of this sort of warfare as the British responded
in kind.
The British prepared to respond en masse against German targets, in part in retaliation against
this targeting of London and other British targets, but also simply because one couldn't
allow the enemy to have a monopoly on this form of war it was felt.
And thus British forces at first targeted Zeppelin bases in Cologne, in the Rhineland
and in Dusseldorf.
They also sought to target in what they hope would be the most efficient and cost effective
way certain other industrial targets, in particular the factories producing poison gas in Germany.
But the inexactness of bombing technology in the First World War was still considerable
and the results were still disappointing.
But the very severity and seriousness of the situation was such that reorganization was
felt to be necessary in Great Britain and thus a historic event took place nearing the
end of the war as on April 1, 1918, the first independent air force, that's to say not
just an adjunct to other fighting forces, but the first independent military organization
devoted to the air war the British Royal Air Force was established.
The British now moved on to larger plans that would finally only come into fruition in the
Second World War, plans for long distance bombing of Berlin.
As it turns out the distances were too great and the technology at the disposal of the
British forces was still too limited in order to really bring this plan into full effect.
But even these hints of what lay in the future, what had been thought of, were suggestive.
The terrible legacy of this air war still lay ahead in the mass bomber raids of World War
II, but the fact that mass bombing paradoxically had not yet been tried out fully in World
War I ironically made the idea even more appealing to many military planners precisely because
its full potential had not yet fully been explored.
In the course of today's lecture we've examined a form of warfare that had to be pioneered
and had to be learned as one went along.
We want to examine in our next lecture a form of war that had been fully expected and in
fact people thought would be decisive, the war at sea.
You'll recall that the naval arms race had done a lot to increase tensions and ultimately
create the poisonous international atmosphere in which the First World War would break out.
But surprises were at store in the war at sea as well which we'll examine in our next lecture.
