Lecture 18 The Global Reach of the War
In this lecture, we'll be considering the global reach of the war, its worldwide nature.
In our earlier lectures, we've been examining repeatedly the phenomenon of stalemate.
The sense that the war dragged on and on without a clear and decisive victory being achieved.
We've talked about stalemate on the western front.
We've talked about the elusive nature of victory on the eastern front for all that it was more mobile.
We've even described the sort of stalemate that seemed to obtain in the war on the seas as well.
It seemed that the powers opposed to one another were too finely balanced to produce an outright and immediate victory.
So the question then obviously arose how to break the stalemate.
A crucial way that was of tremendous allure to policymakers and to military leaders
was to break the stalemate by way of expanding the conflict.
One might gain other allies and add to the strength collectively of one's own side.
One might be able to draw in colonial resources from one's own imperial possessions around the world.
The enemy in this way might be hemmed in on all sides and a decisive result might finally be achieved.
The global nature of the war involved many theaters which we'll consider in this lecture.
We'll examine the fighting in the European overseas colonies in Asia, Africa and in the Middle East
as well as the use of colonial troops from a very different context on the western front.
Then we'll turn to the diplomatic sparring for the sympathies of neutral states and international opinion.
We'll consider Switzerland's role as a haven for diplomats and spies and their devious activities
and we'll examine attempts to sway American sentiment for either side.
Finally, we'll examine the economic dimension of the global war with increasing American loans,
for instance, leading to a truly profound tectonic shift in international finance.
If in some sense this entire lecture will be concerned with one of our major themes of the course
in a very vivid way, the notion of the totality of this total war,
we'll also see by the end of this lecture that another one of our themes also very much comes into play.
And that's the theme in particular of the implications of the First World War for our own times.
Because shifts and transitions in politics and in economics were underway in this global war
that most certainly have reverberated into our own times.
We need first of all to consider the global nature of this conflict.
In a very real sense, the First World War was not the first war with a global reach.
Earlier wars of the 18th and the early 19th centuries, the Seven Years War and the Napoleonic Wars
had already had a global extent.
But there was something new in this conflict and this was due in part to the intensity
of the overseas high imperialism of the late 19th century,
which had divided up entire continents under European domination.
This in turn intensified the global nature of World War I,
because inevitably those empires, those colonial possessions would be drawn in to the conflict itself.
And in addition, the globalization of the modern economy,
which we think of as a phenomenon of our own times,
which is very much a part of the late 19th century and the early 20th century,
then disrupted in a dramatic way by the First and Second World Wars,
the globalization of the modern economy also meant that the war would have worldwide effects,
even in areas that were spared the direct fighting or which remain neutral.
They still would be affected economically by the reality of the war.
Let's turn first to the colonial dimension of this conflict and the war and the colonies.
German colonial holdings were attacked immediately.
There was a sense almost of the war playing itself out, not just in Europe,
but also in the backyards of the colonies in Africa and Asia as well.
Now, as it did so, there was a sense on the part of many Europeans
that this was a very dangerous development.
War spread to the colonies in spite of earlier European urgings
that the non-European natives must not see imperial powers of Europe at war among themselves.
The anxiety in previous years had been that this would undermine colonial prestige.
It would undermine the aura of the Europeans as an organized and a monolithic force
and might very well produce a new sense of assertiveness on the part of native peoples.
These earlier anxieties about the effects of seeing inter-European fighting
were trumped as events eventually took their course by the imperatives of victory and total war now.
In Africa, most German forces were very quickly overwhelmed by Allied forces in Togo and in German West Africa.
In Cameroon, they held out longer until January 1916 against a combined British, French and Belgian force.
The significant exception to this quick overwhelming of German possessions most certainly was German East Africa.
There, German and African troops, that's to say troops that were mustered and trained by the Germans as colonial forces
that went by the name of Ascari, were under the control, under the command of General Paul von Lettow-Forbeck,
who became a great hero of the German popular home front.
General Paul von Lettow-Forbeck held out until after the end of the war in Europe
against the British forces that were pursuing him fighting a war of maneuver and of quick movement,
also very costly wars it turns out involving more than 120,000 deaths on all sides.
In the Far East, Australians, New Zealanders and Japanese were allied with the British,
quickly took over German Pacific Island possessions.
Japan, which had been allied with Great Britain since 1902, declared war on Germany early in the conflict,
not out of concern for the violation of the neutrality of Belgium,
but for reasons that were closer to home and involved geopolitics.
Japan declared war on Germany on August 23, 1914 and attacked Qingtao,
the German protectorate on China's Shantung Peninsula.
This German protectorate was defended very bitterly by 5,000 Germans
and they held out for two months against mostly Japanese force.
Incidentally, this attack also involved the violation of Chinese neutrality
and the process showing how even the initially expressed concerns for international law
would be trumped by the fighting itself.
Japan went a step further.
Japan hoped to use the war itself and especially the way in which the European great powers
were concentrating on events within the European continent itself
as an opportunity for imperial gains in China.
Japan was pursuing its earlier course of not becoming a victim of western imperialism
by becoming a predator itself.
Japan gave the Chinese the so-called 21 Demands of January 1915
and these extensive demands for subordination to Japanese control
would have made much of China a Japanese protectorate.
The British, who were worried by this assertiveness of Japanese politicians
and military leaders mediated and tried to scale back some of these demands.
At the same time, the suspicions toward Japan of another Pacific power
which later would be associated with the Allies of the United States were heightened
and this represented a very interesting friction in the Pacific area
and within East Asia even on the part of powers that supposedly were making common cause.
Inevitably now imperial resources and manpower would be drawn into the conflict.
Germany's colonial holdings were quickly lost
and we'll recall that because Germany had been late in participating in the scramble for colonies
of the late 19th century, it had fewer holdings in fact to lose
but the empires would turn out to be a very significant resource
for the British and the French war efforts.
In 1914, Britain declared war for the entire empire
and the troops of the empire fought for the British cause
on the western front as well as in other theaters of the war.
These involved Australia, New Zealand, India, South Africa and Canada.
The dominions and dependencies as they were called
actually contributed more manpower, more troops to the war
than did the United States when it entered the war later in the conflict.
Dominion troops made great contributions outside of Europe
and were able to thus relieve British forces that were holding the line on the western front.
Australian and New Zealand troops, the so-called Anzac forces
fought in the Middle East, they had fought at Gallipoli as we had discussed in an earlier lecture
as did the British Indian army as well.
This represented really tremendous reserves of manpower.
In New Zealand, 20% of all adult males enlisted in the conflict.
It's estimated that the British Indian forces mustered a million men.
From 1916, conscription, that's to say the draft in place of the earlier liberal idea
of voluntary enrollment in the armed forces, conscription was instituted
in the British dominions as well as in Great Britain itself.
Need to be mentioned, this was not welcomed universally.
For instance, French Canadians very much objected to finding themselves involved
in a conflict that they didn't recognize as being their own.
At the same time, the British came ever more deeply to not only understand
but also seek to recognize the importance of the empire as a whole to their war effort.
This was symbolically summed up in the forming of the so-called Imperial War Cabinet in 1917,
so well along into the conflict itself, which included the prime ministers of the dominions
and representatives from India.
This was intended to be an organ or an institution which would start to represent
a sort of collective leadership for the empire as a whole.
While it was not initially effective, while it ultimately didn't have the sort of voice
that one might have expected for it, it nonetheless for many people symbolized the promise
of a greater role for the peoples of the empire in the future of that institution as a whole.
Indeed, many of those who came from different regions of the empire
felt that there was an implied promise in their participation in the conflict.
They felt that their contributions in the war and their standing up in this hour of need
of Great Britain or the mother country would be rewarded with greater independence
and self-rule afterwards.
We've talked about the way in which the involvement in the First World War,
sending of troops, and in particular the participation in the catastrophe of the Gallipoli landings
had been a crucial moment for many Australians and New Zealanders in, as it were,
forging their own national identity as distinct from their imperial identity within the British Empire.
Expectations were also raised in other colonial lands, especially in India,
where it was felt that the measure of participation in the war itself
and contribution of the imperial war effort would result in greater autonomy, maybe independence to follow.
And it hardly needs to be stated that in addition to these tremendous contributions of manpower,
the economic aid that the Dominions offered, the food that they produced,
the resources that they could contribute were also very important in funding the British war effort too.
The use of colonial troops was a very important, but at the time controversial measure as well.
Colonial troops provided, in a very real sense, immense reservoirs of manpower for the Allied side.
British Indian troops, for instance, were brought not only to fight in the Middle East,
but also brought to the Western Front, where many of them, unaccustomed to the rigors of European winter,
had a very hard time of it, in addition, obviously, to the horrors of the front itself.
France, for its part, drew in many tens of thousands of African soldiers from its colonies in West Africa and Northern Africa.
The numbers are truly astonishing.
It is supposed that somewhere in the number of about two million Africans served,
whether on the Western Front or within the fighting in Africa itself,
either as soldiers or as carriers of material,
and it's estimated that of that number of two million, some 10% of these African participants died as well.
In some units, their casualty rates were equivalent to those of the Western Front,
making very clear that this experience had greater resonance beyond simply the Western Front.
At the same time as these colonial troops were being used and brought over to Europe as well,
German propaganda very loudly denounced what it said was the barbaric practice of bringing non-European peoples
to fight what it was assumed were the superior Europeans.
At the same time, scurrilous and racist rumors were spread that the colonial troops represented a force
for the destruction of civilization and they were allegedly cannibals and the like.
Paradoxically, some of these same rumors about those colonial troops could be spread by some of their own commanders
as a way of frightening the enemy side as well.
The colonies provided also not just manpower in the shape of soldiers, but also laborers,
porters or workers in factories and the like.
Asians and Africans were also brought over to work in France as manual laborers
and among them would be a key example of sort of the rising expectations that grew out of the experience of the war
between the Vietnamese nationalist and later communist leader Ho Chi Minh
who would go on to a career in Vietnamese politics.
Let's turn to examine the war in the Middle East because it represented a case of some of the surprises that the war brought.
Before the war, the Ottoman Empire had often been called the sick man of Europe
and it was assumed that this was a power in decline.
To the contrary, the Ottoman-Turkish performance in the war really was quite surprising
in that it managed to last to the very end rather than collapsing in the opening stages.
In the strategically important areas of the Middle East,
Ottoman Turkey was aided by German advisors and a German Asia corps as well.
And this was seen geopolitically as a serious threat to British interests in that part of the world.
In particular, Britain needed to protect the vital Suez Canal through Egypt,
twice attacked by Turkish forces and to control Persian oil wells
as oil was becoming ever more a strategic resource at this time as well.
To this end, Britain annexed Cyprus in the Mediterranean in November
and in December of 1914, Egypt became a British protectorate.
The use of troops from the Dominions in the Middle East,
especially from India, made clear their importance.
The British launched a campaign in what was then called Mesopotamia and today is called Iraq.
In November of 1914, British and Indian forces landed in present-day Iraq
and occupied Basra and then launched a larger campaign into the hinterland.
The campaign ended in a disaster.
After a siege of five months, overextended British forces had to surrender.
On April 29th in 1916, at Kut al-Amra,
a Turkish army took vast numbers of British soldiers' prisoner, British and Indian forces.
Prisoners were let off on what amounted to a death march to Anatolia
and of nearly 12,000 who had been let off into captivity,
a third died while the rest existed in a precarious and emaciated state.
These reverses were then again overturned with a second campaign
by the British that took Baghdad on March 11th of 1917
and the British also occupied Persia in 1917.
At the same time, in the rearward areas of the Ottoman Empire,
the British had also been participating in encouraging the so-called Arab revolt.
We'll speak more about it in a later lecture
when we talk about attempts to subvert enemy populations.
But in this case, Thomas Edward Lawrence, a British archaeologist,
helped to encourage the Arab uprising against the Ottomans,
led by the Arab leader, the Hashemite emir of Mecca.
Arab forces took the port of Acaba in a dashing raid
and were able then to coordinate their own uprising with British campaigning
in the Middle East as well.
Lawrence of Arabia, as he came to be called,
later became disillusioned with British policy that we'll discuss in a moment.
British successes in the Middle East came at a welcome time.
On December 9th, 1917, General Edmund Allenby,
who had launched an offensive from the Sinai, captured Jerusalem.
This was much needed good news at a time when the Allied side was experiencing reverses
and it was turned into the cornerstone of an effective propaganda campaign
which took on some of the almost religious overtones of a crusade.
The regaining of the holy city of Jerusalem was celebrated as an Allied success.
Later, moving further, Allenby also took Damascus in October of 1918.
And it was very clear to all observers that these events,
even taking place in the context of the war itself,
were in a very real sense laying the groundwork for a future redrawing of borders.
In a very real sense, even as the war was going on,
people would be thinking to what happens after the war?
How does one prepare for a future order of international politics yet to come?
Wartime diplomacy would end up shaping the Middle East
and many other regions as well that we'll examine in detail in later lectures,
but in the Middle East in particular, the consequences of wartime diplomacy
would reverberate down to the present day, in particular the Balfour Declaration.
Jewish nationalists called Zionists who hoped to establish a homeland for the Jewish people
from their dispersed state around the world in Israel
organized units during the war to support the British campaigns
hoping to win concessions once the peace arrived for their plans.
The British, likewise, to gain support of Jewish communities internationally
also sought to diplomatically lay the groundwork for this support.
On October 31, 1917, a declaration was issued in this direction
in the name of the British Foreign Secretary Arthur Balfour,
which stated that the British government viewed, quote,
with favor the establishment in Palestine of a national home for the Jewish people.
It being clearly understood that nothing shall be done which may prejudice
the civil and religious rights of existing non-Jewish communities in Palestine,
end quote. The statement of principle, however, left many questions of practice
and how this would work out in practice still wide open.
At this time, other agreements had also been worked out, albeit in secret,
which tended to conflict with precisely this sort of statement about what the future might hold.
In particular, the secret Sykes-Picot agreement.
In practice, all the sorts of promises that were being made in the Balfour Declaration
or in British encouragement of an Arab revolt in the hope someday of establishing
an Arab nation-state, these promises about the future of the Middle East
were being trumped by secret negotiations taking place away from public scrutiny
by the Allies. In particular, the secret Sykes-Picot agreement of February 1916,
which was agreed by British and French representatives.
The British were represented by Sir Mark Sykes and the French by Diplomat Georges Picot.
This Sykes-Picot agreement carved out spheres of influence in the Ottoman territories
for peacetime. It was agreed that Britain would end up controlling Mesopotamia
and France, for its part, would control Syria and Lebanon.
In practice, these promises, whether the ones made out in the open or implicitly
or the secret diplomacy being conducted behind the scenes, were in conflict
and most certainly the turmoil experienced in our own times in the Middle East
has everything to do with this complicated context of the First World War.
The war stalemate could also perhaps be broken not only by pursuing warfare
in the colonies or the Middle East, the war stalemate also might be broken
by gaining allies for one's own side to tip the balance.
Gaining allies would also have a very significant result in terms of worldwide public opinion
because it would seemingly reinforce the justness of one's own cause
if one were attracting ever more neutral powers to one side.
At the same time, on the part of those who might want to join one or another coalition,
joining the apparently soon-to-be-Victoria side also could promise to give the country
that was joining a share in the upcoming division of spoils and the peace settlement.
One was always looking forward to what would the result of the war be?
What would the peace bring?
The sympathies of the United States among the neutral powers were clearly a tremendous prize to be won
and this led to very many attempts to sway American opinion, access to American loans
and perhaps even American joining of one or another coalition.
The amounts of resources and of capital which was invested into this enterprise was enormous.
The Germans apparently spent about a hundred million, an astronomical sum for that day,
a hundred million dollars in their pursuit of winning American sympathies
before losing them unequivocally before American entry in 1917.
At the same time, the British mounted a perhaps subtler effort to sway makers of public opinion
and journalists and leaders of American politics through sophisticated British diplomacy.
At the same time, as the sympathies of American patricians and American elites
often lay with the British or with the French, for whom they felt cultural sympathies,
many American immigrants of more recent vintage didn't share those affinities.
Irish Americans, for instance, or German Americans were vocally against involvement
and this created a lot of very vigorous debate in the American scene as well.
President Woodrow Wilson sought to be a mediator and peacemaker from outside
and tried to invite the warring powers to come to the bargaining table,
to come to some sort of agreement of compromise, but on both sides
his offers simply did not meet with a welcome reception.
Other allies might join for other reasons. I want to examine just a few of them.
We've already mentioned Japan. Japan's aims were geopolitical to seize German holdings
and to use the opportunity of dominating China.
This was ultimately a course of aggression that would end in World War II,
another strand or trajectory of continuity.
China, for its part, came to join the Allied side late in the war in August of 1917,
due in part to diplomatic pressure from the Allies, but also in part out of the hope
that by joining what it saw as a winning side, it might be able to avoid the predatory inroads
of Japan, one of the Allies itself, a paradox of sorts.
Portugal, for its part, which one doesn't think of as a European great power at this time,
joined the Allies hoping to expand, or at least protect, its African imperial holdings.
After the United States entered the war in sort of a cascade effect,
Latin American and South American nations joined as well, caught up in the momentum
of wanting to be on the winning side when the dispositions for the peace were made.
We want to consider also the policy of revolutionizing, as the term went.
Revolutionizing was a policy practiced by both sides of seeking to subvert the enemy,
to weaken the enemy by enlisting that enemy's discontented minorities,
on the principle of, my enemy's enemy is my friend.
Germany sought, for example, to revolutionize their enemy's own backyard
by cultivating ties with Irish rebels who were fighting against British domination.
They sought to revolutionize the discontented minorities of the Russian Empire
by initiating ties with their representatives abroad or in exile.
They also sought to encourage, as we'd earlier mentioned,
the Turkish Declaration of Holy War or Jihad to muster the Muslims worldwide
into the participation on the side of the Central Powers.
The Allies, for their part, France and Great Britain and Russia,
cultivated the numerous discontented minority nationalists of Austria-Hungary
and the Ottoman Empire as part of this effort.
Diplomacy in neutral states by both sides sought to sway public opinion.
We've already mentioned the case of the United States.
Switzerland at this time was fairly jam-packed with international diplomats
and spies who were engaged in their devious plans
for either secret channels of communication,
ties to minority nationalist exiles
who claimed to have the ability to mobilize their peoples for one or another cause,
and revolutionaries like Lenin, who at this time was in Switzerland
thinking about how he might be able to use this war for his own revolutionary purposes.
In conclusion, we want to discuss some of the important global economic dimensions of the war.
World War I, in its identity as a modern total industrial war,
was also very clearly an economic war.
The war brought an enormous shift in international economic relations.
In particular, caught up as it was in the activity,
as well as the enormous expense of the war itself,
Europe's status in international economic terms began to decline.
Europe's share of industrial production, of worldwide industrial production,
declined from 43% in 1913, the year before the war broke out,
to 34% by 1923 after the war,
owing to advances and economic boom that was taking place in North America, South America, and Asia.
This boom, not coincidentally, was in part related to the tremendous demand
for goods and for industrial production and for food
that the war was creating in Europe and in other theaters of the war.
Patterns of loans and debts to the flow of capital also were overturned during the war.
The United States, at this crucial juncture,
became a net exporter of capital for the first time
and gave out enormous loans to Great Britain,
which then, in turn, went to other allies in the support of the war effort.
By the end of the war, Britain, which earlier had been the banker of the world,
now owed the United States $4.2 billion.
New York replaced London as the banking capital of the world,
and European powers lost markets and assets overseas.
Countries not involved in the fighting directly, like Brazil, Argentina, China, India, and Japan,
participated to some extent, but not as fully as the European great powers,
experienced economic booms at the time.
In the U.S., exports quadrupled from 1914 to 1917.
Before 1917, when Americans entered the war,
the British historian, A.J. P. Taylor, with his characteristic sarcasm,
notes that Americans combined virtue and profit.
In economics, as well as in so many other ways in politics,
the world would never be the same after the war itself.
Bearing on a major theme of our course, the implications of the Great War,
these were transitions that are still playing themselves out in our own times
that we've explored in today's lecture.
