Lecture 19, The War State
In this lecture, we'll be examining a crucial phenomenon, the growth of the wartime state.
The way in which governments took on new powers and new obligations and responsibilities at
a time of total war in order to mobilize entire populations and economies as well as armies.
Total war clearly would put new demands on the state, on governments of all different
nations as they sought to mobilize for victory.
The extent of the demands that were being placed upon them and the extent of the new
requirements of a total war would become clear at the start of the war with shell shortages
on all the combatant's sides, which had not planned for a protracted conflict.
And all of these powers then of necessity were engaged in a competition to reorganize
the state.
There would be many different routes taken in this reorganization, there would be greater
or lesser success, a topic that we'll be considering in detail in today's lecture.
Indeed, in today's lecture, a whole host of major themes really come together from our
course as a whole.
On the one hand, the growth of the wartime state was an eloquent testimony to the totality
of war, how total war would make unprecedented new demands.
Another one of our themes, the shock of the new, was most definitely present here as governments
would take on roles that certainly would have been out of the ordinary even years previous.
And then finally, probably in the largest sense, our final theme of the implications
of the Great War for our own times comes into play here as well.
Because the ways in which we'll see wartime states operating are most definitely ones
that still contribute to how we understand the state, what the state can do, what the
state should do in our own present day.
A crucial outcome of the war itself thus was the development of a new concept, a new model,
of government and of state power, which needed to meet the challenges of total war, victory,
and survival.
The huge economic demands that the war would make were only dimly perceived before 1914.
With a quick, sharp shock, the competent powers were made to realize these new demands when
epidemic shell shortages at the start of the war revealed the problem in all its scale.
From immediate expedience and improvised measures over the course of the war, there eventually
arose a new vision of the modern state as a central and total organizer.
States needed to expand in order to deal with the challenges of mobilization.
In some countries, this required a more expansive view of the role of the state, which could
really mark a radical break with traditions of a limited state that had been so important
to the philosophies of classical liberalism, enshrining the liberties of the individual.
By almost a perfect irony, in the case of those empires that were more authoritarian and had
not made concessions or fewer concessions to democratic forms of organization, they equally
would have to try to incorporate some democratic or pseudo-democratic way, at least, of mobilizing
popular energies.
The most clear example of the new scale of demands that was being made by total war involved
the size of armies themselves.
The need to field and supply mass armies was an obvious priority on all sides.
And the scale of this commitment and this need was truly prodigious.
In 1916, to give just one example, Germany had five and a half million men in uniform,
with all of the challenges that provisioning and arming and moving such a vast number of
men would require.
But it didn't stop there with the armies.
In fact, the entire society was implicated, including not just the battlefront, but the
home front.
The home front is, as a coinage, almost a perfect expression of a very deep truth about
total war.
The home front, meaning those who were not at the front lines, but instead at home, working
in the factories, working in the fields, or engaged in the civilian life at home, very
clearly had to be involved in the war effort as well.
Not through combat, but through industry, by sharing in the enthusiasm's whipped up
by propaganda, by a certain commitment to the will to sacrifice as a whole.
Economic control was in particular a great challenge.
One reason why so many people had expected that the First World War would be quick once
it came was precisely out of an awareness at how expensive modern war was.
The notion was that it simply wasn't possible for war to drag on for years on end precisely
because of the enormous expenses involved, and yet, lo and behold, it would now be necessary
to prepare for the long haul.
The planned allocation of materiel, of production, of what we, in a very dehumanizing way, called
human resources, meaning labor and manpower, and the food supply would demand expanded
bureaucracies to undertake precisely these new tasks.
At the same time, it would be necessary for the state to take on new obligations as well.
This included making provision for the families of those left behind by the soldiers.
Whether these were the wives and children of soldiers at the front, or they were widows
or elderly parents, the state now had to make provision for precisely these people in
order to sustain morale in a sense that one was rewarding those who were making the ultimate
sacrifices in the war itself.
And out of this provision for the families of those serving at the front, on the home
front, there arose a notion of separation allowances, as they were called.
As to say, stipends, or a certain subsidy, which allowed those who had lost the breadwinner
in the family due to someone being in the field or dead, to nonetheless maintain the
economic livelihood.
And very clearly, this was a sense of obligation that underlay the later concept of the welfare
state, celebrated as a new model of a far more interventionist government which would
take upon itself obligations towards the civilian society as a whole.
At the same time, it was true that price controls and planned economies, the project of a rationally
organized regulation of the national economy, the nationalization, or taking over by the
government of branches of industry and transport, even the concepts of compulsory employment
and the regulation of labor, who was to work when and where and for how long, were the
order of the day as states expanded their powers.
And this compulsory mobilization of labor would also involve not just the drawing of
men away from their civilian lives into the mass armies, but also to take their places,
the movement of women, into new jobs, new capacities, and new responsibilities on the
home front, and not least in the factories as well.
But ultimately, to my mind, there's one prime symbol of the power of the state as it mobilized
in the First World War.
No better symbol, to my mind, of the state power could be found than the adoption of
daylight savings time.
As governments simply decreed, the time itself would now be harnessed to their efforts to
increase productivity, not to waste precious hours of daylight to the tyranny of an unchanging
clock.
Germany was the first to institute daylight savings time, and in this competition for
efficiency, Britain followed soon after, and in the United States, daylight savings time
was instituted in the last months of the war as well.
So in a very real sense, in terms of implications for our own times, when you and I get up groggy
unsure of what time it is because the time has just changed, any resentment we might
feel towards this dislocation has everything to do with the mobilizations of the First
World War.
The imperative of mobilization also would imply new compromises and political departures,
ones that might have been unthinkable to more conservative political leaders just recently.
An example, unions, rather than being distrusted and discriminated against actively, were now
often enlisted to help in the war effort.
They acquired a new role in the process.
Unions on the one hand would engage in a patriotic commitment not to strike so as to disrupt
the war effort as a whole, and in turn, union leaders were given a voice in consultation
about economic planning, consultations about the conditions of workers which now took on
existential importance for the state itself in order to succeed in war.
In this spirit of cooperation as well, socialist political leaders entered the governments
in Britain and France, something that earlier would have been tremendously controversial.
In this mobilization, wartime states could follow different paths to achieve control,
and not all states were equally successful.
Let's examine key examples of this.
First of all, the case of Imperial Germany.
Germany had been an uneasy mix of authoritarian rule and pressure for more democratizing change
before the war, and those paradoxes, that kind of split identity, most certainly affected
its war effort.
Economically, Germany was unprepared for a long war.
Resources had not really been stockpiled, as estimated maybe about a six months' worth
had been collected.
It was very vulnerable to the sort of economic blockade that we described in our lecture
on the sea war, as before the war it had imported about 20% or maybe as high as 30% of its food
from abroad.
It now fell to visionary planners to consider how to move beyond improvisation to systematic
organization.
The man who played a key role here was the patriotic German-Jewish industrialist and
businessman, Walter Ratanow.
He was a visionary planner.
He was the head of the German General Electric Company, who volunteered to organize the so-called
War Raw Materials Board to coordinate the German economy.
Government controls proliferated, and indeed this management got down to the point where
there was even an imperial potato office in charge of rationing this crucial resource.
At the same time, the economic changes were profound.
Smaller businesses, which were alleged to be less productive and less successful in economies
of scale, were often shut down by central planners and large industries given preference,
like the huge chemical combine IG-Farben, which was established in 1916.
But there were paradoxes that haunted even this concerted German war effort.
Though it was marked by a certain authoritarian spirit, it was often less efficient than
was believed at the time.
The state of siege law, decentralized aspects of the war effort, and gave individual military
commanders in different parts of Germany control over their own areas in a way that might actually
have inhibited a national policy of central coordination.
Paradoxically, the militarization didn't always make matters more effective.
The most synonymous with that militarization was the growth of what's often called the
silent dictatorship of Generals Hindenburg and Ludendorff from August of 1916, once they
had risen to the great power of the supreme command and established what amounted to a
military dictatorship in Germany.
Kaiser Wilhelm II was increasingly pushed to the margins, and there's a paradox here
that at the same time Allied propaganda continued to portray him as an evil mastermind that
had launched Germany's war effort and continued to control it.
Increasingly he was left out of the loop and very much resented what he saw as his own
mistreatment by Hindenburg and Ludendorff whom he sometimes referred to as the Siamese Twins.
Not fondly.
While even the mere threat of their resignation sufficed for Hindenburg and Ludendorff to win
again and again their own way, they were able to evade political responsibility by acting
behind the scenes.
This first popularity was symbolized by a huge wooden idol that was established to him
in Berlin that really represented a trust in his leadership.
In fall of 1916, this military dictatorship duo launched the so-called Hindenburg Plan.
It was an approach that was later ironically called war socialism, a term that would have
terrified German conservatives before, but was now being used by the government in order
to organize the war effort.
As one of its key aspects, the so-called Auxiliary Service Law of December 2nd, 1916 drafted
all men in Germany from 17 to 60 years of age for war important jobs.
New goals were set for arms production.
Machine guns were to be expanded, the production of cannon as well by astronomical proportions.
Military union representatives were added to committees and a corporatist model, as
it was called, was introduced in order to steer the German war effort.
There were even suggestions that women should be drafted, but this, at least for now, was
too radical.
Forced labor from Belgium and Poland, people under military occupation, was used by the
Germans in violation of international law.
While Germany attempted this ambitious centralizing control in a very militarized authoritarian
way, paradoxically, it was not always the most effective or efficient, and often gambled
by neglecting civilian needs.
As war production was emphasized, civilian needs might fall by the wayside.
The case of Great Britain is an interesting contrast in this regard.
Great Britain's liberal traditions shaped its war effort.
At first, in the opening stages of the war, the liberal government of Asquith was in spirit,
only felt unsuited to the war, more passive, less prone to energetic direction of the war
effort.
That would have to change.
Lord Kitchener was made secretary of state for war and pursued these goals.
After a shell shortage scandal of the sort that was to be found in many competent countries,
British liberals accepted conservatives into the cabinet in May of 1915, really representing
vividly the sort of domestic truce that was supposed to obtain in this time of national
emergency.
In 1914, Britain was also unique among the great powers for not having conscription,
not having a draft, but instead following the liberal tradition of a volunteer army.
In quick order, it fielded the largest volunteer army in the world, of a million men.
War minister Lord Kitchener had created a mass volunteer army called the New Army to
replace the decimated professional troops, the British expeditionary force that had taken
a beating on the continent.
Many so-called pals battalions answered his call.
These were units where friends could sign up and together enlist and be ensured that
they would serve together.
The side effect of such a strategy was that in some cases entire communities could be
decimated in short order, given the losses on the western front of such local pals battalions.
In spite of expectations that in economic terms business as usual would continue as
a popular phrase of the time went, it needed in fact as many increasingly recognized to
be reorganized and structured.
In July of 1915, a so-called Ministry of Munitions was established under David Lloyd George,
a really remarkable British politician who went by the nickname sometimes of the Welsh
Wizard.
He was often considered the people's tribune of the radical wing of the Liberal Party,
in many ways a populist politician, one who was bursting with energy and dynamism and
a tremendous ambition as well.
He threw himself into the work of reorganization of the British war effort.
The munitions ministry dealt with a shell shortage scandal as we mentioned a moment ago,
built a huge staff of 65,000 officials and introduced new control and drive into mobilization
for war.
British unions cooperated with the government.
British businesses were allowed huge profits but could be shut down if they were inefficient.
Pub closing times, something that continues to our own times, were decreed to maximize
productivity and not have workers wasting their time in public houses rather than in
the factories.
At the same time, food rationing and rent control regulated living standards to guarantee
a certain minimum of welfare.
Breaking with longstanding liberal tradition, at long last in January of 1916, conscription
was introduced, emphasizing the increasing role of the state even in a liberal state
like Great Britain.
Also indicative of this process was the so-called Defense of the Realm Act, or Dora, known by
its acronym, an act that was passed to the very start of the war which gave the British
government extensive new powers to arrest dissenters or to shut down offending newspapers,
a radical expansion of state power.
When Asquith's government fell due to lack of confidence, it was replaced by Lloyd George's
coalition war cabinet.
His ambition had reached its height now.
He was prime minister at the age of 53, attaining this rank in December of 1916.
And we'll speak in a later lecture about how he yet further would transform the British
war effort.
In France, the French war effort was beset by ambiguities.
It was less successful in industrial expansion.
On the other hand, it was spared the food shortages seen elsewhere.
In part this had to do with the geography of the German occupation.
Those northeastern areas that had been occupied by the Germans represented many of the key
industrial areas of France itself.
The loss of industry was stunning.
The occupied areas included some 75% of French coal production and almost 80% of its steelmaking
capacity.
But in the hinterland, France's agricultural potential still remained.
The improvised economy that resulted was marked by what was sometimes jokingly and self-critically
called system D in French, meaning to simply muddle through or improvise.
Critical divisions of the previous decades in French democratic life reasserted themselves.
France also reeled from its huge losses at the start of the war, which gave a special
poignancy to many of these debates.
France had borne the initial brunt of the German invasion.
In the first 16 months of the war, France had experienced almost half of all of its
wartime casualties, with more than 600,000 killed.
And French politics also was marked by this sort of turmoil.
During the initial announcement of the Union Sacré, the Sacred Union, René Viviani's
center-left government had expanded to include all of the major parties in sort of a government
of national unity.
Eventually, the great orator Ariste Brion succeeded Viviani, but through the first three
years of the war in France, civil and military officials struggled over who would control
the war effort.
Would it be dominated by civil officials or by the army?
The French army mutinies in 1917, the result from the disastrous Nivelle offensives in
the Champagne that we've discussed in an earlier lecture, marked a decisive crisis and really
introduced a revolutionary new force into French domestic politics.
Extensive reorganization would be undertaken under civilian leadership.
On fall of 1917, under the new premier Georges Clemenceau, a radical politician and a journalist
possessed oddly enough of some similarities to David Lloyd George, the dynamic British
politician, likewise populist, likewise ambitious, and determined to bring the war to a successful
conclusion.
Less successful cases in the adventure, we might call it, of the growth of the wartime
state and of mobilization, were not coincidentally the much more conservative and authoritarian
multinational empires of Russia and Austria-Hungary.
First of all, they were not able to call upon the powers of nationalism to mobilize their
people, but beyond this they were also much more conservative and less advanced in terms
of their own industrialization and organization.
Russia, for its part, could only effectively arm about a fourth of its soldiers, and there
were disastrous cases of Russian troops being sent into battle with instructions that even
though they had no rifles, that they should move up to the front and pick up rifles from
the first dead men that they saw.
Even the legendary and allegedly characteristic immense patience of Russian peasant armies
might finally start to break down in a sort of fury as it became clear even to these peasant
soldiers that their lone lives were not being taken seriously.
In a great mistake as well, politically, that we mentioned in an earlier lecture, in 1915,
after the great defeats of that year, Tsar Nicholas II himself took over personally military
command of the Russian armies, and thereafter he would be personally blamed for disasters.
Some 76% of Russia's industrial base by 1917 was devoted to war production, and that was
an impressive figure, but ultimately that industrial base itself remained too small and inefficient
to keep up with the demands of war.
We might add to that also the tremendous burden of millions upon millions of refugees
that had fled into the Russian interior after the great retreat as well of 1915.
The other conservative empire's structural problems resembled those of Russia, though
on a smaller scale, and in particular, this was a very ominous event, a pillar of this
multinational empire's stability seemed to collapse with the death of the aged emperor
Franz Josef in November of 1916.
He'd been working at his desk only a few hours previously, testimony to his great sense of
obligation, which often was recognized with a sense of personal loyalty by different ethnic
groups of the Habsburg Empire.
It wasn't clear whether the empire would last long after his own death, and that's precisely
what would transpire, the collapse of the empire.
But for now, he was succeeded by his grand-nephew, Emperor Karl I, who was tremendously popular
because of his youth and his vitality.
He was known at large as the people's emperor, and many great hopes were vested in him.
Karl I reconvened the parliament, which had been suspended during the war in May of 1917,
but his hopes for reforms were shattered by the almost immediate ethnic conflicts and demands
for autonomy by some national groups which were voiced ceaselessly within that revived
parliament.
In conclusion, we want to examine on sort of the broadest theoretical scale some of
the liabilities or the problems that could confront any of these wartime states in the
context of a war economy and its demands.
Inflation was a phenomenon that was consciously and deliberately used by the wartime powers
as a way of growing or expanding their wartime economies.
In part, this was done out of the expectation, which seemed reasonable at the time, of not
having to bear the costs of the war ultimately in the final analysis when it was all over
oneself.
The expectation was rather that reparations would be paid by the defeated coalition, which
one always assumed was not oneself, but the other side.
Inflation thus, the increase in the money supply, the running of printing presses as
money eventually would lose some of its purchasing power, increasingly lose its purchasing power
on the home front, was pursued as a deliberate strategy.
And war loan drives were intended to encourage people to buy war bonds as a way of soaking
up some of this inflated currency.
The real exception to this trend, however, was Great Britain, where taxes there paid
for about a third of the costs of the war effort itself.
And in the other warring powers, taxes were seen as too much of a risky burden to impose
at this volatile time.
At the same time, the ravages of inflation in particular and the transformations and
trans-evaluations in a sense of who was worth most in the new wartime economy could produce
large social changes.
Social and economic realities on the home front were transformed as some groups fared
better than others on the home front.
And some of those reversals of status could be tremendously disruptive and anxiety-producing
to a great many people.
To give but some examples, skilled industrial workers, metal workers in particular who were
crucial to the production of munitions were prized, sought after by the booming wartime
economies, and also rewarded with rising wages, which in greater or lesser measure could at
least keep up with the inflation that was eating away at the purchasing power of an
ordinary person on the home front.
By contrast, middle-class citizens, teachers, officials in local bureaucracies who were on
fixed incomes, who earlier had enjoyed a sense of status elevated above that of the
proletariat or the middle class, might to the contrary find their own status-sinking
now and their purchasing power being eroded ever more steadily by inflation.
By contrast, there certainly were some winners.
The owners of particular war industries on occasion flourished enormously, winning enormous
fortunes that the governments in fact allowed them as an incentive for wartime productivity
in production.
But the sight of such millionaires or billionaires flaunting their wealth at a time of growing
social privation could start to tear away at the sense of social unity that had been so
important symbolically at the start of the war.
A further element that over time would undermine trust in the government was the existence of
the illegal black market for food in particular.
As wartime conditions on the home front harshened, ever more people participated in the black
market.
And by participating in this illegal activity, themselves in some sense were already putting
themselves outside of the bounds of legality, weakening their trust in a government that
after all, even though people clamored for it, was not capable of provisioning the home
front sufficiently.
Social tensions would also grow between those who could afford to buy on the black market
and those who could not.
Let's conclude by considering the overall result of this phenomenon.
The experience of the growth and the vast expansion of the power of wartime states produced
something profound, a fundamental break in practice as well as increasingly in thought
with earlier classical liberal conceptions of a limited role of government and a sphere
of privacy where the government should not intrude or coordinate.
Instead, this had everything to do with the wartime context, in a time of total war states
were increasingly expected to mobilize society and solve problems.
Populations might actually clamor for more state involvement to meet the emergency of
the hour.
And the growth of the power of the state was matched by the increased prestige of ideas
of collectivism, of the state providing for the society at large.
Ironically, as we've seen in our investigation today of the track records of mobilizing wartime
states, more democratic states could turn out to be very efficient.
While ironically, German ambitions for total mobilization, authoritarian as they were,
were flawed in practice but nonetheless in a dreadful sort of paradox would often become
an ideal for many later planners thinking about how to organize for total war precisely
because of the scope of their ambitions, even if not fully realized.
We've discussed in today's lecture the crucial phenomenon of mobilizing wartime societies
through the state.
And we'll examine the concept of propaganda, the mobilizing of hearts and minds in our
next lecture.
