Lecture 22 Descent and its Limits
In this lecture, we'll be considering descents, that's to say, those voices raised in protest against the war and its madness,
and the limits that were placed on that descent by warring states.
In our earlier lecture, we had discussed the tremendous pressure which the war experienced placed upon the home front and civilian societies.
And obviously, such a tensing of national energies for all-out war would very clearly reduce social tolerance for descent.
Many who had objected to the war in the abstract before 1914 as a principle, as part of a principled or philosophical political stance,
had actually found themselves swept along by the riptide of nationalism in 1914 and the august madness prominent among the many socialists.
Nonetheless, a range of voices started to speak out against the war, often at considerable cost to those who were engaged in this descent.
This lecture will discuss the waves of strikes and growing workers unrest that expressed the increased war weariness, which was gripping many of the fighting societies.
We'll examine the quiet protests of pacifists and often lonely conscientious objectors who were opposed to the war on principle.
We'll examine the angry condemnation of the war by a decorated British officer, Siegfried Sassoon.
We'll also investigate the growing confidence of radical socialists, including Vladimir Lenin, Rosa Luxemburg, and Karl Liebknecht,
who were not only opposed to the war, but also saw the war in a larger sense as an opening for a world revolution growing out of this disaster.
Let's begin by examining the growing unrest which already signified in a very real sense that the earlier announced domestic truces were crumbling.
After the first two years of the war, this growing discontent could be seen in many of the fighting countries.
Before the war itself, workers' strikes and militancy of unions had reached a new intensity in Europe.
With the outbreak of the war, however, in 1914, strike activity was suspended.
This was part of this supposed domestic truce, the sense that everyone was working together for total victory in total war.
But after such an initial period of lessening of domestic and industrial tensions, strike activity reappeared in 1916.
Strikes increased and would become more vocal over time, and obviously the implicit threat was that dissatisfaction with working conditions
or with the state of one's own life or living standards could over time start taking on political overtones,
which might very well undermine the cohesion of a fighting country.
To give just some key examples, in Germany where the Social Democratic Party had integrated itself into the domestic truce,
it wasn't always capable of keeping the workers under its control, and indeed a certain militancy from below might start disrupting the internal truce.
In May of 1916, for instance, in Berlin, 50,000 German workers stopped work for three days
in order to protest the arrest of radical socialist leader Karl Liebknecht, who was speaking out against the war.
Strikes at this time were also increasing in France and in Britain.
This sort of strike activity would also reach a new crescendo in April of 1917
when 200,000 Berlin workers again went on strike to protest reduced food rations.
Similar strike activity was growing in France as well as in Britain in the time,
and interestingly enough, women workers would be taking a very important role in these protests and in these meetings and strikes.
Nonetheless, governments had insisted from the first on limiting the expression of protest against the war.
Censorship was the rule of the day in all of the warring powers.
An opposition to the war, wherever it might be expressed, was harshly suppressed as a symptom of defeatism,
a symptom of a lack of will, or maybe even the positive intention of undermining the war effort of one's own country.
And indeed, the effort to suppress this sort of opinion, even voices for negotiated peace, could go to extremes.
In France, even a former prime minister by the name of Joseph Caillot was sent to prison, charged with treason.
A former interior minister of France was exiled as well.
Suspect newspaper editors were imprisoned and some were even executed in France.
In Great Britain, the Defense of the Realm Act allowed for extensive censorship as well.
Nonetheless, desires for peace in this world conflict were strong enough that they could indeed find expression at many levels and in many different ways.
One important example of voices for peace came from the neutral powers.
And in this context of diplomatic history, one of the most important phenomena were the repeated attempts
made by the United States President Woodrow Wilson to urge the warring powers to find a basis for negotiation
and to come to the negotiating table to work out some sort of plan for peace.
After repeated attempts in December of 1916, Woodrow Wilson made a last unsuccessful effort to get the opposed sides to state their war aims.
This was unsuccessful, but Woodrow Wilson's formulation of a suggested peace without victory, as the phrase went.
The notion of somehow bringing the murderous madness to a close without a decisive total victory for one side or another
was resisted by the political leaders of the warring countries, but could hold increasing appeal to ordinary people as war weariness set in.
The case of Austria-Hungary was especially keen.
Its leadership was increasingly desperate to somehow bring about a peace,
intuiting that only an immediate peace offered some chance of survival for an imperial regime that was visibly starting to break down.
The young Emperor Karl, who had replaced his granduncle Franz Josef in 1917 on the throne,
started to make indirect secret diplomatic advances to the French, in particular,
to test whether there were chances for peace, whether there was the possibility of a negotiated settlement.
It's fascinating that he did so, he made these diplomatic advances through the use of very traditional channels,
through the aristocratic network of kinship that still obtained even in a warring Europe.
One of his relatives, an aristocrat, was serving in the Belgian army on the opposing side, the Allied side,
and thus was used for the ability to channel his messages to the French leadership.
However, these overtures, which didn't amount to anything in the last analysis,
were finally revealed to the public, to world opinion, by a spiteful French leader, Georges Clemenceau,
in part simply a way of showing that, well, the Central Powers must be weak if they're making such advances for a negotiated peace.
The embarrassment that followed for Austro-Hungarian leaders was keen, as well as for the Central Powers at large.
Austria-Hungary was forced to grovel before its senior ally, Germany, in repentance of this ill-advised gesture.
And many German leaders started increasingly to feel that if Austria-Hungary was slated for extinction,
well, then perhaps Germany found itself in the position, as they put it, of being shackled to a corpse,
and that this represented a liability in Germany's war effort.
Nonetheless, another very important voice in terms of attempts to bring peace about came with the intervention of the Pope of the Roman Catholic Church.
Pope Benedict XV had been elected Pope in the very first weeks of the war in 1914,
and he really represented an attempt to speak out against the murderous madness seen on the battlefield, which he condemned as a senseless slaughter.
He circulated a peace note as a special papal initiative for peace in August 14 of 1917.
This letter was simply disregarded by all fighting sides.
In the encyclicals, the papal letters and appeals which Benedict XV published, he urged peace,
and he also maintained a very strict neutrality in the conflict and in the process was criticized for this neutrality by both sides.
The reason for the neutrality was clear.
On the one hand, the Pope, after all, was the spiritual leader of Catholics fighting on both sides,
on the part of the allies, as well as the central powers.
At the same time, it was felt by Benedict XV that a neutrality which was thoroughgoing offered the best chance of bringing about compromise.
To give but one example, Benedict XV condemned both the cruelties of German submarine warfare and the sinking of the Lusitania, for instance,
as well as the British naval blockade against Germany, which was causing so much civilian suffering.
The result was that both sides found his stance completely unacceptable and saw him as undermining their war effort.
By an almost perfect parallel, French nationalists accused this Italian pope of being essentially Germany's pope,
while German nationalists accused him in turn of being the French pope in his sympathies.
Nonetheless, through quiet diplomacy, the Vatican organized special collections for the relief of war-ravaged areas,
but its diplomatic initiatives amounted in the last analysis to nothing more than a moral voice speaking out against war.
In spite of such widespread desires as could be perceived among civilian populations for peace,
government leaderships felt the need to continue the war because their fear grew that anything less than a total victory,
which would vindicate the sacrifices that had been made in the long years of the war,
would be seen as weakness and bankruptcy of their own regimes, and revolution might follow.
To put it more basically, victory seemed to be the only promise of security and stability for one's own regime and society.
And thus, clearly likewise, any expression of readiness for peace by the enemy was viewed as an admission of the enemy's weakness,
and thus all the more reason to fight on to a successful conclusion.
The admission on one's own part of war-weariness also was condemned as defeatism.
Nonetheless, one could find particular and compelling individual cases of pacifism,
that's to say the praise of peace as an ultimate value, and personal pleas for an end to the war.
We need to be clear on one key fact in discussing pacifism.
Pacifism was not a single uniform philosophical stance.
If it had been, it might have had more effect.
Pacifists could be people who objected to any war, to any war as such.
They could also be people who objected to this war and its war aims and how it was being fought,
or they could be people who simply objected to allowing this war to go on any longer,
feeling that if it had initially a meaning, as a war of defense,
then certainly one could, through negotiation, bring the war to some sort of satisfactory close.
And one's pacifist convictions could be rooted in any number of philosophical stances.
The reasons could be religious conviction, or simply ethical convictions, or both.
When the draft was instituted in Great Britain in January of 1916, pacifists came to the fore.
They did so entitled as conscientious objectors,
meaning people who, for reasons of conscience, for reasons of their world outlook, objected to the war itself.
Such a stance was often not popular in a population that was mobilized for war,
and conscientious objectors were sometimes derisively nicknamed conches.
These conscientious objectors, who protested against being drafted into military service,
were grilled repeatedly and very aggressively by examining boards that were very reluctant to concede any compromise in this regard.
And nonetheless, there were some 16,000 British conscientious objectors who were recognized as such by these examining boards.
And most of those served during the war in alternative capacities as stretcher-bearers or behind the lines.
Even when the objections and the reservations of such conscientious objectors were accepted,
they were often personally vilified at home as traitors or defeatists.
And the practice we had earlier mentioned of young women pinning white feathers on men not in uniform
underlined this in Britain, but the emotion was to be found in other countries as well.
At the same time, very eloquent and heartfelt statements of sort of a personal plea against the madness of war
were to be found among writers and poets.
While many were mobilized for the war, others took a different stance.
The French writer Henri Barbus, for instance, in 1916, published the novel Under Fire.
This was a realistic portrayal of the reality of war and combat, and literary historians are still amazed to this very day
that a book so realistic and so unsparing in its descriptions could have been allowed to appear even under wartime censorship.
The famous British poet Siegfried Sassoon was a highly decorated soldier who had fought on the British side
in the trenches of the Western Front, who as a result of his experiences came to question the war.
And in a public letter in 1917, rejected the further conduct of the war as senseless bloodletting
and threw away his medal in a symbolically powerful act.
Only the diagnosis of shell shock, which was given by military doctors, a diagnosis that he didn't agree with himself,
averted the harsh punishment that likely would have awaited his principled stance.
Similarly, the British novelist and poet Robert Graves survived a long war deal in the trenches
and wrote one of the great memoirs of the First World War, Goodbye to All That, stressing many of the same emotions.
Writers who themselves were not soldiers who were more remote from the war itself
were also to be found among those who took a stance against the conflict.
They included the Austrian writer Stefan Zweig, the French writer Romain Roland,
who together mourned the slaughter that they saw destroying a European civilization that they prized.
And indeed, Stefan Zweig entitled his memoir of this wrenching period, The World of Yesterday,
a feeling that entire civilization was lost in the course of the bloodletting of the First World War.
In the great comic masterpiece The Good Soldier, Schweig, the Czech writer Jaroslav Hasek,
depicted an ordinary soldier, Schweig, who without enunciating great principles or personal pacifism,
nonetheless in his own bumbling fashion by misinterpreting orders willfully and by simply being inefficient,
a very real sense also was engaged in a kind of protest or resistance against the war.
We need to turn to examine the case of a group for political reasons who had been committed to opposition to war
and the tremendous overturning of the earlier philosophical and political stances that they had taken before the war
that 1914 represented. And this was the socialist movement.
The international socialist movement had experienced an internal crisis in 1914 that quite literally tore the movement apart.
In the days of the August Madness, the earlier commitments to frustrating a global war
and the commitments to stop a capitalist conflict simply went by the boards.
We need to go back a little bit to examine the prehistory of these commitments
and the ultimate disappointing rift in the movement.
The so-called Second Socialist International had been founded in 1889
to join together different socialist parties from different countries, different national parties,
into a worldwide movement that would coordinate its ideas and its actions,
and they were officially pledged to resist the outbreak of a capitalist war.
Of course, as we know, that's not what happened in August of 1914.
Instead of doing what they had pledged, closing down the war with a general strike,
the individual national parties of the socialists, the German party, the French party,
other parties had rallied to their individual nation's cause and had voted for war.
The most prominent, the largest, the best organized socialist party in the world
had been Germany's Social Democrats, and it's compelling to see how at this hour of crisis
Germany's Social Democrats saw themselves as caught up in the national cause of self-defense,
further arguing that in particular by fighting against the conservative Russian Empire,
Germany's workers were in some sense serving the larger cause of progress and socialism.
Other socialists in other countries found similar reasons to support their own states,
and this came as a great surprise indeed to many socialists themselves
and to the governments that earlier had been suspicious of socialist motives.
Government plans in a number of countries for the arrest of socialist leaders
at the outbreak of the war were simply shelved because the enthusiastic support for the war
the socialists showed made them unnecessary.
Socialists indeed entered the governments in Britain and in France,
showing the sort of newfound acceptance that socialists enjoyed in the political establishment.
At the same time, it needs to be pointed out that not all socialists went along with his turn of events.
Not all socialists went to war enthusiastically.
Italy's Socialist Party, for instance, consistently resisted the war,
and so too did so-called radical socialists.
Among them, the Russian radical socialist called Bolsheviks,
led by the revolutionary Vladimir Lenin.
Radical socialists denounced the war and argued that now that war had come,
it should be used as an opportunity for international revolution.
In April 1917 in Germany, a group split off from the Social Democratic Party,
disappointed with what they saw as its failure of nerve in the crucial moment of the outbreak of the war.
This was the so-called independent Social Democratic Party,
which saw itself as upholding the real Social Democratic ideals.
It included radicals like Carl Liebknecht, who had refused to vote for war credits in December of 1914.
The first voices within the Social Democratic Party really renouncing and denouncing the war.
Also, his colleague Rosa Luxemburg,
a really remarkable woman revolutionary originally of Polish-Jewish origins,
who had moved to Germany and had started to champion a very internationalist understanding
of how the masses in all countries should renounce nationalism
and rise up to overthrow through their revolutionary spontaneity
the existing regime and usher in a new age.
Such radical socialists broke with a moderate Social Democrats and set off on a more radical course.
The Russian Bolsheviks in particular, led by Lenin, had denounced support for any side in this war.
Attempts were made during the conflict itself to repair the damage
that had been done to international unity of the socialist movement,
in particular in international conferences.
In an attempt to rebuild this fractured sense of unity,
socialist representatives met in conferences that were organized in neutral Switzerland.
At the Simerwald Conference, for instance, in September of 1915,
the splits were clearly in evidence and could not be repaired.
In the April 1916 Keenthal Conference, a renewed attempt to resolve differences failed once again.
But a powerful voice was to be heard, that of Lenin and other radical socialists
who sought to promote their notions of an immediate revolution,
whereas the majority of socialists were instead trying to come up with a formula for peace.
The radical socialists emphasized using the war as an opportunity for revolution.
A planned international socialist conference, the Stockholm Conference of September 1917,
failed to bring together the movement finally.
And as a result of these failures, the voice of Lenin grew in volume and significance.
Let's turn to examine his message.
Lenin's background was a fascinating one.
He was born not as Lenin, that was his revolutionary pseudonym.
He was born originally under the name of Vladimir Ilyich Ulyanov
into an upper middle-class family in the Russian Empire.
But he was radicalized, as many intellectuals would be,
but in his case when his older brother was executed as a terrorist in 1887 by the Tsarist regime.
Hating that conservative regime, Lenin took on a new identity as a committed revolutionary,
denouncing traditional religion, denouncing liberalism and democracy,
denouncing the Tsarist regime and espousing radical Marxism.
Active as a revolutionary conspirator, Lenin devoted his life to the revolution.
Indeed, a contemporary said that Lenin was remarkable for living the revolution every moment of his life.
Lenin was, in quick order, arrested, deported to Siberia,
and then lived in exile, as many Russian revolutionaries did outside Russia, from 1900 to 1917.
In 1903, Lenin led a split in the Russian Social Democratic Party.
He led a faction called the Bolsheviks, the name means majority in Russian,
which he claimed represented a new type of party.
Now, it said something about their ability to maneuver and political acumen
that even though this was a smaller fraction of the party itself,
they had won for themselves the title of majority by being in the majority at crucial party meetings
when the split took place.
Lenin argued that the Bolsheviks were a new type of party,
one that was marked by severe internal discipline, professional revolutionary identity,
and centralized control, all acting together as a vanguard of the people at large
to show them the way and in order to direct their efforts in a purposeful fashion.
The Bolshevik Party, according to Lenin, could actually force history to speed up.
It could accelerate the sort of natural development towards a worker's revolution that Marx had foretold.
And indeed, the Bolshevik Party, through its discipline, through its visionary understanding
of the science of revolution, could lead the masses towards the future.
But in its theories, Lenin faced a very serious problem.
Marxism seemed to be very unsuited to Russian conditions of industrial underdevelopment
and the lack of a strong proletariat or industrial working class in Russia's lagging industrial scene.
This was a very serious problem.
Essentially, you couldn't make a worker's revolution, it seemed, without a working class.
How would Lenin deal with this problem?
It was a key philosophical challenge for him.
As Lenin wrestled with some of these issues, the outbreak of the war found Lenin in exile in Austria-Hungary.
At first, he had to evade arrest as a suspected spy for the Tsarist regime.
Nothing could have been more absurd.
And with difficulty, he managed to flee to neutral Switzerland.
That veritable beehive of diplomats, spies, and revolutionaries in exile.
While there, Lenin formulated a clear answer, as he understood it,
to the theoretical challenges he had wrestled with of how to make revolution in Russia
when Marxist orthodox theory would have suggested this was unlikely to happen.
In a book that was produced in 1916 entitled,
Imperialism, the highest stage of world capitalism,
Lenin laid out a clear argument.
And in fact, in some sense, the title said it all.
Imperialism, the highest stage of world capitalism.
Lenin argued that the World War was a historical milepost.
It was a sign that history was moving towards the inevitable crisis which Marx had foretold.
The outbreak of the war had been caused by the crisis in capitalism
and the tensions that had grown between nations as a result of capitalist competition.
That meant that history was now reaching a decisive turning point.
Lenin argued that this war between nations and empires could be exploited.
It could be turned into a civil war between classes,
not nations, but between the proletariat, the toiling masses,
and the ruling classes exploiting them.
And this is where Russia came into the picture.
Imperial Russia, with its industrial underdevelopment comparatively,
represented in some sense the most promising spot to break through.
Russia was the weakest link in the chains of the capitalist world system, according to Lenin.
And thus, it was the ideal location to stage a revolution growing out of Russian defeat.
Lenin would now present himself quite explicitly as a defeatist.
Russian defeat could produce revolution, and this in turn could spark a larger process.
It's very important to keep this in mind.
For Lenin, revolution in Russia was not an end in itself.
It wouldn't stop there.
Indeed, precisely because of the globalized nature of capitalism, according to Lenin,
revolution in Russia would only be the beginning.
It would be the spark for a revolution that would sweep the world.
The revolution would be internationalized and spread.
But the question arose, how could that revolution be started?
Lenin, after all, was in Swiss exile, and he could only sit and wait for some opportunity for action.
In his darker moments, Lenin sometimes despaired of seeing the revolution break out in his own lifetime.
Nonetheless, as it turns out, the opportunity he had been longing for was just around the corner,
and in 1917 he would feel that his hour had arrived.
We've discussed in this lecture the voices raised in protest against the war and condemning it.
In counterpoint to the massive mobilization for victory in war.
It was precisely in the contest and in the debate of such voices that one would increasingly hear contemporaries
talking about the last years of the war as, in essence, not so much a race towards victory,
but a race to see which of the fighting sides would collapse first.
And this would call forth a new and remarkable effort after years of violence and sacrifice
to remobilize for the last stage of the war.
This remarkable remobilization of 1916 and 1917 on the part of all of the fighting powers we'll consider in our next lecture.
