Lecture 23 Remobilization in 1916-1917
In this lecture, we'll be examining the case of the challenge that faced the warring powers
in 1916 and 1917 of regathering the energies that had earlier been mustered already in 1914
for one final effort in order to win total war.
In our earlier lectures, we've talked about the increasing strains felt on the home front
and the rising voices of dissent or protest that were audible as well.
In this lecture, we'll consider how the challenge that faced these wartime societies
was that of reinvigorating the war effort in these last years of the war.
Historians have called this phenomenon a remobilization of energies for the fight to the finish.
If the initial internal truces and sense of domestic unity had started to crumble,
now very clearly it would be necessary as the war dragged on and as its disintegrating effects
could be seen on the home front as well as in the armies and in the breakdown of political unity
as well as in the growing waves of worker strikes, it would now be necessary in case after case
to remuster those energies.
And we'll be examining in this lecture some selected cases of precisely this phenomenon of remobilization.
We'll examine how in Britain, a new energetic wartime government under David Lloyd George,
sometimes nicknamed the Welsh Wizard, came to power.
We'll examine how in France, George Clemenceau's new government reasserted civilian control
over the war effort and infused it with new energy.
We'll also turn to the case of Germany, very different from these earlier, more democratic countries
where the silent military dictatorship, as it's sometimes called,
of Generals Hindenburg and Ludendorff sought to shore up the popularity of these war leaders
with a propaganda campaign of patriotic instruction, as it was called,
and an expansive list of war aims that it was hoped would appeal to German society and motivate it.
And then we'll turn finally to examine two cases of failed remobilization.
In the case of Austria-Hungary, remobilization didn't happen,
and we'll examine some of the background reasons for that absence.
In the case of Russia, the picture was complicated further by the tremendous strain of the war
and revolutionary events that we'll close with.
First we need to speak to the increasing strains that we've already been outlining in previous lectures.
After the first two years of the war, growing strains and weariness were to be felt in the warring societies,
and political leaders in all of the warring countries recognized an urgent need to reconfigure the war effort,
to put it on more efficient and more systematic footing.
It was clear that the domestic truces of the start of the war,
so important symbolically fused in those moments of the August madness of 1914,
that those domestic truces were everywhere either under desperate strain or already breaking down,
and strikes as well as voices of dissent were symptoms of this breakdown.
In this context, and this is a real key towards an understanding of some of the dynamics that work in the First World War,
democratic countries like France or Great Britain, though they were not perfectly democratic in terms of the franchise,
the women were not allowed to vote, the franchise in Britain moreover still had its limits,
but democratic countries such as these seem to have an inbuilt advantage in remobilization and in mobilizing for war as well,
because in some sense by their very democratic tradition and process that predated the war itself,
they had the advantage of having mechanisms already in place for compromising,
for creating some sort of cohesive consensus out of these frictions.
By contrast, even though perhaps less fractious, less given to vigorous internal debate,
and thus seemingly more monolithic, perhaps seemingly more powerful, the empires were at a disadvantage.
In particular, Russia and Austria-Hungary, with their limited experience of this sort of vigorous democratic debate,
were most decidedly at a disadvantage, and they also faced the problem of not being able to use the powerful ideology of nationalism
as a motivating factor for all of their populations at large, given their multi-ethnic nature.
Germany itself, as we've stated before, had in the years before the First World War
been an odd combination of authoritarian mechanisms, as well as some pressures for democratization,
but as Germany took on a more authoritarian visage with the wartime dictatorship of Hindenburg and Ludendorff,
it too was at a disadvantage in this sense.
Nonetheless, special urgency was given to the efforts for remobilization on the part in particular of the Allies
by crises that hit them at precisely this period.
We've talked about some of these crises already in the course of our lectures,
just to recall them, offensives on the western front by the Allies were defeated.
Italian armies had been thrown back at the Battle of Caporetto in October of 1917,
and Italy seemed to dire straits at the time.
And then as well, Russia withdrew from the war.
We'll be talking more about this phenomenon in our later lecture on the Russian revolutions.
When the Bolsheviks come to power in Russia in November of 1917,
they simply leave the war in pursuit of their revolutionary agenda,
and this came as a tremendous blow to the Allied side having lost a key geopolitical partner in the conflict.
At the same time, it appeared to the Central Powers that they had very well won half of the war, the war on the eastern front.
So in particular, this period, the period of 1916 to 1917,
saw crises and reverses for the Allied side and a will to remobilization
to summon a revitalized sense of energy to fight the war to a finish.
Let's turn first to examine the case of Great Britain.
Britain's remobilization was driven by a remarkable personality,
that of the politician David Lloyd George.
David Lloyd George was a man of immense energy and ambition.
He's in fact been called a one-man Welsh revolution.
He functioned as a transformative power in British politics.
He was both a stormy and effective orator,
as well as a keen observer and practitioner of political behind-the-scenes dealings,
as well as having the sort of outsized personality that exercised a lot of charisma
in terms of pushing through his vision in politics.
Before the war, Lloyd George had been instrumental in crafting legislation
that had already started to lay the foundations for the modern welfare state.
That's to say a form of government that saw itself carrying obligations towards the civilian society at large.
And in this sense, there was a certain internal coherence to Lloyd George
later taking up the challenge of the mobilization of the wartime state with all of its new powers.
The fact, however, that Lloyd George had cooperated across the aisle, as it were,
from his own radical liberal convictions with conservatives in British politics
in bringing down Herbert Asquith's government created a lot of mistrust toward Lloyd George.
His critics saw him as a man without convictions, as a man whose ambition would know no bounds
and would allow him to engage in politically inconsistent actions simply to advance his own agenda.
But more fundamentally, David Lloyd George had objected to what he saw as a weak
and irresolute conduct of the war in the years before he personally came to power.
In this sense, his convictions dovetailed precisely with his own personal ambition.
And so it was in December of 1916 that David Lloyd George replaced Herbert Asquith
as prime minister of the British government and led its war effort.
Lloyd George reshuffled the deck fundamentally.
He replaced the previous large cabinet, which had intended to express by its very inclusiveness
the domestic truce of the first stages of the war with a war cabinet of only five persons,
who he saw as able to provide much more deliberate and targeted and energetic wartime leadership.
Under his own dynamic leadership, victory took priority,
and indeed one of his slogans became the fight to the finish.
In this context of seeing his own personal vision as taking priority,
consultation with Parliament was increasingly disregarded
in favor of a much more personal approach to the conduct of the war.
And as we've seen already in an earlier lecture on the war at sea,
Lloyd George was not shy about offering advice to military leaders as well.
I recall that Lloyd George had been particularly insistent upon trying the approach of using convoys
to carry shipping across the Atlantic as a way of frustrating the submarine warfare,
and his intuition, which ran counter to much of the received wisdom of military experts of the day,
had certainly been vindicated in the success of the convoy system.
A man who had a very strong personality likewise and didn't take kindly to Lloyd George's interventions
or suggestions was the controversial British General Hague,
and a running feud between Lloyd George and General Hague intensified
and was carried through the entire war, but Lloyd George never succeeded in ousting his own opponent.
Instead, this rivalry remained in place.
Let's consider the case of France, where similarly, in a democratic system,
a new and more vigorous approach to the war broke through.
The Union Sacré, the Sacred Union, the domestic truce of 1914,
the opening stages of the war had progressively broken down in French politics,
as some of those earlier, very vigorous fault lines of pre-war French Republican politics
had reasserted themselves.
In addition, in dispute was the question of whether civilian authorities
or military authorities should have priority in the conduct of the war,
and in its first stages emphatically, the military authorities had been expansive in their claims,
and those claims had, to a great extent, been agreed to by the civilian leadership.
This would all change with the arrival of a new leader on the scene.
President Poincaré, who had been the figurehead of the French government at this time,
found himself in dire straits needing a new premier, a new prime minister,
and he overcame a personal antipathy, a personal dislike and feud for one French politician in particular,
Georges Clemenceau, and appointed him prime minister in November of 1917
in recognition, in spite of their personal differences, that here was a man who would be capable of vigorous conduct of the war.
Clemenceau's nickname in French politics was the tiger,
and that was suggestive, along with his very dramatic mustache,
of the vigor and the energy with which he would approach the challenges of the war effort.
He was 76 years old at this time, but nonetheless remarkable for his energy and determination
that had initially given him that nickname, the tiger.
Clemenceau was not only a politician, he was also a journalist.
He had a long career in French politics.
He was a former mayor of Montmartre in Paris and really a long-standing presence in French political life.
He established civilian control over the French effort with himself at the helm
and really viewed himself as a war dictator.
This is a paradox.
In spite of his democratic convictions, he very much personalized the conduct of the war.
Clemenceau had several explanations for why this was vindicated,
why this was justified under the circumstances.
Clemenceau insisted in, I think, a very witty, but also very telling formulation that,
quote, the war is too serious a matter to be left to generals, end quote.
The suggestion was that war in its total reality as total war
had decisive political aspects that needed to be taken in mind.
At the same time, Clemenceau emphasized again and again his commitment to total victory.
He would have agreed entirely with David Lloyd George's slogan of the fight to the finish.
And in fact, at one point when Clemenceau had been asked what his particular war aims were,
he said, what are my war aims?
I'll tell you, victory, victory.
He gave priority to victory in the conflict over the details of a peace settlement,
emphasizing his total dedication to total victory.
At another point, he had a gift, as it turns out, for such phrases
that were intended to mobilize and invigorate French public opinion.
He was asked, what are his policies?
Clemenceau answered, what is my home policy?
I wage war.
My foreign policy, I wage war.
Always, I wage war.
And in this context of total commitment to victory, Clemenceau had very little toleration
for those who urged the course of negotiated peace.
Dissenters were arrested, jailed, or even executed under his direction.
In both Great Britain and France, in these more democratic mobilizations
or remobilizations of a society for war, propaganda of the variety
that we already discussed in our earlier lecture on propaganda
grew ever more coordinated and concerted in order to muster the will for the fight to the finish.
This involved things like the deployment of film trucks
and a message that was coordinated across many different media.
One way of doing this was in particular to stir fears of what German victory might mean
for France or for Great Britain, what these countries might be like under German rule.
And so very definitively here anxieties and fear were played upon
in order to reinvigorate the war effort through fear if necessary.
Let's turn now to the very interesting counter-example of remobilization in Germany.
In Germany, an increasingly restive and restless Reichstag, the German parliament,
had started to demand a more active role, perhaps a more democratic role,
for its parliamentary powers and for domestic reform within Germany itself.
In a very real way, this was an outgrowth of that first domestic truce, the so-called Burgfrieden.
If everyone was now united, as the Kaiser had claimed, as Germans, beyond parties,
well that meant too that Germans should have more of a political role in their own polity.
The response, however, of the imperial government was much more symbolic rather than real.
And one example of this, a visual example, came in 1916 when a German-Jewish firm
was hired to, as stone masons, to carve up a slogan on the parliament building itself
that read, to the German people.
Well, this was in some sense just a reiteration of that implied promise
that the German people at large would be taking more of a role in the future once the war was done.
And this same phenomenon of deferred promises was made in April of 1917
when Kaiser Wilhelm II, in some sense to help reinvigorate the war effort,
gave the so-called Easter message of that year,
promising reforms in the voting system of Prussia, which was not very equitable,
and also for more participation in politics to come.
All of these promises deferred to, however, a point after the war had been won.
This wasn't enough for many politicians in the Reichstag.
In particular, the politician Matthias Erzberger, who represented the Catholic minority in Germany,
started to call for a piece of reconciliation, as he and others called it.
In other words, a settlement to the peace that would not have clear winners or losers.
This led to a dramatic political event within Germany, the Reichstag peace resolution.
The German parliamentary majority, made up of the Social Democrats, the Catholic Center Party,
and the Progressive Party, with its more democratic convictions, passed a so-called peace resolution on July 19, 1917.
It was a little bit vague in its wording, but it nonetheless suggested
that one should leave the door open to a negotiated peace without annexations,
as to say occupation, without indemnities, meaning fines or reparations,
and the result should be a peace without winners or losers.
This was most certainly objected to by the political authorities.
The German Chancellor, Beethoven Hallweg, as well as the German war dictators essentially,
Hindenburg and Ludendorff, disapproved of this markedly.
And the reason that they disapproved of this, in the case especially of Hindenburg and Ludendorff,
is because they saw occupations and annexations as most definitely a key aspect of German war aims in this war.
It is both intriguing as well as a little bit frightening to get a view in on their psychology
as it emerges from these debates about German war aims at precisely this juncture.
Both Generals Hindenburg and Ludendorff were already thinking about the next war, beyond World War I.
They claimed that Germany's very difficulties in the conduct of the First World War,
the fact that they hadn't won an outright victory immediately,
suggested that its geopolitical situation had been vulnerable.
Germany needed, they argued, more territories in the West and in the East
to better its strategic position, to gain more industrial as well as agricultural resources,
and potentially to gain more manpower in the form of puppet regimes in Eastern Europe or elsewhere
for conduct more effectively of the next war.
This is simply mind-boggling in the context of such a total war already to be thinking about the war to come.
The result, however, of this peace resolution, which expressed the war weariness and desires for peace already current in much of society,
was a political embarrassment for Germany and the Central Powers more generally.
Beethoven Holweg was simply fired as Chancellor because it was clear that he had not managed to control the Parliament
with what few political powers had possessed in order to stop them from this gesture.
And the people who had clamored for his removal were none other than the war dictators Hindenburg and Ludendorff themselves.
It was clear that increasingly even a semblance of civilian leadership was fading in the face of their increased personal power as military dictators.
As Chancellor, Beethoven Holweg was replaced by a non-entity, a largely unknown former food controller by the name of George Michaelus,
a bureaucrat who robbed the resolution of its meaning by saying that, well, he agreed with it insofar as he interpreted it or understood it.
And the Parliament itself was unwilling to push a frontal confrontation with a supreme command given how important and popular they were at the time.
Nonetheless, within a divided German society, reactions set in against what some saw as the defeatism
and the inclination to opt out of anything, to opt out of a total victory expressed in the peace resolution.
Reacting against this initiative, there was a remarkable mobilization of German nationalists as well as militarists.
And they came together in a movement that was called the Fatherland Party.
The Fatherland Party was severe in its aims. It aimed to push for nothing less than a total victory, what they called a Hindenburg peace,
a peace, in other words, of annexation in which Germany would dictate the terms.
The Fatherland Party was founded in East Prussia in September of 1917 by Wolfgang Kopp, a Prussian politician,
and a historical actor that we've already talked about before, Admiral Tirpitz, who had resigned and discussed from the German Navy
because he viewed its disinclination to fight unrestricted submarine warfare as irresponsible and weak.
This man who had done so much to raise naval tensions in the years before World War I now joined in this nationalist mustering of forces.
And in short order, the Fatherland Party claimed to have a million or more members.
Whether those numbers are accurate or not, it was clear that this was something new.
A mobilization not by the government, but almost from below of forces clamoring for total victory.
And historians today still debate how we're to understand the Fatherland Party as a mass movement.
Some see it as an uncanny precursor to the later Nazi Party, in part because some members of this movement later in the 1920s and 30s
would go on to join Hitler's movement as well, so there are perhaps certain continuities there.
The German government at the same time also launched a new propaganda campaign in July of 1917 and called it patriotic instruction.
Lectures, talks, pamphlets, posters all urged the German people to hold out just a little bit longer until final victory arrived.
National energies needed to be tensed up for one last final effort that would bring victory, a promise of tremendous proportions.
I want to conclude by talking about less successful instances of remobilization, or indeed their very absence.
A race to collapse on the part of the conservative empires, Austria-Hungary and Russia.
These once great empires seemed now to be locked in a death race, essentially to see who would collapse first under the strains of total war.
Austria-Hungary, in spite of very ardent wishes on the part of its Habsburg leaders themselves, for an escape into peace that might allow their fragile regime to still survive,
had increasingly become subordinated to their larger partner, Imperial Germany, something that many German leaders resented, calling themselves essentially shackled to a corpse, the Austro-Hungarian Empire.
The Austro-Hungarian Empire never fully managed to remobilize, and in particular this had to do with the intense fragility of the system itself.
In a very real sense, the Austro-Hungarian army had been a crucial institution in holding the entire Imperial structure together.
Because regardless of their ethnic background, the officers of the Austro-Hungarian army, whether they were of German background or of Hungarian background,
whether they were Czechs or perhaps of another nationality, had started to understand themselves, had increasingly felt themselves to be above all servants of the Habsburg dynasty,
somehow above whatever national or ethnic differences they might have.
And it's precisely in this context that the devastating losses and tragedies of the first campaigns of the First World War for Austria-Hungary, its failures against Serbia, its defeats against the Russians,
really portended trouble to come, because those loyal officers of the Habsburg armies had been decimated in those initial failures.
And increasingly, they were replaced by newer replacements who were not imbued with the same ethos, but instead could bring nationalist convictions from their own ethnic group of the twelve major nationalities of the empire into play.
Nonetheless, what's truly striking is how, for instance, on the Italian front, the multinational Austro-Hungarian army had performed well into the late stages of the war.
The result was that in a process that linked the home front as well as the fighting front in the largest picture, the nationalist tensions that had been present before the war in Austria-Hungary
were quite literally starting to tear its structure apart, to the point where the new emperor, Carl, no longer dared even to try to reinvigorate the war effort,
precisely because concessions or promises to one ethnic group as opposed to another would simply serve to further heighten ethnic tensions.
The case of Russia was also unfolding with a sort of tragic grandeur.
From 1914 to 1916, Russia had suffered truly horrendous losses, and these losses would continue to haunt the Russian war effort.
From 1914 to 1916, in those first two years of the war, Russia had lost two million men killed, four to six million wounded or captured,
and now its armies were buckling increasingly in a process of disintegration, just like the Austro-Hungarian army having lost that very valuable core of officers who would be capable of leading the armies into battle.
The great retreat of 1915 had also shown that Russia was not ready for the strains of the war itself.
And then at a time, really in a form of what one might call remobilization, although not steered from above, revolutionary events took place in Russia in 1917.
The Tsarist regime was overthrown as a result of popular protests, and a new democratically oriented regime in Russia with liberal politicians at the helm was installed.
This new regime would try to engage in that same process of remobilization to continue the war to a successful finish that we've described for other regimes in the course of this lecture.
That attempt, however, would end in disaster, which we'll pursue in a later lecture on the Russian Revolution.
We'll be turning next to examine a tragic case in which the attempts at the mobilizing and the national reinvigoration of a war effort would lead to nothing less than racial mass murder, the genocide against the Armenians in Ottoman Turkey, examined in our next lecture.
