These lectures are part of the Great Courses series they are produced by the teaching company.
These lectures are titled World War I, The Great War, Part 3.
Chapter 25, Strains of War, Socialists and Nationalists.
In this lecture, we'll be discussing how those enormous pressures that had built up
on the home fronts as a result of the phenomenon of total war straining the societies at large
could ultimately produce revolutionary events.
We'll be examining the outgrowth both of social as well as national revolts growing
out of the world wars tearing at the structures of established states and empires in what
came to many to seem to be a race towards collapse.
In this lecture, we'll explore the growing divisions in wartime societies and the revolts
that they might on occasion produce.
We'll examine also the fascinating phenomenon of attempts not merely to win the war on the
battlefield but also through a policy called revolutionizing of actively promoting such
revolts in one's enemy's camp.
In 1917, war weariness had most certainly become a common phenomenon in the combatant
countries.
1917 in particular was marked by this war weariness as the suspicion dawned on the part
of many contemporaries that in a very real sense the war might last forever.
This sounds to us most certainly at our remove like an exaggeration, perhaps a figure of
speech, but after years of grinding warfare when reads in the accounts of contemporaries
the feeling that this war might very well last a generation or that it might be succeeded
by yet more conflict to come, a tremendously depressing and dark intuition.
Nonetheless, the war would be fought on all sides to the end, increasingly because the
alternatives seemed to be internal collapse.
Revolutionary pressures, both social as well as nationalist in nature, were growing.
We can usefully distinguish between these kinds of revolts so often the factors might
work in tandem or coincide.
Nationalist revolts were once in which demands were raised for changes to the structures
of authority within society or how that authority was disposing of the lives of troops or civilians.
Nationalist revolts on the contrary tended to be directed against an authority of a different
ethnic group.
Nationalist revolts would demand independence and self-determination for so-called submerged
peoples, ethnic groups who didn't have their own independent nation states.
People like the Irish or the Poles would be key examples of this.
Let's start by examining social revolts and then move on to consider national revolts.
Radical socialists, as we've already seen in our earlier lectures, came to favor a radical
prescription, Lenin's idea in particular, of turning the war between nations and between
empires into the occasion for a breakthrough towards a social revolution, as the formula
went turning a war between peoples into a civil war of classes.
At the same time, one could also see social revolts that didn't have anything so far
reaching as a plan for the revolutionizing of all world politics as Lenin was championing.
In particular, the armies of many of the competent powers started to experience a process
of disintegration, a loosening of discipline, a decline in morale.
And a key example of this we've already discussed briefly in an earlier lecture on the Western
Front where we talked about the French army mutinies that followed upon the disastrous
Champagne offensives of Nivelle in 1917.
This is truly a fascinating subject and it merits a closer examination because the French
mutinies of 1917 could certainly have changed the entire course of the war.
If the German forces had attacked in force against troops weakened in their defensive
powers, a breakthrough might have resulted, the sort of thing the generals on all sides
were dreaming about through the First World War.
General's attacks on the Anne River in April of 1917 had brought French units to the breaking
point.
In part this had to do with the massive expectations that Nivelle had raised.
He promised that in the course of several days it might be possible to smash through
the German lines and achieve what earlier attacks had not.
When those initial high expectations were disappointed and when the attacks nonetheless
dragged on, French troops reacted in ways that were really striking and quite radical.
Protests began to grow through the ranks of the French army.
Some troops that were ordered to move forward to attack would actually go into battle and
as they passed their officers would start making bleating noises like sheep, implying
that they were essentially animals being sent to the slaughter whose lives didn't matter
in the larger strategic picture.
Some units didn't engage in this sort of symbolic action but simply refused orders to go on
to the attack and soon disobedience was spreading through the ranks of the French army in May
and June of 1917.
But what it's interesting to observe is that this series of mutinies in fact was not directed
against all authority and against the notion of a defense of France.
In fact it was more carefully delimited and circumscribed.
Mutineering soldiers explained, even as they were refusing orders to attack, that this
was a patriotic strike, that what they were protesting was not the defense of France nor
were they advocating, most of them, the overthrow of the government.
What they were protesting rather was the way in which they were being treated, the way
in which their lives were not being carefully husbanded in the process of the war itself.
And a slogan of these mutineering soldiers that really summed up much of this complicated
nuanced position was, we'll defend the trenches but we will not attack.
Very clearly those French soldiers who were refusing orders had simply lost confidence
in the current leadership.
It's astonishing to observe in this context and really speaks a lot to the patriotic nature
of this military strike was that news of this did not trickle out to the Germans on the
opposing lines.
This was not a mutiny aiming to destroy the French war effort and news of it was not communicated
to the Germans.
In fact the German opposing forces didn't even learn of these mutinies until they were
all over and had been quelled.
And in a fascinating way the Germans, as it turns out, had been unable to exploit this
situation which, if exploited, might very well have produced a final German breakthrough
of the kind that had so long been hoped for on the western front.
The French authorities took determined action as the mutinies spread and in part they did
so by bringing up a man who did have the confidence of the troops.
This was the hero of Verdun, General Petain, who was brought in to restore order and he
did so largely because of the charisma that attached to his reputation as a man who had
defended Verdun but also understood the troops and valued them and their persons.
Petain now imposed a combination of harsh discipline and the restoration of order within
the ranks, on the one hand, with the assurance on the other hand that no more senseless offensives
unrealistic in their expectations would be launched.
And the result was fascinating.
In demonstrative disciplinary acts many of the mutineers were court-martialed in considerable
numbers but in point of fact few death sentences were actually carried out.
At the same time as the impression was being produced of severe discipline and no toleration
for such mutinies, rations and leaves for soldiers were being increased.
In other words, the stick was being combined with certain incentives.
Petain's reputation as a commander who had a very fatherly paternal concern for his troops
was crucial in this entire mixture.
Nonetheless, even Petain's own increased personal stature and charisma, his reputation
as a national hero, even this couldn't alter a fundamental fact that the mutinies had revealed,
the offensive spirit of the French army with which the war had been launched, the cult
of the offensive, all of this would never be recovered.
At the same time, though less dramatic than the French case, there were also instances
of discontent in the German ranks spreading as well.
This was less dramatic but certainly there was a simmering sense of disquiet among German
troops that could be summed up as it has been by military historians since as a hidden military
strike, nothing quite so outspoken as the French army mutinies of 1917 but a slower
sense of a growing resistance towards the sort of orders that earlier had been followed.
German officers complained that troops were often unwilling to accept orders to attack
and all of this began to spread its influence through the German ranks as well.
One reason for this was that many German soldiers could sense that the strategic and material
balance in this industrial war was turning against Germany and never more so than when
they actually had successfully taken Allied trenches and discovered in the bunkers and
in the fortifications a wealth of material provisions of the sort that they themselves
did not have, in part these were supplies coming from the United States.
At the same time, the cohesion of the German army, which was intended to be an expression
of that internal domestic truce or the Burgfrieden that was supposed to obtain in German society
as a whole, was breaking down as ethnic minorities within the German army were increasingly distrusted.
These include Poles from the German Eastern provinces or Alzations, that's to say in many
cases French speaking soldiers from Alsace and Lorraine who had been incorporated into
the German Empire after the Franco-Prussian War.
They were distrusted precisely because it was felt that they could not be entrusted with
a task of holding the line against people who might be related to them on the enemy side.
So for instance, soldiers from Alsace were left on the Eastern Front when troop transfers
took place to the Western Front after the fighting died down in the East.
It was assumed that they simply could not be trusted to fight the French and this was
resented as a sign of distrust.
Another blow to morale paradoxically came through a measure that was intended to increase
that morale as more medals as in particular the coveted iron crosses were handed out in
ever greater numbers to stiffen the morale of German troops.
Some German fighters by contrast felt that the honor that they had earlier won through
the award of such medals was being cheapened and maybe even mocked by this sort of profligacy.
In fall of 1917, they were disturbing signs in the German ranks.
As troops were shifted from the Eastern Front that now lay quiet instead towards the Western
Front to prepare for offensives, in many cases 10% of those troops being moved would simply
jump off the trains and desert as they passed through the German home territory.
At the same time as these sorts of more social revolts and protests against military authority
were to be seen on the ground in the armies, nationalist revolts were also gaining steam.
Let's consider first a truly remarkable case, that of the Irish Easter Rising.
Because this represented something very threatening to the British Empire itself.
This was unrest exploding not in far away colonies where it might be quelled by colonial
troops.
This was unrest exploding in Britain's own colonial backyard, its Irish possessions.
There was obviously a longer prehistory of repeated revolts and uprisings within Ireland
itself which had seemed to come to a head in 1914.
In fact, just before the outbreak of the war, many British politicians were more worried
about the situation in Ireland than of the prospect of a general war breaking out in
Europe.
Just before the war, conflicts over the prospect of home rule, that's to say more autonomous
political representation within Ireland itself had brought Ireland to the brink of civil war.
As on the one hand Ulster volunteer forces, which championed the notion of uncompromising
union with Britain itself, faced off against nationalist Irish volunteer paramilitary forces
which demanded Irish autonomy and eventually independence.
When the First World War broke out, that conflict was put on hold.
It was part of the phenomenon of the enthusiasm that grew for the war itself, but it also
had another interesting subtext operating at the same time.
Many Irish nationalists felt that this issue of precisely how home rule or Irish self rule
should be worked out had to be put to the side for the moment and that in fact by joining
in the war effort and by showing a loyal attitude, they might very well be able to win over
the long term more concessions when the peace had arrived.
And so it was that 200,000 Irish, for varying reasons that depended on the individual, joined
the British army and participated in the fighting itself.
Not all Irish nationalists agreed with this calculation of deferring the problems till
after the war.
To the contrary, the revolutionary nationalist Irish Republican brotherhood planned a full
scale revolt while the war was going on.
And they had influential friends.
Sir Roger Casement, who was an Ulster Protestant who had been knighted for his work, his diplomatic
service in the British Foreign Office, joined the nationalist forces and secretly worked
on the plans for the revolt.
In line with the German hopes for revolutionizing Ireland to encourage trouble and unrest in
the enemy camp, Casement traveled to Germany to get German assistance and also tried to
recruit Irish prisoners of war who had been taken on the Western Front fighting for the
British to organize them into a brigade that might fight for Irish independence.
When he returned from the secret mission, he was arrested, captured by the British secret
services, and then executed in a London jail in August of 1916.
Other plans, like Casement's, were quickly unraveling.
The Germans didn't support the Irish effort nearly so much as the Irish nationalists had
hoped.
A German arms shipment, for instance, that was sent, was also intercepted by the British
two days before the planned uprising, tending to kind of give away the fact that something
large was being prepared.
Nonetheless, the planned Irish nationalist revolt went ahead anyway.
The calculation on the part of these desperate and often very romantic revolutionaries was
that even if they failed, Irish nationalism would be galvanized and martyrs would be given
to the cause, and that's precisely what ended up happening.
On April 24th, 1916, as part of this Easter Rising, the Irish rebels seized in downtown
Dublin the central post office and other parts of the downtown area, but failed to take the
Dublin Castle where the administration was housed.
They proclaimed an Irish republic, but after a week of fierce fighting, taking place in
downtown Dublin itself with large civilian casualties, the rebels capitulated.
The British reaction, in part suggesting just how worrying British politicians found this,
was a harsh one.
British forces reacted with severity by executing 15 of the rebel leaders and incarcerating
other of the nationalist volunteers in camps in Britain.
These harsh reprisals had a remarkable and, as it turned out from the British perspective,
perverse effect upon Irish public opinion at large.
At first, these revolutionaries had been seen as a force of chaos, as an unnecessary intrusion
of unrest, but as a result of these harsh reprisals, that public opinion turned from
an initial disapproval to increased sympathy for those who are now regarded as martyrs
for the nationalist cause.
This nationalist turn, this galvanizing of public opinion in favor of Irish nationalism,
which the rebels had hoped for, later would lead to independence in Ireland in 1921.
In the most famous poem that grew out of this event by William Butler Yates, actually entitled
Easter 1916, the act was celebrated as being, though violent and perhaps overly romantic
and misguided, nonetheless a terrible beauty, an act of tremendous political and moral significance.
In the popular Irish culture, there was another song that's still heard today, a song entitled
Foggy Do, which memorialized the rebels who had fought in this lost cause and bitterly
pointed out an irony that was present to the mind of Irish nationalists.
This was a world war going on at the same time as the Easter Rising, which the British
claim was being fought for the right of small nations like Belgium, so that they might be
free.
And the irony that was being underlined by the nationalists was, why not Ireland?
Why was Ireland exempt from this equation?
The result was that ideologically claims to be fighting for self-determination for the
rights of small nations might very well start having unintended effects by galvanizing nationalist
movements in many parts of the competent powers.
And this was also true, especially in multinational regimes like Austria-Hungary and Russia itself.
And thus, let's turn next to examine some of the crumbling cohesion of the Austro-Hungarian
Empire and its vast multinational diversity.
The Habsburg armies, as we'll recall, had faced disasters at the start of the war.
Their experienced and committed officer corps had, to a great extent, been decimated.
And the result was that German forces, increasingly, as the phrase went, had to corset or reinforce
Austro-Hungarian armies by serving side by side along with them and infusing them, as
it were, with greater discipline.
Many Germans resented this.
They frequently talked of the feeling of being shackled to a corpse, and there was very frequently
the sense that Austria-Hungary itself might not long survive a continuation of this war.
This in turn led to a process, really, of national differences starting to tear apart
what earlier had been a pillar of the Habsburg Empire, its own armed forces.
As well as individual soldiers, especially from Slavic nationalities of the Habsburg
Empire, at times simply defected to the Russians on the Eastern Front.
In part because of their ethnic affinity to those fighting on the other side, they might
often simply lay down their rifles as they were ordered to advance and walk forward with
raised arms, shouting out, brother or comrade.
And in turn, the stereotype of this kind of disloyalty, which was certainly there in
individual cases but was not true of all of the soldiers of different ethnic groups, minority
groups of the Habsburg Empire, this sort of stereotype that they were all supposedly
disloyal, further undermined ethnic relations and increasingly became a self-fulfilling
prophecy.
As troops felt that they weren't trusted by their own officers, their motivations certainly
sank.
And that comic masterpiece of world literature, Yaroslav Hasek's Good Soldier Shvayk gives
ludicrous testimony to this.
It shows how the soldiers of the Habsburg Armies are very frequently involved in brawls on
an ethnic basis in taverns and in bars rather than fighting side by side against the enemies
of the Empire.
But this could take on a more serious significance as prisoners that have been taken from the
Habsburg Armies could be organized into foreign legions to fight against their earlier rulers.
From fall of 1917, for instance, in Russia, a so-called Czech legion was organized from
prisoners of war and was set to fight against the Austro-Hungarian forces which they'd earlier
served with in the cause of Czech independence.
Growing nationalism was reflected in a very vivid way in the advanced Czech national movement,
which was a key model for other nationalist groups as well.
Much of this was taking place in exile as activists organized to defend their national
cause.
In Paris, for instance, Tomasz Mazarek and other exiles were busy forming a so-called
National Council, which spoke not only for the Czechs and claimed independence for them,
but for a larger group in what they called a Czechoslovak Union, as the allied Slavic
people of the Slovaks made common cause with the Czechs.
And as the allies recognized these claims for Czechoslovak or Czech independence, the future
existence of the multinational Habsburg Empire was very clearly being called into question
in an existential way.
Other nationalities were, at the same time, galvanized to seek independence as well in
a wave of rising expectations.
And this sort of phenomenon was to be seen also in the growing disarray of the Russian
Empire as well.
The Russian army was in a state of disintegration.
They were losing their confidence in their leadership.
As the saying went, they were voting with their feet by simply leaving the front.
And food riots in Petrograd, in the imperial capital, in spring of 1917, with a very important
participation by women workers as well, led ultimately to a revolution in which the Tsarist
regime collapsed in the spring of 1917 with incredible unprecedented speed.
And we'll speak more about that in our next lecture.
But the case of one ethnic group that was divided between all of these empires was a
classic one and spoke to the growing nationalist aspirations of many ethnic groups, and that
was Poland.
Poles had been divided between the three empires of Russia, Germany, and Austria-Hungary over
the course of the last centuries.
And now Poles increasingly grew restless once it was clear that the future shape of Europe
was going to be changed and was about to be decided when the war ended.
Now tragically, about one and a half million Poles were serving in the different armies
of the different empires and often could be facing one another on the battlefield.
This was a tragedy that nationalists wanted to work against.
And the Polish socialist as well as nationalist patriot, Josef Piłsudski, who is from the
Vilnius region in Lithuania, planned to establish Polish military forces that could serve as
the basis for later independence and the core of an army for a future Poland.
Those volunteers and his legions soon adopted the slogan, we are Poland.
And it was clear that a very militarized kind of nationalism was coming to the fore here.
In November of 1916, as we already discussed in our lecture on occupations, Germany and
Austria-Hungary had declared, though with very vague details, the founding of a Polish
kingdom hoping to create large Polish armies that would fight on their side.
Polish nationalists saw this as just an invitation to be cannon fodder for the central powers
and the plan failed.
There were very few volunteers.
Piłsudski, who had worked against the subordination of Polish volunteers to anybody else's command,
was soon arrested and jailed by the central powers sent to a prison in Germany.
At the war's end, he would emerge from jail with great prestige, would lead the Polish
nationalist movement, and later would become the dictator of Poland.
Abroad, and working in tandem with these efforts, other Polish activists were also at work.
A man whose relations with Piłsudski were not very good, he was a rival, in fact, Roman
Tmowski, sought to rally support for Poland from the Allied side.
This was a case of trying to play the sides off of one another in order finally to win
national independence.
Finally, we want to consider the phenomenon of a broader revolutionizing with some key
cases.
This was a phenomenon to be seen on all sides of trying to subvert minorities on the enemy's
side and produce unrest.
But a key example of this on the Allied side was the Arab revolt that had been fomented
by the British in particular.
The British had encouraged an Arab revolt within the southern lands of the Ottoman Empire
with political support and advice as well as arms.
The revolt had broken out at Medina in June of 1916, and was led by a famous family, the
family of Sharif Hussein ibn Ali of the Hejaz.
An Arab army now rising up in revolt was rallied to the cause of fighting Ottoman forces,
and the revolt soon was spreading through Arabia and to Syria, raising expectations
someday of a great Arab state.
The young British archaeologist Thomas Edward Lawrence, who later acquired legendary status
as Lawrence of Arabia, championed this Arab cause and identified with it intensely and
celebrated the preeminence of one of the leaders of the revolt, Faisal ibn Hussein, the son
of the Sharif.
An Arab surprise attack made news headlines with the capture of the port of Akaba in July
of 1917.
Significant Turkish forces were pinned down by this revolt, and the rebels later were
able to cooperate with the British in their campaigns in the Middle East.
News of Allied diplomacy, the Balfour Declaration and the Sykes-Picot Agreement, however, would
lead to keen disappointment of those initial hopes for Arab independence.
The German initiatives of trying to revolutionize the Allied sides are also fascinating, and
turned out in some cases to be disastrous.
The Zimmermann Telegram of January 17, 1917 was a secret initiative.
It was a telegram sent by the German Foreign Minister, Artur von Zimmermann, to the German
Ambassador in Mexico, urging action and negotiations to try to bring Mexico into the war on the
side of the Central Powers.
And what was being offered in this war that would pit Mexico against the United States
was the prospect of regaining lost provinces that now had been incorporated into the United
States, provinces of Texas, New Mexico, and Arizona.
Suffice it to say that this attempt at revolutionizing America's neighbors ended
catastrophically, as this really outraged American opinion and galvanized support for war.
The German Supreme Command also sought to use Russian revolutionaries as revolutionary weapons,
and in particular, they used the Bolshevik leader Lenin.
Just weeks before the outbreak of the revolution in Russia in March of 1917, Lenin was in Swiss
exile, essentially sitting there despairing over how he might be able to someday produce
the revolution he had longed for.
And then on the orders of the German General Command, Lenin and 31 of his other revolutionaries,
who also were in exile, were transported by train through Germany itself to Russia in
April of 1917 to spread the virus of revolution and defeatist ideas to take Russia out of
the war.
As soon as Lenin arrived in Petrograd, and he was a man whose dreams were coming true,
he preached Russian defeat as a necessity, and the overthrow of the government, precisely
what the Germans had wanted.
Lenin very cheerfully accepted the German assistance while pursuing his own plans.
As critics called him a German spy, Lenin was using the Germans just as much as they
were using him.
And this successful revolutionizing of Russia was in one sense the greatest success of this
policy during the entire war.
It knocked a great power out of the conflict, but it was one that was a double-edged sword
because German elites would come to regret it as the same revolutionary ideas would spread
back to Germany towards the end of the war.
Let's speak to the outcomes of these strains and social and national revolts.
The growing revolts revealed a paradox.
To many political leaders it seemed that the only way to quell dissent within was to win
total victory because otherwise revolution would erupt and defeat would be the result
as well.
This dynamic in turn made the conduct of the war more extreme and less likely to compromise.
In general, as the war drew on, one can observe a revolution, you might say, of rising expectations
taking place among general populations within Europe, nationalities and ethnic groups, hope
to win independence in the post-war order.
Outside of Europe, similar effects could be seen as well.
Real troops as well as colonial laborers were participating in these rising expectations.
Among them, for instance, would be the later Vietnamese communist leader Ho Chi Minh.
And in the context of these rising expectations, revolutionary events would come to a head
in 1917 in particular.
The war would enter its revolutionary phase most vividly in a series of revolutionary
events in Russia itself that we'll examine in our next lecture.
Thank you.
