Lecture 26 Russian Revolutions
In this lecture, we'll be examining the revolutionary events in Russia of 1917.
The wars have often brought revolutions, and in this case, in the context of the First World War,
in an almost perfect symmetry, in the year 1917, total war would provoke an attempt at total revolution.
The Russian Empire was the first to break down, the first to collapse under the pressure of the demands of this industrial conflict.
In the context of pressures that were operating on all of the competent powers, Russia, as it turns out, had won the race towards collapse.
We'll be examining in this lecture the March Revolution of 1917 with its mobilization of forces from below.
We'll also then examine a few months later the seizure of power by Lenin and his Bolshevik comrades in November of 1917
as they would seek to inaugurate the foundation of a new communist government
and produce a social revolution that would craft a new utopian society.
Thus, the year 1917 would be a crucial one in modern history, not only because of the Russian revolutionary events,
but also because of other things taking place at the same time.
And the British historian A.J.P. Taylor, in particular, has argued that 1917 in a very real sense marked the start of world history
in a true sense with the Russian Revolution on the one hand and its upwelling of ideological implications,
and on the other hand America's emergence as a world power, the entry of the United States into the First World War as well.
Both events very clearly were of enormous significance because they injected new ideological energies into the First World War
and in the process changed the meaning of the conflict as well.
We'll be examining in this course events that really touch on the main themes that we've been pursuing throughout this course.
The phenomenon of the shock of the new, the revolutionary events that we'll be describing here most certainly sought to craft an entirely new order.
As well, we've been pursuing the topic of the ideological dimensions of the First World War.
Well, here in a very true sense was a tremendous new infusion of ideology, the challenge of ideas.
And then finally, the last of our major themes, the implications of the First World War for our own times are most certainly on display here as well,
as some of the ideas of communism would continue to work their way out into the present as well.
We need first of all to provide some background about the revolutionary events themselves.
How had it come to this?
The last ruler as it turns out of Russia's autocracy of its imperial system was Tsar Nicholas II, who had come to the throne in 1894.
Historians with their gift of perfect hindsight have often pointed out that as a man, as a personality, Nicholas was very unsuited for this role
of being an autocrat, of being at least in theory an absolute ruler.
It's often suggested that with his deep sense of responsibility and caring about the duties that he felt had been entrusted to him,
he would have made an excellent landlord or estate owner, not however the bold and reforming ruler that Russia needed in its Tsar.
And further compounding this tragedy, his wife, the Tsarina Alexandra, who was the granddaughter of Queen Victoria of Britain and also of German origins,
unfortunately tended to worsen matters with bad advice, even though her intentions and her devotion to Nicholas II were of the very best.
There had in some sense been a wake-up call or a rehearsal for the Revolution of 1917 years earlier.
In 1905, as a result in part of the trauma of defeat by non-European power in the Russo-Japanese War, revolutionary events had come to a boil in Russia,
and in that 1905 revolution, the imperial throne had nearly been toppled.
In that context of the 1905 revolution, at a grassroots level, very interesting events had been taking place.
A grassroots revolutionary movement had centered on a new institution, quite democratic in nature, called the Soviet in Russian, we say Soviet,
which literally simply means council.
These councils spread throughout the countryside, in the cities, in the factories, in military units,
and they were intended sort of as an expression of democracy from below, where in an unhierarchical way people would discuss and would take collective action.
In the context of this movement of the Soviets, Leon Trotsky, a brilliant revolutionary and orator, had gained a special prominence,
and he later would play a role in 1917 as well.
In 1905, in these revolutionary events, the Tsar and his conservative advisors had managed to diffuse the revolution.
They did so by granting a parliament, the so-called Duma, as Russia's parliament is called today,
but this seeming concession to democratic ideas was later undermined in its significance as the Tsar continued his policies and as the parliament was not given real powers.
Nonetheless, in the years after this traumatic revolution of 1905, reforms had been attempted.
From 1907 to 1911 in particular, structural improvements had been proposed and enacted,
but historians judged that they still needed more time to really ripen into full significance and produce a larger reform movement within the Russian Empire itself,
something that contemporaries urged it badly needed.
At the same time, an active revolutionary movement was also developing.
It included the peasant-oriented social revolutionaries, whose slogan might have been described as trust the peasantry,
who argued that out of the moral health of the peasantry and the peasant masses of Russia,
there might emerge a new model of sort of an agrarian paradise that could sidestep the woes of capitalism and provide an entirely new concept for how society could be organized.
Another revolutionary movement was the Marxist social democrats.
The Marxist social democrats were modeled on the Social Democratic Party of Germany, which was seen as the best organized, the largest, the dominant,
and they sought in essence to emulate some of its successes.
Within this Social Democratic movement that followed Marx's doctrine, a small and radical faction was that of Lenin's Bolsheviks,
who had hijacked, as it were the name, the majority, even though they were smaller radical factions, and now argued their hardline message.
World War I, in this context, represented a test of strength.
It would challenge the resiliency of the Russian Empire.
It would put it under enormous pressure and, in essence, this was a test of strength that the Russian Empire ended up failing.
In the initial enthusiasm to be seen in Petrograd and in provincial capitals, there had been the same sorts of celebrations in August of 1914,
as we've discussed in the case of other powers as well.
Different ethnic groups, non-Russian nationalities, had at first pledged loyalty to the regime.
They were probably less enthusiastic about the victory and reinforcement of the Tsarist regime than some Panslavist or Russian nationalists.
But nonetheless, the mood had certainly been one, in part, at least of that sort of exultation that we've seen elsewhere in Europe.
And some of the same nationalist fervor now operated to include proposals like the renaming of the capital,
which was St. Petersburg originally, now renamed Petrograd to sound more Russian and to shed some of those earlier associations with German culture.
Nonetheless, the war itself took a very disastrous course for the Russian forces.
Unrelenting catastrophes on the battlefield produced a crumbling of morale.
You'll recall that some Russian forces had been sent into battle without adequate weapons and had simply been told,
pick up your rifles as you approach the front lines and go on to the attack.
The Russian Tsar, Nicholas, who had taken over command personally, had, as it turns out in that particular gesture,
miscalculated badly what the requirements of the situation were.
Henceforth, he would be blamed personally as well for the catastrophes on the battlefield.
And increasingly, discipline itself was breaking down.
Ordinary soldiers would, as the phrase went, vote with their feet by simply leaving for home,
getting up out of the trenches, throwing away their weapons, burying their uniforms and simply heading home.
Within the courts of the Tsar's empire, a pro-German faction, in fact, even started whispering
that it might be necessary to leave the Allies and that Russia's survival as an empire,
the survival of its imperial structure, might necessitate finding a separate peace,
something that the Russians had pledged not to do along with the other Allied powers at the start of the war.
Serena Alexandra, who had been so very important in providing moral support and firming up Nicholas's intentions,
now fell under the influence of a truly remarkable and strange personality, that of Gregori Rasputin.
Rasputin was a crazed holy man and faith healer, something of a deranged sex maniac from Siberia,
who nonetheless exercised a remarkable magnetic influence over men and women alike by the force of his personality.
There also was something else at work that historians have not been able to adequately explain.
It seemed that he was able, at least in the short term, to improve the condition of the ailing heir to the throne,
who was suffering from hemophilia, at least in the short term, this produced enormous prestige for Rasputin.
And Rasputin's domination of elements of the imperial court and his influence over the emperors herself left many Russians scandalized.
While Rasputin obviously was only the symptom of larger problems, not their cause, he became a vivid symbol of so much that was wrong with the ruling regime itself.
And a group of nobles set about assassinating Rasputin in December of 1916.
It's really remarkable to read some of the testimonies or the records that circulated about this assassination.
At a time of mass death in the First World War, Rasputin himself seemed to be almost unkillable.
The assassins saw the legends that have accumulated around this assassination go.
The assassins in December of 1916 at first tried to poison him with cyanide in some cookies and in wine that was served him.
When that didn't work, they shot him with a gun and then shot him again when he continued to stagger out into the courtyard of the building where he had been lured for this assassination.
He then was beaten with a truncheon and just to make sure that he finally was dead, his body was thrown into the Nieva River in its icy state.
The result of this assassination, symbolically important as it might have been, didn't ultimately resolve the problems.
Rasputin really had been a symptom rather than a cause.
And the revolutionary situation finally had built to a crescendo with the March 1917 revolution.
When the March Revolution broke out, it did so spontaneously.
And even revolutionaries who had been longing for revolt and upheaval were taken by surprise.
The March Revolution of 1917 broke out on March 8th.
In Russian history, this has often been called the February Revolution because by the older Russian calendar that then is replaced by a calendar that is the same as used in Western Europe,
by the old calendar, February 23rd was the date of the outbreak of this revolution,
it had started on March 8th by the Western calendar with the demonstrations of women workers in Petrograd,
many of them wives of soldiers at the front who were clamoring for food, who were protesting at inadequate rations.
They then were joined as they urged by striking workers from the armaments factories of the Russian imperial capital.
At this point, as the protests were growing and growing, the city garrison, the troops who had been moved into the capital itself to keep order by quelling revolts,
as they had so many times in the past decades, that city garrison, when ordered to fire on the crowds that were protesting,
instead refused to do so and joined the protesters.
Very clearly, this revolt was snowballing.
And as more and more units joined the rebels, Tsar Nicholas ultimately faced no other option but to abdicate, which he did on March 15th,
with surprising speed, three centuries of the dynastic rule of the Romano family in the Russian empire had simply drawn to a close.
And the question now emerged, well, out of this chaos, out of this confusion, what was to present itself as a new order of rule and new authority?
Almost trying to keep up with events, a new provisional government was formed by March 15th as the Tsar was abdicating.
It was made up of former Duma politicians, former parliamentary leaders, who subscribed to liberal ideas, who wanted to move Russia in a more democratic direction,
and who pledged also, out of their deep sense of Russian nationalism, to stay in the war and to honor their obligations to the allies that had been undertaken at the start of the war.
Now, one might have expected that the Western allies, the French and the British, might have been dismayed by the seeming chaos in the Russian empire.
To the contrary, and this was for ideological reasons, the events and the founding of this new liberal-style government was actually greeted with a sense of relief and celebration by the Western allies.
In their own propaganda about fighting for international law and justice, being allied with the notoriously conservative and despotic authoritarian Tsarist regime had sometimes been something of an embarrassment.
Now, by contrast, in an ideological sense, all of the allied forces seemed to be united ideologically behind the banner of growing democracy and a certain inner cohesion.
The provisional government, however, of these politicians who had played role in parliament before, was increasingly ineffective,
and the provisional government ruled for only about eight months with ever less authority before finally being overthrown.
One problem that the provisional government faced, in addition to its own disorganization, was that it faced the rival authority of another revolutionary institution, the Soviets,
a revival of that revolutionary tradition from 1905.
The largest of these Soviets or councils was the so-called Petrograd Soviet.
This was another power center which claimed to speak for the other Soviets around the country established by soldiers and sailors and workers.
For now, at least at the first, the provisional government was tolerated by the Petrograd Soviet, but it announced that it was going to keep its eye on this provisional government to see that it was ruling true to revolutionary ideals.
The provisional government continued the war and prepared in a liberal legalistic sense for the calling of elections and eventual constitutional reforms, trying to follow the rule of the law.
In this context of disorganization, it was very clear that the provisional government was vulnerable to challenges, and a great challenge came about when Lenin,
as a result of German policies of revolutionizing Russia, was shipped back to the Russian lands.
Lenin had been enormously frustrated in the spring of 1917 to be not forming revolutionary events in Russia, but reading about them in a newspaper in Switzerland in exile.
But his dreams had come true when the German general staff transported him back to Russia in April of 1917.
A myth circulates that Lenin and his fellow revolutionaries were transported through Germany in a sealed train so that they couldn't spread the virus of their revolutionary ideas in Germany itself.
Symbolically apt as this legend might be, it actually isn't true.
The train car was open, but it was certainly cautiously guarded and watched over so that the revolutionaries wouldn't be able to propagandize German workers as they passed through the territory.
Nonetheless, when Lenin emerged at the Finland station in Petrograd in April of 1917, he immediately declared striking revolutionary messages that were summed up as the April Theses.
The April Theses, or arguments, promised that with a further radical revolution, peace, land, and all power to the Soviets as revolutionary organizations would become a reality.
In essence, Lenin was championing the idea of revolutionary defeatism.
The worse things got, the better things would get for revolutionaries within Russia.
Defeat was necessary for the greater cause of revolution.
Now by his call for the overthrow of the provisional government and for Russia in essence to leave the war as a loser,
Lenin shocked even his own Bolshevik associates who felt that surely one had to give more time for events to evolve and that defeat might not be the answer.
Slowly, however, by the force of his arguments and his revolutionary logic, Lenin convinced them.
Lenin was supported in his message by a fervent revolutionary, Leon Trotsky, who had played a role in the Revolution of 1905,
who had only recently returned from New York where he'd lived in exile on news of the revolution and who at first was not a Bolshevik but joined the Bolsheviks in summer of 1917
and would add his powers of rhetoric and oratory and his revolutionary passion to that of Lenin and his colleagues.
It was said at the time that in a real sense, the provisional government's weakness meant that power was lying in the streets.
The only question was, who would pick it up?
Lenin was determined to do so.
The provisional government was eventually in its last stages led by a socialist by the name of Alexander Kerensky,
first as minister of war, later as a prime minister, who sought to emulate that sort of mobilizing of the war efforts
that had taken place under David Lloyd George's leadership in Great Britain, under that of Clemenceau in France.
He, too, was a great orator.
He, too, was a man of fiery revolutionary ideals and he sought to communicate them to the Russian soldiers to reinvigorate the war effort.
Kerensky prepared an offensive into Galicia to take the fight to the central powers once again, but this failed in July of 1917
and the military collapse soon turned into retreat.
When a premature Bolshevik uprising misfired in July of 1917, Lenin fled to Finland,
but he continued plotting against the provisional government, which soon found itself threatened both from the left,
by the Bolsheviks and the radical socialists, as well as from the right on the part of more conservative nationalist Russian politicians.
By October of 1917, the Bolsheviks felt that the moment was arriving.
The Bolsheviks had managed to achieve a majority in the Petrograd Soviet, infiltrating representatives of theirs into this organization
and moved to seize power as Lenin urged.
The time had arrived to take up power lying in the streets.
And this happened in November of 1917 with the Bolshevik seizure of power.
The Bolsheviks took power in a coup on November 7th, 1917, with astonishing ease.
This is an event which, confusingly enough, was called at the time Red October,
because by the old calendar the events had taken place still in October.
Small numbers of Red Guard forces, as the Bolshevik vanguard was called,
stormed the lightly defended Winter Palace.
Among the troops defending the Winter Palace at this time was really a remarkable testimony to women's involvement in the war.
It was a women's battalion that was among the defenders, but they were soon overwhelmed.
The members of the government who were present at the Winter Palace were arrested,
and the capital of Petrograd, in quick order, with surprising speed, was seized by the Bolsheviks.
The Bolsheviks later mythologized this Red October into a great October revolution.
And it was presented in propaganda art as well as in films that recreated these events as a mass event.
The joke, however, at the time went that the film of the Great October Revolution
involved more people getting hurt or accidentally injured than the event itself.
The Bolsheviks announced that they were taking power, not for themselves,
but in the name of the Soviets, in the name of these revolutionary grassroots institutions.
The reality, however, was that real power was held by a select steering committee,
the Council of People's Commissars, called by the acronym Sovnar Kom,
which represented, in fact, Lenin and his comrades,
who now set about establishing their power with a new revolutionary regime.
First, the peace decree, as it was called, announced that Russia was leaving the war.
This came as a tremendous blow to the Western Allied powers.
They had just lost a key ally.
On December 15, 1917, a ceasefire was signed with the Central Powers.
The war, as far as the Bolsheviks were concerned, had ended,
and the international revolution was about to follow.
The state as well took over ownership of land throughout the lands of Russia,
and the peasants were allowed to seize it, even though the state would retain title.
At the same time, the Bolsheviks set about quelling resistance.
The so-called Che-Ka secret police was established very quickly on December 17, 1917.
Che-Ka was an acronym for the words that in Russian stood for
Extraordinary Commission for Combating Counter-Revolution and Sabotage.
And the Che-Ka, as black leather clad, secret police armed with pistols,
were charged with a policy called Red Terror,
which moved against suspected counter-revolutionaries or class enemies
who were incarcerated and brutalized.
The beginnings of a concentration camp system were established at this period.
Stalin would later elaborate it into a vast Gulag Empire, but its origins lay here.
One after another, rival party was shut down, even fellow socialists eventually,
and newspapers were banned.
State control of internal trade, factories, and land was established.
And in really remarkable ways, Lenin saw himself trying to imitate, in this regard,
the German war effort that had jokingly sometimes been called war socialism
of intense state control of resources to mobilize for war.
In elections, which the provisional government had called to a constituent assembly
for a future democratic Russia, the Bolsheviks allowed these elections to go forward,
but they were disappointed. They received less than 25% of the seats,
and thus, in their disappointment, shut down that assembly as soon as it started to meet in January of 1918.
They simply sent in revolutionary guards who declared that the assembly was being shut down,
it was no longer necessary, and in this case, guns trumped democratic legitimacy.
Russia's brief experiment with democracy was over at the start of the 20th century.
On July 16, 1918, the Bolsheviks also undertook a measure that made very clear
that there was no going back to the old regime.
The imprisoned Tsar, Nicholas, and all of his family were executed,
shot to death in a cellar in Yakitorinburg.
Later, myths and legends circulated that some of them had escaped,
but there seems no evidence compelling of this.
The family most certainly was martyred by the revolutionaries.
The mood of emergency, which was current among the revolutionaries who sought to use this window of opportunity,
was summed up in the policy of war communism, intense state control of all factors in the economy
and the mobilization of society, not for war, but for revolution in a very real sense.
Lenin, for his part, announced that the need of the hour was dictatorship.
He defined dictatorship as, quote, authority untrammeled by any laws absolutely unrestricted by any rules whatever
and based directly on force, end quote.
The revolution demanded it.
And the revolution the Bolsheviks were envisioning was not just a limited Russian revolt or seizure of power
that they had crafted, they were instead preparing for a world revolution.
The Bolsheviks felt this special sense of urgency as they expected that their Russian uprising
would be followed by a world revolution that would break out in quick order.
They set about propagandizing a world audience by breaking into the safes of the Russian foreign ministry
and collecting all of the secret treaties and the secret diplomacy that was evidenced in those documents
of the foreign ministry and by simply publishing them.
And this was an enormous embarrassment to the Western powers, the Western allies,
because there some of the quite craven and not very honorable secret treaties and discussions over territory
to entice one or another power to enter into the war were now laid bare for propaganda effect.
Similarly, Bolsheviks on the Eastern Front, which was now quiet after the ceasefire,
tried to fraternize with German soldiers and sought to spread their ideas.
In uncanny ways this was almost a throwback to the Christmas truce of 1914 on the Western Front,
but now in 1917 and early 1918 this was intended to produce not just peace for a religious holiday
but in fact a spread of revolutionary ideas.
Lenin, for his part, who made no secret of his admiration for German war industry,
German organization and mobilizing for war, believed that a key to world revolution would be
if Russia in some sense could link up with the Germans.
Not the Germans of the Kaiser's regime, not Hindenburg and Ludendorff and the war dictators,
but with the German working classes who were enacting this tremendous mobilization.
Lenin was tantalized with a possibility that if German efficiency and Russian revolutionary fervor
and passion could be fused into one revolution, a new world would most certainly result.
To win time for this expected coming world revolution, which the Bolsheviks quite literally
hoped for every moment after they had launched their own seizure of power,
Lenin needed to convince his skeptical comrades of a further element of defeatism.
It was necessary to sign a peace treaty with Germany, no matter how humiliating,
no matter how harsh, because this, Lenin argued, would be the price for saving the revolution
in expectation of the outbreak of a worldwide conflagration.
After the December 1917 armistice, a strange set of negotiations began at the fortress of Brest-Litovsk,
earlier a Tsarist fortress, now in German hands, on the Eastern Front,
and both sides would be jockeying for propaganda effect, even as they pursued their own intentions.
We'll talk more in a later lecture about these negotiations at Brest-Litovsk,
but it would be suitable to take stock of the implications of the revolutionary events we've just described.
The Bolshevik seizure of power in fall of 1917 represented a truly revolutionary event in world politics.
It would change world politics, and I think that a hundred years hence this revolutionary event
will be emphasized even more by historians than it is today.
It introduced a new factor into world politics of the 20th century,
a new kind of ideologically steered and guided state, which was devoted not to smaller gains or changes,
but devoted to nothing less than the overthrow of all other existing states and capitalism itself.
The Bolshevik coup, in a very real sense, was a pivotal historical event of the century.
Communism would do much to shape the ideological discourse and dynamism of the modern age,
because one thing was clear, all states and societies would be forced to respond to its ideological vision.
Another pivotal event taking place at the same time in 1917 was the entry of the United States of America into the war,
which we'll examine with its implications in our next lecture.
