Lecture 28, America at War, Over There and Over Here
In this lecture, we'll be examining the American experience of the First World War.
In this lecture, we'll be examining the impact of the First World War on American society, affecting life at home, as well as America's relationship with the wider world.
This really speaks to one of the major themes that we've been pursuing through the course, the question of what meanings were assigned to the war.
And what I hope we'll be seeing in today's lecture very vividly is that the American experience of the First World War, because of American later entry, as well as because of distinctive features of American notions of why one was fighting, would also be distinctively different.
At the same time, we also clearly will be speaking to another one of the major themes of the course, the implications of the First World War for our own times.
The very fact that America was venturing out of a traditional stance of much more isolationist approach to world politics, and instead now really sallying forth as a young superpower potentially into world affairs speaks to the question of how America relates to the wider world, most definitely an issue still with us today.
We need first to examine American organization in preparing for the war. Woodrow Wilson had been a keen observer of popular opinion, and this popular opinion itself now had to be shaped and cultivated in ways that are already familiar from our discussion of propaganda in an earlier lecture.
Without the same sort of immediate galvanizing motive which other competent countries in Europe had had of presenting this as an outright defensive war, notion of why America was fighting had to be crafted in different ways.
Now certainly the defense of American shipping, the anxieties over a policy of revolutionizing of America's neighbors, these contributed a certain defensive element, but it wasn't nearly as overwhelming as the invoking of a defensive war in a country like France at the outset of the conflict in 1914.
Instead, American participation had to be explained in terms of ideas and principles. And chief among those would be the notion of a crusade for democracy, even though the United States was far away from the events of the fronts in Europe, nonetheless the government now set about organizing enthusiasm positively.
And a crucial institution was created to fulfill this role. This was the so-called Committee on Public Information. You see here in part just from the growth of all of these acronyms that we've been discussing in this course, a very vivid representation of how the increasing bureaucratization of war efforts was a universal phenomenon.
This CPI, or Committee on Public Information, was organized when Woodrow Wilson charged a progressive muckraking journalist, George Creel, with a task of coordinating an agency that could produce effective and innovative propaganda, not just imitating European models and patterns, but doing so in distinctively American ways.
George Creel argued in particular that what was American about his approach to the business of convincing masses was precisely the fact that rather than emphasizing censorship, he was providing information, and hence the name, the Committee of Public Information.
In other words, publicity and the creation of enthusiasm, in other words, marketing of the war, would be, according to Creel, a distinctive and uniquely American approach to the business of creating enthusiasm.
The CPI, which grew into a vast apparatus with some 150,000 employees, was soon blanketing the country with more than a million publications, which fanned enthusiasm for the war effort and sought to convince of the purpose and the ideals behind American involvement.
Tens of thousands of instant orators who were called four-minute men, the play here obviously was on the patriotic volunteers, the minute men of the American War of Revolution in the 18th century, these four-minute men, by contrast, were instant orators who were sent out to fire the masses with speeches lasting only four minutes before movies and before music performances began.
And soon this sort of a presence of professional agitators was part of the life on the home front. It's estimated that in 18 months, and this is really a stunning statistic that I want to share, it's estimated that in 18 months a million such performances,
a million oratorical performances, were heard by audiences of 400 million spectators in the United States. Just to state the obvious, this number most clearly includes people hearing talks many times over in the course of those months and it involves repeated performances by the same orators, but it gives some indication of the magnitude and the scale of this drive to produce enthusiasm.
In part, the CPI also commissioned movies as part of a efficient way of communicating to audiences that might not be as susceptible to the printed word, some of the message that they sought to convey.
And on occasion, it wouldn't be a very sophisticated message. A famous film of these times was entitled The Kaiser, the Beast of Berlin. And once again, the demonization of Kaiser Wilhelm as this archetypal villain of the entire narrative of the First World War was part of effective propaganda, even though it didn't match the reality of a monarch who was increasingly outside of the loop and being pushed to the fringes of the German war effort, no matter.
Movie stars and celebrities were likewise urged to help sell liberty bonds at monster rallies, all in a sense of social togetherness. Within American society, even apart from the officially commissioned efforts of the Committee for Public Information of the CPI, one could survey a fascinating repetition
of some of the phenomena that we've already discussed in our earlier consideration of propaganda. The self-propagandizing of American society now echoed the phenomenon that had taken place in Europe. And we might hear, too, speak of a war culture that grew up and took hold in the United States as it earlier had in European countries.
To give but some examples, American universities in particular, many of whose young men would soon be drafted or included into the armed forces, many American universities participated in the mobilization for war by changing their curricula, changing the courses that were offered.
And they did so in particular by integrating particular courses whose aim was to explain the values of Western civilization that were at stake in the conflict at large. These were originally given the name of war and peace courses, sometimes also war issues courses.
And it was precisely such vast overviews that sought to generalize about the nature of Western civilization and implicitly why it was worth fighting for that later developed into the history survey courses that were taught decades afterwards, still taught today.
I teach such a course myself. Some of the listeners may, in fact, have taken these courses or required courses, the so-called Western civilization surveys, which were for a long time a staple of liberal education. And these are most definitely an outgrowth of the experience of the First World War.
At the same time, as part of an uglier self-mobilization on the home front, one could detect here as well a jingoistic aggressive instinct towards what was now perceived as an alien element German culture.
The communities, the once large and vibrant German-American communities now often came under attack. German culture was scorned, German works of music taken off of the playlists of famous orchestras and symphonies, German language courses were on occasion abolished at some schools.
And as one had seen in other European cases, now to the language also needed to be cleansed of certain associations that now were linked to the enemy. And in particular, the word liberty would be often substituted in common words or phrases that earlier had had quite innocent German associations.
So that the Hamburger, which betrayed its tie to Hamburg, a German city, was now renamed the Liberty Sandwich. Sauerkraut, by contrast, would now be labeled Liberty Cabbage, and probably in the most absurd case German measles would be renamed Liberty Measles.
In the face of such large social pressure, in American society at large, there were indeed many instances of people with German sounding last names who altered them to make them sound less German or more Anglo-Saxon, and there are many such cases of family history dovetailing with the history of the 20th century.
In general, a once large and vital German-American community, which had vast numbers of printing presses, schools, German language newspapers, came under immense social pressure to demonstrate its loyalty, in part by giving up some aspects of community life that earlier had bound them together culturally.
And one might say that the German-American communities were never the same again. Other immigrant communities were also affected, regardless of whether they were associated with the Central Powers.
A propaganda message or slogan that read 100% Americanism was the order of the day. Some immigrants were urged, implicitly or explicitly, to drop their identity as having ties to another culture from old Europe, to drop the hyphenated identity that might make them a Slovak-American or a Polish-American,
or especially a German-American in favor of simply avowing nothing but one monolithic American identity, now to be shaped out of the war experience.
Economic mobilization was a reality as well, as in European states, so too in the United States, the government energetically intervened in the economy in ways that would have been quite unthinkable to classical liberal thought or to American tradition previously
to mobilize for this war effort. In summer of 1917, a so-called War Industries Board, also an acronym WIB, was founded by the government with an investor by the name of Bernard Baruch in charge to regulate prices and profits and to prepare economically for war activity.
This War Industries Board used the threat of nationalization, that's to say, of the government taking over to compel cooperation by different branches of industry.
At the same time, many branches of industry and big business and corporations were quite eager to cooperate because this mobilization carried with it incentives as well.
It produced a great industrial and agricultural boom in the United States, which surpassed even that which had been taking place before America entered the war, and great profits as well.
In a break with classical liberal tradition, certain strategic assets of the economy, like America's railroads, for instance, were nationalized for the duration of the war in order to steer them in strategic purposes.
At the same time, America's tax structure was changed in significant ways. The scope of the income tax, which had been instituted quite recently in 1913, was now expanded enormously in order to make it more progressive and to gain more funds in the process of changing the tax structure of the nation in durable ways.
A figure who was especially associated with this American mobilization and girding for the war effort was a remarkable man who later would go on to become an American president, and that was Herbert Hoover.
Herbert Hoover was the very model of a self-made man. This was an orphan from Iowa, who by his own talents had gone on to be educated at Stanford, to become a famous and talented engineer, engaging in mining projects around the world, and fairly had come to be synonymous with American can-do attitudes and engineering prowess.
This was a technocrat who in ways perhaps in his technocratic skills resembled Eric Ludendorff in Germany, oddly enough, who had organized a vast project, the relief effort, in Belgium and in northern France during the first stages of the First World War.
He now was given a further challenge, a task of serving the United States war effort. He was made food administrator that amounted to a dictator of the food supply under the Food and Fuel Act of August of 1917, which allowed the American government to regulate these resources.
Price controls were used to spur production and to lower consumption in the United States on the home front, but Hoover, in ways that echoed George Creel's emphasis on an American approach to these challenges, argued that instead of rationing outright, it would be better to emphasize voluntary measures, which indeed turned out to have striking successes.
These included encouraging people in their own homes to practice food conservation. There were meatless days that were announced, or days without wheat, which aimed to preserve scarce resources and cut down on waste.
At the same time as in the European war efforts, organized labor, the unions also found their roles transformed by the very existence and operation of this wartime domestic truce.
The demand for labor in the industrial boom, in fact, led to a labor shortage, which increased the bargaining power of American workers.
And so too, the trade union membership in this period rose significantly, actually doubling from 1914 to 1920 after the war's cessation.
The unions were most clearly participants in this entire process, especially under the leadership of the President of the American Federation of Labor, the AFL, Samuel Gompers, who was actually co-opted into the so-called National War Labor Board,
an organization which arbitrated labor disputes and protected workers' rights to join unions. Very clearly, a new role was being taken on.
At the same time, in mobilizing for war, German chemical patents from the tremendously modern German chemical industry, which had had branches in the United States before the war as well, were seized.
And an example of this sort of seizure was, perhaps without our knowing it, quite familiar to us in our own times.
Bayer Aspirin had been a significant product of the German chemical industry, and the original company, Bayer, or in German pronounced Bayer, simply meant the Bavarian Company.
Bayer lost its patents as a result of their being seized during the war, and even afterwards was not able to participate in the American market because what was marketed as Bayer Aspirin, still retaining the old name, was in fact run by another company.
And the German company, the parent company, had ultimately only regained its rights to the name as well as the product itself in 1994, so sort of a hidden story of long-lasting effects of precisely this wartime mobilization.
Not only the economy was controlled, so too was, increasingly, free speech on the home front.
Laws which were quite radical in their clamping down on speech that was judged to be opposed to the war or to recruitment were passed.
This included the Espionage Act of June 1917 and the Sedition Act of May of 1918, which imposed very harsh punishments on what was considered to be speech that was opposed to the war.
This included the surveillance of the mails and censorship of newspapers, including the newspapers and publications of many ethnic communities as well.
In a famed case involving speech, the American socialist Eugene V. Debs was arrested and given a 10-year jail sentence in June of 1918 for a speech in which he had defended opposition to the war.
And in spite of repeated judicial appeals, Debs served nearly three years of that sentence.
It speaks a lot to the support that was out there in the home front, notwithstanding such pressure upon free speech, for his message that while in jail he received nearly a million votes as a presidential candidate.
At the same time, just as in the case of other competent countries earlier in the war, social changes were taking place.
Women were most definitely at the center of many of these changes.
Women participated in the effort on the home front as one million women entered the workforce to participate in the war effort.
Almost a quarter of workers who were engaged in specifically war work were women.
And the fight for women's suffrage, which had certainly been gaining steam and momentum in the years before the war, now took on new strategic significance.
If women were to be fully employed and mobilized in the war effort, then so too it was increasingly seen as necessary for them to be integrated politically.
And Woodrow Wilson, indeed, went on to call the notion of women's suffrage as vital to the war effort.
In part because of this sort of impetus and groundswell, the 19th Amendment was passed by Congress in January 1918 and became nationwide law in 1920, finally acknowledging women's right to vote.
Other changes were also taking place in American society and they often involved sensitive issues of race.
A vast migration, a vast demographic transition, took place within the United States in precisely this period.
The labor shortages of the war years in the industrial north produced a large African American migration from the agrarian south to the industrial north that reconfigured America's demographic landscape with lasting consequences to our very times.
The vast migration and movement of peoples is truly astonishing when one considers the statistics that are advanced.
It's estimated, for instance, in my native city of Chicago, that its African American community grew by almost 150% in precisely these years.
The African American community in Detroit is said to have expanded by 611%.
And this migration, profound and large as it was, also encountered racial violence.
There were riots in Chicago, St. Louis, and many other cities involving racial clashes.
An unfortunate record.
At the same time, we need to concern ourselves as well with the record of American soldiers in Europe experiencing firsthand the fighting on the front.
American soldiers were fondly called dough boys and the origins of this term are disputed.
I wish that I could provide the definitive answer on the origins of this term, but it's still one that probably leads to heated debates on the part of historians of language.
One suggestion that is advanced is that dough boys, which is a term which was earlier used for what we today would call doughnuts, were the food in the canteens that were set up to relieve American soldiers and thus that they took on this name that essentially meant a pastry.
Another suggestion is that American soldiers' buttons earlier in the 19th century resembled doughnuts in their shape and their form and thus this word was used.
A more cynical explanation suggests that dough boys was a name given to soldiers who took dough or slang for money for their services.
Whatever the origins of the term, it certainly stuck.
And the first American dough boys were landed in France in June of 1917.
This came as a shock to German planners.
One of the premises of that careful statistical planning which had preceded the gamble of unrestricted submarine warfare was the promises by the German navy that even if America entered the war, no American soldiers would arrive in Europe.
German submarines dominating the Atlantic would send them to the deep.
That's not what happened.
Instead, because of the convoy system and because of the overwhelming force of this mobilization, two million American soldiers were brought over the sea without the losses of troop transports.
The German gamble had misfired disastrously.
The American force, the mustering of American manpower, was not overwhelming at first on the western front.
The American soldiers did not take the brunt of the fighting.
In fact, they were slowly brought up into the front lines and needed to be equipped with the weapons of the Allies.
As it was concentrated on bringing over young American soldiers by preference to the weaponry which the Allies could provide.
So American soldiers were often equipped with French weaponry, for instance.
But even if the American involvement was at first smaller in its scale,
the sheer numbers of the American soldiers pouring in and the fresh reserves that they represented,
the ability to reinforce weary French or British or Belgian troops,
made clear that potentially this was an enormous new factor
and it further underlined that the strategic balance in this war had tipped against the central powers.
For many American recruits, this experience was the adventure of a lifetime.
For many of them, it was their first longer trip from home,
away from the reality of whatever corner of the American continent they had known before.
And very clearly, it was acknowledged that this was an experience,
world historical and significant as it was, that would change those who lived through it.
One anxiety of those who were at home about how soldiers might be changed
was expressed in a popular song of the day which asked rhetorically,
how are you going to keep them, meaning young American soldiers,
how are you going to keep them down on the farm after they've seen Paris,
once they've seen the glories of Paris and old Europe as well.
General Pershing was horrified at what he thought might be the possible public reaction
back home in the United States when his troops were offered the use of French brothels
or the ability to set up houses of prostitution for themselves.
When Pershing relayed this offer by the French command back home to Washington,
one American member of the President's administration also was horrified
and said, for goodness sake, don't tell Woodrow Wilson.
He'll try to call off the war if he hears of it.
Among the American officers who were involved in this war effort over there,
on the Western Front and who later would play very prominent important roles
in the Second World War and after were names that are familiar to us,
Harry Truman, George C. Marshall, and George S. Patton.
General Pershing insisted, just as we've emphasized with Creel and Hoover,
an American approach to mobilization,
so too General Pershing insisted on an American approach to American involvement in battle.
And that American approach involved keeping the American Expeditionary Force, the AEF, together,
rather than dispersing them in units piecemeal through the Allied lines
as many French and British commanders urged them to do.
The notion was that America had to husband its resources of thinking in cold,
realistic political terms in order to really be able to use its potential military might later
in a peacetime settlement if necessary to sway its allies as well.
Now, an exception to this policy of keeping American forces together
concerned African American units that the Americans had organized.
Exceptions were made in their case.
Unfortunately, this probably reflected an assumption, a racist assumption,
that they were less capable.
These units were put under French command
and also served with tremendous distinction.
Overall, some 400,000 African American soldiers served during the war itself.
And an unfortunate reality reflecting the realities in American society of the day
was that many African American soldiers were mistreated as well as segregated,
and thus it was by their own commands.
And thus it came as a greater surprise and a welcome difference
that on the part of the French population that they encountered,
as well as French soldiers, many African Americans experienced,
by contrast, quite sympathetic and generous treatment by their French allies.
The African American units, the 369th U.S. Infantry in particular,
became famous at this time, given the nickname of the Harlem Hellfighters.
They served in the French lines, and indeed their service was so recognized
that the regiment was later awarded the highest French decoration,
the Croix de Guerre, for its service in the Great War.
This friendly French reception also extended to the culture
and in particular the music of these African American soldiers
The vast popularity of jazz, the art form developed by African Americans
in particular in New Orleans, in the United States,
its popularity worldwide, enduring to the present, has its origins in these days.
The American troops now went into their first engagements and were blooded in combat.
The first American attack took place in the small village of Contigny on May 28, 1918.
In a battle of bellow wood, American and French troops halted a German advance in June of 1918.
The American Expeditionary Force then went over to an assertive role,
a major offensive at Saint-Michel, south of the battle, earlier Battle of Verdun,
in mid-September of 1918, and then the Muse-Argonne Offensive from late September of 1918.
The enthusiasm of young American soldiers could be costly, with a steep learning curve in this industrial war.
It's indeed horrific to recognize in the sources that talk about American involvement on the battlefield here
that one saw an uncanny repetition, the same enthusiasm for the offensive,
the same notion that American pep and dynamism in youth could overcome the enemy lines
that broke against the fire of machine guns.
But in this war effort, there also were prominent heroes, distinctively American, in their approach.
Among the heroes of the American war effort was a Tennessean from East Tennessee, Alvin York,
who, though originally a pacifist from his religious convictions,
had later been convinced that the war was necessary and went on to become a celebrated, if reluctant, warrior.
In the Muse-Argonne Offensive, when his particular unit was pinned down by German fire,
he used his talents of backwards marksmanship that had been honed in the forests and the hills of East Tennessee
to devastatingly counter enemy fire.
Using his marksmanship and his talents, he killed 25 German soldiers immediately
and caused more than 100 to surrender to his own decimated unit.
The result was that Alvin York received the Congressional Medal of Honor.
Approximately 117,000 American soldiers died in the war in combat or of disease in this conflict,
and the war was nearing its climax.
In 1918, events would approach their crisis, as we'll examine in our next lecture.
