Lecture 29, 1918, The German Empire's Last Gamble
In this lecture, we'll be considering the climax of the war itself in 1918, the end
battle as the German Empire gambled for the last time on the Western Front and instead
met with defeat.
This lecture will chart that last wager of the German High Command in the spring of 1918
as it hoped to press the fighting on the Western Front to a successful conclusion just in time
before the prospect of the mass arrival of American forces.
We'll consider the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk as a result of which the Germans were able
to focus their energies away from the Eastern Front to the Western Front, and we'll examine
how after initial successes this offensive came to an end.
It's necessary to speak a little bit to the logic behind the wager itself, the gamble that
the German High Command undertook.
In the spring of 1918, the German command quite consciously gathered its forces for one last
throw of the dice, one last wager, in order to win the war.
In their calculations, timing was everything.
The victory that had been scored on the Eastern Front, as Russia, after the Bolshevik seize
power, left the war, after the Germans felt they had won half of the World War, that in
the East, now meant that German troops could be moved away from the other earlier theaters
of combat, and instead could be massed on the Western Front to achieve superiority there
against the Allied forces.
Furthermore, this breakthrough needed to happen, needed to be achieved, before American troops
arrived in numbers sufficient to tip the balance.
The gamble that had earlier been made of unrestricted submarine warfare had suggested to the German
High Command that the Americans wouldn't be able to bring over troops, but they started
pouring in.
Nonetheless, this was the opportunity to get in ahead of that development, and it was hoped
bring France and Britain to their knees before American strategic reserves and its military
potential tipped the balance.
So in a sense, this was the last of a series of gambles that had been undertaken by the
German leadership.
One gamble had been the Schlieffen Plan at the start of the war, Verdun as well as a
project to bleed the French Army's white had been another gamble, and then finally
the unrestricted submarine warfare had also represented a gamble or a conscious risk.
Now this was to be the last one, the spring offensive of 1918.
This time, however, in distinction to those earlier gambles, the leadership saw itself
as risking everything, putting everything into one throw of the dice.
And indeed, it was clear that if this tactic, if this approach didn't win victory, then
Germany probably simply would have to acknowledge that it had lost the war, something that the
generals were loath to admit in public, but that was clear in their reasoning as well.
We need first of all to, as it were, take stock of the triumph that Germans felt they
had achieved in the East, and this was summed up in the words of the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk.
The Treaty of Brest-Litovsk is where the negotiations took place after the Bolsheviks
had acknowledged that they were leaving the war and were pleading for peace with essential
powers.
A ceasefire had been arranged in December of 1917, and the Bolsheviks as well as the
Germans met at the former Russian fortress, Brest-Litovsk, what had been the borderlands
of Eastern Europe between Germany and Russia, and there they set about negotiating a peace
treaty.
And nonetheless, each side was pursuing irreconcilable aims, the Germans seeking total victory, the
Russians in a sense, the Bolsheviks in particular, aiming to salvage their revolution and be
sure that it would survive.
The negotiations thus, because of these irreconcilable aims, had a curious character.
They took on a strange complexion as both sides, very loudly and with a lot of rhetorical
flourishes, argued that they, that their side was pursuing the true meaning of self-determination
for the peoples of Eastern Europe, Poles, the Baltic peoples, others, who were being
argued over.
But even though the emphasis here rhetorically was on who truly had the correct practice
of self-determination most at heart, the reality was that in fact, this was a concept
that neither side really cared about.
In fact, the notion of self-determination for them was simply being used as a slogan
for on the one hand, domination of Eastern Europe geopolitically, or on the other hand,
the spread of revolution that trumped any notions of national self-determination.
Nonetheless, this in some sense was an acknowledgement that the rhetoric of national self-determination
was a reality in that national aspirations and expectations had been rising in Eastern
Europe as well as elsewhere.
The Germans for their part were seeking control of huge expanses of territory, while the Bolsheviks
in turn sought to place the negotiations in the context of their larger expectation of
a worldwide revolution that they saw as just around the corner.
In this sense, the negotiations for the Bolsheviks were essentially meant to be a platform for
a global propaganda event or performance.
Quite explicitly, the aim of the Bolshevik negotiators as they engaged in their rhetoric,
as they read speeches from the negotiating table about their revolutionary aims and purposes
was most definitely not so much to be speaking to their insincere German negotiators across
the table, but rather to speak to the world at large, to address the masses, in particular
the working classes of the world, and among those, most especially the working classes
of Germany, arguing that in some sense a common cause could be made against the earlier authorities.
This attempt to speak over the heads of political leaders to the people at large was most definitely
how the Bolsheviks envisioned what they could gain from these negotiations that otherwise
were obviously going to be very painful.
In a really fascinating way, Woodrow Wilson at the same time was pursuing many of the
similar strategies of trying to speak to a worldwide audience and masses of public opinion
rather than to the leaders alone.
In their appeal to world public opinion, the Bolsheviks had some very powerful weapons
to deploy rhetorically.
The Bolsheviks had broken into the safes of the Russian foreign ministry and had publicized
the secret treaties of the allies that were found there, a tremendous embarrassment to
the propaganda efforts of the allies themselves as it revealed some of the uglier backroom
deals that had been taking place that didn't always comport with the high ideals of self-determination
or of international justice.
In particular, the man who was leading these negotiations for the Bolshevik side, the
revolutionary Leon Trotsky, who was to begin with a brilliant orator, here was probably
at his very best in arguing and convoluted but compelling ways about principles of self-determination
and at the same time he was actually stalling for time.
The hope was that the revolution was about to break out.
The expectation that Bolsheviks breathlessly had in their minds was that in a moment red
flags would start rising as they had in Russia elsewhere around the world as the working
classes rose up in revolt.
The waiting, however, finally took an end.
The negotiations reached a deadlock and Trotsky was reduced to a strange sort of argument,
a new tactic.
Trotsky stood up and to a puzzled and bemused German audience of negotiators announced
that he was simply leaving the negotiations.
There was now neither peace nor war, and Trotsky got up and left.
Lenin Trotsky's colleague had had some misgivings about this particular approach.
He didn't suppose that the Germans would simply agree to a deadlock and a stasis, and Lenin's
misgivings turned out to be justified, because the German army, when it got over its surprise
at this negotiating tactic, it simply responded by attacking.
They moved forward their armies in a strange sort of war that in some ways in its speed
resembled the Blitzkrieg, the lightning war of World War II.
As German forces got onto trains and moved forward from station to station, meeting almost
no resistance as they penetrated ever further into the Russian lands.
German armies in fact came within a hundred miles of Petrograd itself, the capital of
the Russian state, and thus seemed to very actively be threatening the existence of the
Bolshevik regime.
Precisely because the revolution seemed to be in such immediate peril, Lenin now moved
heaven and earth in his arguments and in his rhetoric to convince his comrades that
it was necessary to sign the treaty no matter how harsh it would end up being.
And he narrowly managed to convince his comrades on this score.
Finally, on March 3, 1918, after lodging protests, Bolshevik negotiators nonetheless signed
the extremely harsh Treaty of Brest-Litovsk with the Germans.
This treaty ended up stripping vast territories from the Russian Empire.
By some estimates, the Russian lands lost a third of their territory.
The earlier Russian Empire lost a quarter of its population, three quarters of its coal
and iron, as well as its most industrialized areas, those that had earlier been in the
western parts of the Empire.
Russia ceded control of the Polish territories, of Lithuania, the vast area of Ukraine with
its agricultural resources, Finland, and the Baltic provinces as well.
In spite of these reverses, however, and in spite of an impending civil war within Russia
that will speak more about in a later lecture, Lenin's calculation was a cunning one.
Lenin breathlessly was awaiting news of the outbreak of an international revolution.
He explained to his colleagues that whatever was signed on a piece of paper at this late
stage of the war would scarcely matter because it would all be overthrown by a working-class
revolution worldwide, and the result would be that the Bolsheviks and their other socialist
colleagues around the world would inherit the earth regardless of what was signed at
Brest-Litovsk.
This is sometimes summed up as the idea of taking one step backward in order to take
two steps forward.
It was a tactical retreat in the hope of a final strategic victory.
The Germans for their part exalted at what seemed to be an incredible triumph.
The wildest hopes of German nationalists who had clamored after annexations in Eastern Europe
had been realized.
They would be able to dominate these areas.
Many Germans in fact felt a sense of relief that half of the war had now been won, and
it would perhaps now be possible to win the other half as well.
What's riveting to observe in this context is that in many senses some of the same people
who earlier had been enthusiastic about the peace resolution of the German parliament,
the Reichstag, were now sharing in this enthusiasm and this fervor for triumph in Eastern Europe.
In some sense, the earlier mood of compromise now turned in a more triumphalist direction.
And in the process, perceptions of Eastern Europe, which had already been affected by
the experience of military occupation in the East, and fantasies of a German colonial empire
in the East would later be taken up and radicalized by the Nazis in World War II.
At the same time, the very harshness of the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk, imposed upon a defeated
Russia, produced some real liabilities.
In part, the Western Allies, now as a result of hearing the news of this devastating treaty
against their former ally, their resolve was strengthened by this brutal performance.
Because now, quite vividly, there for all to see was what sort of peace terms the Germans
would impose upon the Western Allies if they won the war.
And a certain even more uncompromising tone entered into the political planning of the
Western Allies as they prepared to realize their hopes for triumph.
In some sense, the later harshness of the Versailles Treaty that German nationalists
complained about was a direct result of these earlier harsh terms and their effect on the
Western Allies.
Another further military effect was that while huge territories had been carved out of the
Russian Empire in Eastern Europe, it was necessary to keep them under occupation in
order to exploit them in the pressures of total war, and thus a million German soldiers had
to be left in the East to hold down these occupied territories.
That million soldiers might very well have been used in the spring offensive in the West
to devastating effect, but instead they were pinned down in the East.
The Treaty of Bucharest as well with the defeated Romania on May 7th, 1918 was likewise very
harsh and promised vast food resources and oil for the central powers.
Now in the exaltation of this mood of triumph in the East and overlooking these liabilities,
German planners prepared for the spring offensive of 1918.
This last German offensive in the spring of 1918 was also given several different names,
all of which made clear just how much hope was vested in this conflict.
The Kaiser's Battle was one name given to this spring offensive even though the Kaiser
himself was simply an onlooker, he'd been pushed to the margins by the military dictatorship.
Another name for the offensive was Operation Michael, and Michael was sort of the archetypal
German figure, much as Uncle Sam is presented as an archetypal American or John Bull for
the British, so Michael is an archetypal figure for the Germans, and all Germans were to tense
their energies for this last conscious risk.
It was a conscious wager because if it failed there would be no reserves left for the war.
And in fact at one point Ludendorff who was with his technocratic skills, formidable technocratic
skills, was planning this offensive, he was asked what would happen if Germany failed?
What would happen if the offensive broke down?
And he calmly replied, well then Germany will be destroyed.
It was clear that this was one last risk.
With a transfer of German troops from the east however, the Germans had achieved a superiority
on the western front of about 10% in terms of manpower.
And the attack itself began on March 21, 1918.
It began with such a storm of steel and such a deployment of new technology and new tactics
that it makes very vividly clear to us just how much technology as well as approaches
to the stasis of trench warfare had changed over the last years.
It began with a five hour bombardment of a hitherto unexampled intensity of artillery
fire that was intended not just to break the front lines, but in fact was of such intensity
that it was intended to destroy communication lines as well.
And this five hour bombardment was followed by a whole succession of different kinds of
poison gas that were intended to debilitate those who were still defending the allied
lines.
The attack had been aimed at the juncture of French and British forces, that area which
precisely because it was shared defense was judged to be most vulnerable, and preparatory
to the moving forward of German troops, and this is a key example of just how much artillery
had become more precise and had become deployed ever more carefully and with tremendous precision.
There was deployed the rolling barrage as it was called.
Now a barrage will recall is simply a massed fire, a volley of artillery from the other
side.
This rolling barrage by contrast was the calculated and calibrated moving forward of an entire
curtain of fire so that shells would drop on particular lines that already had been
aimed at before and then would move forward slowly in a rolling or creeping fashion so
that German troops could follow closely behind this curtain of fire as it steamrolled across
the lines of the allies.
Stormtroop groups were deployed with their new tactics to simply break through the enemy
lines and the principle here that Ludendorff was advocating was using the strongest forces
against the weakest points of the enemy defense.
The stormtroopers thus and other German troops didn't move forward in lines or in massed
attacks had been the case at the start of the First World War.
They instead were in small squads or groups that would move forward hugging the contours
of the landscape and if they encountered an allied strong point they simply moved around
it, pressing forward in the attack and leaving the strong point in their rear to be taken
care of by reinforcements.
This stormtroop attack in which Ernst Junger, probably the most famous of the German stormtroopers
was included, achieved tremendous results.
The Germans pushed the allied lines back over the course of repeated attacks over four months.
The allied lines were pushed back about 40 miles and this in terms of the earlier stasis
of trench warfare was simply a tremendous result.
There was one problem however that was lurking in these very successes.
Ludendorff had deployed new tactics, new approaches on the battlefield but seemed to lack a concept
of well in the larger picture how would victory be achieved.
In other words he was using modern and successful tactics but lacked a strategy and indeed he
would grow very angry if he was questioned on this.
It seemed that he was simply improvising and this as it turns out would be a liability,
not having a plan for ultimate success.
In this moment of crisis which strained allied forces in these sectors to their very limit
out of the crisis a unified command emerged for the allies, something that had been already
moved in the direction of by the allied forces but now finally French General Flush was at
last given unified command of the allied forces to coordinate them.
The German attacks finally petered out.
The attacks had been ground down as ever fewer reinforcements could be found and there were
other discouraging signs in the troops themselves.
Many of them when they captured allied trenches discovered such a material abundance of supplies
also including liquor that they would spend time looting them rather than moving forward
precisely out of their own privation and because their living standards had been lower.
At the same time German soldiers well understood that this signified that in a larger sense
Germany was losing the economic or the industrial mobilization.
The Germans were finally halted 56 miles from Paris.
This was almost an uncanny replay of the Schlieffen planet seemed and the Germans also deployed
a weapon whose real purpose was in fact to sow terror.
To spread panic Paris was bombarded by long range guns.
Around 250 Parisians were killed by the shelling which was intended to inspire terror.
The long range guns were capable of shooting shells 70 miles away so high up in the atmosphere
that it would actually resemble more the trajectory of a missile that would come slamming down
into the city but without a purpose other than terrorizing the civilian population.
In some sense this was a terrible harbinger of air war yet to come in the 20th century.
What was clear as a result of the petering out of these attacks was that the gamble had
failed and the German collapse now began.
It was marked symbolically by a day that is referred to as the Black Day of the German
Army August 8th 1918.
Decisive reverses came for the Germans now that they had exhausted their ability to attack.
An Allied counter attack at Amiens in August broke their lines and in particular the massed
use of Allied tanks overwhelmed discouraged German troops who started to pull back.
There was a breakdown in morale moreover that gave this day if not a strategic significance
than an enormous symbolic significance.
Soldiers had lost the will to fight and when reserves could be scraped up from the rear
lines to be thrown into battle to reinforce the now crumbling front lines there was also
a very worrying phenomenon to be seen.
German soldiers who were retreating or deserting would shake their fists at the reinforcements
and call out to them that they were scabs or strike breakers who were unnecessarily prolonging
the war.
German morale in the armies that earlier had been very strong now clearly was breaking
down.
As the German armies retreated the Allies took the initiative and retained the initiative
for the rest of the war.
The U.S. Army went into action independently for the first time and overran the salient
or the territory that had been bulging out in the front line at St. Michael.
Simultaneously Allied troops also launched an attack from their long inactive camp in
Salonica in the Balkans in August of 1918.
Hungry Bulgarian troops whose privations had been growing to the point where they couldn't
continue the war effort to help Germany these Hungry Bulgarian troops simply withdrew in
the face of this attack.
And on September 29th of 1918 Bulgarian representatives signed an armistice in Salonica.
Salonica now was finally was showing its potential as the underbelly as it were of the central
powers the south was being opened up.
Bulgaria was the first of the central powers to leave the war.
At the same time on the western front in September of 1918 a massive Allied offensive was launched
at St. Michael in Musargon sector and on the Saint-Canton Cambrai sector.
By the middle of the month the Germans had retreated back to where they'd launched their
spring offensive the fortified Hindenburg line.
But in spite of these successes the Allies were still very cautious and were rarely assumed
that the war would actually continue until 1919 so far still into the future.
They were almost slow themselves to realize just how badly the central powers were now
crumbling.
On September 29th 1918 Ludendorff informed the Kaiser and other stunned German political
leaders civilian leaders that the war was now lost.
Only an armistice he said could save Germany now.
He envisioned this in part as a breathing space and a moment to regroup forces and stave
off total defeat.
At the same time one could already see that Ludendorff was looking for people he could
blame for this defeat and he started actually a whispering campaign against the civilian
leaders blaming them for having created these conditions even though they were actually
all of his own doing.
At the same time in order to win the sympathies of Woodrow Wilson's democratic campaign for
a new world order a desperate attempt was undertaken in Germany to make the government
look more representative of the people.
A revolution from above in other words was improvised in the German Empire but ultimately
came far too late to satisfy the allies or even attract much notice on the part of the
German people who had longed perhaps for such reforms before but now they were simply downgraded
in terms of the attention they received.
A more liberal aristocrat Prince Max von Baden became chancellor and started internal reforms
to move Germany in the direction of a constitutional monarchy.
The German government now styling itself as more democratic appealed to Woodrow Wilson
for peace on the basis of his 14 points on October 4th 1918.
This was rather late in the day.
Wilson whose sentiments had hardened by this point responded by demanding that Germany needed
to fundamentally change inside first.
The German situation grew ever more dire as its allies were falling away.
After Bulgaria left the war in September Turkey followed in October.
Allied troops began to move up through the Balkans from Salonica and Austria-Hungary
was next on the list of assaults.
On the Italian front from October 24th to November 2nd the Austro-Hungarian army which
had held out surprisingly long now began to dissolve.
As many of the troops simply started leaving for home the Italian forces moved forward
and in a celebrated battle called Vittorio Veneto which amounted essentially to a battle
of Caporetto in reverse that earlier Italian disaster took vast numbers of dispirited and
discouraged Austro-Hungarian prisoners of war.
On November 3rd 1918 the representatives of Austria-Hungary signed an armistice with the
allies but they were signing in the name of a state that almost had ceased to exist.
Germany itself now broke down.
One broke out in Germany provoked by futile gestures at the war's end.
On November 3rd German naval authorities whose navy had spent much of the war actually in
port felt that it was necessary to do something to salvage their honor and one proposal was
to sally out with the entire navy in order to engage the British in a final apocalyptic
battle of the sort that had not been seen during the war.
This was sometimes called the idea of a naval death ride.
When soldiers heard the news of these orders on November 3rd they simply mutinied in their
base at Kiel and soon the revolt spread to other port cities including Hamburg and Bremen.
At the same time down in the south in Bavaria a socialist revolt broke out on November 7th.
Ludendorff was fired from his position and escaped abroad in disguise fearing that he
would be put on trial.
Another man who had been important to the German war effort, the scientist Fritz Haber
who had helped both with wartime mobilization in the chemical industry as well as the production
of poison gas, he also escaped abroad fearing trial by the allies.
Kaiser Wilhelm now faced the question of what to do.
Some of his own followers suggested that he might lead German troops in a suicidal attack
on the western front to go out in a blaze of glory.
Kaiser Wilhelm very sensibly declined that kind offer and instead abdicated.
He had been told that the German army no longer stood behind him and he slipped across the
border into Holland where surprised Dutch authorities received him and where he would
live out the rest of his years until 1941 when he died a bitter exile.
Termoil also reigned in the capital of Imperial Germany, Berlin.
On November 9th, a German Democratic Republic was declared by revolutionaries in Berlin.
The day previously as all this termoil was going on, on November 8th, a German armistice
delegation met with the Allied Commander General Fosch and heard the terms that would
be dictated as a result of the armistice.
They agreed.
On November 11th, 1918, at 11 a.m., the armistice came into effect.
The armistice had been signed at Compiegne and now, at long last, the guns fell silent
on the western front.
The result of the war had been determined now in these moments by the question of how
the peace would play out and what order would be imposed still lay ahead in the future and
we'll examine it in our next lectures.
