Lecture 30, The War's End, Emotions of the Armistice
In our previous lecture, we had discussed the climactic year of 1918 and how Germany's
last gamble on the Western Front failed, leading to the plea for an armistice or a ceasefire.
In this lecture, we'll examine the fascinating scene that emerged as the armistice was signed,
the emotions that were unleashed by this important event.
When the guns at last fell silent on the Western Front on November 11, 1918, at 11 o'clock
in the morning, with the armistice, those who had survived the Great War experienced
a tidal wave of different emotions.
Some felt grief, others felt anger, loss, a sense of relief, exultation, or furious desire
for revenge.
In this lecture, we'll seek to explore that range of responses to the conclusion of the
war and the many divergent hopes that were vested in the upcoming peace settlement that
would finally order the outcome of the war itself.
With the armistice, the hatred that had been building up over years would, as it turns
out, impede the reconciliation that perhaps should have followed, and indeed many Germans
would find it difficult fundamentally to accept that they had in fact lost the war at all.
We'll consider finally in our lecture a crowning horror in the concluding stages of this conflict,
a natural disaster following on this man-made disaster, a worldwide pandemic that swept
the globe, the so-called Spanish influenza that killed an estimated 50 million people
worldwide.
The news of the war's close on the Western Front was met with mixed emotions.
As the guns ended their firing on the Western Front and a great stillness finally settled
on the battlefields, many contemporaries felt that now was the time to take stock of the
war, the coming peace, and the emotions that they themselves were feeling.
And these emotions were of a wide range.
The defeated could feel despair and fury at their condition and a lack of understanding
as to how had it come to this.
The victors would feel some very complex mixture of celebration as well as mourning, because
even in victory, nonetheless, it was true that the sacrifices had been enormous.
And in Central and Eastern Europe there was also a mood of exaltation, of celebration
of new independence that was achieved by some peoples that earlier had not had their own
states.
It's important throughout our discussions of the moods and the emotions that would accompany
peace to keep in mind one fundamental fact.
Even with the armistice, the ceasefire on the Western Front, the war did not neatly end.
In fact, it would in particular continue in aftershocks in Eastern Europe and elsewhere
as we'll be discussing in a later lecture.
It speaks volumes, however, about the longing for peace that had been built up, even in
advance of the formal ceasefire itself, that in the case of the American public, there
was a premature announcement of the ceasefire on November 7th.
So days before the official ceasefire of November 11th, a news reporter had simply misunderstood
events that were unfolding around him on the Western Front and had cabled back the news
that the ceasefire had officially been declared and American cities and towns erupted into
vast celebration.
Some people simply even ignored the fact that later there was an official announcement
that this was too early and was not a true announcement of an actual ceasefire in American
media history.
We certainly have had many cases of misinformation or the spread of wrong news.
This was an especially bitter one for some in that moment as they longed for the news
at last of an end to the war finally.
At the same time, the armistice, when it finally arrived, brought a great stillness, brought
a great quiet to what had been the clamor and clash of battle, and it would now be necessary
to take stock of the situation as it stood.
The armistice itself was signed with German representatives who were brought in to sign
the armistice at 5 a.m., very early in the morning, on November 11th.
The armistice was signed in a railway carriage at the Forest of Compagnie near Paris, and
afterwards this railway carriage and the furniture from inside of it, the tables and chairs,
where the armistice had been signed, were later taken off to a French military museum
and sort of hailed as relics of this great triumph.
During World War II, when Hitler crushed the French and intended to humiliate them thoroughly,
he with a keen symbolic sense had that very same railway carriage and the same furniture
brought out for the signing by the defeated French of an armistice.
So there were certainly ramifications and echoes that were to be heard in the years afterwards.
The terms of the armistice were drawn up very carefully by the Allied forces to reflect
the determination of General Fosch, in charge of the Allied war effort now, that Germany
should not be allowed to use this ceasefire as a chance to regroup and to reinforce its
efforts and to continue the war.
In fact, this armistice was to be the acknowledgement of defeat, and the terms made this clear.
The terms included Germany undertaking to withdraw from all occupied territory.
There was an interesting footnote here.
This didn't include the vast territories in Eastern Europe that were occupied by the
German forces, and the reason for this exception on the Eastern front, or what had been the
Eastern front, was already a growing fear on the part of Western forces of that strange
ideological force in the East, Bolshevism, and its communist ideology.
Anxieties grew that this might be a spreading ideology, and thus even the defeated Germans
might still play a role in containing the threat of this radical revolutionary ideology.
At the same time, and this was the fulfillment of a long-held dream for French nationalists
and French patriots, Alsace-Lorraine, the lost provinces that had been seized by the
Germans after the Franco-Prussian War in 1871, would at long last be returned to France.
It was great celebration, ecstatic celebration, as French troops would move into these earlier
lost provinces.
The German Rhineland was to be cleared of German troops, it was to be turned into a demilitarized
zone, and the Allies would move in as occupying forces to take over strategic bridgeheads
along the Rhine at Mainz, Koblenz, and Cologne.
This in some sense had a real symbolic resonance.
Many of those same bridges had been used to shuttle across German troops when the Schlieffen
Plan counted down at the start of the war in 1914.
Now they were to come under Allied occupation precisely to forestall the possibility of another
such invasion or aggression.
German military material, as well as the large German high seas fleet, whose intentions
of saling out for a death ride had been frustrated by sailors' mutinies, were now to be turned
over to the Allies' wholesale to ensure that Germany could not continue the war.
The Treaty of Brest-Litovsk, by which the Germans had ratified their triumph, this remarkable
triumph on the Eastern Front, also became invalid.
Germany would have to pay for the damage caused by the war, and the British naval blockade
would continue while negotiations for the final terms of the peace would take place.
This was a remarkable and dramatic element of the armistice terms that the naval blockade,
which had caused economic privations as well as hunger on the German home front, would
continue.
At the same time, there already were some provisions and negotiations that would take
place for the provision of emergency food supplies to the German civilian population,
but it speaks volumes about the mutual distrust and hatred among the parties that now would
be negotiating the peace, that for a long time it was difficult to agree on the terms
through which the emergency food supplies would be delivered.
German authorities were worried that if they allowed German ships to be used for the bringing
of these emergency supplies, those ships might very well be confiscated in the long run,
so in some sense even the German government itself was impeding the swifter delivery of
these food supplies, but the pressure of the naval blockade would certainly remain.
At first, the armistice was set for 36 days, but the armistice was later renewed and then
indefinitely prolonged as negotiations were carried on for the final treaty itself.
The German delegation that signed the armistice agreement at Compeña was led by the Catholic
Center Party politician Matthias Erzberger, who is identified now with those parties that
had spearheaded the peace resolution in the Reichstag earlier, who had argued for a piece
of compromise. Erzberger was playing a role here that would raise the ire of many German
nationalists and later indeed he was assassinated by a death squad for his role in signing the
armistice in 1921. Now Germans would have to await the terms of the peace that the Allies
would announce. Germans at this point seized on to with sort of a desperate intensity the
hope for what they called a Wilson peace, and that meant a piece of moderate terms that
would be along the idealistic lines that Woodrow Wilson's rhetoric had announced before
based on the 14 points speech of January 8th, 1918. There were even mass demonstrations
in which one could see posters held up, only the 14 points posters announced. Germans at
this point were slow to realize the extent to which the last stages of the war, the spring
offensive of 1918, as well as the harsh terms of the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk imposed upon
a defeated Russia had hardened Allied sentiments, including those of Woodrow Wilson, and the
terms would be far harsher than they had expected. The ceasefire itself came into effect at 11
a.m. on November 11th. The guns fell silent, and the war had lasted 52 months. The reactions
to the news of the armistice are really compelling to examine, and in some sense they represented
a bookend to the experience of the First World War. We had spoken earlier in one of our first
lectures about the August madness of 1914, so now too there were remarkable scenes of
mass psychology to be observed in the reactions to the formal end of the war. Allied Western
Europe was an example of celebration, which could take quieter as well as more raucous
forms. Reportedly, from the evidence that we have in the front lines of the trenches,
as the firing finally ended, the mood was not one of raucous celebration, but rather
quiet exhaustion and simply an end to energy. In the capitals of the Western Allies, the
pictures were very different. In London, riotous celebrations broke out, and there were reports
of strangers making love in public. In Paris, the bells rang, crowds paraded down the boulevards,
probably in scenes that might have reminded people of the August madness of 1914, cheering
and celebrating, and crowds also gathered at symbolically significant spots, such as
a statue representing allegorically the city of Strasbourg in the lost provinces of Alsace-Lorraine,
which now was being celebrated and cheered as finally returning to France in a symbolic
sense as well. Allied soldiers, when they could be found in the streets of Paris, would
be hoisted up onto the shoulders of some of these celebrating civilian crowds, and would
be carried aloft, British, American, and French soldiers being celebrated as the victors.
Trophy cannon, which had been captured from the German troops, were now symbolically in
triumphant processions pulled by civilians down the rue de Rivoli in a vivid celebration
of victory. This celebration also extended to the more remote and secret areas of the
war effort. At Porton Down in Britain, where the secret gas warfare laboratory had been
working intensively over all of the years previous, the guards as well as some of the
workers got drunk in the celebration, and some of these guards apparently released apes
who had been used in the experimentation, who then terrorized the countryside until they
were captured once again. There are still, in fact, symbolic remnants of these celebrations
in the mood of exultation and jubilation at peace arriving at last. A Belgian beer was
created, which was dedicated to peace itself. And in fact, Bohr, and still bears the name
Pax, it's still produced today and certainly is a survival of those celebrations. At the
same time, we keenly can imagine that alongside these loud public celebrations, inescapably
there were many quiet moments and takings of stock, inescapably private sorrows would
also be felt in quieter corners, even of victorious countries, as widows, orphans, bereaved parents
and siblings thought of the sacrifices that had gone into the end of the war. At the same
time, it's very important to keep in mind that Eastern Europe represented in its reactions
to the end of the war significantly different emphases. The formal closing of the war had
a similarly mixed reaction in Eastern Europe, a mixed reception, but at the same time an
added element was present as well, and that was the celebration of national independence
in countries where nationalist dreams of at long last achieving one's own control over
one's own territory and land seemed to be achieved. And to my mind, there's one key symbolic
fact that better than all others can really sum up this phenomenon, the meaning attached
to the First World War as a war that had produced national independence. And this fact is to
be seen in Poland, an impolish collective memory to this very day, November 11th, which is
celebrated as a holiday in memory of soldiers and of the experience of war in the West,
November 11th by contrast in Poland is celebrated as the day of national independence, when
at long last, after decades of not existing on the map of Europe, a resurrected Poland
again emerged onto the European political landscape. And the same was true in many other
independent countries that now emerged in Central and Eastern Europe out of the wreckage
of fallen empires, celebrating their new existence, even as they were still threatened in their
fragile beginnings and in young republics. Germany was an entirely different case. Germany
was defeated. Many Germans were now glad of the fact that the war was over, but simply
incredulous at the news of their defeat. Many were psychologically unprepared for this
revelation. Censorship and propaganda had often hidden the true fortunes of the war.
And this was even the case among some nationalist politicians who complained that they had been
lied to as the war, as it turns out, was now lost. The propaganda reports from the front
had read at worst all quiet on the Western front and otherwise had announced tremendous
victories and now people were being forced to confront the fact that the war had been
lost. There was also another fact on the military battlefield that made it additionally very
difficult for ordinary people to take a board without the full information that someone
like Ludendorff might have had. The reality that Germany had simply lost the war. German
armies and German lines of trenches on the battlefield stood not on German soil but on
foreign soil. How is it possible to lose the war and yet nonetheless be victorious, so
it seemed, by fighting on enemy soil? In addition, the sheer momentum of the dramatic events
of the end of the war were very hard to take in. In quick succession, the Kaiser abdicated,
a new German Democratic Republic had been declared, and then two days later, the Armistice and
Germany has lost the war. Some very important psychological things we can intuit were taking
place at precisely this time in the German public. In the humiliation of this news of
defeat for many Germans, the new democracy that was emerging at the same time would come
to be associated with the feelings of failure and shame. And thus it was that at precisely
this moment, a conspiracy theory was emerging that suggested that Germany hadn't lost the
war. This came to be called the stab in the back legend. And in fact, even though it came
out in full force at precisely this time, it already had been percolating for some time
previous during the war itself. It was part of a larger process of finding scapegoats for
those events when the war was not going well. We'll recall in particular the Jewish census
of 1916 that already had been singling out the German Jews as scapegoats for German reverses
on the battlefield. The stab in the back legend had also been encouraged by someone like Ludendorff,
an earlier war dictator of Germany who now was casting about for others to blame, whether
they were civilian authorities or other political factions within Germany, to blame for his
own failures. The stab in the back legend argued that the German armies, in fact, had
not been defeated on the battlefield, but had been undermined by dark and treacherous
forces on the home front. In particular, the democratic revolutionaries of 1918, those
who had inaugurated Germany's new experiment with democracy would be denounced by nationalists
in resonant terms as the November criminals, suggesting that this revolution had been an
act of treachery from its beginning. One, at this time, obscure ordinary German soldier
by the name of Adolf Hitler, who was recovering as this news rolled in from being gassed in
Belgium back in October of 1918, recovering in a hospital in Eastern Germany, heard the
news of Germany's defeat and was shattered by this revelation. He went blind in what
probably represented a hysterical reaction, and afterwards would claim that in that blindness
he had had visions that instructed him of his mission to restore Germany's greatness
in the future. The losses of the First World War were ones that would be difficult for
the vanquished as well as the victors to take a board. And it speaks volumes about the scale
of the First World War's totality, that the number of deaths was so huge that it cannot
in fact even today be determined with precision. Nonetheless, the numbers were horrific even
in their approximation. Germany had lost almost two million dead. Austria-Hungary about 1.5
million. On the side of the Allies, Russia had lost 1.7 million. France nearly one and
a half million. Britain nearly a million. Italy half a million. And the Americans over
a hundred thousand. The generational losses were crushing. In France, 17 percent of those
who served in the war were killed. An entire generation damaged. All together, according
to a quite conservative estimate, some nine million soldiers died as a result of the war.
And we need in trying to take aboard the enormity of that figure to keep in mind of the ripple
effect of these losses. Every dead soldier left behind family and relationships that
were shattered by that loss as well in sort of a spreading impact of grief. The injuries,
even of those who were not killed outright, were significant. Twenty million men, according
to best estimates, were wounded. And seven million of these were probably disabled in
a permanent way as a result of their wounds. What we can't know with any precision is
how many of these soldiers would suffer from psychological disturbances long after the war.
And even those who survived physically would often later consider themselves a haunted
lost generation that had lost something of its energy, something of its confidence and
its sense of purpose in this disillusioning war. The economic damage reckoned alongside
these huge losses of people and of lives was also enormous. A report from 1920 that tried
to take stock of this estimated the cost of the war at the astronomical figure of $337
billion. Besides the immediate losses of the war were other losses of markets, for instance,
to neutral countries or to the United States, as well as the plague of inflation that obtained
in all of the competent countries. Equally difficult to quantify but nonetheless significant
were what contemporaries saw as a shattered confidence in that prime idea of European
and Western civilization at the start of the century, the notion of progress. Here, quite
vividly, it was the case that technological advances and an advanced civilization had
been turned to the purpose of murder. And then there was a crowning horror, a natural
disaster that overtook the world even as the war was drawing to a close. This was a devastating
pandemic called the Spanish influenza. Contrary to its name, which suggested that it had come
from Spain, even though its origins remain not entirely clear, medical historians seem
to agree that the epidemic apparently appeared first in Haskell County, Kansas in the United
States in early 1918. While the war itself didn't cause this pandemic and historians
debate the extent to which the privations and the suffering of the war might have made
populations more vulnerable, that's still debated, the movement of troops and ships
as a result of the war, as well as perhaps the weakened constitutions of civilians in
war and countries apparently facilitated the spread of this pandemic disease. The disease
spread to Europe and to other parts of the world mutating in several waves of infection.
Though spreading from the United States itself, apparently, the pandemic came to be called
the Spanish flu because neutral Spain without the same sort of censorship of news that applied
in other countries that suppressed the news of the scale of this disease as it spread,
in neutral Spain the reports of disease were not downplayed as they were in warring countries
and thus the impression was formed that Spain is where it hit first and hardest. The disease
was especially horrifying because it, with enormous rapidity, attacked a victim and seemed
to especially zero in on the young and the healthy. This virus probably killed another
50 million people around the world, mostly in the fall of 1918. And this figure of 50
million, though it's higher than earlier estimates, is still a quite conservative one. Earlier
estimates talked about 20 million lives taken by the Spanish influenza. More current figures
are suggesting perhaps up to 100 million deaths worldwide. This disease killed more people
in one year than the medieval plague the Black Death had over 100 years. Most recent estimates
that are now taking in stock the global reach of this pandemic suggest that maybe 17 million
people died in India and some figures suggest that maybe 2% of the entire population of
Africa died as a result as well. In towns in the United States as well as elsewhere in
the world the death rate was so high that not enough coffins could be produced for the
dead and attempts were made to through fumigation or the wearing of masks or other disinfection
procedures to protect oneself against this mysterious disease, but ultimately while they
were ineffectual the disease seemed simply to have burned itself out by taking all of
the hosts that it might have as it spread. And then a very interesting thing followed
upon this intense suffering and mortality of the Spanish influenza. Not long after this
devastating pandemic, the memory of this disease seemed to be seemingly effaced from
collective consciousness. People didn't talk about it, it was somehow obliterated from
historical memory and to a great extent from popular historical consciousness, including
especially in the United States. And the question presents itself, why? How could a disease
of this proportion be forgotten? Did the tragedy of the world war overshadow this disaster
and produce as it were a sort of short circuiting of grief by overloading our capacity for suffering?
Was the enormity perhaps of this natural disaster something that one could not fully comprehend
or take in? Whatever the case, the phenomenon of the Spanish influenza is something that
medical experts warn us is not unique and not a one-time occurrence. Epidemiologists
who study such diseases warn that pandemics like the Spanish influenza of 1918 certainly
can recur in our own time and in fact with a great deal of anxiety they're watching for
the next outbreak of this sort of worldwide disease. At this point in the context of such
continuing mortality and suffering which worked in tandem with the hopes and the grief of
the war itself, the question was how would one move forward? How would one start to rebuild?
On January 18, 1919 in Paris, the formal opening of peace negotiations took place. However,
hatreds built up over the last years of the war would increasingly impede a peace settlement.
In the case of France, popular opinion strongly and loudly demanded that Germany be punished
for its aggression, made to pay and that in the future somehow French security which had
been violated had to be guaranteed, otherwise the war would have been in vain. In elections
that were held in Great Britain in December of 1918 after the war itself ended, the sentiment
was very similar. This was often called the khaki elections after the khaki color of British
uniforms precisely because they were so dominated by military issues. In these elections Lloyd
George and his coalition won a decisive vote of confidence and they ruled until 1922 and they
won this vote of confidence on the strength of promises of making the Germans pay in the peace
negotiations. A common demand was hang the Kaiser and it was also demanded that people like General
Ludendorff, the war dictator of Germany as well as scientists like Fritz Haber who had helped
produce poison gas be put on trial for violations against international law. At the same time as
they awaited the news of what the peace would be like, many Germans still remained very skeptical
that they had even in fact lost the war. At the same time, most generally in the context of such
negotiations, even the victorious allied powers as they prepared to dictate the terms of the peace
would have to wrestle with the question of what the concept of victory might even conceivably mean
after the losses of such magnitude that they had experienced. One other consequence of this war,
of decisive effect, was the toppling of age-old dynasties and thrones, the overthrowing of an
entire traditional political order in Central and Eastern Europe as an aftershock of the war
itself that we'll consider in our next lecture.
