Lecture 31, toppled thrones, the collapse of empires.
In this lecture, we will be focusing on the vivid scene of thrones toppling, dynasties
crashing down and the sound of the collapse of empires.
As the war ended in defeat for the central powers in 1918, their empires and political
structures also came crashing down.
In this sense, total war had led to total defeat.
This lecture will outline, first, the startling internal collapse of the central powers, the
collapse of the German Empire, then the Austro-Hungarian Empire, and the Turkish Empire, and will
also survey the ongoing crash of the Russian Empire as well.
In the case of each of these imperial structures, what order would replace the now extinct order
was most certainly a burning question.
The political map was in the process of being transformed.
As a result of the war, four great empires came crashing down with astonishing rapidity
and in the process also tore down the ruling families with them.
The Russian Empire of the Romanov family, the German Empire ruled by the Hohenzollerns,
the Austro-Hungarian Empire of the Hapsbergs, and the Ottoman realm as well.
In Europe, republics replaced dynastic kingdoms in what seemed to be a fulfillment of Woodrow
Wilson's promise of a new democratic age.
Nine new national states appeared out of the wreckage of empire, from north to south in
Central Europe and Eastern Europe, Finland, Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania, the three
Baltic states, Poland, Hungary, Austria, Czechoslovakia, and Yugoslavia.
So in other words, one witnessed the astonishing birth of new nations as it were arriving at
the state of becoming nation states.
But two key points need to be emphasized about this transformation.
These new states were not merely created by the negotiators of the Paris Peace Conference
soon underway, rather facts unfolded on the ground with astonishing speed, suggesting
that the appeal of nationalism and those ideas that Woodrow Wilson had announced of self-determination
and associated democratic appeals were notions that had an appeal far broader than merely
that of the rhetorical plane.
And some who view what they would call the Balkanization of Central and Eastern Europe
as a great tragedy are prone to personalize this development by seeing Woodrow Wilson as
responsible for it or having caused it by his rhetoric of self-determination.
The reality was far more complex.
On the contrary, Woodrow Wilson's articulated ideas would have such appeal because they corresponded
to such mass sentiment.
New independence for nationalities in Central and Eastern Europe also, and this is the second
basic point, made for a very different perception of the war itself.
One of the themes that we've been pursuing through this course has been that of the different
meanings, the often starkly different meanings that were assigned to the war both as it was
going on and in its aftermath by different participants or witnesses.
So too in this case, the aftermath of the war was seen not as was sometimes the case
in Western Europe as senseless tragedy and waste and problematic victory, but was seen
as something very different in Eastern Europe, instead often as a baptism of fire for national
freedom and independence.
Let's turn first to the crucial case of the German Revolution and Germany's beginning
of an experiment, unfortunately a brief and failed experiment with democratic government,
starting with the German Revolution of November of 1918.
After naval mutinies to frustrate the intended death ride plans of naval officers had broken
out and after revolts had broken out in other parts of Germany as well, the attempted revolution
from above by Germany's elites to create a constitutional monarchy and to win more favorable
consideration in a peace settlement had failed.
Kaiser Wilhelm II abdicated and fled to exile in Holland, where he remained for the rest
of his life.
Generals Hindenburg and Ludendorff, meanwhile, had systematically sought to evade responsibility
for the defeat, and this in some sense represented a crucial milestone in the growth of a conspiracy
theory, the stab in the back legend, blaming not Germany's military leaders, but mysterious
others for this defeat.
Once Max von Baden, who had been landed with the duties of imperial chancellor, now instead
prepared for a transfer of power.
He offered the power of the state and the government to surprise social democratic leaders
who were caught unprepared.
In a sense there was a strange irony about this very moment.
Social Democrats as a revolutionary party had long been insisting in their own propaganda
and in their own beliefs, ideologically, that they were a party that was organizing to take
power and to produce a fundamental social revolution within Germany as well.
And now when the hour arrived, they were surprised and caught off guard.
The social democratic leader Friedrich Ebert took over thus on November 9th, 1918.
In this chaotic set of circumstances, his colleague Philipp Scheidemann declared a German
Democratic Republic in Berlin.
The new German experiment with democracy was beginning, but it was beginning in the context
of great confusion.
There was a sense in which the revolutionary events themselves were coming so fast and
furious that it was difficult for observers and ordinary Germans to keep track of what
it was that was happening.
One of these observers commented that it seemed in these event-filled days that Germany had
fallen asleep under an empire and then had woken up under a republic.
In part, the confusion was further underlined and accelerated because there had not been
planning during the course of the war itself for demobilization that might follow upon
defeat.
This speaks volumes about the sense of the totality of the war.
Total defeat or total victory seemed to be the alternatives in years past so that governments
on all sides had not been thinking about the unthinkable.
What would happen if your side lost?
How would you prepare for an orderly demobilization?
It seemed on the contrary that total victory was the only thinkable option, but now it
would have to be faced up to this fact that defeat was a reality.
In the process, Germany was in a situation in which chaos and confusion were rife.
To just enumerate some of the symptoms of this confusion, throughout Germany's cities
and in the barracks of the army and the garrisons of the sailors, local councils were being organized.
And these were quite explicitly on the model of the Russian Soviets, which had been the
grassroots councils of a sort of very basic democracy of the street that had taken such
a trajectory in the Russian Revolution.
At the same time, a socialist republic was being declared in Bavaria.
Separatists were being mobilized in the Rhineland to perhaps establish an independent Rhineland
state, maybe under French patronage.
And these cases made very clear that perhaps Germany's own borders were not secure, perhaps
Germany's cohesion might be breaking down territorially due to these regional differences.
And then add to this the fact that out in the streets of Germany, out in the barracks,
there were now 10 million German soldiers who needed to be demobilized.
They were armed, they wanted to go home, it was unclear if one or another political faction
might win their sympathies, most certainly a potentially volatile force.
And at the same time, to add just one last difficult problem, a revolutionary movement
of radical socialists called the Spartacus Revolutionary Movement, after a slave rebel
of classical times in the Roman Empire, the Spartacus Revolutionary Movement was being
organized and it planned actively the overthrow of anything less than a radical socialist state.
This was symbolized perfectly by one fact, while the German democracy was being proclaimed
by Scheidemann on November 9th of 1918 from the German Parliament building, just a few
steps away from the balcony of the Royal Palace, a radical socialist by the name of Karl Liebknecht
who had held firm to his convictions during the course of the war, was declaring a rival
socialist republic, a radical socialist republic at that same time, promising a system that
would link up and make common cause with the Bolshevik regime in the east, hoping to accelerate
the progress of an international revolution. There was something deeply, deeply symbolically
laden about the declaration of this radical socialist, maybe even Soviet republic from
the Royal Palace. It was precisely here where four years previously, Wilhelm II had gone
out to declare the domestic truce, arguing that the Burgfrieden or the piece of the castle
was now a reality and that he saw before him only Germans. This unity of Germans, which
had been breaking down desperately before, now would grow as a situation resembling civil
war would start to develop. There was a paradox in this rivalry between different branches
of the socialists. On the one hand, there were the moderate socialists, the social democrats
who had stood by Germany's war effort from the August Madness of 1914. On the other hand,
there were the radical socialists who claimed that the majority socialist party had betrayed
the interests of the German working class and who wanted to push revolution fast and
furious. The paradox here was that the SPD, the majority and more moderate socialists,
had earlier been claiming that they too wanted revolution, but now they would find themselves
faced with the challenge of trying instead to simply save order. Government leaders now
fell back on an agreement which would come back to haunt them very quickly. The government
leaders made an agreement with the German army for mutual assistance. The army extracted
the promise that the German army itself would not be purged or cleansed of its traditional
officer class, and in turn the government won the active support of the army in staving
off threats to its existence. In the process, the army which was caught already in an increasing
process of disintegration, as well as the government, set about hiring committed fighters who would
take up the cause of the government. These were in essence brutal mercenaries who came
to be called Freikor, essentially meaning free corps or free units who would set out
to quell revolts, and these Freikor were of a varied complexion. On the one hand they
included former soldiers, included stormtroopers who didn't want to end the existence of fighting
but enjoyed it and wanted to prolong it, also included students and younger boys, young
men who felt they had missed out on the experience of fighting on the front, but were now caught
up in the civil war atmosphere that ruled in the streets of Germany. This was not a
very auspicious beginning for the record of the German democracy which comes to be called
the Weimar Republic. The reason it's called the Weimar Republic is because the constitution
of this democracy is written in southeastern Germany in the city of culture and associations
that were more liberal in nature than the imperial capital of Berlin, the city of Weimar,
and thus the entire state takes on the name of the Weimar Republic. The provisional government
that ruled this young German democracy included the three parties that earlier in 1917 had
supported the peace resolution and had spoken out against the hard line German nationalists.
This provisional government was made up of the social democrats, the moderate majority
social democratic party. It included left liberals and it included the catholic center party.
In the elections for the constituent assembly which would write the constitution in Weimar,
the elections which took place in January of 1919, a strong vote was returned which seemed
a considerable voice of support for the project of building a German democracy. These three
parties which oriented themselves democratically and pledged to introduce an effective German
democracy gained 76% of the vote in this new German election. This seemed to be a mandate
for the building of a new German democracy and in that sense a good omen. The constitution
which was written then in Weimar was considered a model of democracy, a model of progressive
governance, an enlightened welfare state obligations growing in many senses out of the new role
that the state had taken on in World War I. Indeed this new German democratic constitution
was admired by many democrats worldwide. It included universal voting rights and the
rights of women to vote as well as a bill of rights and very extensive social commitments.
Some historians however cautioned that maybe it was too democratic. It had a system of voting
that's called proportional representation which aimed to give even small groups a voice in the
larger political landscape. But the system of proportional representation made for in the end
effect a quite splintered parliament with many parties and introduced the danger that a small
and very radical party might be able to in a sense get its foot in the door and then use the
democratic process to subvert democracy, something that the Nazis later end up doing. At the same
time and most definitely a burden to this young German democracy was the stab in the back legend
that was growing in conviction and force. In the minds of many, German democracy would come to be
associated with defeat and the terms of the Versailles treaty that were being announced
to an outraged German audience at precisely this time. Radical nationalists would soon be denouncing
the government as not legitimate but rather November criminals. And when German troops returned
from the front, the government itself welcomed them as undefeated in the battlefield in the
words of the President Abert. And this obviously raised a serious question. If the troops had
been undefeated fighting on foreign soil, how then had Germany lost? The reality that Germany
had been beaten because of a balance tipping against it in material and military terms,
that was suppressed. Instead, the stab in the back legend, Dolchstos Legende in German, was
already being circulated during the war and now proliferated, asserting that Germany's armies had
been betrayed by treacherous elements on the home front. And with sort of a grim regularity, the
groups that were scapegoated were democratic politicians, socialists, Catholics, as well as
German Jews. Germany's ill-fated ally, Austria-Hungary, had also come crashing down. Even before the
war's end, Austria-Hungary had been in the process of dissolving before the eyes of its leaders.
National committees had been founded by the separate ethnic groups who increasingly clamored
for independence. And exile politicians of these ethnic groups abroad, including in the United
States, agitated the Western allies for recognition. At first, the reluctance of the allies to see
the Austro-Hungarian Empire simply dismembered was considerable. If they looked forward to
restoring a balance of power, it might be very good to have one larger state like Austria-Hungary
preserved. But with the intensity of hatreds and emotions of total war, that reluctance
faded over time. From 1917, with those world historical events, the Russian March Revolution,
which introduced a more democratic system, and the American entry into the war, and Woodrow
Wilson's notion of a crusade for democracy, a new ideological emphasis took hold worldwide
and condemned this multinational empire of the Habsburgs. Wilson's 14 points included the demand
for the free autonomous development of the peoples of the empire, and this soon would develop into
a demand for independence. By the summer of 1918, the allies were supporting the national claims
to independence of the minorities and recognized exile committees. A key example was that of
Czechoslovakia. A national committee had de facto been taking over power in the Czech lands,
and had been making common cause with the related ethnic group, the Slovaks, mobilizing one of the
best organized national movements in Europe. Abroad, Tomasz Mazaryk and Edward Benes co-founded
in exile the Czechoslovak National Council in London in Paris of 1915, and events now
snowballed. On October 28, 1918, an independent Czechoslovak Republic was declared in Prague.
Further south, in the Balkans, a pre-war South Slav movement, which aimed to unify
the South Slavic peoples, the Croats, the Serbs, and others, led to the forming of a Yugoslav
committee in exile in London of May of 1915, which united Serbs, Croatians, Montenegrens,
and Slovenes. They then created the Korfu Declaration of July of 1917, in which Serbia and
representatives of other South Slavic peoples agreed to the project of creating a combined
Yugoslav state in the future, but its nature remained unclear. Would this be a greater Serbia
expanded with other related peoples, or would it be more in the nature of a free and equal
federation? That remained for the future. On October 29, 1918, an independent Yugoslavia
was declared. Hungary itself, now as the empire melted away, even though it had been one of the
major constituent parts of the obviously Austro-Hungarian Empire, also split away from Hapsburg rule.
At first, on October 16, 1918, Hungary declared itself independent of ties from Austria, except
for still having a common monarch, a Hapsburg king and emperor. On November 16, 1918, they went the
next step. An independent Hungarian republic was declared under Prince Michael Karoli. Austria now,
and this is almost a crazy paradox, Austria too now became independent of the Austro-Hungarian
Empire. With the empire's collapse on November 12, 1918, an independent German Austria was declared.
In the expectation of soon joining the German Republic to the north. This small country of
seven million German-speaking Austrians was a shadow of its former power. This was essentially
what was left of once great empire. Vienna had once been the capital of an empire of 50 million,
and now it was an outsize imperial city in a small remnant of a country. The young emperor
Karl, who had sought to save his regime, was dismayed by these events. In mid-October of 1918,
the emperor had sought to save or salvage the situation by proclaiming a federal reorganization
with autonomy promised to the nationalities in Austria, but this came too late. On November 3,
1918, the Austro-Hungarian armistice had been signed for a state that no longer existed. The emperor
Karl stubbornly refused to abdicate and instead went into exile to Madeira, dying young there.
This represented the end of 600 years of Habsburg rule. And the Danube Basin, that entire region
which the Austro-Hungarian empire had united, once had been a political and economic coherent unit,
but now was torn apart, and the empire was separated into seven states. In another imperial
hangover, 5 million Germans were now living as minorities outside of Austria or of Germany,
and this was an ethnic problem stored up for the future. Independence now came in Eastern Europe
as well, as the Russian Empire, which had begun its disintegration earlier, now further continued
its disintegration, in what really amounted to a process of decolonization pursued earlier than
that of the other European empires. Poland was a key example of this sort of emergence of what
had been a submerged people into a really dynamic mobilization to achieve the long aspired to cause
of national independence, where earlier Polish forces of volunteers had been organized to fight
under the auspices of the Austro-Hungarians as volunteer legions in the struggle to liberate
Polish territories, and it was hoped to achieve national independence. The balance had tipped
against the central powers, and the earlier leader of these legions, Piłsudski, had found himself
incarcerated by the Germans, and so now the hopes came to rest upon the Allied powers,
and the imperative was to win Allied sympathies for the cause of Polish independence. A key way in
which this could be achieved was by demonstrating that the Poles were committed and participating
in the active struggle against the central powers, and a very vivid illustration of this was the
existence of a military force called the Holler Army of 100,000 Poles who were fighting for the
Allies in France on the Western Front. This army was made up of Polish exiles or former prisoners
of war who had earlier been fighting for the central powers, but now had found their way
to the Holler Army to fight on the Western Front. Their commander, Holler, had engaged in a
tremendous odyssey to arrive at the Western Front. He had earlier been a commander under
Austro-Hungarian auspices of Polish troops. Now he had broken through the front lines to the Russian
Empire, defecting and had come up through the Russian Empire itself in order to make the
long journey to the northern port of Murmansk and to travel thence all the way to France
in order to command this army of volunteers on the Western Front. This participation of Poles
in an active military sense was recognized by the Allies, they were recognized as a fighting force,
and Allied sympathies were won in a decisive way for Polish causes. Abroad, the nationalist
politician Roman Dmowski and the world-famous pianist turned politician Ignacy Paderewski
both agitated for Polish independence. The effect was clear. Woodrow Wilson's 14 points agreed and
made independent Poland a key war aim. November 11th, 1918 is still celebrated as Poland's
independence day. The commander of Polish legions, Pilsudski, was freed from incarceration in a
German jail and traveled to Warsaw to form a government there. And in spite of personal and
political conflicts between these rivals, Pilsudski and Dmowski, who would lead the delegation to
the Paris Peace Conference, they together worked for a one united independent Poland, though its
borders still remained unclear. At the same time, with the German collapse, the Baltic
republics of Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia and Finland became young independent republics,
though their independence remained fragile. Because German forces remained in the territory,
the Bolsheviks moved forward to spread their revolution and civil war threatened as well.
To the south of what had been the lands of the Russian Empire, the Transcaucasian Republic
included the former Russian territories of Armenia, Azerbaijan and Georgia, which soon
were reconquered by the Bolsheviks and only became independent again in our own times.
Ottoman Turkey also collapsed with startling speed. Arabia had been made a separate state.
Palestine, Iraq, Syria and Transjordan would come under Allied disposition,
and the remaining parts of the empire now were occupied by the Allies. Young Turk war leaders
now fled into exile, escaping calls for bringing them to trial for their actions.
The new Sultan Mehmed IV cooperated with the Allies, but a nationalist counter reaction
set in against what was seen as this craven cooperation, and it was led, this nationalist
movement, by a former young Turk, Mustafa Kemal, who later would be known as Ataturk,
or father of the Turks, who resisted the government as well as the Allied occupation,
and eventually abolished the Sultanate, the last remnants of the Ottoman Empire,
and created also a new state, a new nation, the Turkish nation state.
What we've examined in today's lecture is the remarkable rapidity with which nationalist
dreams for achieving national independence and a realization of long-held hopes for
self-determination of the variety that Woodrow Wilson had been announcing would now finally
come true. We've also examined the difficult first stages of the founding of a German
democratic state. Anxieties grew with the terms of the Versailles Treaty as they were announced
to German democratic politicians. In May of 1919, the terms of the Versailles Treaty were presented
to a shocked German public. And indeed, one German politician complained with a sense of anxiety and
tremendous fear, arguing that these terms were ones that should not be imposed upon a German
democracy, which had sought to fulfill some of Woodrow Wilson's ideas. This German politician
exclaimed, what hand would not wither? What hand would not be paralyzed that laid itself
in such chains by signing a Treaty of Versailles? The Paris peace settlement, thus which followed
upon the achievement of this collapse of empires and the founding of new states, represented
an incomplete and unhappily incoherent answer, as it turns out, to a fundamental challenge of
this new age. How to combine an attempt at the realization of Woodrow Wilson's democratic message
of a crusade to make the world safe for democracy and to achieve a new world order founded upon
more democratic governments, on the one hand, with the demands that had grown out of the emotions,
the hatreds, the passions of the war itself, for a reigning in and a revenge for the crimes
of the enemy side. The Paris peace settlement, a whole complex of treaties that would be signed
with the defeated powers. And in addition, among these treaties, the most important of them,
the Treaty of Versailles that would be imposed upon a defeated Germany as the centerpiece of
this entire settlement, would leave traumatized international politics and raise once again
the question of how such problems might be solved through peaceful settlement rather than through
a recurrence of the same sort of total war which the future held in store. It's precisely this
dynamic of the crafting, the writing, and the attempt at the creation of the Paris peace settlement
and the Treaty of Versailles itself with a defeated Germany that we'll be examining in
much more detail in our lecture to follow.
