Lecture 32 The Versailles Treaty and Paris Settlement
In this lecture, we'll be looking very closely at the business of peacemaking, the attempt
to remake a world with the Versailles Treaty and the larger Paris Settlement of which it would be a
part. Here's the key problem. How does one make peace after a war of this duration and this
totality? The peace settlements ending the First World War were beset with contradictions.
Should the treaties try to reconcile enemies, or should they on the contrary seek to decisively
punish the defeated side? Were they meant to repair the pre-war balance of power?
Or were they meant to transcend it entirely and abolish it as a thing of the past?
In this lecture, we'll consider in depth the entire complex of treaties with the defeated
central powers, which together are called the Paris Settlement. We'll examine the divergent
motives of the victors at work in the drafting of these peace treaties. The case of the 1919
Versailles Treaty with the defeated Germany brings the paradoxes of this peacemaking into
sharp relief. On the one hand, there were expressed desires for European reconciliation.
On the other hand, economic and military constraints were imposed on Germany,
along with reparations for war guilt. Elsewhere in central and eastern Europe, in the new
republics established out of the wreckage, the settlement was celebrated as a ratification
of longed for national independence. At the same time, however, many issues left unresolved by the
Paris Settlement would soon return to haunt Europeans, and a particularly troubling aspect
of the lack of resolution that it brought was the seeming pulling out by the United States
of this entire structure by not ratifying the Versailles Treaty. The Paris Peace Conference of
1919 opened on January 18th, and it involved the beginning of work on five separate treaties
with the defeated powers, the central powers. These were Germany, Austria, and Hungary now
treated separately because they had broken apart Bulgaria and Turkey. This was a huge
international gathering of diplomats. 27 states participated. There were somewhere on the order
of 10,000 delegates, participants, observers, and experts on all sorts of diplomatic questions
who are taking part. But in the negotiations themselves, there were some significant parties
who would not be allowed to participate. And in particular, the defeated central powers did not
share in compromise or give and take crafting of this solution. Rather, they would have the
terms told them and would have to accept or reject those terms. Another presence that in some sense
lurked in the minds of many of the peacemakers, but was not represented as such in the process
of the conference itself, was Bolshevik Russia. The Soviet ideology was something that was already
worrying many of the peacemakers. Russia was a pariah or untouchable state in their mind,
and thus they sought, even as they feared it, not to include it in these negotiations.
The peacemakers were dominated by four participants in particular, and these were aptly called the
Big Four because of their outsize importance and the fact that they would gather for their own
negotiations, even as formally the process was supposed to involve many other countries.
The French were represented by Premier Clemenceau. Clemenceau negotiated with a truly
dogged and inflexible determination with the goal in mind to defend French interests
and to secure French security for the future. In other words, now that the war had been won,
Clemenceau was determined to win the peace as well and establish structures that would ensure
French security. The British by contrast were represented by the British Prime Minister Lloyd
George, and Lloyd George, in spite of his earlier ferocity and the promises made in a recent election
to really make the Germans pay. By contrast, his role in practice turned out to be a good deal
more moderate. He tried to compromise where possible, but was himself inflexible when
defending British imperial interests. More cynical French observers would say that, well,
certainly the British could afford to take a more measured line against the renewal of the
German threat because they had the channel still between them and a renewal of that German threat.
The Italians as participants on the side of the victors were represented by their Prime Minister
Vittorio Orlando. But Orlando was tremendously frustrated by allied refusals to meet all of
the Italian territorial demands on the Adriatic. And out of this frustration, he engaged in a
dramatic gesture that was probably soon repented of. He stormed out of the negotiations on April 24,
1919, and henceforth the Big Four would be reduced to the Big Three. That was to say,
Clemenceau, Lloyd George, and the American President Woodrow Wilson. Woodrow Wilson had come
to the Paris settlement negotiations to construct a new piece along idealistic lines. And Woodrow
Wilson also was confirmed in his providential sense that he had the special mission of constructing
a new durable international order on idealistic lines when he witnessed the rapturous welcome
that awaited him. When he arrived in France, he was met by enormous crowds. And it's estimated,
this is an astonishing figure, that he was greeted by some two million French people as he traveled
through the territories of France on his way to make different diplomatic visits. He was hailed
there by crowds that called him by the name Wilson the Just, celebrating his unique role
as a voice for peace. And one could see posters posted through European cities,
clamoring for this demand, we want a Wilson peace, whatever that might mean.
No American president had spent so much time away from the United States while in office,
and historians gifted, as they are with perfect hindsight, have often criticized Wilson's decision
to personally lead the American delegation in negotiations. They argue that this robbed him
of the flexibility of a longer view and caught him up in compromises that he later regretted.
And indeed, during the negotiations themselves, the negotiations were directed not so much against
the defeated powers alone, but also represented a certain competition and a certain tension between
the Allies themselves, as they often pursued different priorities. In this case, different
priorities clearly would clash. Wilson's aim was to enshrine a democratic peace,
carrying within itself an acknowledgement of the notion of self-determination. And beyond this,
his dream was also to establish a structure that would institutionalize these new sets of ideas.
This structure that he envisioned was to be a world organization called the League of Nations.
By contrast with what Wilson presented as his idealistic message, the European powers, and in
this case, in particular, the French and the British, tended to instead emphasize things that
were stressed in the older kind of traditional diplomacy that Wilson aimed to overcome and
to make obsolete. They emphasized instead the imperatives of national security and the realities
of power politics, the balance of the balance of power. The expectations of the Germans as well
were a factor in all of this, especially after Germany had turned itself into a democracy.
German political leaders and many ordinary Germans had expected to be included in the
negotiations, not as a defeated power, but welcomed as a new democracy into the family
of free peoples. This was to be disappointed precisely because the Allies aimed to negotiate
the terms of the treaty without interference by compromise with the defeated powers,
and instead of being active participants, Germans would have to wait to hear the terms
of the peace as it was decided upon. Further, time was a crucial factor on all sides in this
negotiation. If one can, one should try to keep in one's mind as we talk about the different
results of the negotiations. Keep in mind, mentally, a clock ticking down as the negotiations drag
on, because even as the negotiations proceeded, certain other factors were changing, and in
particular the strength of the negotiating parties was being altered itself as the negotiations
proceeded. Armies were being demobilized, facts were being established on the ground as new nations
declared their independence, wartime economies were slowly being demobilized, so clearly shifts
in relative power were taking place even as the negotiations went on, and this was clearly a factor
in the minds of the negotiators. As an additional source of pressure, the negotiators were constantly
being lobbied from all sides by advocates of different causes, and one needs to imagine what
the scene must have been like in the hotels of Paris during the negotiations. Every night,
activists for one or another nationality striving for independence would be slipping propaganda
and memoranda and all sorts of other literature under the hotel doors of delegates to the negotiations
in the hope that their dreams of national independence might come true. Somewhere to be
satisfied, many others not. The Versailles Treaty, which was the centerpiece of the entire Paris
settlement, was carved out with many compromises between the Allied negotiators themselves,
and with many dissatisfactions, and nonetheless in many cases still represented a ratcheting up
of demands to their maximum. What were the terms of the Versailles Treaty? There were many of them.
The Versailles Treaty included 440 articles, so this was quite a detailed list of terms.
Let's outline the most important ones. Germany was to lose all of its colonies,
and about 13 percent of its pre-war territory in Europe, involving about 10 percent of its
population. So Germany itself was to lose lands. It was to be cut around the edges. This included
Alsace and Lorraine, the lost provinces that had been taken from France in 1871. It also included
disputed territories that would default to Belgium and to Denmark. It also included large
provinces in the east, which had had mixed German-Polish populations, but now became part of a new
resurrected Poland. And true to the promise of the 14 points, Poland was to gain a Polish corridor
to the Baltic Sea in order to give it access to world trade, even though this meant that part of
Germany, Eastern Prussia, would be split off, physically split off from the rest of Germany,
and it would be no longer geographically contiguous. At the same time, the important
East German port of Danzig was to be made a free port split off from Germany itself.
Next, Germany's armed forces that had fought this long, long war
were to be drastically reduced so that they would not represent a threat again.
With no conscription allowed, no draft, the German army would be limited to a very small
volunteer force of 100,000 men, not an army on the scale of millions as had been fielded in the
First World War. Germany also was to divest itself of many of those destructive new technologies
that had played a role in World War I. Germany was to have no air force, no submarines,
and gas weapons were emphatically banned. Territorially, the Rhineland, on Germany's
Western frontier, was to be demilitarized. This demilitarized zone was on a front of about
or a belt of 30 miles wide to be left bare of German military forces so that if Germany ever,
it seemed, was in the process of becoming a threat again, the Rhineland would represent a jumping
off point for a renewed Allied invasion. The West Bank of the Rhine was to be occupied by the
Allies for about 15 years. France had demanded something far larger. It had demanded an independent
Rhineland buffer state to be set up of German speakers in the Rhineland area, which would not
be part of Germany, but would offer security to the French in the future. They finally agreed to
scale back this demand in exchange for British and American pledges of guaranteeing French
security in the future. Germany would also have to pay an unspecified amount in reparations for
the war. Woodrow Wilson resisted this demand. It went against his principles of not exacting huge
fines for the conflict, but nonetheless he gave in on this score. The sum was not immediately
specified, but later it was set at $32 billion in 1921. Limitations were also to be placed on
German industry and commerce as a way, as it were, of shackling the German revival that many felt
was sure to come. And an example of this involved important exports like liquors. In particular,
the agreement stressed that certain names of famous products that were French would not be
allowed to be used by the Germans, so that the Germans henceforth could not market their brandy
under the name of Cognac. This would be limited to the French regions, and likewise the Germans
couldn't market their sparkling wines as champagne, but instead would have to call them by less famous
and less charismatic names. Parenthetically, the very fact that the United States doesn't
ratify the Versailles Treaty allowed Californian wine growers to continue using this famous name
of champagne for their own products. But of all of these articles, of all these clauses, there was
one which had a bombshell significance psychologically. This was article 231, which popularly came to
be called the Wargilt Clause. That was not its formal title, but that was how it was understood.
In this article 231, which aimed to establish a legal foundation for the claims to reparations
that were being made by the treaty, Germany was made to accept the blame for starting the war.
And we need next to examine the German reactions to these terms. When the terms of the treaty were
announced, German public opinion was thunderstruck. And when it recovered from its surprise, which
to us in retrospect might seem overdone or exaggerated, given the reality of the hatreds
and the passions that it built up, and how the Germans had defeated Russia in the Breslautovsky
Treaty, but when German public opinion recovered from its surprise, outrage spread on a gigantic
scale. Nonetheless, no negotiation of the terms was to be allowed. Rather, they were to be accepted,
or the blockade would continue, and the war would recommend.
German naval officers took action and protest. When the German fleet had been moved to scap a
flow in the Orkneys to a British base, the German officers took a decisive moment to scuttle or
sink the entire German fleet so that it wouldn't fall into enemy hands. German nationalists denounced
this Diktat, the German phrase, for a dictated peace, and clamored and protested against what they
named Germany's bleeding borders. Across nearly all of the political spectrum, the rejection of the
terms of the Breslautovsky Treaty by German public opinion was unanimous, and it especially focused
on war guilt as an issue. It seemed to many Germans who were not fully aware of how irresponsible
and unpredictable German aggressive foreign policy had been in the lead-up to 1914,
and after the First World War ends, the new German democratic government didn't throw open the archives
of the diplomatic service in order to really have a nationwide debate about one's own foreign policy.
For these reasons, German public opinion, to a great extent, had remained unaware of these realities,
and instead, in a very heartfelt way, emphasized that surely a disaster on this scale
had involved the responsibility of many European nations and not the Germans alone.
Whatever the facts of the matter, the passions were clear. To a certain extent, we can see now
when the passions have died down, the terms of the Versailles Treaty, in fact, were milder than
those which Germany had imposed on Russia in the Breslautovsk Treaty of 1918. So there was an
element of hypocrisy or blindness to many of these protests. In spite of this wave of outrage
and protest, the German delegation ultimately had no choice. It ultimately signed the Versailles Treaty
on June 28th of 1919 in a famous and significant historical location, the Hall of Mirrors,
in Versailles. We can imagine the scene as it unfolded in the records that are given to us
by historical contemporaries. The site was important because the Hall of Mirrors, this beautiful
palace complex of Versailles of Louis XIV of earlier ages, had played an important historical
role back in 1871. This was where the German Empire had been officially declared over the body,
one might say, of a defeated France, humiliating the French additionally. Shortly before three
o'clock in the afternoon, the signing ceremonies were ready and a thousand observers were gathered,
there were even photographs showing officers and observers craning to look through windows in order
to, from the outside, to get a view of this historic event. And these observers watched as
Clemenceau, leading the proceedings, barked out the order, bring the Germans in. The German
representatives, two of them, walked into the room with faces that were, were as pale as those
of corpses. They avoided making eye contact with anyone and approached the table where the treaty
was laid out. The two Germans were offered pens with which to sign the treaty, but they
ostentatiously instead pulled out their own fountain pens, which they'd brought along
so as not to have to use enemy pens or enemy ink in the signature of this treaty.
When they were done signing, the treaty generally was signed by all of the parties,
and parenthetically, the famous pen company based in France, Waterman, which had provided
the pens for the signing, had the, the joy of seeing its product used in the signing of this
diplomatic instrument. And afterwards, Waterman used in its ads the claim or the, the proud
pronouncement that Waterman pens had been used. I'm pretty sure that after the disastrous outcomes
of the Versailles treaty, these ads were quietly shelved. And thus it was that five years to the
day from the assassination in Sarajevo that had sparked the First World War, the Versailles
treaty was signed. Within Germany itself, outrage against the treaty continued, and unfortunately,
irrational as this might have been, came to poison views of German democracy by association.
In the outrage and the, the social mobilization that grew out of the German reactions to the
Versailles treaty, there were some fascinating instances of people that we've already talked
about before playing a role as well. In particular, that brilliant German Jewish scientist, Fritz
Haber, who had earlier been instrumental in pioneering gas warfare, and by his discovery
of ways to synthesize nitrates, had prolonged the German war effort with the ability to
produce fertilizer and explosives. He now set about, once he returned from exile, since he had
feared being put on trial, once he had returned to Germany, he sought to find some way of creatively
overturning the Versailles treaty through science. And in particular, he was haunted by a statistic
that suggested to him that there was gold present in seawater out in the oceans in miniscule amounts,
but maybe it would be possible to extract it from the seawater. He attempted this and was very
disappointed to learn over time that in fact the statistics that he'd been working with had vastly
exaggerated the amount of gold that was available in trace amounts in seawater, and in fact would
require far greater volume than ever expected before to produce the requisite gold to pay for
reparations. The result was that he failed, but he had a nice consolation prize. He won the 1918
Nobel Prize for his earlier work not on gas warfare, obviously, but for synthesizing of nitrates,
and it was a great and crushing blow to Allied opinion. American newspapers suggested, well,
if you did this, I mean, if you gave a man who amounted to a war criminal in their perspective,
the Nobel Prize in science, then you ought to give German propagandists the Nobel Prize in literature.
One outcome of this was that Fritz Haber was not put on trial as a war criminal, in part because
of the stature that the Nobel Prize had given him. A word to the other treaties of the Paris
settlement that were important as well. The Treaty of Saint-Germain with Austria on September 10th
of 1919 ceded territories to neighboring states from the Austrian lands and forbade the Austrian's
union with Germany. The French were insistent upon this. Germany was not going to emerge out of the
war stronger than it had been before the war started. So you had the bizarre situation of a
country that didn't want to be independent, German Austria, being forced into independence.
The Treaty of Trianon with Hungary on June 4th 1920 also left only a small portion of what Hungary
had once been. Immense territories were ceded to Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, and Romania,
and many Hungarians rejected this furiously with a famous slogan, no, no, never, in reference to
the Treaty of Trianon. And recently on a trip to Budapest, I saw for sale posters of maps of
Hungary showing it in its older borders. The Treaty of Nuit with Bulgaria of November 27th 1919
did something similar. It ceded vast territories. The Treaty of Sevres with Ottoman Turkey of
August 10th 1920, likewise dismember the empire with Syria and Lebanon falling to French control,
Palestine and Iraq to British control, and other territories going to Greece and Italy.
The Kurds and Armenians were to gain autonomy, but this treaty was never ratified because it was
rejected by nationalist Turkish revolts. The League of Nations had been a very important key
idea of Wilson's included in his 14 points, and he was especially willing to compromise in particular
instances like on reparations in exchange for the creation of this institution of collective
security that he hoped would later peacefully correct any problems or flaws in the Versailles
Treaty. This institution, whose aim was to promote peaceful resolution of conflicts,
consisted of a general assembly and a smaller council. The League began its existence in Geneva
in January of 1920, and in spite of some successes, the League ultimately turned out not to have the
enforcement mechanisms or the teeth necessary to ensure that its dictates were followed,
and it ended in failure as the world moved towards World War II. It was finally formally
dissolved in 1946 once its failures had been patent. Two great powers, the United States
and Soviet Russia, ascendant superpowers in fact, were not members. The United States rejected the
Versailles Treaty and with it the League of Nations Covenant. One reason for this was Wilson's
inflexibility on the Versailles Treaty itself and the conception of the League of Nations.
He wanted it to really match his vision and was unwilling to compromise on aspects of its structures.
His political miscalculations in this regard forced a showdown in American politics.
Anxieties expressed by some American senators included questions of sovereignty. Would the
League of Nations mean that America no longer was sovereign as a nation? Would it have to obey
the dictates of others in this collective structure? There were questions about the
obligations of the United States under the system of collective security. If all states were to
guarantee each other's borders and their security, wouldn't America conceivably be drawn into faraway
struggles which didn't involve its national interest? There was also a growing sense of
disgust on the part of a broader American public at what they saw as the dirty dealings of the
negotiations of the Versailles Treaty which seemed to them a return to balance of power politics
and the cynical old ways of European diplomacy versus Wilson's idealistic vision. It's also true
that some uglier prejudices expressed themselves in skepticism towards the League of Nations,
along with some quite valid worries. Some of these prejudices included the notion that
non-white peoples would be on an equal basis with those of European heritage. An anxiety also
about religious affiliation argued that this would be an organization dominated by Roman Catholic
countries by their sheer size. That was another prejudicial anxiety. As Wilson campaigned for
the approval of the treaty and refused to compromise, he exhausted himself and finally
ran himself down to the point that he collapsed and never could recover his health. Finally,
to a great extent because of Wilson's attitude of take it or leave it, the United States Senate,
in spite of attempts to compromise and salvage something of this agreement, finally refused to
ratify the treaty in March of 1920. What are the verdicts on this tremendously controversial
treaty of Versailles in the larger Paris settlement? There were clearly disappointments
with the settlement itself. Apart from the fury of the defeated, like the Germans, there were many
others who were disappointed. Many representatives of non-western peoples under colonial rule
had grown over the course of the war participation to hope for self-determination as an outcome
of the war, but they received no hearing. Some of these included the later Vietnamese communist
leader Ho Chi Minh, included the representatives of a Pan-African Congress which aimed to agitate
for independence for African countries, proposals for a declaration of racial equality, a statement
of principle that the Japanese had put forward were also ignored, and this was resented as well.
German colonies and Ottoman territories such as Arab lands that had hoped for independence
were instead called mandates, a term that obscured colonial rule. But paradoxically, even as this
represented the revival of older colonial patterns, the very notion that as mandates they were, at
least in theory, being prepared for independence someday in the future was a presage, an omen,
of later processes of decolonization that really accelerate after World War II.
Italy itself was an interesting case. Feeling cheated of Dalmatian territories at the head
of the Adriatic, Italy denounced the entire parasettlement itself as a mutilated victory,
and even though it had been one of the victors, it in the long run acted like a loser in the war.
As France sought to build up a strong Poland as a cordon sanitaire, a safety belt as it were,
states in Eastern Europe allied with Poland as well to contain both Soviet Russia and Germany
conflicts with other states undermined possible solidarity. Many earlier economic
unities had been destroyed by the outcome of the First World War, and British economist
John Maynard Keynes warned against crippling Germany economically. There were also many minority
questions left over. In spite of the ideal of national self-determination, many minority issues
remained. Germans pointed out with a great deal of justification that German minorities
had often been denied self-determination in the Tyrol, which fell to Italy in the Sudetenland
in Czechoslovakia in Poland and in Austria. The treaty now had to be enforced, and France felt
that it was left in the expression of a French politician holding the tail of the tiger, dangerous
to hold on, but even more dangerous to let go, fearing a future renewal of a German threat.
Views of Wilson's role in all of this are diametrically opposed, dramatically.
In some cases, Wilson is denounced for his role. In others, he's quite popular. If you go to Prague
in the Czech Republic today, if you come by train, you'll arrive at the Woodrow Wilson train station
on Woodrow Wilson Boulevard. In fact, however, neither Wilson nor the other peacemakers had
been omnipotent or all-powerful. Events on the ground unfolded and demanded their recognition
or reaction. And indeed, debate continues to this day on the Versailles Treaty. Some diplomatic
historians contend that it was too harsh, others that it was not harsh enough. Others argue, indeed,
that it was the best that really could have been done at the time, and anxieties about its legacy
were felt even as the treaty was being written. One observer, I think, summed it up best.
After a war to end all wars, he worried, this might very well end up to be a peace to end all peace.
We'll be examining the outcomes of many of these issues in our next lecture.
