Lecture 33 Aftershocks, Reds, Whites, and Nationalists
In our earlier lectures, in which we had discussed the events after the armistice of November
11th of 1918, we had been at pains to point out that this was not, in spite of its formal
ending of the war, truly a definitive end to the conflict. And it's precisely this dimension
of the wars that follow after the Great War that we'll be exploring in this lecture on
the aftershocks that follow the conflict, Reds, Whites, and National Wars. In the turmoil
that followed the end of the war, a new and intense level of ideological conflict followed,
which in many ways prefigured the Cold War that truly came into its own decades later
after World War II. It did so especially in Central and Eastern Europe in the immediate
aftermath of the First World War. Partisans of the new international communism that Lenin had
spearheaded and that had been heralded by the institution of revolutionary Soviet Russia,
faced off against forces opposed to the revolution. The revolutionary forces, the Bolsheviks,
were often labeled Reds because of their revolutionary color, Red. They faced off against
the counter-revolutionary forces, arrayed against them, they were often called in distinction
to the Reds, the Whites. Across much of Eastern and Central Europe, after the formal closing
of the First World War, battles continued to rage and red terror and white terror alternated
as it spilled across the territories. A violently brutal civil war surged across Russia with
ineffectual allied attempts at trying to intervene in this conflict and tip it in one or another
direction. In the New Baltic Republic's German mercenaries and the invading Red Army clashed
with the forces of the independent states and radical socialist revolts in Hungary and
Finland and in Germany erupted and then were suppressed. Soviet Russia and independent
Poland clashed. Other new nation states also collided repeatedly in battles over where
borders would be drawn. And thus, in a crucial sense, even as the Great War formally had
extended, fierce new lines of division were being drawn on the map and indeed in European
society as a whole. So the First World War, in fact, did not end neatly with the Armistice
or even with a Paris settlement. Rather, in reality, it continued in a series of aftershocks
which testified to a great extent to the difficulties of realizing national self-determination in
areas of mixed populations where minorities were now evident and had found themselves
relocated on a redrawn political map. And at the same time, the revolutionary agenda of
radical socialists also played a role. These clashes, these wars and civil strife following
in the wake of the Great War made clear that a new level of ideological violence had been
reached after the conflict's end and had everything to do with the ideological processes
that had taken place during the First World War. These aftershocks pitted revolutionaries
against counterrevolutionaries and nationalists of different ethnic groups against one another
in a multifaceted, complicated, shifting battle with shifting fronts. In its brutalizing
effects, the Great War in a sense had functioned as a hinge of violence. Even now that the
war was over and the fighting on the western front had formally closed, the Great War had
opened out to a new level of conflict and violence. Let's begin by considering the
tremendously brutal civil war in Russia that follows upon the Bolshevik's seizure of power.
From 1917, when the Bolsheviks come to power to 1920, the Bolsheviks and their newly created
military force, the so-called Red Army, struggled to keep control of the state that they had seized
during a civil war of incredible ferocity and atrocities on all sides. In this civil war,
it's estimated, and the figures here are really a matter of conjecture and debate because they
can't be with precision determined, but it's estimated that some perhaps seven to ten million
people died in the former lands of the Russian Empire, which represented five times as many
as in the Russian Empire's role in the World War itself. So in some sense this dwarfed the
experience of the Great War in Eastern Europe. Some estimates for all of the Russian deaths
in this period of violence and privation and starvation for this entire period of 1918 to 1922,
including deaths by violence, hunger and disease, actually run to 20 million. So we're talking here
about a context of enormous upheaval, enormous human suffering and crisis. The forces that faced off
against the Bolsheviks were called the Russian Whites, but this designation in itself was
very vague and unclear because the forces labeled the Whites in fact were of tremendous diversity.
They were of a varied array of political orientations and they pursued different aims. There were
social revolutionaries across Russia who in distinction to the Bolsheviks instead aimed to
produce a socialist free state based on the peasantry rather than on a model of tremendous
industrialization such as one had seen in Western Europe. There were also outright monarchists who aimed
to restore the tsarist regime in one form or another. And at the same time there were also supporters
of the provisional government and a more democratic form of statehood for Russia that had been
overthrown by the Bolsheviks. The armies of the Whites included a whole array of generals who you
might even think of as warlords who among themselves didn't really coordinate their attacks and this was
one reason for their ultimate failure. They included General Danikin in the southern lands of what had
been the Russian Empire, Admiral Alexander Kolchak in Siberia, General Vrangol in the Caucasus,
and General Judenich whose troops fought in the Baltic region. Though there are assaults on the
Russian central region especially based around Moscow where the Bolsheviks now gathered their forces,
though there are assaults on the center repeatedly threatened the Bolshevik regime and indeed many
observers in the west were certain that the Bolsheviks weak as they were would ultimately succumb to these
attacks. Nonetheless the White forces ultimately lacked mutual agreement about what their final aim was,
what their political goals should be, and lacked strategic coordination. Finally after the attacks
petered out in November 1920 when General Vrangol's forces were at last defeated as the last of the
White forces the Civil War drew to a close. But there had also been another very significant
international dimension to the Civil War and this was in a form of a somewhat half-hearted and
irresolute intervention by Allied forces. To protect the military supplies that had been delivered
first to the Tsarist regime and then to the provisional government in Russia as it continued to fight
in the First World War in 1917 and to support the White forces the Allies landed troops on the
edges of the Empire especially in ports in the north the Pacific and the Black Sea and these
forces included a varied array of international units. There were British units, French, American
and Japanese forces. At the same time their determination was not to get sucked into an
apocalyptic conflict within the Russian Empire or the former Russian Empire and thus result was that
even though they were present there and were a tremendous irritation to the Bolsheviks and were
held up as an example of how the capitalists worldwide were seeking to eliminate the Bolshevik
regime nonetheless the Allied intervention symbolically significant as it was didn't amount to a
strategic tipping of the balance. There were also other forces and that were at work in the Russian
Civil War from outside and one of these really represents an astonishing epic story you might
call it an odyssey of the 20th century. This was the so-called Czech Legion. The Czech Legion
was made up of 40,000 former prisoners of war who had been captured by the Russians after their
loss by the Austro-Hungarian forces who were mustered for the cause of Czech national independence
and thus represented sort of a force that had been built up out of former prisoners of war.
They sought to return to their homeland and in the turmoil of the Russian Civil War they actually
took over the entire trans-Siberian railroad and rode up and down it battling with the Bolsheviks
before finally at long last an epic journey returning to the Czech lands and to national independence.
Ultimately the Bolsheviks were victorious in the Civil War and the reasons for this were remarkable.
The Bolsheviks even though they were weak and the forces opposing them had been weak had nonetheless
a decisive advantage because of their key values of discipline, organization and a cool determination
to see the battle through. By late 1920 the Allied forces who had been helping in an intervention
to try to aid the Whites ultimately withdrew and the Bolsheviks had triumphed.
The Bolsheviks had centralized the government under their control cementing the beginnings
of what would turn into an attempt at a total state. In the economic realm the policy that was
followed was called war communism. This included centralized state control of production, banks
and at least theoretically control of the land as well for agricultural production, all of which
reflected Lenin's admiration for what he saw as Germany's successful centralization of control
of the economy in pursuit of what had ironically then been called war socialism, the government
taking a central organizing role in mobilization for war or international revolution.
The war commissar of this new Soviet state from March of 1918 was the determined and charismatic
revolutionary Leon Trotsky. He organized and then led a new kind of army, a revolutionary peoples army
It was announced the Red Army and he coordinated its movements and its growth from his armored train
which became famous as sort of the symbol of the mobility, the modernity and the determination
of the Bolsheviks. At the same time centralized and very severe control over the population
and its politics and its speech and its activities was enforced by the secret police called the
Cheka, the Extraordinary Commission to combat counter-revolutionaries. In their trademark
long leather coats with pistols at their side they used terror as a political weapon against
those suspected of treason against the Soviet state. They followed a decree that had been
published in September of 1918 which had promoted red terror as a tool of politics. Ultimately
the former areas of the Russian Empire that had fallen away, especially in the Caucasus
including also Ukraine, were reconquered by the Bolsheviks and became part of a larger state.
This took on the title of the USSR, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics or the Soviet Union
as it was often called in December of 1922 as the Bolsheviks organized themselves to wait
for the worldwide revolution that they expected was soon to come. And this state, this revolutionary
organization, the Soviet Union existed into our own times and only collapsed with the end
of the Cold War. At the same time the Bolsheviks had been determined in accord with their ideological
expectations to expect and anticipate and help along the international revolution that
they were sure would follow upon their own revolutionary triumph in the underdeveloped lands of the Russian
Empire. Because the Bolsheviks were constantly looking forward to a worldwide revolution they
created a new organization to actually export revolutionary ideas, revolutionary fervor and
models for how to succeed in producing this new radical social revolution. This new organization
came to be called the Common Turn and this was one of those characteristic Bolshevik words
that was sort of produced from chopped up other words and crammed into sort of a super acronym.
The Common Turn stood for the Communist International. The Communist International
organization might be considered really kind of a company or an organization for the export of
revolution. It was also often called the Third International to set it off from the failed
Second International of the socialist movement that had broken down in 1914 as socialist solidarity
worldwide had dissolved. This Common Turn was founded in Moscow in March of 1919. Trotsky
proudly called it the General Staff of the World Revolution. The Common Turn also did something
very important in terms of seeking to centralize the direction of these hopes for worldwide
revolution. It imposed discipline on all member parties. To join the Common Turn, the
Communist International, a party of radical socialists elsewhere in the world had to acknowledge
that the Common Turn's direction and the example of the Soviet Union as the first successful
attempt or experiment at this radical socialist revolution had to be followed. Discipline had
to be maintained. And certainly, worldwide, the Common Turn encouraged the founding of
Communist parties in countries around the world. Just to give a few examples, the French
Communist Party was founded in 1920 in the immediate aftermath of the turmoil of the First World
War and among the founders was the Vietnamese activist Ho Chi Minh, who would later play an
important role in the Vietnam War. Far away in China, the Chinese Communist Party was founded
in 1921, inspired by these same ideas, and among those attending its foundation was a man
who would later play a great role in Chinese Communist history, Mao. At the same time, revolutionary
events were moving along in other countries in Central and Eastern Europe. A key example
was that of Finland. Finland had been earlier under the control of the Russian Empire and now had
broken off into independence. But no sooner had it done so than a civil war broke out. Red and
white forces of Finns, espousing one or another ideological stance, battled in a civil war in
1918, which ended with communist defeat. And this was a dramatic civil war because fighting
took place in the capital itself, in Helsinki, in the downtown streets. And if you visit the
National Museum in Helsinki today, you can see the front door actually riddled with bullet
holes from these engagements and fighting in the streets of Helsinki itself. There were
encouraging signs for the common turn and Bolsheviks who expected that world revolution in
Western Europe as well. As a sign of growing workers' militancy, a general strike took place
in France on May Day of 1919. Huge demonstrations, a walkout from the factories, and many
communists hoped that this was but one more signal of the coming apocalyptic world revolution.
In Britain, for instance, dock workers also showed a new consciousness of worldwide socialism
by simply going on strike to refuse to load supplies that were intended for the Allied
intervention in Russia. This was a symbol of solidarity with the Bolsheviks in Russia.
In northern Italy, matters were more violent. Strikers simply seized factories in the fall of
1920, and a revolutionary situation seemed to be developing. Important as these were, the
great prize and the place where the Bolsheviks in particular expected large-scale revolts
to break out was Germany. Germany was heavily industrialized, and it seemed ripe for an
upheaval of the sort that Russia had seen. This was an agenda pursued by the communist
organization Spartacus. In Berlin in January of 1919, Spartacus staged an uprising. Among
the leaders of this uprising was Rosa Luxemburg. Rosa Luxemburg was a remarkable radical socialist
revolutionary. She had grown up in Poland and had moved to Germany where she'd become one of
those charismatic leaders of the more radical social democrats. She was, however, a critic of
Lenin. She didn't like his authoritarianism and instead placed her trust in the spontaneous
revolutionary instincts of the masses themselves. She had her qualms about the revolts. She was
unsure that the masses were ready for it in Germany, and her skepticism, which didn't prevent her
from going along with it, her skepticism in fact was fulfilled as it turns out the revolts did
not find an answer or an echo in the German working classes more broadly. The revolt failed
and German government troops actually arrested and simply murdered outright the leaders, Luxemburg
and Karl Liebknecht. A second communist uprising in March of 1919 also was quelled, failed, as did
communist revolts in 1923 in Saxony and Hamburg as well. Far down south in the areas where the Nazis
later would be building their strongholds in Bavaria, revolutionary events also were creating a
mood of turmoil and very nearly a civil war. In November of 1918, while Germany was caught up
in these revolutionary events, the revolutionary socialist Kurt Eisner had declared a socialist
state of Bavaria. After he was assassinated by a German nationalist, his associates went the step
further of declaring a communist republic of Bavaria in April. This was another reason for hope
for the Bolsheviks. The revolt it seemed to them was breaking out in Germany, but this revolt too
was suppressed by government forces in May of 1919. Revolt also broke out in defeated Hungary.
The defeated country of Hungary had been imperiled by its neighboring countries, by Czechs, Croatians,
Serbs and Romanians. And a Hungarian communist, Belikun, who had returned from Moscow and following
the ideas of the common turn proclaimed in this troubled state a Soviet form of government
on March 20, 1919. This state only lasted for a few months, but it left a traumatic imprint
on Hungarian society. A policy of red terror was instituted by Kuhn's regime, along with a deluge
of decrees and laws, instituting a communist system, including state ownership of large
estates. Finally, outside forces destroyed this regime. On August 1st of 1919, Kuhn was deposed
as Romanian forces actually moved in and occupied Budapest. Such revolts in Hungary as well as
elsewhere through Central and Eastern Europe, though unsuccessful, nonetheless had an important
effect. They stirred fears among Europe's middle classes and made them more susceptible to the appeal
of radical movements promising order. In the long term, fascism would find some of its appeal here.
More immediately, the white forces in Central and Eastern Europe, as in the Russian Civil War,
presented themselves as a force against revolution. Key among these white forces were the German
Freikorps mercenaries. Germany's democratic government, in the first days and weeks and
months of its revolutionary regime, had felt forced to employ these mercenaries to suppress
challenges from radical socialists from the left and to guard Germany's imperiled borders.
The estimates of their numbers are very large. There may have been 200,000, maybe even 400,000
such German Freikorps mercenaries. They put down the Spartacus revolt in Berlin and other
uprisings throughout Germany with terrible violence that made them notorious. Some of these
leaders, who were disgusted at the notion of Germany actually signing the hated Versailles
Treaty, in their disgust left Germany to engage in a year-long rampage outside of that country
in the newly independent Baltic lands, where they hoped to establish a new German military
state outside of Germany's borders before they were finally expelled by December of 1919.
And the young Baltic republics regarded afterwards their fight against these free booters and
Soviet forces who had invaded as the wars of independence. Among the Freikorps were later
members of the Nazi movement, and these included, most notoriously, the future commandant of
the death camp of Auschwitz, Rudolf Huss, who in his memoirs described this particular
Freikorps fighting in its brutality as a searing moment that changed some of his own dispositions.
After the Kuhn regime had been deposed in Hungary, white forces took over there as well.
Admiral Miklos Horty took power in November of 1919 and instituted a policy called white terror
in retribution against the revolutionary movement of earlier. Within Germany itself, the members
of the Freikorps had a longer afterlife as well, and they contributed a lot to the dismaying
level of violence that was present in the politics of this embattled democracy, especially in the form
of death squads. After the Freikorps had been disbanded once the initial crisis had passed,
Freikorps members often organized secret terrorist groups who contributed to the atmosphere of
political violence that was the order of the day in the Weimar Republic. They joined the failed
Kopp Putsch or Kuh attempt in 1920, which sought to create a military dictatorship in Germany.
Afterwards, they formed murder squads who deliberately targeted and gunned down democratic politicians
who were blamed for Germany's humiliation. These included the man who had signed the Armistice
in November of 1918, Matthias Erzberger, who was gunned down in 1921, and the foreign minister
of Germany, Walter Ratanow, that dynamic businessman who had done so much to organize Germany's war
effort from 1914. He was killed in 1922 by such terrorists. At the same time, wars were also raging
in Eastern Europe over borders, in particular the Polish-Soviet war. War broke out in the
borderlands between Soviet Russia and a revived and expansive Poland, which had moved into
Ukrainian territories in the spring of 1920. The Soviets now mounted swift counterattacks,
and these were led by General Michal Tukhachevsky. They sought to break through Poland and allow
Soviet forces to link up with radical movements in Europe, especially Germany. This tantalizing
prospect was called by the Bolsheviks the idea of the Red Bridge, to connect to radical German
movements, and perhaps as Lenin had dreamed of, create a symbiosis or a fusion of German
organization and Bolshevik-Russian revolutionary fervor that would transform the world. The Soviet
forces, however, were finally halted outside of Warsaw after desperate fighting, and by the
Poles, this is called the Miracle on the Vistula River, something of a parallel to the Miracle
of the Marne back in 1914, and ultimately an uneasy peace was signed in 1921 between the
Bolsheviks and an independent Poland. But conflicts continued in Eastern Europe. In a key example,
the city of Vilnius, which today is the capital of Lithuania, was claimed both by Poland and
Lithuania. When Polish forces took it in 1920, this embittered relations between the two
countries for the entire interwar period. To the south, Poland also came into conflict with the
new state of Czechoslovakia over the area of Tessian that both sides claimed. The thing to keep
in mind about these territorial conflicts in Eastern Europe between newly independent nation
states was that these conflicts would ultimately make it very difficult to build collective
security arrangements against a revival of aggressive powers either in the east or in the west
in the form of Germany in particular. So the plans for a cordon sanitaire that had been key to the
French ideas of how Eastern Europe might function in the defense of collective security in Europe as a
whole were ultimately undermined. Interwar Poland's expansive borders also meant that 30% of its
population consisted of non-Polish minorities. Piłsudski, who had led the Polish Revolutionary
military forces, returned to power after a period of retirement in 1926 in a coup and became dictator of
the Polish state indicative of a larger turning away from democracy across Europe at this time after an
initial democratic wave. Finally, an event that is often forgotten in European history today was of
great significance. This was the Greek-Turkish War. Turkish nationalists had reacted fiercely and with
total rejection to the 1920 Treaty of Sevre that had been part of the Paris Settlement imposed by the
Allies. The nationalist resistance to the Turkish government as well as the Allied occupation was led
by Mustafa Kemal, who came later to be known as Ataturk, father of the Turks. He earlier had been one of
the young Turks defending Gallipoli. Now he presented himself as the leader of the national movement.
At the same time in 1919, Greek armies had invaded Turkey to fulfill what was called by Greek
nationalists the Megali idea. That's to say, the great idea of a greater Greece, not only in the
Balkans, but spanning the Mediterranean and Asia Minor as well. By 1921, that Greek campaign had turned
into a disaster as Turkish nationalists mobilized against it. The treaty that finally resolved, and I
use the word ironically resolved, these conflicts came in 1923, the Treaty of Lausanne. Greece and
Turkey agreed on the compulsory exchange of populations of their respective ethnicities. And the
result was a huge uprooting of people. Some 400,000 Muslims were removed from Macedonia and sent to
Turkey, regardless of whether they were a Turkish in fact, or whether they even wanted to move. Likewise,
1.3 million Greek Christians from Anatolian Asia Minor, the Turkish lands now, were sent to Greece in
return. Although this operation took place under international supervision, nonetheless, it was
marked by massacres and ethnic cleansing. Yet the notion that what was called sort of euphemistically
population transfer could be a solution to political problems was later hailed by European
politicians as a successful model of problem solving. This would have ominous results as later
deportations and ethnic cleansings of the 20th century would often be justified with reference to the
Treaty of Lausanne. In the Treaty of Lausanne, earlier promises of autonomy for Kurds and for Armenians in
the former Ottoman Empire were now dropped from the agenda, and their claims forgotten. And to this very
day, the Kurds remained the largest ethnic group without a nation state of its own, and many of the
problems of the Middle East clearly have their origins here as well. In the Irish case, the Irish
War of Independence also flowed naturally from the First World War, as the Irish Republican Army, using
a guerrilla warfare led by Michael Collins, fought against British irregular forces that were called
Black and Tans, in many cases resembling the German Freikor, and very notorious for their atrocities
as well. The war led ultimately to the establishment of an Irish Free State of the southern
counties of Ireland, not including the north. And nationalist dissatisfaction with this outcome led to
an Irish Civil War between the Irish Republican Army and the forces of the Free State. Europe
itself more generally was on the move. With the collapse of empires and the drawing of new borders that
we've described, 20 million people found themselves suddenly as ethnic minorities in the new Europe.
Refugees fled the continuing conflict in enormous masses. It's estimated that 1.75 million Russians fled
westward in order to escape the turmoil of the Russian Civil War. And in these times, if you visited
Paris at precisely in these years, you were perhaps likely to have the door held for you by a
doorman who was a former general of the Russian army. Your taxi driver might very well be a Russian
aristocrat. Stateless people such as this were castaways without clearly defined rights in the newly
redrawn Europe. And the philosopher Hannah Arendt, who was a keen observer of the 20th century, later
argued that this was the beginning of the century of the refugee or the displaced person. At the same time,
many of these post-war conflicts were later forgotten or lost from collective memory. But these brutal
aftershocks would contribute to the slide into another abyss of the Second World War. A more
immediate question of how to remember the Great War itself we'll consider in our next lecture.
Thank you.
