Lecture 36 – Legacies of the Great War
In this concluding lecture, we confront the largest and most difficult question of all
in our study of the First World War.
What was the true meaning, legacy, and overall significance of the Great War?
What lessons can be taken away from this?
In this lecture, we'll start by examining the structural impact, the economic, social,
and political outcomes of the conflict, as well as the individual human impact of this
disaster.
And ultimately, one conclusion powerfully presents itself, inaugurating a cycle of worldwide
violence for the rest of the 20th century, as this seminal catastrophe has been called
of the 20th century, the First World War represented a true watershed in the devaluation
of human life, the downgrading of individuality in favor of larger collective power, especially
in the hands of the state, and it created ultimately a surge in our own terrible knowledge
of what humans are capable of, as well as a keener sense of the tragic fragility of human
progress, because we've seen the spectacle of an entire civilization turned against itself.
In examining the structural impact and economics, there were fascinating outcomes from the war,
as well as certain benefits, paradoxically, to some countries.
In the global economy, Europe had come to lose its earlier centrality.
It lost markets to other countries, and took on debt as well in order to pay the vast costs
of a total war.
In the process, the United States became the most important trading nation, and it sometimes
been said that in a sense perhaps the United States was the only victor of the First World
War.
In a symbolic as well as financial sense, New York became the financial capital of the
world, displacing London from this earlier position of honor.
In addition, many non-European economies of countries that had been involved in the war
or only fueling its economic energies also boomed during the war, and cycles of dependency
on more developed European economies also were broken by developing countries worldwide.
In social terms, the demographic impact of the war was huge.
With 9 to 10 million killed, and twice that number wounded, many maimed for life.
It's estimated that the war, and the numbers here are not entirely clear, one has to speculate
on this, that the war left some 3 million widows and 10 million orphans as well.
There were certainly common anxieties felt in post-war societies about the demographic
imbalances between the sexes that were feared, and the notion that the very best individuals
had been those killed in the war, all of these notions haunted societies.
Demographic historians have pointed out that the picture that emerges from statistics is
a good deal less dramatic.
They argue that contrary to the notion of a permanent entire generation missing from
the demographic picture, and the common images of the time of an entire generation of young
women without potential husbands doomed to a life alone, that this in fact doesn't match
what the statistics tell us about the demographic consequences of the First World War.
In fact, they argue that relationships nonetheless presented themselves, and that this gap in
the demographic statistics over time closed or healed.
Nonetheless, what very clearly is being presented here had a certain psychological significance
for societies that had such fears or anxieties, and that was the notion that social elites
who earlier would have felt a sort of noblesse oblige to lead a society, these had been severely
damaged by the war itself, and that in some sense a negative selection, as some social
Darwinists worried, had taken place as the most idealistic, those who were most motivated
had gone off to war and had died.
At the same time, the conception of women's roles was dramatically altered.
Social historians are very careful to point out that phenomena like the involvement of
women in great numbers in production for war industry, in heavy industrial work in the
factories, was often something that was reversed after the war ended, as soldiers whose positions
had been filled by women entering these particular branches of industry returned and took their
jobs back again.
At the same time as this sort of surge into the workforce might have been reversed, one
thing again was clear psychologically.
The notion of what it was that women were capable of, the roles they could take on had
drastically changed, and one could see this as well in the notion of finally the recognition
of women's political voice in the right to vote.
Politics also clearly had been transformed by the sheer experience of this total war.
The power of the state, of governments, what the state was expected to do, or seen as able
to do, certainly had increased profoundly.
And doctrines of classical liberalism, which had emphasized the restraint of the state,
the model of a limited state in a constitutional form, were badly damaged as a result of the
First World War.
The state had been both necessary and had shown what it was capable of.
The militarization of politics, moreover, in the style, language, and ideology of mass
movements that gained ever greater currency in the post-war period, had also resulted
from the experience of war itself.
The international balance of power was also affected by the war and its outcome.
In a negative sense, in fact, in terms of geopolitics, the war had not resolved what
many contemporaries saw as the fatal flaw in the balance of power that had led, indeed,
to the outbreak of the First World War.
This is what contemporaries had earlier called the German problem.
The question of whether a large and dynamic and modern and progress-filled German state
at the center of the European continent would be a force for disorder, or on the contrary,
an anchor of stability.
In some sense, Germany remained as this mysterious factor in the balance of power at the center
of the continent, still, even though it had been defeated with massive potential military
and, clearly, industrial power as well.
The French politician Georges Clemenceau was very keenly aware of this.
He quipped, indeed, at the end of the war that the German problem is that there are
20 million too many of them.
But the Versailles Treaty itself didn't change this.
The potential power of Germany was still outsize for the balance of power as it had existed
before.
With his particular gift for paradoxes, the British historian AJP Taylor argued earlier
that Germany, in fact, in a relative sense, came out of the First World War stronger in
terms of the balance of power than it had been before 1914.
Just to pursue his love of paradox a little bit together, how did that argument run?
AJP Taylor suggested that before the war, in 1914, Germany had been one of five European
great powers.
It had been one of many players in the balance of power.
After the war, it was the strongest of three remaining European great powers still standing.
After the collapse of Austria-Hungary, after the collapse of Russia, which though it potentially
could be a great power at this point seemed to be out of the equation in terms of European
politics, there remained Germany and France and Great Britain.
Germany moreover, Taylor argued, was likely upon its recovery sometime in the future to
economically dominate the continent, and perhaps also later in political and military terms.
France was keenly aware of this, it didn't need AJP Taylor to point this out.
France faced the problem of confronting some point in the future and eventually revived
Germany demographically stronger and larger, industrially and militarily powerful.
And many French politicians as well as the general mood of the French population was
often dispirited by the enormity of this future challenge, as well as the sheer scale of the
sacrifice that the French people had offered up in human terms, in terms of the dead in
the First World War.
And this demoralization certainly contributed to the disastrous fall of France during the
Second World War.
Moreover, an unstable German state that emerged in the troubled experiment with German democracy,
as it turns out, would again produce crisis later in the 20th century.
In general, at the same time, fascinating things had been happening internationally.
In general, the earlier mighty colonial empires that European nations had amassed in the later
19th century in particular, these empires themselves and their legitimacy were increasingly
being called into question around the globe.
And later in the 20th century, there would be an entire process of what we call decolonization
as empires broke down and as national independence was achieved by non-European peoples around
the globe, as well.
Well, this process of decolonization, to a great extent, ideologically began right in
this period of the First World War.
Think of the ideological charge that we've been at pains to point out was operating especially
from 1917 during the First World War itself, the notion of a revolutionary message of self-determination
of peoples.
And if self-determination was a key ideological slogan, then it was one that didn't apply
just to European nations, not just to Belgium, not just to Czechoslovakia, but applied as
a universal principle.
And though delayed as a result of the compromises of the Versailles Treaty and the Paris Settlement,
nonetheless this ideological charge of self-determination would infuse the energies and the aspirations
of once colonized peoples to win their independence later in the 20th century.
Just to illustrate some of the changes that were taking place accelerating in mentalities
in this regard, Australian patriots came to consider the Gallipoli landing, the founding
moment of an independent Australian national identity, and we could add many more such
examples growing out of the First World War to this list.
At the same time in international politics, we need to keep in mind that a new kind of
state had emerged, the Soviet Union, which pursued its revolutionary agenda in international
politics, which was nothing less than the obliteration of the existing order to produce
a new one.
Let's turn now from these seemingly bloodless structural and economic and international
political aspects to consider the human impact of the war.
The war had battered earlier common notions that had been prized by European civilization
in the 19th century of progress, growing out of the advance of technology and the advance
of social organization coupled with liberal ideas which privileged the independence and
the talents of the individual.
To the contrary, the growth of the state during the First World War of necessity and its massive
potential coercive power made a sheer mockery of earlier liberal ideas of the notion of
a limited state and a private sphere for the individual.
The state had proven that it could mobilize and interfere in the lives of millions.
At the same time, there were also effects on the mass psychology and the intellectual
history of European civilization.
After the First World War, contemporaries spoke at length of their feeling of great
disillusionment, the increasing questioning of all great ideals and great words, all faiths
and all earlier certainties.
And it seemed to be typical of the time that so many thinkers would resort to irony as a
way of hiding their despair over what had been revealed by the First World War.
At the same time, extremely insightful contemporary historians today have been, I think, giving
us a healthy warning of needing to be skeptical about this entire narrative of disillusionment
and having been lied to and manipulated by governments.
The reality as attested to in the sources from the First World War that are vivid to
us is that most certainly a common sense of ideological charge and enthusiasm had infused
the first participation in the war whatever later disillusionment might have followed.
This spontaneous mobilization of European societies with enthusiasm for this war was
something that many people didn't care to remember afterwards and perhaps hid in this
narrative of disillusionment.
Historians are also still debating today a difficult question whether a process of brutalization
had taken place both on an individual and a collective civilizational level as a result
of the enormous violence of the war.
This question is tremendously difficult to get at.
Those historians who are skeptical of the thesis of an entire social process of brutalization
taking place during the war point out that it's difficult to show evidence of some increase
of mass murders or of domestic violence as a result of the return of soldiers.
They point out and they're right on this score that many soldiers returned to their
civilian lives and seemed at least to outward appearances to return to a kind of normalcy
or find a way of living after the war.
At the same time as it's difficult to quantify or find conclusive evidence for a process
of brutalization, there nevertheless are very suggestive instances.
To outline some of those, contemporaries themselves spoke of a certain hardening of the spirit
that they detected in their own societies, the way in which people were becoming desensitized
to the scenes of war, the images of mass violence, and how the inhuman increasingly seemed normal.
How human life was regarded and valued perhaps thus changed as a result of the war.
The knowledge of what could be done to human beings changed how human beings were regarded
and thought of.
The Battle of Verdun is a key example.
If human beings could be fed in their masses into an enormous grinder of human beings
and a factory of death, didn't that change how we thought of the individual and human
dignity as well?
Another example that's very suggestive in this regard is the change status of how human
life, especially the weakest human life, was regarded in the pressure cooker of total war.
It's suggested by current research that neglect in German asylums, the lack of provision of
food to the inmates of these asylums during the war itself in time of blockade and of
shortage resulted in the deaths by starvation as well as disease of some 70,000 inmates
in what amounted to passive euthanasia.
So in Germany, long before the Nazis came to power with their explicit aim of crafting
a master race and eliminating those whom they called life unworthy of living, euthanasia
as a social tool was already being discussed in part as a way of rationing scarce resources
and a cost-benefit analysis.
Two years after the war, in 1920, in defeated Germany, one book was published that shows
some of this trajectory and made the logic inherent in this process very clear.
This book was entitled Permission for the Destruction of Life Unworthy of Living.
It was produced by a lawyer by the name of Karl Binding, who offered legal arguments
for euthanasia, and a psychiatrist named Alfred Hoche, who offered medical arguments
in the same direction.
Hoche had lost his son at Langemark, that famous nationalist encounter about which legends
were created from the start of the war, where allegedly German idealistic students had gone
into battle singing the German national anthem and sacrificed themselves.
Out of this tragedy, perhaps these authors advocated, quite explicitly, the killing of
the unfit.
And the experiences of the First World War were held up as part of this argument.
If it was the case that in the First World War, fit people had died, what was the complexion
of the society that resulted after this process of selection?
What was to happen with those whom the war had left unfit as a result of the way in which
they were damaged?
And moreover, they argued, had turned them into lives unworthy of life, at least in
their perspective.
Very clearly, how human life was regarded was altered in the perspective of many.
Finally, there's a question of ideology that we need to consider.
In spite of the fact that the First World War long had been considered to be more in
the nature of a traditional war involving territory and politics rather than ideas,
in ideological terms, long before the Cold War of later decades of the 20th century in
our own experience, it was already in this period that the emerging superpowers of the
United States and the Soviet Union presented models for modernity.
What a new world would be like for the 20th century, very different models, that of democracy
and that of communism.
And yet at the same time, these rivals had things in common in the sense that they both
promised to abolish the earlier way of doing things.
In particular, both urged a new worldwide order, whether it was democratic politics worldwide,
which it was hoped would bring peace, or the abolition of capitalism and a worldwide worker's
revolution.
Both abolished earlier concepts of the balance of power, and tried instead to craft a new
world order.
This was felt by contemporaries at the time, and one contemporary hauntingly observed in
a phrase that I think really captures this, that people of his time increasingly needed
to make a choice, a choice between Woodrow Wilson and Vladimir Lenin, a choice between
Wilson's democratic ideas and Lenin's announcement of international revolution.
This entire process also, with a sort of grim fortune, was also trendling towards World
War II.
In spite of the manifest horrors of the First World War and all that it had revealed about
what total industrial war would be like, Europe hurtled towards the Second World War a mere
21 years later.
But when the war broke out, it did so without the naive celebrations of the 1914 August Madness.
And that, by the way, was something that infuriated Adolf Hitler, that the German people did not
celebrate and cheer the outbreak of the Second World War.
He came to worry about whether the German people were up to his plans, and in addition
about whether another stab in the back, which he believed in, wouldn't result.
The trends of the First Total War in World War I would now be intensified in World War
II, with more destructive weaponry and technology, even less inhibited targeting of civilians.
Even more total mobilization of all of the energies of societies for total war or total
defeat.
The contemporary historian Omer Bartov advances a pessimistic but haunting argument about
the inner logic of such modern industrial war.
He suggests that once invented, once put into practice, industrial war and industrial killing
that accompany it, inevitably are repeated and refined.
First total war has been invented, it's not possible to un-invent it, or un-know it, or
un-think it.
And he suggests in a dialectic process, genocide, the killing of civilian populations because
of who they are, represents a perfected form of industrial killing.
So that in a sense, the trenches of World War I, Bartov suggests, and the death camps
of World War II are linked by an infernal logic.
The killing in the trenches of World War I was efficient, the far more efficient, and
safer for the killer's form of mass murder are the death camps of World War II.
The lives of many actors of the Second World War had also been decisively shaped by the
First War, and their decisions were affected by it.
This obviously involved millions of people to pick out just a few particularly suggestive
cases.
Before World War II, the experience of the future French defense minister André Maginot
at the huge battle of Verdun had helped create the massive fortifications to which his name
would be given, the ill-fated Maginot line which Nazi armies slammed through at the
start of the Second World War.
Winston Churchill's urgings to aim for the soft underbelly of Nazi Europe during World
War II in some sense revived an earlier idea he had, the impulse that had led to the failed
landings at Gallipoli in 1915.
And likewise, his urging of intervention against the Bolsheviks immediately after World War
I was echoed in his later suspicions of communism and Stalin.
The French leader Charles de Gaulle, also a veteran of the Battle of Verdun, had learned
the moral power of resistance and willed greatness against material odds that he would put into
practice in World War II and after.
And while it's clearly not possible to totally plumb the psychology of a dictator like Hitler
to understand fully how his experience of World War I shaped him, it's important that
he recalled it as a time of greatness that he wanted to recover.
Likewise, Hitler's decision not to use poison gas in World War II was probably affected
by his experiences, not out of humanitarian motives, but rather out of fear of precisely
what had happened in World War I, allied retaliation with superior technology and weaponry.
Finally, we come to a key question, the implications for our own times beyond the resonance of
the lead-up to World War II.
And this notion of the implications for our own times has itself been one of the main
themes of our course.
Beyond its formative impact on World War II, the implications of the Great War continue
to reverberate for us today.
And in part, we ourselves need to make some conclusions about what the war means for us.
This also has been one of the largest themes of the course, the many different meanings
assigned to the war while it was going on, as well as afterwards.
The ideological dimension of the Great War itself continues to work itself out in world
history, as it has throughout the 20th century.
And this again underlines another major theme of our course, the importance of ideology.
The Cold War, which endured into our own times and shaped the lives of billions of people
around the world, actually began not just after World War II, but in fact was already
present in 1917 in that key moment of world history.
We still live today with the consequences of that apocal struggle and also seek to understand
the history that we've lived through.
At the same time, the claims of nationalism, demands for self-determination, and the ethnic
aspirations which came to the fore in World War I and played such an important role in
its outbreak are still present today as well worldwide.
In spite of the repeated prophecies of the end of nationalism and its fading, it's still
with us stronger than ever.
And indeed, we could point to particular regions around the world where regional strife, which
inevitably affects our globalized context as well, whether in the Middle East or the
Balkans or in Ireland or in former colonial areas, they're all still with us, part of
the legacy of fractured empires, ones that broke apart in the First World War.
Indeed, even a venture like today's attempt at European unification, the European Union,
are often propelled by the serious determination to transcend the power politics and nationalism
which helped ignite world wars.
A vivid symbolic event of this that just underlines it with great eloquence came in 1984 when
the German Chancellor, Helmut Kohl, and the French President, François Mitterrand met
at Verdun and there in this site, holy to the experience of both peoples in the ordeal
of the First World War, in an eloquent and quiet gesture, each one gripped the hand
of the other in a gesture of solidarity and an implicit promise that this sort of disaster
would not follow again.
Finally, we want to address the question of the legacy of the totality of this total war.
This has been another very important theme of our course throughout.
The totality of the war paradoxically is difficult for us to fully understand as we might and
we need to precisely because our own identities, our own understandings of ourselves in the
world have been shaped by the experience of that total war and the totality it revealed.
In some sense, World War I is still part of us.
And what I mean by that is this.
It includes the understanding of the power of the state which experienced such a dramatic
expansion in World War I.
The state retains that expansive role.
What we think the state can do or should do, we'd like it to do, or what the state can
get away with doing is most certainly in our psychology a legacy of that vast expansion
of the First World War.
It's also unfortunate the case and this is so nightmarish that we probably only are
able to deal with this by often simply pushing it to some darker reaches of our consciousness
and ignoring it is our own existential reality with the threat of the totality of war ever
present in our own age of weapons of mass destruction, whether the ones we deploy or
ones deployed by potential enemies.
Total war, which in 1914 was a novelty, but in the years afterwards and in World War II
has now been practiced and perfected is we must recognize an ever present apocalyptic
dimension to modern life and what it means for us to exist in our own times.
That apocalyptic dimension is somehow at the same time both unimaginable, inconceivable
and nightmarish and yet somehow self-evident and obvious as well.
What then can we say by way of lessons of this entire man-made tragedy, the seminal
catastrophe, the original catastrophe of the 20th century?
Many thinkers have spoken of the world wars, both of them, sometimes even as a 30 years
conflict of the 20th century as representing something very profound, not just conflicts
that had military and political reasons, but rather as a larger civil war of western civilization.
Some even speak of a suicide attempt of western civilization.
Civil wars, by their very anguished nature, are fought over large questions, existential
questions, questions of identity, what does it mean to be us, and questions of ideology.
And to truly understand the Great War and its long-term legacy, we need to take that
ideological dimension seriously as we've been arguing throughout the course.
As a war in which contemporaries felt an intense stake and were willing to sacrifice,
die, and kill in, that most certainly was not a war about nothing, but a war which had
existential stakes.
And the spectacle of a civilization making war on itself, it scarcely needs to be said,
offers a paradoxical scene.
The strange and terrible, vivid tableau of tremendous resources devoted to destruction.
Resources of qualities, of human characteristics that we consider as good, creativity, determination,
sacrifice, a sense of solidarity, all of this being offered up for the purpose of destruction.
And so at the end of this terrible cautionary tale, our study of the First World War, one
is left with the one profound wish that these inner resources, passion, sacrifice, determination,
solidarity, could be used to better, more peaceful, and constructive purposes than war.
And that truly is the most basic and human conclusion of our course of study on the First
World War.
We genuinely hope you've enjoyed these lectures from our Great Courses series.
Our courses are available to order online.
Visit our website at www.teach12.com or call our customer care representatives at 1-800-TEACH-12.
Thank you very much.
