Okay, hello. This is Inyash and Stephen again. Hi. We have recorded this after the rest
of this episode because we went and rushed the On Punching Nazis episode last week really
quickly a few days after it happened, and the episode that you just heard was recorded
before that. So we've gotten some listener feedback and we wanted to put it on the air
while it's still somewhat relevant. So we are recording the feedback to that episode
right now and putting it at the end of this episode while someone still potentially cares
about it. That sounds about right. Should I start? Yeah, go for it. Okay. So let's go
with Not Without Incident. Not Without Incident said, while I agree with a lot of your ambivalence
about Nazi punching, I think there are two important points that weren't really addressed.
First, Stephen mentioned this in passing, but the idea that the state protects against violence,
also called the state monopoly on violence, doesn't really apply to some oppressed people.
In other words, if you already feel the state isn't going to punish violence done against you
or a group you support, there really isn't any reason not to punch Nazis from a societal norm
standpoint. There is even an argument put forth most famously recently in the book Ghetto Side
that this lack of any serious state response to violence in poor black communities is the primary
cause of the high murder rate. And we did briefly mention that, as he said, but I think that is
a very good point and we should have probably hammered on it a bit more. I think you mentioned
the state monopoly on violence, not me. Okay. In any case, whoever said it during the episode,
yeah, we kind of glazed past that. I'm not sure if I talked about this in a previous episode,
but so I mentioned previously that Melissa has had that same experience with the police where
the police are not anyone you ever call. You do not want them involved in anything because they
will only make things worse. And in cultures and societies like that where, I mean, especially
in there are places in the US where the police, you can't expect them to be on your side. And in
those situations, I totally understand why someone would go to taking enforcement of those things
into their own hands. I still think it's a bad idea and that it'd be better to have a functioning
police system. But given that there's a lot of places in the US where we don't have one,
I kind of see their point a bit. But on the other hand, the guy that punched him looked to be a white
kid in downtown New York. I'm not sure he has that. Maybe he made the trip. But I mean, the other
thing to consider too is that that sounds like a good reason why you need to handle life conflict
sort of internally without getting the police involved. That's not a great reason for preemptively
attacking people who say stupid things on the street, right? Did you hear that? I know you
listened to Sam Harris a lot. Did you hear that interview when Sam Harris talked with a leader
from the black community? I don't remember who it was now. But Sam Harris made the point like,
what is wrong with these people who someone steps on their shoes and scuffs them a bit,
that they resort right away to violence and possibly even killing each other about it.
And he said, Sam Harris, you are lucky to live in a society where you can simply accept that
that's no big deal and not make a thing out of it. Whereas some of these young men, if they don't
make a thing out of it, then their honors at stake, they could be targeted for violent crimes by
other people because they're seen as weaklings. And it's a self preservation mechanism to keep
up those appearances of being a badass. And it sucks for them because they don't have a choice.
They have to respond with violence and get offensive and say, you got to apologize to me
or else their life, it gets really shitty. Yeah, the guy painted a very good picture. His name
was Glenn C. Lowry Lowry. And the episode was racism and violence in America. And it was a
it was a good conversation. I think it's one that was fruitful for both of them and for me to listen
to as well. I did sort of paint that picture, right? Where Glenn was giving me the example of,
you know, you're on the bus, and the guy scrapes your boots or whatever. And it's the kind of
thing that, you know, most people don't care about. But then if you don't say anything, well,
then you're a pussy, his words not mine. And, you know, so then you've got to step up and now
there's now there's a beef and I don't know how crazy this guy is, you can't go to the police and
be like, Hey, so this scary guy said he's going to kill me, but he hasn't done anything yet. So
like it is really on you to handle that is reality for a lot of people. And you're right,
the police don't aren't the the go to resource for them that we wish they would be. And this is
one of those episodes. I mean, Sam Harris gets a lot of crap. And I think in some cases deservedly
so. But one of the things I love about him is that he is always willing to sit down and reasonably
talk through things. I've had situations on the specifically on the punching Nazi things with
Facebook, where there's some people get so emotionally invested, and it's just not something
you can talk about at all with them, which is fine. There's some subjects I can't talk about
because I get too emotional. But Sam Harris like sits and talks and listens. And he's very thoughtful
about everything. And by the end of the episode, it sounded like he had come around a bit and
changed his view. And I was like, I have more respect for you know, Sam Harris. Yeah, he's
willing to listen. He updates a lot. And that's one of the things I like about his his approach.
Recently, he got on board and he updated to the what I consider the appropriate level of
concern with like AI risk. And so he's been talking about that a lot lately, completely unrelated
to all this, but just talking about a big update. Should we go on to his second point? Yeah, why
not? Not with that incident. Second point is, I think there's a much more direct way that pro
Nazi speech and alt-right or even mainstream conservative speech in the US is more violent
than you all acknowledged. He says 45,000 Americans die every year due to lack of access to healthcare.
200,000 Americans die prematurely from air pollution. And he goes on to give, you know,
several other statistics about how policy leads to death. And he says he can't vouch for how reliable
any of these numbers are individually. But I think it's reasonable to argue that any speech
espousing an extreme right wing ideology is violent and lethal in a completely literal sense.
And that that is very much a thing that I have a strong aversion to, because he is literally
citing examples of difference in opinion on policy. He's talking about pollution policy
and health care policy, which are both very complicated topics with many other effects.
And he's at this point saying that a difference in idea on pollution regulation or a difference of
opinion on basically government regulation is violent and lethal and therefore a violent response
is justified. And I think that is exactly the opposite of what we want. It sounds like when
someone says that disputes over health care are violent and lethal in a completely literal sense,
that sounds like an excuse to kill and main people who are on the other side of you,
on the other side politically. And that is I just that is exactly where I don't want to go.
I think there's an important distinction to be made between like systematic, you know,
if it works out to where certain ways hospital regulations are run or something, tend to
disenfranchise, say homeless people, homeless people tend to be of certain demographics,
that and I mean, there might be historical reasons why that would end up being the case.
And you could make there could be a case made that's quite plausible, that it's due to a history
of segregation and discrimination and stuff like that. But there's a difference between
stabilizing and turfing a homeless person who walks into your ER and going to the street and
hitting them in the face until they're bleeding to death, right? So like one is lethal and violent
in a completely literal sense. The other one is just like, well, I mean, our hands are tied,
the hospital staff, any of them might wish that they could keep them around and do everything
they could to make them, you know, fully healthy again. But that's just just not in the cards for
working in that system, right? But I guess if you're going to equate that and running out there
and hitting that person in the face with a brick, like, I think that you're missing something pretty
important, right? Or am I misreading that to be fair? I mean, I think that's exactly the point that
yes, weapons laws are weapons of mass destruction, you can kill far more people with laws than you
can by going out and individually stabbing someone. But on the other hand, at this point,
he's making the case for violence of liberals versus conservatives, Democrats versus Republicans.
And I think a civil war is much worse. At some point, the alternative of resorting to violence
to enact your favorite policies is worse than simply accepting some poor policies. But more
to the point, once you are not talking anymore and fighting instead, you're no longer allowing your
opinion of the world to be changed by evidence and words. It is now being enforced by guns and
weapons. And so if you're wrong about something, there's no way to find that out. You're going to
hurt the person who disagrees with you. And if he disagrees with you for a good reason,
you'll never know. Yeah, I mean, I think once you're talking about settling things with violence,
things have gotten pretty out of hand, right? To be fair, not that incident did say,
with a last sentence in that post. However, I'm not sure how well this holds up to scrutiny or
violence is the correct response, even if you accept everything above. And I mean, just pragmatically,
even if you thought that violence was the correct response, and you are talking about possibly
violence between, you know, anyone who's liberal and anyone who's conservative. Well, one of those
parties, one of those groups tends to be more in favor of having lots of guns. So you can punch
them all you want. But if they're going to jump on the war bandwagon with you from the other side,
there, I'm not sure this is a war you can win. So maybe talking about it would be easy. I think
I'm taking this too lightly. There was one other really good thing they brought up. Yeah.
Okay, so go on with how he responded to me about that. Yeah, so one obvious place to draw the line
is violent resistance to politics that are explicitly murderous. But I think that is clearly
too passive. Do you agree that violence would have been acceptable in response to Jackson's use of
the Indian Removal Act in parentheses, the Trail of Tears, even though that policy was not intended
to be lethal? I thought that was a bit of a headscratcher. And I've been giving that some thoughts,
like other examples might be like Japanese internment camps in the 1940s, right?
Would it have been okay to violently oppose those? And I think it probably would have.
I think it would have. I mean, so like the implicit, well, and in the Indian Removal Act
explicit part of the decision there was that like, look, we're going to tell them to move. And if they
don't, well, we're going to make them, right? When you're talking about making people do things,
you're talking about coercing them with violence or threats, right? Or plausible threats of violence.
So yeah, I think, I mean, I don't want to equate the Trail of Tears or Japanese internment camps to
what, I mean, I guess, what exactly are we equating it to? Is he talking about the politics,
or I guess the statistics about? Well, he's saying at some point the laws are evil. And
where do we draw that line between bad pollution regulation and having someone taken out of their
home and shipped off to a internment camp? I mean, explicit or poorly veiled implicit targeted
discrimination? Is that a fair line? It's like we could say, everybody. So here's what I would
consider kind of an edge case, the redlining that they did in the God, I don't even know what decade
it was now decade before I was born, but not very much before it. It was they had maps of cities,
and there were neighborhoods that they would outline in red, which is where the term redlining
came from. And they're like, in these neighborhoods, you can sell houses to black people. And in
these neighborhoods, you can't. And that was not an explicit law anywhere, but it was policy and
real estate agents and realtors knew about it. And when black families tried to buy houses in
these other neighborhoods, they were not allowed to. And that was a way of really not only socially
segregating people, but making sure that the assets that black people had were less valued.
They lost a lot of wealth by being put into our worst neighborhoods. And it has led to a lot of
problems, both socially and economically. Yeah, economically. And I don't know, is that a thing
that it is unjust enough that it feels like something that you should maybe be able to respond
to with violence? But what would you do? Like punch a bureaucrat in the face?
That's sort of what I was thinking about. And I mean, so I get there's a very, I think there's
a difference between saying there's an understandable outlet, or there's an understandable situation
where someone might want to react to the violence versus saying violence is the ideal response.
I mean, like, you know, if you're a victimized black family being redlined here and screwed
into a bad neighborhood, I don't think the correct response would be punching your realtor in the
face. They're just doing their job. And I mean, that's not that's not a great defense, but a better
defense would be it's not like it's their decision. Do you punch a lawmaker in the face who voted for
that? I mean, that almost makes more sense to me. It could be that the realtor is personally
against it. They're just like, Well, I mean, I'm making a living, and I'm doing my best to try and
you know, skirt it a little bit. I mean, that's being deterrable. But what if there was like a
journalist who was was printing a lot of articles about how this is a great idea, because the races
should be kept separate? Yeah, that I mean, that sort of makes sense. I mean, to punch them then or
to not punch them, I guess I could see I could I'd be more sympathetic to punching that person
over the realtor is just doing you know, what they have to do. You know, it's not like, again,
it's like the doctor or it's like the ER docs kicking somebody to the curb after they're stabilized.
It's not like they're mean. It's not that that it's not like they lack compassion. I mean,
they're ER doctors, they're probably not a bunch of assholes, right? You don't get into that line of
work if you hate people. But because I think Richard Spencer is more closer to the journalist.
Yeah, he's more of a popularizer. But I don't know if that would, I don't know if that would still
be, I don't know, it's it's it's a difficult situation. I don't think that I would respond
with violence, just because I still think the better option would be to take this thing to the
public and point out the injustice and work for laws or take it through the courts and hope that
you get a good lawyer and that society is swinging more towards your way rather than trying to fight
it out. And if it's not, you know, if they're not swinging your way and things do suck, I mean,
so this is kind of the thing, and I'm not really sure how to pin this down. But I do think that
there might be circumstances where an undesirable or the kind of thing that you shouldn't advocate
is a is appropriate. This might be one of those circumstances where I wouldn't say, yeah, you
should go hit him. But you know, if someone does hit Richard Spencer in the face, it's like, well,
I'm not going to look super hard to try and find you and put you in jail, right? Like, I'm not going
to say people should go out there and hit him. But in this particular case, he's like, this could
be one of those. I'm trying to think of a good analogy. And unfortunately, the only one I can
think of is terrible. So I think they should treat it just as much as the same as they would
treat any other assault like that. Well, like once you're selectively enforcing the laws,
you're basically making things legal. It's true. And I do see where that's obviously a terrible
slide into vigilante violence. But I don't know. It's complicated. And I'm not a political scientist.
There could be great reasons why, you know, I mean, there might be 1000 historical examples
where this exact kind of rebellion has shifted the tides of history. And if that's the case,
that's that would be a compelling point against my being tacitly against it.
I think the Trail of Tears is an interesting example, because the Native Americans had basically
already lost the war, right? Their their option was to do what he said, or be wiped out by the army.
And at that point, it comes down to, is it worth being wiped out in order to inflict casualties
on the people doing this to you? I mean, that yeah, that sounds like a completely different
topic. And some might come down one way or another, right? And so that doesn't really quite,
it's not quite analogous to the modern day situation, because we all, I mean, unless we're
talking about getting the military involved, we all have access to basically the same weapons.
So I mean, if it's just going to be a group of thugs, you know, with swastikas versus a group
of people without swastika, you know, a bunch of victims, but they all have, you know, whatever
guns you can buy, I mean, that's going to be a fairly even fight. It's not like, you know,
you've got, it's not like it was with the Trail of Tears, right? Although I'm not sure what exactly
went down historically with the Japanese internment camps. I mean, presumably everybody could go buy
munitions, but it was just a matter, I guess that was, you know, full on military intervention,
right? Yeah, that is an interesting case, though. Yeah, I guess I don't think we're anywhere near
where we were, certainly not with the Trail of Tears, where I was talking about, look,
get out, or we're going to drag your broken body out, or, you know, with the Japanese internment
camps. I think society in general is swinging way away from those things. I don't think we'll
ever swing that far back into them. It could be that we're, that parts of society are swinging
back a little bit, and that's why people like Spencer are getting platforms and shit. But I
don't think, at least in my perspective, that we're nearly as badly off as we were a century ago.
Speaking of Spencer, there was another comment I wanted to just make really quick. I was going
to reply on Reddit, but it's a, it's something I've heard elsewhere too. Can we see that right
after one, if we finish up not without a two? Yeah, yeah, yeah, please. Okay. Now, with that
incident ended that with another example might be the disproportionate number of black and mentally
ill people executed in the US. Unlike healthcare laws, this is state sanctioned killing that the
majority of Americans favor carried out only after due process. He does have a very good point,
and he says, although the number of people actually killed isn't huge, how do you feel about violent
resistance specifically to the death penalty? And I kind of like that he brought that up because
I personally hate the death penalty. And I think it is a monstrous injustice and there
should be no such thing. But I do not violently resist the death penalty. So I guess I've made my,
I have cast my vote in that particular case that despite how bad I think it is, I think
more violence to stop it is even worse. I mean, I think also it's just pragmatically,
like if you're talking about trying to maximize the amount of good you can do throughout your life,
how many judges could you beat up before you get thrown in prison? You know, two or three? So,
I mean, if you're just, if you're breaking into their houses and I mean, let's talk about killing
them. If you're just going to run in there and beat them up and say, you shouldn't be
sentencing people to death penalty. And I don't think my doing that would have any effect on
how society views the death penalty. Probably not. So I mean, you could join an advocacy group that
like, what's that amazing one that does investigations in like decade old cases with DNA
and stuff. Oh, yes, I know what you're talking about. We'll find it. The something project.
Yeah. The innocence project. Something like that. Anyway, there are organizations that,
if your if your goal is to is to minimize people killed by death penalty, you're better off giving
money or volunteering for one of these organizations than you would be just again, killing judges,
right? Or whoever it is that you think is responsible voters, maybe I mean, so I, I'm not
in favor of the death penalty either. But there doesn't be a difference between saying, look,
society as a whole thinks that death penalty is okay. And we're going to kill, you know,
a handful of serial murderers every year versus and a lot of perfectly innocent people. Yeah,
some sort of perfectly innocent people. Again, I'm not for this, but I'm just saying that there
seems to be a difference between saying we're going to kill people after due process, after
they've been in court, even if it even if it's kangaroo court bullshit, there's there's something
more desirable going through the system and deciding on it that way, rather than saying,
you know what, I'm going to be the arbiter, me personally, I'm not talking to anybody,
and I'm going to go out and kill people or whatever your whatever form of violent resistance
takes. Like we talked about on the Nazi punching episode, there was that guy at University of
Washington who got shot. And this was like a Bernie campaigner, right? So you have to be
willing to accept false positives, you know, whether I guess you're going through due process
and death penalty or if you're going to go out for vigilante, right? I guess in the least convenient
possible world, what if it was the case that all the laws are exactly as they are right now for
white people. But if you were a black person, you were found guilty of a law, it was death penalty.
Yeah, or found guilty of breaking the law. And it doesn't matter what law it is, like you,
you knocked over a 7-eleven, you stole a few hundred dollars. Well, you're found guilty death
penalty for you. At that point, do we have violent resistance? Yeah, I mean, that sounds like a much
more supportable case, right? You know, so again, we're like, it's kind of thing.
Like at what level of injustice are you willing to take up arms?
Yeah. And certainly, I think that again, like you said, if it's anything that's explicitly
discriminatory, again, I guess I'm also wondering who to be violent against. I mean, it could just
be that by being violent, you're raising the alarm and somebody somewhere will notice and somebody,
you know, will start passing laws or, you know, like Gandhi did that, but with the opposite of
violence. Yeah, just in general, doing destruction to businesses and government buildings and hoping
that the government eventually says, we don't want any more of this, let's change the law so
people stop rioting. I mean, I could see a case for that. To the extent that I'm against this,
it's pretty softly, but it's to the extent, it is in principle, I'm against it. But in practice,
things get a lot muckier, right? But I mean, that is the argument I've seen that if you gum up the
works enough, the system reacts to having its works gummed up that badly. Yeah. And I mean,
I guess then it just, it's a matter of being tactful, right? Like it's punching individuals
in the street really gumming up the system. No, if anything, it's making this guy famous as hell.
I mean, so one of the commenters, the great Nick said that punching Richard Spencer is probably
a bad thing. But he said that he'll appear in public less because of this punch, which means
that he'll appear on media less and have influence over fewer people. I kind of disagree completely
at that point. I don't think I'm the only person who would never have heard of Richard Spencer if
it wasn't for this incident. And then we went to check out his websites, his sites got clicks,
somebody got ad revenue. This gave him a lot of press. Yeah. And you don't have to leave your
house to get press. If you have a computer in your house or if a journalist is willing to come
to your house, right? So there's a great article about someone who worked with, do you remember
Tucker Max? No, Tucker Max was a raging douche hole who on internet would just say crazy misogynist
things and came out with a book about basically how awesome it is to be a misogynist. And they had
almost no revenue for advertising. So they bought a few really just extremely sexist awful ads in
this subway system of I think Chicago or the bus system of Chicago, I don't know. And they immediately
got censored and removed and the city government said, Hey, we're sorry about this, but they got
massive media coverage for putting those up and then forgetting them pulled. And they had tons of
people protesting them. And they, I mean, it went to number one, New York Times bestseller,
because so many people heard about it. And even if 99.5% of people are decent people and think,
Oh, this is awful, that tiny small fraction who would have never heard of him are like, Oh,
hey, this guy, this sounds funny. Or this sounds cool. Let's read this. So it is he the believe
the name of the article is, I wrote the book on outrage marketing or whatever, and you should
stop playing into these people's hands. And I think it's a good point that a lot of this is just
trying to get attention by getting the outrage. And it is it is counterproductive when we give
them all this press, I think so too. And that's, that's sort of where we came down on the episode
and how to deal with these people. You know, if it's a small enough minority like this, I feel
like it's completely fine just to completely ignore them. I think the Nazi puncher did more
for their cause than Richard Spencer has. Watch, it was an inside thing. And the guy
having the in front of the camera when he got hit, you know, I'm not really that conspiratorily
minded. But if I was, that's exactly the kind of thing I would orchestrate, right?
I didn't want to say the reading great lyrics comment, what his words were,
punching Richard Spencer probably is also a bad thing. But he said that he will appear in public
less because of the punch, which means that he'll appear less on media and influence fewer people,
just something to think about. And yes, that is exactly what I was thinking about when I
wanted to talk about this. And it is the reason that I wanted to put together that episode because
what you're basically saying is just to think about the use of terror made someone terrorized
and shut up their speech. And I'm like, yes, that is exactly what I don't want.
Yeah, I guess that's sort of why I came down on the episode. Like I'm not, I'm not in favor of
this guy being attacked. But like I said, part of me feels like the sunshine's a little brighter
every time a Nazi gets his nose broken. But I, that's not the kind of thing, that's not the
kind of thing I want to endorse. But if it's the kind of thing that becomes necessary, that's fine.
And I'm not really, that's a pretty wishy-washy position. And it's not very actionable. And it
could put me on the wrong side. If things do get really out of hand, I might be one of the last
people on board to pick up a gun and go start shooting people or whatever, again, form your
violent resistance wants to take. I really don't think just punching these people is going to make
any difference. You're going to make the martyrs, you're going to put them, you know, if the numbers
go up, all these people are going to be on TV. And, you know, I, so I guess I'm not really sure
where we're supposed to go with this. Do you want to read Matt's counterargument to us? Or should
I read it? Matt wrote us an email and he had a counterargument for us, which is a thing that we
like on this episode, in general, in our spheres. So Matt says, the reason there are only 300 of
them, by of them he means the people who attended Richard Spencer's conference, the kind of white
supremacists that were on that video. The reason there are only 300 of them is because of the
extreme cost you incur for publicly expressing that belief, including being punched on the street.
Have you been on the internet lately? It's swarming with people capable of being Nazis.
Every racist YouTube commenter is a future Nazi waiting for a movement to exist so he
can come outside. To the extent that Trump is that movement, it's the perfect time to get
busy punching. The thing about revolutions is that they never work if you can see them coming.
Because they're a total reversal of power, you can't announce you're coming or the movement will
be squelched by the powerful faction you're looking to overthrow. This is an evolutionary
selection pressure acting on revolutionaries where the only ones that ever occur seem to come
out of nowhere. So the fact that you can't imagine a fascist revolution in America isn't
evidence that there won't be one. And he goes on to cite a number of stats showing that very popular
white supremacist websites such as Stormfront have as many as 100,000 visitors a month and
obviously not all of them are white supremacists, but he goes on to show that there's a organization
with like tens of thousands of members registered online, which is also white supremacist, and tries
to make the case that there's a much larger presence of white supremacists than we believe,
they're just underground right now. And he ends with, not ends with, but he also mentions,
you said it was too late to respond with violence by the time the government was on the side of
the fascists. So here's a terrifying bit of recent news from leaked FBI documents. And he
linked us to an article which I will link in the description that says the FBI has been
investigating white supremacists infiltration of law enforcement, which apparently white
supremacists have been getting jobs as police officers in various locales around the US and
slowly trying to infiltrate them, which kind of makes the whole laws thing a bit moot because
they could selectively enforce only the laws that they like. So I didn't read the attached link
there, but is it saying that a shady organization of secret white supremacists has made the conscious
decision to infiltrate the police in other areas of government or that some police officers happen
to white supremacists? Both. Okay. Well, the first one's scarier. Right. I mean, you're going to get
some percentage of assholes in every discipline, right? Or at least most of your discipline. But
if they're making the concerted effort to sneak in for this express reason, that is a little
disconcerting. I don't really know, again, what the appropriate response is. I mean, if you punch
a cop, it doesn't end well for you. And certainly, I guess I'm always concerned about false positives.
I think he wants us to be worried that there are a lot more white supremacists that we were saying
that there were and that they're kind of underground and building slowly. Yeah. And some of these are
stronger cases for that. I mean, YouTube commenters, I mean, if that's the case, then what was it?
Last year, the year before where the hashtag kill all white men was super popular. And that was among
like college campus girls. So I think that your average internet Nazi is going to just be some
15 year old sharing frog memes. It's not going to be some person who actually has an actionable
plan or wants to go out and do violence. They just think they're being edgy and they're entering
puberty. But like I said, that's that's the case for some of these weak ones of YouTube comments.
And I think Matt's Matt's contention is that punching the Nazis in public makes them less
likely for people to want to join the edgy group and be and be vocal and public about it. I don't
know if I agree with him, but I think that's what he's trying to say. Whereas I'm kind of more of
the opinion that the more you punch them, the more the edge lords are going to want to join that group
and be like, look at how edgy I am. Yeah. And I mean, if you can say again, too, from I imagine
from their position, if you're out there getting attacked for these beliefs, that just helps you
win your oppression Olympics that you're trying to enter into and saying, look, we're so marginalized
that we're the only ones in the country that people are being violent against, etc. Like again,
I don't believe that. But I think that's the kind of thing that they're going to tell themselves
and their internal narratives that's going to make them, I guess I'm getting as I don't think
that's going to slow them down. If anything, it'll speed them up. And you know, then when somebody
goes all the way and starts killing the people, then he's going to be making martyrs. And I think
that's going to get out of control pretty quick. But that said, the intercept article here is
worrisome. So that's a nice way to put it. So they're likely may be a bigger problem here than
I was originally given to think. So thank you for enlightening me. I mean, fairness, I didn't
research that article very in depth. The FBI later walked back from that investigation and
apologized for it. But it's not clear if that's because they had a lot of political pressure
to do that. Yeah. So that I mean, it sucks, because if you do say that and you stop there,
then you could say, Oh, well, that's just evidence of the how high this conspiracy goes,
or somebody greased some palms, but it's also consistent with like, sorry, we were actually
wrong. So I guess it maybe doesn't stand alone to make a case, but it might be evidence. I mean,
these things happen all the time, too, where the IRS was super into investigating Operation
Snowball with the Church of Scientology. And then they were threatened with just thousands of
lawsuits. And like, you know what, nevermind, sorry, bye. And so I mean, sometimes that is just
enough to push people back even when you're right. Yeah. So something to think about. I don't know
necessarily if in I'm willing to grant everything that you're that Matt rodent is true, I still
don't know if hitting the people is the appropriate way to do it. I mean, maybe it's actually voting,
maybe it's going through the door getting signatures to put forward amendment or mendems or
something. I wonder if there's some way in the system to go about doing this, rather than just
hitting people on the street. For me, I guess I'm not really sure if this a lot of these are cases
for killing people, right? If you're, you know, if you want to make sure Richard Spencer not
ever talks in front of a microphone again, you don't hit him in the face and then get
a diswarmed and press coverage, you kill him and then you can't say anything ever again, right?
If you really want to terrorize white supremacists into not talking, you kill him and you make a
big message out of that. Yeah. And I mean, certainly if you're talking about how we're
trying to win this war against white supremacists and stuff, I mean, wars aren't one with
throwing punches, right? It's interesting that they always walk back from that though. They're
like, no, no, beating people up is okay, but not killing. Well, and I'm really glad they do.
I'm not, I'm absolutely not in favor of that. I by no stretch of the imagination,
can I be reasonably interpreted as saying we should be out there killing them. We
absolutely should not be, but it seems like all the arguments that you're making here
apply more strongly to that case. Unless you're just trying to scare them to going inside,
but it's not like they lose internet access if they don't go outside, right? So what are you
going to do? Like troll them? I mean, that's not really going to stop them either, right?
But having your life be uncomfortable enough that you are scared to go out of your house and go to
the grocery store does suck, which is I think what their goal is. Okay, thank you for stealing
me that from me because it wasn't clear to me at all what their end of goal was. If it wasn't to,
you know, silence them. Or I guess if it was to silence them, I wonder how you did that without
killing them. But yeah, I mean, that's not going to make them stop. They're still going to vote
for assholes. They're still going to be greasing palms. They're going to be doing all their shady
shit. They're going to just be what, writing fewer articles, which is also I guess somewhat
advantageous. I don't know. No, I mean, it's a sticky point, right? Maybe certainly the point
where I talked about killing people. I don't know if that can be, I'm terrified of being quote
mind there. Did you have anything else to add on that one? Not on that one. All right, so we
did have another write in from, I don't know if we want to use people's names and write ins or not,
but let's just call him G. His first initial is G. Yeah, so G wrote in and basically made a defense
of Richard Spencer, felt that we're a little unfair. More than a little unfair. He said,
you were very unfair to Richard Spencer. Yeah. So this is a good point. Richard Spencer is not
a Nazi and has never advocated violence against anyone. I will agree that he is not a Nazi and
that he is not a part of the American Nazi Party. And he has said several times that neo-nazis don't
like him. I'm not sure about the not advocating violence because while he has always been very
careful to say publicly that he is for a, you know, for a peaceful, what do they call it?
Cleansing. Yeah, a peaceful ethnic cleansing. And once his political goals to be brought about
in a peaceful method, that's kind of bullshit. Because at this point, nearly or close to one
third of the US population is a minority is minorities. You cannot peacefully deport 100
million people. First of all, if you are forcing 100 million people to leave, you are stripping
them of almost all their assets. Because when you, when the rest of the country knows that you have
to leave, they can get your property for cheap. They know you aren't taking your house. They,
they know you aren't taking most of your stuff with you and you have no chance but to sell it
for pennies on the dollar. So it is a massive looting of that demographic. And second of all,
they have homes, they have families. Where, where are we going to put them? You can't just ship them
off to other countries. So if you try to make 100 million people leave, there will be violent
resistance as there should be. Well, and also, I mean, it's bullshit. I'll say one question too.
Like, I mean, my family came over sometime before the civil war parts, my family did,
but there are definitely minority families in the United States have been around the United States
longer than that. Where do we send them to? Right? What is their appropriate homeland? So,
I mean, if it's not here, we seem pretty arbitrary to draw the line anywhere else.
And I'm pretty sure he wouldn't try to kick me out since I'm quite white and I come from Europe.
But on the other hand, my parents moved here like an 84. They, they're, they're more recent
immigrants than most of the people that he was targeting. And why am I not getting kicked out?
I believe it's just because of the color of my skin and just this peaceful repatriation.
How are you peacefully going to get all those people leave? You can ask them to leave 100 million
people aren't going to leave. So the only way to get them to go would be to force them, which is
violent. And that, that's, that's exactly what I was going to say is that that seems like you've
crossed the line from writing an article for your shitty blog to out of hitting something like the
Trail of Tears, right? Where again, so that's the thing is the immigration police come to your house
and like, you know what, we want you out while I don't want to leave. Okay, well, we're going to make
you. And by make you, we're going, it's like, at that stage, it's things are going to get violent,
right? So I mean, this seems like this seems like a perfect analogy to what not without incident
was saying on Reddit that to the, to the Trail of Tears example. With a Japanese internment.
Yeah, yes, it's not supposed to be violent. I mean, if you want to just leave your shit and come
out quietly, things don't have to get violent is really what it's saying. But that's not really
a peaceful solution, right? And any, any, I think any altercation where you're telling people to do
at gunpoint isn't, or I guess at the threat of gunpoint. And then of course, the obvious
implication of shooting your gun, that's not that can't doesn't count as peaceful. It maybe
counts as non deadly. I totally think it's, it's a bullshit dodge to say I want this to happen
peacefully. And we should not allow them to get away with that. Yeah, we did acknowledge that
that is black genocide right article wasn't written by Spencer. So I don't see how fair it is.
Well, I guess I'm, let me read this out of in context here. G went on to say the old blog
post you cited quote is black genocide right unquote was as you quickly stated on the show,
not written by Spencer. So I don't see how it is fair to associate Spencer with it,
especially considering that he moved it from his site. I guess I don't know how long it was on
there for. And like I said, I first heard of this guy the day after he got hit in the face.
And I did a weekend's worth of quick research. So I mean, if it was true that he went on there,
and he's like, I can't believe people publish it like this on a website, it's immediately gone,
this, this user's banned. That's what happened cool props to him. I got the impression that
what that wasn't the sort of stance that he took on these things, but I could be wrong.
You know, it's, it's, it's a tricky subject that because he know I was I was perturbed when I saw
people quoting that and attributing it to him, because he didn't say it. And I dislike that it
was associated with him so much, because on the one hand, yeah, it was on his site. But on the
other hand, no, he didn't write it. So how at what point is the fact that it was on his site
a tacit endorsement by him and how much can he divorce himself from that? I think it's not
it's enough that I wouldn't use that as an argument against him personally. But when other
people do, it's hard for me not to say I kind of see your point that he is at least not against
this sort of thing. I agree. I mean, you know, if you want to remove it and stuff that that seems
to be some some indication, but I dislike that it's being used. And I think it shouldn't be used
against him basically is what I'm trying to say. He said plenty bad things by himself that you don't
need to quote mind someone he was associated with on his website. That's what I was going to say is
there's plenty of room to just find things that this guy said personally. And I don't think he
needs guilt by association unless that association is ironclad. You know, if this was somebody that
he pushed up or he paid him or something to and he's, you know, help publish his shitty book or
something like that's the kind of thing where we could say, look, he's helping this person,
this person's bad. But that doesn't even that doesn't even seem to be how far this went. So
I am curious as to what all our listeners think about when guilt by association is valid, because
I do remember saying earlier that I would not sign with Castelia House to publish anything I
were to write because of what a douchebag and somewhat racist their owner is. And Vox Day owns
Castelia House and Theodore Beale, I guess this is real name, but he goes by he writes by Vox Day
online. And he is the same kind of I don't want to say white supremacist, but asshole. Yes,
that's pretty all encompassing term. Yeah, he's he's this sort of Richard Spencer type of person.
And I would not want to be associated with him. So I would not sign with him. And it does make
me wonder when someone signs with Castelia House, what exactly are they, you know, are they okay
with their name being associated with? That's important. I mean, I don't have a lot to add
there other than that's a good query to put out there. So skipping the rest of this email is
pretty long. But it was it was thoughtful. And I appreciate I mean, I go on and read more of it.
Yeah, I'm not done with it either. I just wanted to thank the author, G here that I mean, clearly,
you disagreed the way we approached it and felt that we weren't being fair enough. But you
responded to us in a very polite way. And I appreciate you doing that. I mean, you cited some
stuff here. I'm not necessarily moved by your arguments, but I appreciate the way you engaged
them. And I think this is the way dialogue should go, right? I mean, he could have just hit us.
So no, there was there was some other stuff on here that, yeah, by all means, go ahead and
see what else was on there. And Yash. So this is I'm approaching these in the order he wrote them.
He said, I founded a bit odd that you objected to even considering genocide as a possibility.
As rationalists, shouldn't you be willing to consider any idea? How do you know that
genocide is wrong unless you consider it first? I would like to say that I am strongly against
the death penalty. As we mentioned earlier, I have a blog called death is bad. I in general
think death of any humans is a horrible thing. And I have thought about it extensively. So
when I don't consider genocide, it's because I consider the death of even one person to be
an atrocity. And the death of an entire group is much more so.
So yeah, as as rationalists, I do think that one of the things you try to do is to engage
every idea thoughtfully. That's not to say that we have to spend a lot of time going over things
that if we've decided that we don't like doesn't mean that we don't have to revisit them or that
we're not compelled to address new arguments. But if you're against death and principle, and
you've got solid reasons for that, then by extension, you're against genocide. And I mean,
is there some plausible or is there some possible future or hypothetical where you might be in
favor of it? Probably. I mean, if it's if it's invading aliens that turn out to be really easy
to kill, but they're really bad, sure, we can genocide the species, you know, like lived in
Middle Earth and orcs were literally just murder hobos that do nothing but but rape and kill,
then maybe it'd be okay. But we're not these are humans. Right. I mean, but the thing is we
have considered genocide. I mean, we've heard of it at least. And there are very good reasons
to not even bother bringing up that argument because it's so fucking stupid. Yeah, that's
that's sort of where I'm at. I do see where you're where you're getting at, like, shouldn't you
engage this? Don't you claim to be a rationalist? And that I think it's it's fair to say that the
point has been engaged and some are really thrown out, right? Not necessarily like, oh, we just don't
talk about that. That's on our sacred box of things we don't talk about. It's like, no, that's not
our box of shit we've settled our minds on. Yeah. And if you're going to make a new case for genocide
that's super compelling, I mean, I'd be curious and reading it just morbidly. What could possibly
be a compelling argument? Go ahead and send us an article. But I think the odds that I'll change
my mind are pretty small. And that's not necessarily close minded of me. Like the odds of me changing
my mind about homeopathy working are also pretty small, right? Or, you know, like, I don't know,
Bigfoot wandering around North America, like we would have found one by now. Now, if we did find
one that would cause an interchange my mind. So there's a difference in saying, like, I'm not
interested in wasting my time, you know, flying out to the the woods of North, you know, of Northwest
America to go look for big feet, Bigfoot's, I don't know. It's not close minded to me to say, no,
I'm not gonna waste my time doing that. Because I don't think they're there. Close minded to be
saying, I'm going to shut out any and all possible evidence that you're bringing forward. I feel like
that's a digression. But I'm trying to make the point that I feel like it's okay to dismiss the
topic of genocide in a certain group of humans, more or less without really spending a lot of time
talking about it in the same way that I'm not going to waste my time thinking about lots of other
stupid propositions. If I see a proposition for a perpetual motion machine, anything that violates
the law of conservation of energy, unless there is a number of really big Nobel laureates that have
come out and endorsed this, I'm not even going to bother looking at it. I'm like, this is a fundamental
misunderstanding of how reality can work as far as we know it. I'm not even going to bother reading
the first paragraph about your perpetual motion machine. I mean, that's how strongly I feel about
is genocide a good idea. Yeah, I almost feel like that was too much time to spend on it.
So moving on then. Well, that's just, I mean, how uncomfortable did that make everybody sitting
there talking about why genocide is a bad idea? I think that if that's the kind of thing that
you're on the fence about, you need to settle your moral framework pretty hard before you're
ready to come out and talk about it. Is it not impossible? Sure. Like, you know, the orcs example
is probably the most reasonable one, right? Since none of us are orcs, I don't think that's really
worth, and is this too, is this too flippant? I feel like to engage it too much is to give it too
much platform, but I mean, if anyone has a really good case for genocide, I guess, shoot us something,
but you probably will not get any traction with us. Yeah, don't anticipate that. But again,
I don't think that's being, I don't think that's a flippant dismissal, but I don't really know what
else to say. So let's just move on. Yeah. All right. This one I thought was very interesting.
You claim that Spencer gave a Nazi salute at the MPI event, MPI being this event we've
talked about that was captured on video. That is false. If you watch the video,
you'll see that he's raising a glass, not saluting. And I was like, why? So I went back and I watched
the video and I'll be damned. He was raising a glass and toast at the end. He did not actually
give the Nazi salute. I saw a picture of somebody doing Nazi salute, though. There were some people
Nadine's doing the Nazi salute, which again, we should go back to Guilt by Association,
but I thought it was crazy how I had seen the video before. And in my memory, I remembered him
giving the Nazi salute because I'd heard everywhere giving the Nazi salute in his speech. And it just,
I had a mental image of him giving the Nazi salute. And then I went back and looked and
no, there's a glass in his hand and he's clearly kind of toasting. And that was a crazy brain
thing that made me be like, well, like this is why we have evidence. And I'm glad we have
a video recording of this. Right. Well, we had that friend post a Facebook post, you know,
I forget what the context was, but it was like something alternate fact is true in the sense
that like, we grew up with the Berenstein Bears spelled the way that everyone thinks it was spelled,
but it wasn't that where Nelson Mandela died in prison, all these things like everyone thinks
are true, but they're not. Yeah, this seems to be just one of those things where yeah,
I had the same thing that I thought that I saw this video and apparently that was in a genie
movie. Right. So anyway, yeah, fair enough. So that may be not not on this, not on this case,
maybe not on film. Was he giving a Nazi salute? So are bad. Some people in his audience were
giving the Nazi salute though. So I mean, again, guilt by association. I mean, it's not like,
not like he did it. So I mean, but if you're in the room with people who are enthusiastically
doing a Nazi salute, the guy who wrote in here seems to he's making the case that it might have
been a tongue in cheek ironic spirit, but I don't know how you get that from the from the footage.
And if it is, I mean, I can kind of see how it is because that's a really uncut, like there's
so much baggage with that gesture. There is a lot but the okay, so as he pointed out, he said,
well, let me read this real quick. I would also guess that those who did salute weren't even
really Nazis, but were saluting in a tongue in cheek ironic spirit. People in the alt right
are called Nazis all the time by the left. And some of them find it fun or funny to embrace
the label rather than argue against it, which I totally see because every now and then you hear
people saying that since I'm signed up for cryo, it is my own crazy religion and I'm just as bad
as the people who think that Jesus is going to rapture them or whatever. And I've gone to the
point where I'm like, okay, fine, it's my religion. This is my sacred burial right when I die. I want
my body to be frozen instead of buried and believe what you want because I don't really care. And
I saw her to see that point, especially if you're in a group that gets shit on console. How many
times have we been told that people on the right are Nazis? I've been hearing it since Reagan,
that Reagan is a Nazi and the Republicans are Nazis. And I can see at some point people on
the internet being like, you know what? Fuck you all. Fine. I'm a Nazi. Hail Hitler, you know?
Like in a sort of a reverse trolling ironic sort of way. And I can kind of see his point,
but on the other hand, I don't want us to lull our way into Nazism. Because for every 10 people
that are doing it ironically, there's at least one person who's like, yes, we should be killing the
Jews. Hail Hitler. One of the people in the group doesn't know it's a joke, right? So we can make
up whatever percentage we think that is. I'm not really sure. But yeah, I think that that might be
a reasonable concern that there's exactly some percentage of people that thought we were all
joking, right? And then one person shows up with their backpack full of ammo and a couple of guns
and like, wait, are we not really doing this? So yeah, I think that's one of the reasons we don't
joke about things like that very much. The Nazi thing, because there are people who will take
it a certain way. I would not be comfortable with that anyway. Even even as a joke, I'd be like,
guys, we're still joking, right? Yeah, I don't want to be the guy who realizes that like, oh,
it turns out that now four fifths of the people are Nazis. And I was the only one who still thought
it was a joke. Right. Oops. So that that that is interesting. And that that was, it's an
uncomfortable fact, but I'm all for putting the truth out there. Spencer didn't salute at that
that event. So or didn't not be salute at that event. So there it is. I keep thinking because,
you know, I've been on panelists at Denver Comic Con a number of years now, and some of them have
been pretty large, like 400 people, right? And afterwards, after we're done, you know, having
our talk for 48 minutes, and we close, and there's the applause, what if some of the people like,
gave me a Nazi salute from the audience? Like, what would I do at that point? I'm pretty sure I
wouldn't shut down everything be like, Hey, guys, let's let's not do that after the talk's already
over. I don't know. I could see you at least writing a blog post saying, Hey, I saw this happen.
What the fuck was that? Was that some sort of uncomfortable joke? Let's not do that again.
Or at least explain what you're coming from. But if it is already like sort of an inside joke,
I mean, I if that's that might actually be true. It's an uncomfortable inside joke. I might
mean, maybe get a better sense of humor. You know, I know I did it a lot when I was a hardcore
atheist. No, not a Nazi salute. God, no, when I had just come out as an atheist. And I know
some people who are witches as well. And it's it's a thing that like, Oh, yes, we we worship
Satan, hail Satan, you know, let's go drink the blood of the babies tonight like we do every night.
Oh, sure. Because you hear that from Christians a lot. If you're an atheist, it means you actually
worship Satan and just the the, you know, the neo pagans nowadays, or even the old school pagans
who apparently have a beef with the neo pagans, which is interesting. But they will every now
embrace and be like, Yeah, no, I'm totally doing the baby eating tonight. That's what we witches do.
And that seems a lot more funny from this side, you know? Yeah, I guess I'm a big supporter
of the church of Satan. That said, if there was any reasonable concern that some percentage of
atheists was actually eating babies, it would stop being a funny joke to make. Yes, it would.
So maybe that's where the line is like, I mean, if it's true that some of them are joking, that's
fine. But this isn't the kind of thing that you should be complicit about. Yeah. And to the extent
that anybody was not joking when they said yes, atheistic babies, or yes, we atheistic babies.
To the extent that someone might not have been kidding, then the whole thing stops being funny
and the entire group should stop making that joke, right? Yeah, every now and then you do wonder
about the guy who says that we should kill religious people. And I think that's why there's
never any jokes about ha ha, let's throw all the religious people in ovens, because that's a place
we're not willing to go. Yeah, I'm not sure. Are you talking about a specific guy or a hypothetical
guy? No, but I mean, there was at least, I remember some of the more virile young people
and the forums I was on that was like, we really should just kill anyone who's seriously religious
because there's no way to help them and they're bringing down all of the rest of humanity. Well,
not to belabor too far in that rabbit hole, but like, you were seriously religious for a while.
So I mean, good thing you weren't killed before you got a chance to change your mind, right? So
that seems like a great argument for not killing people before you try and talk to them. Probably
after. And certainly no one else made a joke about it. There was no ha ha, yes, let's give the
whatever the equivalent of the atheist Nazi salute is. Fair enough. Well, I guess what we're
saying is, don't be given the Nazi salute, or people are going to think bad things about you
and it'll be your own goddamn fault. Yeah, I think that's a fair takeaway. I mean, if you're willing
to just roll with that association, well, then you're willing to roll with being called a Nazi
and all the nonsense that comes with it. But if you want to be taken more seriously, you don't
make those kinds of jokes, right? Yeah. Again, I'm not convinced everyone who's doing that is
joking, right? I think it would be an outlander's claim to say that literally everyone is joking,
right? Some of these people seem quite earnest, and you'd be playing mind reading games by saying,
no, I actually think you're joking despite that you're telling me you're not, right? So yeah,
forget that noise. Oh, I was wrong. It was G who was trying to convince us that there's a lot more
Nazis than we think there are, or a lot more alt-right people than we think there are. Oh,
it wasn't the last right in. Yeah, it says it's a movement that's spread out across the country
and indeed the world. So the 350 people that could make it to DC for the conference isn't the
best baseline. You should consider the fact that white nationalist ideals are so persecuted by the
mainstream culture that many adherents of the movement do not want to be seen supporting it
publicly and consequently wouldn't go to a conference even if they could. If we look at the
web traffic and then he gave us the stats on how many people go to these websites. So I guess it
was the pro-right guy who was trying to tell us there's more right people out there than we
thought. And that's probably true. Excuse me, that is true. That's in fact who wrote that in. But
yeah, I'm sure that the alt-right community is bigger than these 300 people. I meant the people
who were earnest enough about it to go to these conferences. Now, you're right, there are probably
social disincentives from going. So maybe that number would have been 10 times bigger. I guess
the point that I was making didn't really hinge on it being 300 or 500. It was more like even if
it's 3,000, even if it's 10 times people who went, or even arguably 100 times people who went.
We're still looking at like less than 1% of people. We're not looking at half of our neighbors,
right? But once we start getting the 30,000 ounce start to be a little bit worried. Same,
no, I totally agree. But I guess, like I said, even if it did get all the way up to being,
you know, 300,000 people. That's still 0.1%. Yeah, this isn't like, you know,
it's not as mainstream as standard republicanism or conservatism or republican ideologies. There
was one last thing here that G wrote in was for a podcast that is ostensibly not about politics
and meant to appeal to a wide audience, you do express your political opinions on the show
quite frequently. As a conservative with moderately positive opinion of Trump, I often find it
frustrating that a podcast which I otherwise enjoy so often drops in remarks, which I consider
horribly backwards without any discussion or consideration of other points of view. That's
fair. And I really appreciate the way that you wrote that in, rather than, you know, flaming
and being irate or something, especially like on leading up to the election, we were, I think,
much more guarded about being outspoken against the president and certain actions and factions and
groups. You know, so like, if we haven't made it clear, ideologically, I want everyone to be able
to talk and be comfortable around each other sharing ideas. Yeah, this is what prevents punching.
Yeah. Being able to have an open discourse. And exactly. And but that doesn't mean that I don't
have my opinions, you know, to the extent that G wrote in, to the extent that you're right-wing,
I'm left-wing, right? Maybe you probably even less so. I think I'm pretty moderate on a lot of
things. But I think there's a difference between saying, you know, you have to agree with us or
you're stupid. And maybe we came off that way. And if that's true, that might not have been fair.
I would like to see, you know, if anyone or G specifically thinks that there's remarks that
are literally horribly backwards and that we didn't give any discussion or consideration,
write us in and let us know. Because I would be interested to know in what those points are.
And maybe mention them on our next listener feedback.
Yeah. I mean, I do find with talking about that, I'm trying to think of anything right off that
was horribly backwards. But I mean, if we're super biased, we might not have caught it.
Exactly.
Well, I mean, let us know. I don't want to be the asshole who's pissing people off. I mean,
obviously, if Spencer heard our last podcast, you know, he wouldn't be a fan of most of the
things we said, or maybe not Spencer in particular, but some of the people in that camp, I'm not super
concerned with being charitable or with those people coming away from the show and being,
you know, happy having listened to it. But there's a midline. I don't want to scare away half the
population and make it seem like this show isn't safe or conservative minded people, or at least
not fun to listen to. So was that two, I don't know.
No, I think those right on. All I have left is one thing which is just a note to drop in. It's
not something we really have any or at least I don't have anything to comment on it. Peregrine
Tuch, I think is the how you what how the name would be pronounced says since it came up in
Germany, we have a criminal offense called Volksverhetzung, I think. I'm glad you tried
reading that rather than me. I wasn't prepared. I mean, I took a little bit of German, but it was
a long time ago. So I don't know if that's right. Anyways, it's basically a law against incitement
roughly translated the relevant part reads anyone who in a manner which is likely to
disturb public peace incites hatred against parts of the population or calls for violence or
arbitrary action against them attacks the human dignity of others by insulting maliciously contempting
or slandering parts of the population will be punished with imprisonment for three months to
five years. There is a later sentence for those who only do so in writing films, computer games,
etc. Anyone who denies the Holocaust in Germany is guilty of this and it is known over here and
sometimes a cause for great indignation that no such law exists in the US and anyone can say
more or less anything. Generally, we do not understand why you don't just make it punishable
by law to incite hatred against part of the people, especially if the way it is done is by
telling lies or slandering the minority you want to incite hatred against. And I don't really have
anything to say to that aside from I think that is an interesting law and I kind of like it,
but it's good to have another opinion. Yeah, I mean, so a carefully crafted and extremely
well, I mean, the problem with I think making certain forms of speech illegal. And so the
the person who wrote and had expressed some frustration about, you know, or at least some
confusion about why America is so gung-ho, you know, free speech, no matter what. I mean,
the same the same freedoms that allow people to say terrible things are the ones that allow people
to say good things that no one wants to hear. The only thing that keeps the engine of progress
moving forward is being able to talk about whatever idea it is. And if you put some things off the
table, then those things will never get moved forward. But I mean, again, in anti Holocaust
law, it's hard to see how that's going to hurt things in particular. But that's a slippery
slip to like anti blasphemy laws or Liz Mejia state laws. Yeah, whatever, whatever other
things that might have a bad impact down the road or plausibly could. So having a blanket thing of
like, look, we're not going to say we can't talk about anything. Having that base rule of just
free speech around the board. I think that it's one of those things. This is actually one of the
things that I might this is probably a bigger topic, maybe we can save it for later. But like I'm
like utilitarian consequentialism utilitarianism on one hand and free speech on the other. Like
I'm kind of even like if it's a case where look, some bad things might happen if you say this,
I'm kind of in favor of like just keeping free speech around in general.
Because the higher order effects are more beneficial.
Exactly. So like, you know, one obvious thing, you know, like would be,
should I have the free speech to burn a Quran knowing that, you know, people have said embassies
on fire around the world? I probably shouldn't because I know that'll happen. But to say that I,
you know, I can't just because some people are going to be violently outraged by it.
I mean, you can get highly outraged by anything. Exactly.
People used to get violently outraged that a black person would date a white person.
And if you're going to say, look, anything that has a violent con consequence, based off of your
speech or your actions, that's going to leave anyone who's any, any group of bullies who's
ready to be violent, going to let them dictate whatever you can say and think or say and do,
right? So free speech wins, I think is a is an important axiom for just progressive society.
Again, I'm not saying that there's no way that you can curtail certain corners of it.
I personally do think that in general, the the laws again, the laws protecting free speech are
great because they do help us get to the truth eventually. But I'm such a big fan of truth.
And I really hate the propaganda lies that sometimes people spew out that I am willing
for there to be some laws about when if something can be proven to be malicious and just blatantly
false that any reasonable person should have known better and not spread these things,
then yeah, it's fine to haul them into jail as long as you know, you can prove it in court.
Because there's certain things that I think you're just as long as they're not illegal,
I'm going to uphold everyone's freedom to say whatever they want. But there's some things
that I think maybe could be pushed into the line of illegal. And in that case, we would
have someone arrest them and take them to court rather than punching them in the street.
Yeah, sure. I mean, a really easy example would be like accusing the person who
whatever didn't give you promotion, accusing them of being a pedophile,
right? You know, that gets people out with pitchforks outside their house. I mean,
I was exercising my free speech isn't a good response to that, right? You're lying to incite
terrible consequences for this person. So I mean, don't let my my endorsement of free speech be
taken to be to where you know, you can say or do literally anything. I mean, I guess with truth
and honesty behind it, I'm a fan of free speech. But it was interesting to get the perspective
of someone who is living in Germany. Yeah, no, absolutely. And like I said, I think I can see
why it would make sense for laws to like that to exist in some parts of the world, even if I
have mixed feelings about them, they make a lot of sense to me. So well, this went on longer than
we thought it was going to. Oh, well, hope we didn't bore anyone. If we did bore anyone, hope you
didn't listen to it because you know, you can always stop and fast forward or listen to something
else, right? Yeah, this is this is on you if you're bored. All right, we'll see you all in a couple
of weeks. Thanks.
