Hello Bayesian conspiracy listeners.
This is Kyle, the sound editor and sound designer of this podcast.
A while back we asked you, our listeners, if you could help us create a new musical intro and outro for the show.
We'd like to thank you all so much for your submissions, and for all the other wonderful contributions made to our podcast by the rationalist community at large.
Today we'd like to introduce these new listener-created compositions, which will permanently replace our old, yet beloved, heavy metal track.
Our new intro theme music, which you will hear at the conclusion of this announcement, is composed by David Groovier, who also did some composition for Harry Potter and the Methods of Rationality.
Our outro music was composed by the dynamic duo Sumerci and Keeper.
And now, on with the show.
Welcome to the Bayesian Conspiracy. I'm Amy Ashbrotsky.
I'm Stephen Zuber, and today we have a guest.
But first, we are going to do listener feedback.
We're doing listener feedback at the top today because the guest is a little bit late, but we will introduce him as soon as he gets here.
Gotcha.
Before we get into actual listener feedback feedback, I want to do a host opinion update.
I'm ready.
Okay, so a couple months ago now, I think we had the marriage episode, where I came out as basically against marriage in all its current present day forms.
And I got some, I don't know, feedback.
I don't, people have talked to me a bit, both, both through I am and through messages on Reddit and stuff about it.
And I am moderating my position slightly.
I think that there is a place for marriage when it comes to one person staying at home and taking care of the kids and being the homemaker.
Because there is, for both parents to work and have to pay for someone to be the homemaker and to take care of the kids is really expensive.
And that is something that you can do if you make a lot of money.
But in a recent post on, oh God, I forgot the blog it is, but the name of the post is Seizing the Means of Home Production.
It just pointed out that it can be really economically useful to team up with another person and split these tasks where one person works outside the home.
The other person works inside the home to raise the kids, keep things running.
And you know, there's a lot of other crap that goes on with keeping a household running more than just cleaning and keeping kids.
There's the taxes, there's all sorts of running down to city hall whenever that needs to be done.
There's a lot of chores, which I, you know, I have to do myself, which is a pain in the ass right now.
My car is overdue on maintenance because I haven't had fucking time to go and do it.
And if I had someone in the house that had some extra time every now and then help me out, that kind of stuff, that'd be really useful.
Someone else wrote me saying, how's that tying to marriage?
Well, and someone else wrote me and said that, yeah, her and her husband both had a strong careers, but they really wanted kids.
And so she, due to the protections that marriage gives, she felt comfortable quitting her job and raising the kids instead.
And that's fair because when you go into a partnership with someone, you need some assurance that they're not going to just punk out on you
after five years if you guys have decided to go into this for a long time.
Because you are giving up a lot of income and not only that, but a lot of work experience and resume building when you're staying home instead.
And so that's, that is a valuable thing.
So that empty box that Nazim talked about that, that's where that's other marriages.
It's just, it's a box with high walls that makes it hard to get out.
So the benefit that, so that the protection that you're mentioning there is the, the insulation from like an easy dissolving of the relationship.
Well, no, I don't look, I'm getting everything up to do this.
And like my life track, or I guess both of our life tracks kind of depend on this not falling apart in the next five years.
Let's lock this down with some legal work.
Is that what you're saying?
No, because I don't think that people should be, should have a harder time getting out of a relationship they aren't happy with.
I think of anything that that should be easier because there's already a lot of psychological barriers to it.
But I do think that if someone does give up their career, then it is good for there to be like, honestly, I think of it more of an LLC kind of thing.
You and someone else have teamed up and there is some assurances that even if you do dissolve this LLC, that you won't be left destitute.
You will have access to half the resources that you guys together created because even though one person was working outside the home to bring an actual cash money,
the person working inside the home was contributing as well.
That's why you formed this LLC with the other person to take advantage of their labor without having to pay someone to do it.
So yeah, getting half the stuff and then getting some, not severance, but that's sort of after you've been let go from a job,
they keep paying you out for a while to transition for your transition that I think that sort of thing makes a lot of sense.
And I just hate the fact that it is called marriage and it is tied to having your relationship being respected by society.
And if you are in love, you are considered supposed to get that.
And I think all that is total bullshit.
So from now on, I am going to refer to all marriage as homemaker protection contracts.
And that is because that is the legitimate use for them.
And I think that is what they should be called.
And right now my sister is going to be entering into a homemaker protection contract with someone,
which I think is stupid because both of them are going to continue working outside the house.
No one is staying home to raise kids and make home because they don't want to do that.
So I don't know why they're getting a homemaker protection contract when...
Well, sure. When you rebrand it that way, then it sounds stupid, right?
Yes, yes. That is my direct intention.
So yeah, if someone is staying home to be a homemaker, good on you, get a homemaker protection contract.
But otherwise, I think it's silly.
Well, that's nice to hear an update.
I think my general feedback or my general thoughts on it are like,
it makes sense to protect yourself from bad situations,
just like you don't want to enter into a lease with somebody who has broken six leases in the past or something, right?
Because then, you know, your chances of being fucked are pretty high,
but if they have a good lease history and you can check their relationship credit score and it comes out great,
then I don't know, I guess it's ruining the metaphor.
I think that if you calculate the risk to be super low and most people...
Actually, I've rated it that most people don't even calculate the risk.
They just think, this is what people do. We get married and I got to lock this down.
Yeah, that's the problem.
But to the extent that any thinking person is getting married
and they have the time and energy to consider the question,
is this a risk to my future?
And the answer is most likely no.
Then it's like, you know, if it makes one person happy
or makes both of you a little happy or whatever, then I don't know.
Yeah, but it's always a risk.
And that's actually, that was my same thinking with my last marriage
because I was already kind of against marriage, you know?
But it made her happy.
And if I had just thought of it as homemaker protection contracts,
I would have been like, no, we don't need to do that.
And I think I'm going to keep doing that
because that's basically their legitimate function, my opinion.
That there will always be some risk involved
and that is a risk you're willing to take.
If you're getting a homemaker, you know, life partner out of the deal.
Maybe it's not scary to me because I don't have any stuff.
Like, if I don't have a life savings or a house, then like, you know...
Yeah, great.
You can have half of my 1999 Honda Accord.
Are you planning to have no stuff for the rest of your life though?
I don't know.
I mean, when in doubt, like the future being like the past, right?
Cool.
No, I plan to have stuff for trying to buy a place.
But yeah, I hear you.
It's something to think about.
And it's nice to have a moderate move back.
I don't know if we put this in the air or not,
but after the recording when we did that episode,
Navin asked if there was anything that you had,
if you'd get ready to under any circumstances.
Yeah, if you did mention this, I think the next episode.
Oh, good, because I thought that was awesome.
So it wasn't like you were just like,
no, I hate it forever and it's bad for everybody.
Right.
So it showed at least a thought about it.
So cool.
All right, what else we got?
All right, on to actual listener feedback.
Oh, wait, we should think our supporter as well before I forget.
And to think our awesome sound engineer, Kyle Moore,
who makes this sound like audible chocolate in your ears,
as opposed to like a cheese grater ruining like a record?
I don't know.
He can't make that sound any better, but he can make it.
He can't make the words any better,
but he can make the sound sound better.
Yeah.
Oh, well, who was the name so I can add it to our list
that you guys think it's last week when I wasn't here?
The most recent one that...
Yeah, it was like two first names, right?
Like Chris Johnson or...
That sounds right.
I'll find it.
Okay.
Yeah, but we can take the next person.
Okay.
This week, we would like to think our Patreon supporter,
Stefan Abbs or possibly Stephen Abbs.
And I'm assuming it's Abbs.
It's ABS.
Sounds right to me.
I hope the guy has great abs because otherwise.
Is it Stefan or Stephen?
I should ask him.
Yeah.
I mean, Steph, I don't know.
It doesn't matter.
It does.
We want to see your name, right?
Hopefully it's one of those two things.
We really appreciate your help.
It makes everything awesome and keeps the lights on over here.
So thank you very much.
Yeah.
Here you go.
So the second to last episode that came out,
so we recorded these, you know,
how we've mentioned it before.
We kind of lead some in advance.
So two episodes ago, we did one with Vivian on...
It didn't turn out to be what it was going to be about,
but then what it actually ended up being about
was just like, I don't know,
how to try to think sanely about privilege and social justice,
warriorism and that sort of stuff.
And we got a lot of feedback,
kind of like this comment on the website from Pink Wojak
that said,
I found the double thing required to understand privilege unbearable.
Please don't do that again.
And there was one of the most active subreddit conversations
on there.
And follow me and just go check it out and add stuff.
So as long as we're on both the subreddit and privilege,
should I read Ustis's comment on about privilege?
Yeah, go nuts.
Okay.
Ustis on the subreddit talked about privilege.
Ustis says,
I really dislike the term privilege
because it has a different meaning in colloquial terms
versus how it's used in sociological context.
This is very...
This isn't very unlike theory as in the scientific model term
as opposed to how people use theory in day-to-day talk like.
To mean hunch.
Yeah.
It's my theory that your spark plug needs to be replaced.
Anyways,
Ustis says privilege from a sociological perspective can be
looked at simply as a set of problems that a particular group
of people simply doesn't have to deal with just by being a member
of that particular group of people.
A poor white person has a much lower chance of being pulled
over if they drive through a neighborhood predominantly
populated by a different racial group.
Just by being white,
they have a higher chance of being considered for a job.
Typically,
when someone is saying that a person is privileged,
they aren't dismissing that person.
They are pointing out how they are being dismissed by the person's
unawareness.
Rather,
they are pointing out how they are being dismissed by the other
person's unawareness of the kinds,
severity and frequency of problems that they're talking about.
And my feedback on this is that I totally agree with that.
And this is one of the problems with talking to everyone else
in the world is that privilege does have a distinct
technical meaning in academia.
One that is entirely reasonable and that you can't really
argue against.
You're like, yes,
this is a thing that really exists and it really does make
life easier if you're white.
But that is not how it's used out in the real world in academia
in that rarefied atmosphere where you're only talking with
other people that know these sorts of things and that are
fairly reasonable about the sort of thing.
I should hope some of the new stories you see out of colleges
makes me wonder about that nowadays.
But in those places,
yeah,
that's that's a good way to use it.
But out in the non-academic world where I hang around with
a fair handful of SJW types,
I usually see it as shorthand for why it's okay to denigrate
or attack a person or a group.
It's because like,
well,
you're a white person,
you have privilege and therefore it's okay for me to call
you a piece of shit or whatever it is.
Right.
And that's that is how most people outside academia see it
being used,
which is why I think it has got this sort of backlash because
you're you're using it as an excuse to punch people.
If we go back to the punching analogy,
you're like you're white,
you're privileged.
I don't care about you.
I don't care about your life circumstances.
I don't care if you just got well,
I was about to say,
I don't care if you just got raped last weekend.
They probably would care,
but the point is they don't know what your life is.
They just know that you're white and therefore it's okay to
be an asshole to you or to like,
you know,
punch at you.
Well, and that's I mean,
you know,
and I get the terminology and someone would say,
well,
it's not actually punching,
but as long as we're using that phrase,
like just don't wire people throwing punches in the first
place and I get like we come from positions of privilege in
the academic sense towards easy to say why we're not throwing
punches because we we haven't been pushed to that extreme
maybe,
but at the same time was it was it one of the commenters?
I'm trying to remember how to pronounce the name.
It was like give me a second.
Sorry.
More than a mile.
Yeah.
More than a more than a male.
Yeah.
I mean, I had a lot of good comments.
That's that's your bad for making it hard to say.
I'm pretty sure I know who this is.
So but I think that's basically a tactic of like a
Motton Bailey, right?
Have we talked about that in the podcast before?
No.
Should we cover Motton Bailey quickly?
I think we should.
Okay.
Motton Bailey was introduced by Scott Alexander as a the
quickly in terms of the analogy in old medieval cities.
The Bailey is the area around the area in a settlement
where useful work is done.
It's where the stables are where the blacksmith is.
There's probably don't have the store houses of grains,
but anyways,
it's the place where economic work gets done where
everyone actually does the life where things happen and
the Bailey is like the big tower in the center.
That's super well fortified and you want the Mott because
that's where things get done.
But when someone comes by and needs to defend yourself,
everyone retreats to the Bailey.
They should rain arrows down upon the invaders until they
leave and then they can go or everyone goes up into the Mott.
Did have I been saying this backwards?
I honestly don't know.
So I don't know.
The Mott is the big tower.
Okay.
The Bailey is where the useful work is done.
That's fine.
Everyone goes up into the Mott.
They stay there.
They're fortified and then once the enemy leaves,
they go out to the Bailey again.
And in the analogy is the Mott is something like the
way privilege was said here that privilege is that a group
a sort of a series of problems you don't have because
you're in a certain group,
like you won't get pulled over by the cops for driving
through a neighborhood.
And that is true and unassailable and everyone says,
yes, that's true,
but that is not where the useful work of the the term
privilege usually gets done.
When we see the work that the board privileged user does,
it's always in reasons to ignore people or shit on them.
Exactly.
To tell people to shut up and get out of here.
I feel like the best way to explain this analogy.
So the Mott is the defensible one.
The Bailey is the not defensible one.
Yes.
So like the Mott of like feminism is like,
we just want equality for women.
It's like everybody wants that.
Anyone who doesn't want that is obviously a shit bag.
But the movement may have been hijacked by people,
you know, who will the second you say like,
hey, look,
why are you shitting on trans women like terfs?
Like we talked about in that episode and they're like,
you know, we'll fuck them.
They're not real women or whatever,
whatever their bullshit arguments are.
And then you say, well,
your whole thing is nonsense.
They're like, no,
no,
no,
I'll be care about is equality for women.
And so I think,
you know,
people people will deploy that when attacked and then move back
to not using that steel version of the position and then just
attack with with,
you know,
bullshit situations.
Yeah.
Um,
in fact,
I just found more into males thing about that post about
that.
If you want me to read it quickly.
Okay.
Statements like men have more social power are very susceptible
to Mott and Bailey shell games.
Consider men are taller than women in colloquial usage.
This means statistically speaking,
the mean height of men is higher than the mean height of women.
Everyone knows you don't mean 100% of men are taller than 100%
of women because everyone is very aware of the actual fact
of the matter here and everyone is aware that everyone is
aware,
et cetera.
So there's a low risk of being misunderstood.
Now consider men have more social power true,
but boring.
The median man can get away with more BS than the median
woman.
Also,
the most powerful humans tend to be men.
Here's the false,
but highly inflammatory yet frequently asserted as truth
statement.
All men are more powerful than all women in some vague sense.
Yes,
even a poor disabled minority has more social power than
sale a pair Sarah Palin because he's a man somehow.
That's how privilege works.
Stop asking clarifying questions.
That reads a lot like Scott Alexander.
Yeah.
And so the true but boring meaning is true,
but boring.
That's the motte.
Most men would readily admit to it because it frankly doesn't
mean a whole lot.
Yeah,
I suppose in the history of the world,
that's how things have turned out.
The second insertion,
the Bailey is a falsehood.
Why defend a falsehood?
Why commit a falsehood in the first place?
Does the position that men should be more sensitive to the
historical roots of present day inequalities require that we
assert a falsehood?
I hope not.
And yeah, that's the thing.
The Bailey is like a falsehood that does a lot of work,
but isn't defensible.
And I find that like you switch back and forth between them
whenever you need to defend your statement.
Exactly.
And I don't I don't like that approach and it's it.
I might do it in real life.
I'm not sure if you ever see me doing it,
call me out on it because it'd be interesting to see what it
feels like.
But from like from the outside,
it looks to it feels dishonest.
Yeah.
And you know,
I know people in real life.
We should we heard the doorbell.
So bink.
Yeah, remember what you were saying just that in real life
when people discuss privilege,
they they are equipped with the proper definition,
but that's not how it's usually employed.
Yeah.
And so if you ask them to be like,
well, can you explain that they'll give you the academic
version,
but then they'll go right back to not using it that way.
Yeah.
In my experience and the switch is always on the sly between
the mod and the Bailey,
which is what makes it such an effective tactic.
Yeah.
So that said,
we are we did the listener feedback first.
We're jumping back to doing the actual episode now.
So check out the subreddit for that episode for some
engaging conversation.
But there were two other things that possibly we can engage
before we jump into Josh's thing.
Yeah, go nuts.
You're going to jump in here whenever you want.
I was going to say when we talked about the punching thing
and you asked,
why are we punching anything punching is very similar.
The first time I heard it and I think this is where
originated though,
I'm not sure it was a term used by comedians that you're
allowed to make fun of the president because
he's the fucking president.
You can't hurt the president.
He's he's up there.
He's got a lot of power and they they called that like
punching up at the president.
You can mock him all you want.
But if you're like mocking the disabled black person in
your audience,
that's a shit thing to do.
Don't do that.
That's he's below you in his station in life and that's why
you don't punch down,
which was the where I believe that term originated from
comedy.
It could be punching up is funny punching down as a dick
move also like roasting would be funny to do with people
who are on board or like,
you know,
even somebody who maybe isn't on board,
but is socially equipped to take the reputational hit from
being made fun of.
Yeah,
but you don't grab some random person and start sitting on
him like roast style.
Right.
And then then the term gets co-opted by the larger society
and now all of a sudden anyone who you think is above you
in social privilege or status or whatever you can rip on
for whatever reason.
I'm also not a big fan and I mentioned this to use this on
the I had seen this mentioned to use this on the subreddit.
If this is 50 years ago and DNA tests were readily available
and people,
you know,
we're we're say like an Italian person.
This is,
you know,
back when they were less equal in society in America.
If they were punching up at somebody and then oh,
it looks like three out of the four grandparents were non
Italian white or something.
Then like,
are they doing the wrong thing?
It depends if they're not really Italian,
but if they thought they were,
I just I feel like you can avoid a lot of that thinking by
just not being just period.
But again,
I recognize that I say that for my for my position.
So I if there's something there to be had,
there probably is,
but I just feel like you also don't make friends that way.
And you know,
I don't know.
I loved uses as comments.
They were very long and thoughtful,
but I didn't find my mind changed.
But I just find them engaging and they're nice way to
to analyze this.
If things weren't clear in the episode,
I thought they were very clear in those comments.
I think he has,
you have some or I think they have some very good points
and I like what they have to say.
I just this is why we engage,
you know,
everyone,
right?
Yeah,
because there there are many sides to the stories.
Finally,
Mourin de Miao also on the subreddit.
We got to find out how that name is pronounced.
I couldn't help but apply a handsonian lens while listening.
Can't imagine why.
Essentially,
every culture war topic,
almost any tough topic is something that doesn't matter.
More concretely,
you're weighing in on the issue on Facebook,
Twitter,
or in person accomplishes almost nothing.
At most,
you will slightly change one mind via several hours of effort.
Mostly,
it's about tribal signaling.
You're showing off your allegiance to the tribe.
The left literally uses the term ally and your quality as an
ally is judged on the basis of your unquestioning compliance.
Hard to get more tribal than that and the right has their
version as well of things that you are.
Oh God,
there was a great article about not politically correct,
patriotically correct was what it was called,
that there are certain things that you can't say when you're
on the right,
even if you think them because then all the people on your
side will be like,
are you one of those hippies,
liberal tards that,
yeah.
Because arguments are soldiers and or because yeah,
arguments are soldiers and conversation is war,
right?
Right.
So anything that you say that that is the least bit
this merging of your own side.
If you're like,
hey guys,
maybe slow down here for a second.
Then it's like,
oh my God,
he's fighting against us.
He's shooting our own soldiers in the back.
Get him.
And yeah,
it's I think I don't really know the way to approach that
without getting too into it other than like just to not
care,
but it assuming that you do care,
which a lot of people care about stuff.
Maybe I'm weird and that I don't then you know,
I don't know how I don't know what their money is for that.
Maybe being aware of the fact that like it's okay to say
your side can do better or that you know,
just being willing to talk with other people.
Yeah,
and not shit on them and realize that you don't have to
you don't have to convert everyone all the time.
Just talk with people and have a civil conversation.
They're humans too.
Even if they may be wrong,
being wrong is not a sin.
Relating to that,
I really enjoyed the reason episode on Sam Harris's podcast
with a Christian something.
I forget his last name.
Oh,
Paulini,
the X X Hitler Youth guy,
right Christopher Palloni was the author of the inheritance
cycle book series.
Who?
Oh,
I met him at DCC.
He's the nicest motherfucker you'll ever meet.
Oh, my God.
Not like the premises then.
No, no, no, no, no, no.
So Christopher on the on the Sam Harris podcast was a reformed
neo-Nazi and it was a very intense conversation.
It was a lot of fun.
He had been out for 20 years,
you know,
out of movement and he's been writing books against it and
helping other people escape that culture.
But man,
as far as you know,
reaching out and talking to people that was one of the themes
that he's trying to push and it was a very,
very good conversation.
Yeah.
Would you like to sound like you were going to jump in,
say something?
Kind of actually makes me think about some things I went
through with Tom people back home with the idea of conversation
and so,
but what I mentioned to you in a message about regarding
keeping to the conversation about last week's podcast.
You know,
privilege works well for consciousness raising of the
majority.
I don't know if you touched on this yet.
Not really not.
No,
but you don't get to punch sideways.
If you're going to,
you don't have to mention like you don't have,
you know,
a Jewish female punching,
you know,
Hispanic female punching
and an African American female punching,
you know,
a gay
Native American male.
This doesn't work.
It only it only functions well for bringing to the tension
of majority,
majoritarian
groups in society.
Their attention.
So this idea of conversation is it back to my little with
the Trump's thing or dealing people back in West Virginia
and in Rappalachia more generally
is getting past the idea that we have to have debates and
we have to win.
We have actually conversation and the point is to build
community to build community.
And so there's no point in winning if you lose the community
in the process and I like to cut what you said about
conversation being war.
It doesn't have to be.
I mean,
like it can be intense,
but it could also be just general bonding for clarification.
That's a popular quote from a less wrong blog post or from
a less long,
less wrong blog post series on politics of the mind killers
that that that particular lines repeated a lot.
So it's sort of tongue-in-cheek.
I didn't right.
I'm just in the one.
At least you mentioned it and I liked it.
And so that's I just I know I have a hard time with the way
we talk about privilege because I think what you were when I
came into in the middle of was what you were saying about
there's the academic use and then there's the application.
And we move back and forth between them without actually
having there's too much slippage,
slippage slippage slippage slippage slippage and that's
where it gets troublesome for me and talking to people all
the time about this issue like what you were you're bringing
up the last week also telling a white Appalachian male that
he's privileged is missing a lot of the intersectionality of
what that person goes through.
And what's also funny to me is when you get an intersectionality
is that I ran brought this stuff up really.
She talked about the greatest minorities the individual and
if you continue breaking down this identity politics pre
identity politics,
she had much as I'm not an Iran fan,
but when a woman hits something you got to you know, but
mainly yes that idea of following every different group you
could possibly fall into and the next thing in the day you're
going to be just the individual you are and this in my guess
my last thought on this would be to ever read the philosophy
I think it was by Nigel Nigel.
I don't have say his last name.
Probably not.
It's back in like the 70s code.
What's it like to be a bat?
That was Thomas Nagel.
Nagel.
Yeah.
Thank you.
Yeah.
You have read that one, right?
Yeah.
It's a short essay.
It's a very short but the main concept was at least my
takeaway years ago was it we'll never know what's like to be a
bat as a bat knows how it is to be a bat.
We only know as a human how a human would interpret it interpret
interpret interpret being a bat and I think that we should
also understand that as a person I will only understand a female
or an African American or a neighbor American or someone
who doesn't speak English as a primary language a person didn't
go to college only through my experience of trying to empathize
and so much of our arguments and so much of our communication
is based on the assumption that you will understand me completely.
You hold my assumptions and that's where I think the concept
of privilege the concept of conversation is war gets muddy.
So is it there's aren't true we don't we people do not understand
my assumptions.
They do not only know what I know because what I've read
and what I've seen and I can only touch the differences of
other people's lives you know through analogies and we know
how bad those can be for understanding the world.
Yeah.
So the reason we brought you here today we should that's actually
a good segue yeah reaching across to talk to people we should
introduce you because I don't think we did yet you are Joshua
I am Joshua you're okay going with Joshua on the podcast I am
okay.
You know anything that you want us to take out if you think about
a couple days later shoot one of us a message or probably
you're already in touch and you know there'll be no gotchas
no you said it sorry it's going out there's you know whatever
you want is good so if you're like you know what I regret
saying this thing or something or whatever.
Yeah do you want to just do like an intro yeah Josh with the
reason we're back and start the podcast and do the thing the
reason I wanted Joshua on the podcast is because of the past
you like the welcome to the Bayesian conspiracy thing.
We'll do that at the end.
Okay the reason we.
Oh right over the past few months I saw a number of posts on
Facebook of yours where you kind of went into what I want to
say went into deep cover went back into into Trump country
basically and really because you you originally were from
Alabama right no no not a West Virginia West Virginia which
is even more Trump country okay okay I was like the coal mine
it's more of the you give an example real quick is it all 55
counties went Trump okay and in the primaries all 55 counties
on the Democrat side went Bernie okay so there's no Hillary
love so it is completely Trump and what is so and yeah you
you got out I'm I believe and went to college somewhere got
out as in well the story was I want to be a musician so I went
to Atlanta first I so I went from a town with two traffic
lights and one was at a three-way because there's a gas
station okay so 1600 people at most at the time graduating
class of 69 kids and I take off for a town that has I don't
know let's say a thousand traffic lights at least six at
least six you know lanes going in on 85 and so my car was
rattling the entire time so point being it was a it was a
world change and I knew I want to be in a city I knew I need
to be where the action was because when I was in high
school middle high school I sound like you 10th or 11th
grade this guy came in actually was a friend of willing
well he actually owned Willie Nelson's ex-wife's guitar he
was a songwriter and I and I went I volunteered to help the
FFA you know do this big dinner so I could get to meet this
man what's FFA future Farmers of America okay and that is
something very big it where I'm from yeah it's having been
raised in Denver my whole life I would not have known those
actually you get hogs you know the school sponsors it you
raise them or not just hog the cattle beef whatever maybe and
you then you slaughter at the end of the year wow and you
have a big sell I mean there's also they tell you we adopt
highways we learn how to deal with you know general maintenance
of a farm but just agriculture on an on an industrial level
to there's classes in it so more of the point was this is it
this guy told me I waited around to the very end of this
dinner and the speech that he gave and I said I want to be
a songwriter I want to be a musician and he said well you
can't hunt tigers there are tigers to be found and that
meant you had to go to go to Nashville or LA or someplace
that was that people were writing songs and playing music
and stumbled across Atlanta had a music scene that you know
there to be a big fish in a small pond type of thing early
on so so with that and I did that for a year and that was
for the purpose of conversation I was there being a musician
going to music school and I found myself but you know but in
the evenings speaking with you know bassist and drummers from
all different levels in the program and the thing musicians
talk about more than anything else politics and religion
and so what I would have expected musicians to talk about
we talked about politics and religion and there's one dude
to talk about baseball but I mean I wasn't I'm a Mets fan
so I don't care about the Braves so with it I found myself
saying well but where I'm from or you know where I'm back
home we do this and one day the space players said well son
we ain't back home and with you know with an accent and so
on and it was really a moment like I want to have an opinion
so I went to college I dropped out of music school to go to get
a four-year degree so I could have an opinion because I felt
that I wasn't informed enough and so conversation led me to
realize how much I was missing in communicating with other
people and then I went with undergrad did did a bunch of
different you cross this whatever classes interested me took
that kind of but I gradually gradually with my degree in
economics and two minors just shy of majors with in English
and history and then I moved I went to DC worked in think tank
and then moved out here for grad school in economics nice
so that's how I'm out here that's and then and so when I went
back home yeah this was about a year after less than a year
10 months after Trump had been elected.
Yes actually it was November.
Okay, so bars wouldn't get inaugurated so I went back home
for seven weeks I was I was fortunate to be able to work
remotely and my grandmother is having some health issues and
so I went back home stayed with her and helped her get to the
hospital in Maryport but so I was like you know the one thing
I found with Trump was how much even I misunderstood the
people I grew up with.
I mean they're like these are my people I mean like I listen
to the same music still mean I still listen to country music
not stuff radio but like the 90s and so on and but we listen
to the metal music watching these guys on Facebook who are
metalheads are these huge Trump supporters and they're gun guys
now and I'm like what does happen you know where the women
who were the most spoken members of our class voted Trump like
what's going on things didn't line up in my mind and so and
I found myself getting very humble by the process I spent the
part of the five months after Trump's getting elected pretty
much just like you know laying around the house not reading
anything like I just like like give me a shelter but with
that's actually get that should give a prognosis of this so
I read quite a bit and so the year 2015 I read 67 books for
that year and then and then went up until Trump got elected
and I had 4546 read and then in the next five months I did
not complete a single book it was that kind of emotional
impact and so when I went back home basically I start
hashtagging like report from rural America or something of
that nature and just asking people not and it wasn't about
like I need to win an argument wasn't about understanding
the statistics are saying here look at these numbers or here
is an X textbook economics it was tell me your narrative
explain to me why you believe the way you believe and what
are your examples and you don't don't be antagonistic and I
think the one thing that when you first was actually an issue
over the me guarding me to movement and sexual harassment
in the workplace I think that was the first time you commented
okay me about about any of this okay if you want to hear a
bit about that I didn't see this exchange so is there anything
to dive into there that's not too far derailing no there's
no real exchange it was just more I posted I posted a thing
about some quote from a woman I spoke to and he mentioned
like we should talk when you get back to the thing and we
haven't talked yet not on this topic and so basically what
I found was talking to some of these women particularly who
work in the poultry plants or the cabinet factors around my
area was one thing it was mentioned like you know the
women are just as bad if not worse than the men it comes
to sexual harassment now in as in harassing other harassing
men or harassing other women both okay and it's actually
because my this woman actually said that's that's she's like
I don't she's very much like I don't care if you're lesbian
and that's how she preps it but when I put a ring on my
finger behave like the men and don't you don't start you
know trying to entice me to cheat on my husband the women
were not stopping when it came to that aspect of her co-workers
but when you bring in just the male were a new manager or
you bring another guy I mean I worked in these plants for two
summers and I kind of have to verify what she said is seems
pretty accurate I mean even when I worked in the hospital I
worked in a mental hospital in my undergrad the women were
very aggressive a new guy shows up and it's like I want that
one and they and they're now at lunch table like choosing
and they'll they're very physical they want they'll touch
you without quite without asking they will entice you and
even if you have a kid at home and a wife I mean there was
in my grandfather actually told me because I mentioned this
to him that this conversation I had and he's like he's like
yeah you know we actually had this new guy come in a manager
brought in from corporate and the vice president or okay but
not vice president but one of the upper management had to go
to lunchroom and tell all these women do not this man has
three kids at home he's here to work and so what the point is
even knowing the statistics and this is the point I'm trying
to see even knowing statistics about sexual harassment in
the workplace it doesn't line up with these people's reality
what they're seeing is something different and so what I learned
in this is I do can't win an army of statistics it's about
narrative it's about making people feel heard and it's about
making and the thing also is funny it's like not funny but
some none of them are advocating for it like no one said we
need to keep it the same no one says we need you know men and
women should be able to you know her sexual harass anyone in
a workplace it should be a sexual harassment free zone
no one's disagreeing with the same thing to me to move is
asking for but the fact that they make a narrative or the
movement has been a narrative about women only these women
are responding with I'm not a victim and I and also women
are just as bad when are we gonna take care of them and
that's what fascinated me was this hearing these kind of
stories.
I'm on a brief tangent you said something which which
surprised me in which I guess now I'm connecting the two
things that they might be related you said that the women
that you talked to said there was impossible to find any good
men anymore.
Okay, that's a that's a different time I say it's not
different but I count as a separate point because this
runs across the spectrum also voting.
I so I'm gonna do a shout out to my ex-wife she with the
Georgetown firm masters when I met her she both she and I
had a undergrad campus presence people knew who we were
because of our activities in different organizations she was
the president of Lambda she was the president of the Women's
Studies of Students Association.
So she had a very much a known record on campus as a very
liberal progressive minded person and here comes this boy
who at the time was identified as a libertarian and not say
maybe I don't identify myself but a people didn't find me as
that a guy who debated a guy who wrote columns in the in the
campus paper and so so she's actually back home in what in
Huntington, West Virginia where she has a urban farm for addiction
recovery help to deal with the opioid addiction and do with
the job training skills dealing with yoga and meditation
that even using was a Tai Chi using using a martial art of
some sort to help men and women both.
I mean she's working with the golden girls.
Is a home for abused women and so on neglected women.
So she's involved in that that's what she's helping with
and so here's that woman on the left and then I go to people
who I went to high school with home some of who are homeschooled
and very much a conservative you know you know the world needs
to be go back to the day of you know call the very much a
gotten guns kind of thing.
Well get very gotten guns but it's almost a new Luddite like
she doesn't have like she doesn't have Wi-Fi in her home
just have like she has electricity but there's no heat
it's done through wood.
Whoa.
Yeah.
The other dad's account to make I mean she's a wonderful human
and but the point is that she's on the she's on the on the
right that's what I'm getting to and so the thing I found was
the one on the right first said like where are they all the
men gone and I was like where have all the men gone and I
spawn because I'm going through my mind like well there's
masculinity and there's men and males.
There's a lot of male bodies and so going through that process
of what do you mean exactly and what she's meaning is men who
work men who provide men who are dominant in the way that's
appealing obviously not ones who you know batter and abuse
but there is a certain type of masculinity that she's attracted
to and then I go and I talk to people across spectrum from
some independence and people who don't vote at all to to
eventually over here the genie and I said that to her issue
to make sure I said Rachel said where have all the men gone
and she's like oh God that's so true where have they gone she
has no idea either and that's the point because I want to give
the point genie is in Cabell County which they actually if
you want to go on the Netflix they'll find a documentary
called heroin which the the E is in parentheses at the end
okay it's about the opioid addiction it's actually in
Huntington which is my and genie's undergrad hometown
and that's where we went to school in Marshall and you
follow these three women through that through this battle
and one is the fire chief and the things this point out is
that 11% of that county has been or are on opioids or heroin
the amount of money that's going to you know it's something
in the millions you know I think it's almost I think it's
six I think it's a hundred million dollars something goes
through that a year and so what's fascinating is that a lot
of these men aren't available because there are other things
going on there's a lack of education but there's also a
lack of motivation and and this leads into a whole other
topic that I find with other men is where the men I do talk
to back home who are like they're nervous they're scared
to talk to women they're scared of social interaction because
you might very well accidentally sexually harass someone
or something and then you're fucked for life well there's
no like it's it's not that you accidentally sexually harass
someone it's that you were joking you thought flirting
around or something and it turns out that you're a monster
well it's more yes so the point I think it goes back to
there's a book and I get I do not condone the books I've
never read it but I heard an interview and now like in PR
it's called manning up a woman wrote it about her like kids
and one thing she highlighted was in the 1950s men first
men aren't trained and understand other people on a personal
level the society has just failed to teach us interpersonal
relationships which they need to and we and we should advance
that cause but in the 1950s and 40s there was an expectation
this is what you do as a man women might not get what they
want but they knew what they're getting and as you go through
women liberation and women started becoming more individual
and so you have some women who are into Tantra and some are
into BDSM and you have others who are on the sexual level
but then you have others who they want to be stay home
moms and others who want to be corporate leaders and all
that's great and beautiful and you have entacious many
respects but they now put the situation where these men don't
know how to respond there's no protocol for them to go out
there and interact with these ladies and this is what more
what my friend was mentioning was that there are you know I
don't know if I can say hi because I don't know how to say
hi now and of course this is you know and I hear from you
know from my academic female friends that you know victim
hood who you just like honestly can we just acknowledge that
people just don't know how to interact and communicate it's
not for fear of being sexually harassing it's just for fear
of not knowing how to be turned down I these these posts
sometimes by a particular friend I'm thinking of that is like
this this guy came over to me and was trying to buy me a
drink or something and I'm just sitting here drinking my my
coffee and reading a book I'm like what stop creeping on me
asshole right I'm like okay that's fair she didn't want to be
bothered and then like a week or two later I also see the the
same friend saying no one ever asks me out or hits on me I am
so alone I'm like these two might be related people are afraid
to approach people now because they don't want to be the
creeper that everyone's like oh watch out for that guy he'll
come over and start annoying you when you don't want it oh
god I'm trying to get how I phrased it to her but mainly
the the the issue was how do I know that what I'm doing is
being perceived as flirtatious versus being perceived as
aggressive and she's like you won't know until she likes you
and that's what's that's the job and that's not worth the
risk oftentimes and that's into this gets you don't want to be
aggressive so much that you don't bother with the flirting
you don't you don't want to be the aggressive asshole no one
does so there's two thinking economically about this there's
actually two books come to mind one is right years ago called
more sex is safe for sex okay and it's really more of a
theoretical thought experiment but the idea is that if you
want safe for sex you let's take the let's say there's two
kind of guys there's the guy who he would like to have sex
and he's you know and he's you want to do it safe and wants
it want to be respectful and then here is this other dude
who just doesn't you want to use protection just want to go
out with anybody and will in night after night with different
people then the middle you have this other lady who she
prefer guy a but if guy a leaves the market she will give into
a guy be every so often and so we need to find ways to incentivize
guy a to enter the market and what we're finding or at least
what I'm seeing from talking to people back in rewapilacha and
even around here even is that there is not that incentive
everything is a disincentive for the good guy well they're
trying to disincentivize guy bees from being like guy bees
but it doesn't stop guy bees and it does stop guy a's from
even showing up and you see the pool in which you're surrounding
when you're getting although now I feel like the dick hole
who's like telling women what their problem is no and I don't
want to be in that position I although I do want to say do you
think this this idea that there are no good men left is what
leads to the aggressiveness that the you see in from some
of these women in workplaces like when you do see the one guy
who looks like you might be a good guy you got to jump and
get on him right yeah that makes sense I'm not sure exactly
how how strong that is I did not I did not speak to anyone
directly on that level to have but that makes sense to me though
when you're looking because you're always out looking in those
areas looking for stability I mean remember actually think
about the first episode maybe a man men like if you play your
cards right you know Peggy you know you'll be living out in
the you know the hills I couldn't even finish the first episode
because it was so fucking misogynistic I wanted to throw
up I think that's part of the theme of the show I know I know
it is but it that is the thing that is I hate so much I could
not swallow it and I had to stop watching so I'm gonna get
shut on because I couldn't finish the first episode because I
got bored so okay like some people like horror and other
people are like I know that this is what a horror movie is and
I can't watch it and that was the same kind of thing I couldn't
watch Matt and the sad thing is that's my favorite TV show
of all time it's well renowned I mean people that I'm close to
really liked it but it's just I couldn't get into it now I
feel like I'd have to catch up on a lot and they're long
episodes I'm lazy right I mean it's like getting cut up on
Highlander so like what you cut up on Highlander right yeah
I think there's you know you got all the movies to watch and
also you have to watch the seven seasons or six seasons of
the show and then there's a seven spin-off season and you got
to watch Highlander too which is widely regarded as the worst
movie ever but there's actually three or four different versions
of it you got to watch the first one no aliens don't watch the
first one was God awful but I I do like the renegade version
which is the director's cut and then also the producers came
over one and there's a couple things I disagree with but
nonetheless let's get off the movie but I will say Highlander
is probably one of the most influential things in the way
I have you being a man so like we might be be interested to
come back to that maybe some point we'll put a pin in that
yeah I've never seen any Highlander so sad or Sean Connery
in it okay yeah he's only on the set for seven days oh yeah he
was not in much of it but here's a highlander the movie or
Highlander the TV series oh okay but mainly the show has a lot
of aspects to understanding the right amount of temperament
that I find at least for me to want to exude so but with that
let's moving back to this point of what were you saying I don't
recall but I do have some things I want to touch on before
okay let's do that yeah okay like somewhere along the way we
can edit so yeah so these are some things that you have said
over the past couple months I think I just started jotting
down because I was like I'm gonna have my podcast so I want
to hit on hilarious yeah someone actually pays that much
attention to my Facebook other than either a green or
disagreeing openly on the on the form okay the so we're gonna
hit two facts and a statement that you made in quick succession
and then we can hit that talk about these one was that non
Hispanic white males make up 31% of the US population but count
for 70% of suicides in the late 90s the risk of a non college
white person dying in his or her early 50s was 30% less than
that of his or her black counterpart but by 2015 the
risk was 30% more than his or her black counterpart yeah and
then you said we live at a time where the left cannot fathom
how everyone does not like the things they like and value the
things they value and the right preemptively expects for the
things they like to be belittled trashed or look down on and
the things they value to be judged quaint old fashioned
backwards or stupid my friends on the left do not see how
they blindly fueled the rise of Trump let alone continue to
do so are these related things the facts and then this I'm
not they're likely yes because I'm not going to time together
right now but they were kind of spread out they were spread
out they weren't that wasn't one post no that was the series
of the issue of the facts is to understand that the type of
men that are from where I'm from to realize that we do have
issues with suicide we do have issues with depression and
you know we got we look at life expectancy and that's the
thing that two things with life expectancy actually just came
across this the other day what a couple of counties in my
state their life expectancy is decreased to the point where
it is now equal to Ethiopia and that's something that I don't
think that people back to the privilege a little bit is that
it's hard to tell someone who has a life expectancy of
Ethiopia who doesn't have a septic system because available
to them when these kids go to you know besides when they go to
school I mean there don't have the type of education to you
know not education but the opportunities to have a life
that's going to put them on a path to getting out of that
area they're stuck there forever and they know it and they
a lot of them know it and so what's so with that said is
more of I'm my frustration is that people don't understand
exactly what's going on so at least back to statistically
with rural America in the sense that there is a there is a
male like divide as in like you know there's a group of males
who are getting healthier and there's group of males who are
getting poor who are getting less healthy or getting poor
and the main thing is with the line about the white men living
in 30 like what was the years again in 19 in the late 1990s
yeah so night with tonight late 1990s I had a 30 30 you know
30% less chance of dying than their black counterpart at the
certain age of early 50s and court had a lot to do with drug
usage particularly with opioids is what's doing a lot of that
but to underscore that's not a tie lifting all boats and
that's where it's where a lot of people looking around like
who had issues where with not a form of action but like exactly
but the policies that kept telling like these people who
were disenfranchised and you're not watching yourself get
better you're watching yourself getting worse in response and
that breeds some sort of and there's and yeah and they there's
a sense of being left behind leaving feeling ignored and
that's something that's really fascinating when you talk to
people in like Medau County or Clay County some of the poor
counties in my state or even getting further south even that
they don't expect a politician to come through to save them
they don't expect a politician even know they exist.
They do feel they're on their own and so it's a little bit
more about this community thing is that the aspect of this
and going to the friend to talk about not knowing how to discuss
things with women is that he the other thing he said besides
not having a protocol for for communicating with with the
opposite sex is there's no place to get together anymore.
There's not a dance hall there's not a there's not a nice place
to have dinners or there's not a place to go to sports games
these things are falling to the side and what I'm finding
from talking to people is that a lot of the behavior a lot of
choices particularly when it comes to voting is that these
men who are working at a plant be it a deliveries or you be
poultry be it a cabinets be whatever the they're making
I mean there's you've got so many different plants and
operation in West Virginia we make van shoes we also make
you know cold and I was like cool well we do make cold we
dig it up but I was like the charcoal we make charcoal and
so as a host of things going on there but far as the job I
said a lot of these men and the concern comes from not just
about their own livelihood some of them have like made things
like you know to go on into other occupations a lot of niches
like I have a friend who's doing leather work now he got out
of out of work and he now had to figure out a thing to do so
he's doing he's selling leather bags and leather belts and out
of a shed and you have other people who are making knives
but your custom knives selling it and they're they're using
the internet to do a lot of this too so do they they say the
benefits in one way but they're concerned about their
community they can and when so when people talk even for me
when I heard the line like back with Trump was make America
Gregian I did go to that liberal response like back when
there was slavery and inequality and you had had had tariffs
and strong unions to the degree that you're actually you know
you know slowly economic growth in places you had little say
at the front is a part of the franchise but one of the parks
of that that tagline was that great again can mean whenever
they the listeners thinks it is right so it's fake it's
completely totally meant to you know let you may fill in the
blanks and that's the thing when I did go to that liberal
perspective I went with a lot of my where my academic friends
were going to these people they were they're not asking for
the racism back they're not asking for even the same type of
work a lot of times they're just asking for their communities
they're asking for a place that you could raise a kid without
worrying about drugs and some place where they can have just
a play not just the main street but a liveliness because my
hometown for example up until the 80s actually had a blue
grass festival small town but it was a place you had big blue
grass names come through my grandfather sat and talked to
many of them and though he doesn't play an instrument his
love of music is what got me into playing music you know
it's very much that like like how can I get you know how can
I encourage you Josh to pick up an instrument and he had all
these stories and he knew he knew what good music was but he
went but the point you had a community for there and then
when I was down you had he had a certain family that was
available they had the older generation that played music
and so I actually he took me out to play with them on Saturday
nights this at a guy's trailer he had a microphone set up the
whole kitchen was moved out to be a concert you know little
stage and they play traditional country music and so then on
the week on the on Sunday and then on their nephews and niece
would play bluegrass on Saturday and the car on Sunday on
Sunday and now there's nothing like that and there was
just one family that held that bluegrass together from the
80s where you had a community of rock bands playing into the
80s and then they then they left and then you had the bluegrass
that hang on hang on and then now that's gone and so and I
think it seems like part of what you were why I tied in that
other comment was that it's not just that there is no future
for them and life keeps getting worse and it seems that nobody
cares at all it's not just that nobody cares they don't expect
people to care is that the people when they do talk about them
denigrate them they're like get out of your shitty town stop
being a racist assholes you know yet with the times or you
deserve to be left behind like the you deserve to be shat on
thing is right and it's that's what the left is left can be
good at that is because they're very good at moralizing
things right and I mean so is the right at times right but
the moral majority but in this case talking about the particular
this particular group of people about you know what Hillary
was like yes she talked about helping bring in new jobs you
know and retraining but she forgot the identity aspect of
community you know a lot of that retraining would go to people
who don't have the same skill set you know so we're actually
like we bring in jobs but we're not going we're not going to
the same work hers filling those jobs and so a lot and there's
that big concern about brain drain and honestly if they
would you know southern Virginia northern Tennessee
western Virginia western Pennsylvania they're in Ohio now
there's kids if their kids are going to when they're going
to Cincinnati Columbus they're going they're moving to put
there and this is also why you know Ohio is booming in
respects they have a fair governor who is working well
enough to get with promoting R&D promoting job growth you
know retraining and being very active on that proton as a pro
job person a pro retraining person but giving opportunities
to people and the brain drain is not from rural Appalachia to
the big cities you know I'm a rare one going this far west
they're just going across the river because they want to be
close to home they want to be close to their families so
with your current econ degree is there and I realize this is
a tangent and we are getting off the Trump thing but is there
any hope for these small areas to be revitalized or is it
just an area of of America that is dying and everyone is
going to eventually have to move to cities like is there
there's really nothing in the modern economy that can be made
of value in those small areas now right and that's not no
not really transportation cost has gone down so dramatically
this is also why we back in the late 1800s early 1900s you
had to have your steel mills in the middle of the city like
Pittsburgh now we can we can put those outside of town so
we can we can put them 30 40 50 miles if not even two hours
away from their source I mean my hometown's a poultry coming
down we have two poultry plants middle of nowhere I mean
seriously I mean when I was a kid I had to go to a movie to go
to an actual theater to a mall meant to go to Maryland which
meant to drive an hour and 15 minutes and that was a big
thing to go to a good hospital was to go to Virginia and that
was another hour and 15 minutes we had we had a regional
hospital but deliver baby to go to a good hospital I got to
drive for an hour to it's just that it's only 20 miles away
for me there's a great distance when you're driving it's
you know 65 miles an hour to these places still not getting
there in time but keeping more the points that these no that's
actually not the problem a lot of the problem the thing
there's mindset issues my grandfather's mayor of my
hometown and understanding the importance of systems and
maybe get around to that later because I think in terms of
systems a lot because of economics but with it he my
town my county is like the second fastest current county
in the state and it has a lot to do with my hometown the other
Incorporate town in the in the county has a part-time officer
it's dying and it's dying because it was completely
agricultural and they refused to do anything other than
hospitality and they eventually lost the hospitality
no offense but if they're listening I don't think our
podcast is that kind of reach but with that said my my
hometown is industrial it's very cosmopolitan we have a lot
of influx of Hispanics from all over Latin America from the
Caribbean's and so it's actually very it's actually very
beautiful thing to look at that in retrospect so what I bring
it is that my grandfather is very thoughtful on what his
role as a mayor and also understanding the fact of the
charter for the town is set up in a way that mayor doesn't
have a lot of power it's it's the board there to counsel I
mean sorry it's the council but the people have voted in
consistently people in onto this council who are actually
barely educated with a lot of experience in management.
They you know so there's not a personal that on that board
that doesn't have a degree less sorry my grandfather has the
lowest amount of degrees on that board or the council excuse
me and that's that's what's funny though is he's still pro
Trump.
No my my grandfather he's he's very lukewarm okay but even
though your your town's doing very well it's not like they
were still very much in the the Trump no the town is yes but
my my grandfather is a little different breed okay but what
I'm getting to is this that thinking in terms of who's
actually running the town and keeping it on pace there and
and they're making decisions that are not anti-business but
not pro-business they're making decisions that how do we work
together as partnerships because the culture to plants
together both and make up 85% of the water usage the town
produces all the water for the region and they sell it they
sell it at cost to anyone outside of the town so the making
points here is that they're thinking systematically and so
when you get to when you get the Trump this is where a lot
people are not concerned so much with the Trump that the left
knows that's the other thing that's very important yeah so
we think in terms of systems but with how towns are run and
mice and so on but wanting to keep on keep on the Trump thing
a little bit more is that these people are they know Trump has
faults they know that he he tweets they're not oblivious
to it but that's not the Trump they're concerned with.
So this is what I really wanted to dive into and I haven't
really said anything in the last 35 minutes this I want to
understand the like for really quick my background is like
I have immediate members who voted Trump and they voted not
for the you know the reality TV show host the you know
proud I've ever read a book because I'm already so smart or
the you know the flagrant sexual offender they voted for the
guy that in one case you know wasn't Hillary Clinton no
matter what yeah that's a big thing and the other one was
just the well he's not a politician that's what makes
him good and people like that too because they they you know
at least in my in my small circle or my small window into
this world that you know what a politician has done for us
lately they fucked everything up for the last 50 years we
need to shake things up and that is that anything like the
common narrative in real Trump land or well there's some
appeal to the non-politician aspect but most of the but you
talked to these people and they understand that you need
people who know how things work they I think more of them
had better view of what his cabinet is going to look like
that the you know the lie lie things I hear about where I'm
from often excuse me something I hear a lot from where I'm
from is it's really about who you surround yourself with
that's the big thing and they assume Trump was gonna have
better people and honestly some of them are not bad people
I'm actually kind of lamenting McMaster's leaving keeping
a little bit more sane you know more a little more sanity
around but sometime there are some issues with with McMaster's
too so but with that said is that example of where they
weren't looking for Trump as being a being a non-politician
alone they were looking for someone who seemed to come
and talk to them and to not talk down them and this is the
third read that second part there about the belittling that
from that comment please we live at a time where the left
cannot fathom how everyone does not like the things they
like and value the things they value and the right preemptively
expects for the things they like to be belittled trashed or
look down on and the things they value to be judged quaint
old-fashioned backwards or stupid yeah and that's what I'm
the big thing that I find is that there's a not not the big
thing but a big thing is it the right is on defensive the
rural America is on defensive and so someone who was sticking
to the system regardless if it came from the system or not
that was really secondary it was just someone who was not
talking to down to them and Trump was not he much as he
looked like a goofball being you know in my state with a
you know coal miners cap on and it couldn't fit and try and
look like you suck shoveling out of the sandbox that to be
should have been an insult and that would have been an insult
if Hillary did it but Hillary would have come across as doing
it out of mockery Trump did it out of census of praise and
that's what these people really want to was not being talked
down to for once and this is the I want to the thing that also
is clever the end of clever some I hear a lot Trump is the end
of clever and not say the end of clever yeah so let's talk
and more economic point of view is all the money it's offshore
to have to come back to be taxed and look at you know Google
and Apple for example and they want to do a holiday and Trump's
a 10% tax rate on that 10% it's a nice brown number kind of
thing it's all it's easy to comprehend at least Paul Ryan
comes out a few weeks later and says no it should be actually
12.5 now you're like wait a second where did you get that
from five so 10 is easy to understand 12.5 is like what
math are you using and so the points they want to cut the
people are tired of being talked down to and lectured and
preach to and whatever else so with this at least from where
I'm from I don't think anyone likes any of that honestly
and this will get to another point about this how people
what led to this reactionary state of the right or role
America but the end of clever is very important the idea like
let's cut out a bunch of access even if it's going to be with
a you know an axe or chainsaw and then in eight years we will
then go back to rebuilding they just want to gut the red tape
they want to then they feel the net even if we know we know
economically a lot of the regulations are actually beneficial
you know for many things yes there are some costs but then
there's the cost also a lot of times pay for themselves
elsewhere so we can look at these studies but that's not the
narrative these will have and that's getting this narrative
there's like 500 things in my mind right now to go from that
direction but with narrative is horribly important to
understand these people and so the left often talks about
their voting is our own self interests you know we're the
ones wanting to give you good jobs we want you know we
government can give you these opportunities and redistribute
through the tax system give you benefits how can you vote
against your interest.
Well these people and not just an atalacha but also in
Louisiana for example there's sociologists out of California
she wrote a book called strangers in their own land
and what she really got to was it to them and it's very true
across rural America.
Businesses are not the enemy they are the things that give
you money to put food on the table for your kids they are
the saviors and every time you had a regulation you are making
it harder for you to get an income every time government
makes it makes you know regulation it makes it hard
for you to have an income and that's what they're seeing
that's a narrative even if we know Cole was actually you know
going down long before Obama came in the war on Cole is very
much you know is that a big narrative out there Oh God
yes I very much applaud my state on the fact that we have
have a lot of windmills we've taken a route to do some
version of alternative energy grant windmills are not
efficient in any meaningful sense I mean they are you
technology from like the like what the 1500s that's at best
I mean like we're going to say we'll give you if not back
in the 1100s so they're not exactly the future.
Now that gets until a different issue with with the
alternatives but but I'm glad we're doing that we're at least
showing some aspect of having those kind of jobs available
and a lot of engineering electrician jobs are created
with that but the war on Cole and that is a very big narrative
and realizing that states have identities when you're from
a state I never identify as a coal miner I don't think of coal
myself personally is an important thing I mean it's just a
fuel it's an energy but my grandmother is a coal miners
daughter you know my brother my well my uncles are coal
miners ones one was a president of a coal company worked his
way up from in high school digging coal to owning the
company in winning awards for environmental practices because
you can do that too but so taking into account that I did come
from a family of coal miners but it was back in my grandmother
generation it's with her siblings that I learned about
these going to family reunions with them I'm not exactly
someone who cares about the past and this is my grandfather's
influence he's a very non nostalgic person and so that's
what I learned from him was that that's a past energy you
know gasoline the question union should have been gone in
the seventies to him you know we need to be moving into other
technologies but he's also the guy who thinks that the worst
thing the government ever did was you know not fun NASA at
the same rate it was during the sixties so again he's your
grandfather sounds like a cool guy exactly what I was going
to say anything space program doesn't earn enough sounds to
that's a point in my book well it's he's a guy who thinks
okay so I think my grandfather would have been a great
economist actually because when I was in seventh grade there
was a we had to build a bridge in our little to have a little
river that goes through a little creek branch whatever
we want to call it and through the middle of town and so we
had we built a bridge in like 94 and then come 97 we had to
build a new one and they're like why this is a waste of money
and so I'm here in seventh grade and I'm in a group and this
one kid made a statement about how wasteful it was and my
grandfather picks me up from school and we're driving across
the bridge right after class and I said something about why
did we build this bridge and I and he's and I said we're talking
about this in class he said did your teacher say it and I was
like no it was you know so and so and he's like oh that's his
dad talking and he goes through and he explains to me why we
had to build the bridge why was based on an investment due
to the fact that we had it we were building a dyke because we
had a flood in 96 and thus we had to raise the bridge and going
through the steps and explaining there's multiple layers here
and so what happens a lot of times that people are stage one
thinkers it's what's directly in front of them and so he is
very good at trying to think out these extra things and so he
sees NASA as a huge investment in technology and it's because
it's a spin-off it's all about the spin-off and that's the same
with funding research and R&D I mean this is a man who yeah
we're we're starting to run low on time I was wondering you
posted I think this was recently about the populists just one
again in Italy they did they and and you seem to to you were
saying something along the lines of no one seems to realize
that this is a problem or what to do about it or well no
people realize it's a problem but you were saying along like
something along the lines of when will the left wake up and
yeah so I don't use the first the phrase wake up but much like
same Harris that's a horrible book title okay because he kind
of stole it from glimback and glimback stole it from every
other person before him hey they still from the Jehovah's
Witnesses yeah we had a magazine called awake I'm just I'm
not I don't know any of those other references but I think
the book waking up was about raising your consciousness
through meditation that sounds somewhat appropriate at least
I think waking up has been a common metaphor ever since
humans started waking up from sleep sure and all the kids
these days are saying woke like yeah yeah all the things you
gotta learn from you know like talk to your 14 year old
sister to figure out what they mean and I was old and I started
using Urban Dictionary so did she just say oh man now I'm
old so two things with with the populist one I grew with
now Ferguson on this one that Trump is not a fascist and the
left if they believe he is they have misdiagnosed what they're
up against he's a right-wing populist which you can be both
though a lot of fascist start out with populism well a lot of
fascist I mean the first fascist was a populist right well
the fascist appeals certain populist instincts but populists
you know least in the American sense and most of you know
European as well have been you know pretty much buried in
their own weight of bad policy you know when we look at back
to you because you the response to well it's not like populism
is known for good policy either no it's it's all for feel
goods and that's where the where the issue is like you know
there's no there should never be a concern well in the long
run about populism winning you don't think well I'm wishful
thinking because the reason I say that is that you know the
not Ferguson perspective is that there's no reason the long
run because the policies can't sustain themselves.
Well I guess what does winning look like just winning look
like a six million person genocide that seemed like a
populist like wasn't I mean I'm not a historian but I mean
that that looks like a if it wasn't it if it wasn't winning
it was certainly a hard price to the populists losing right
I mean ultimately sure Venezuela is going to go down in
flames or whatever but you don't want to get to well
Venezuela is a left-wing populism if we're going to
dinosaurs the populist and there's other aspects of
this way let's when you say in the long run populism can't
win and okay that's fair but you don't want to go through
the you don't want to go and down phase exactly no and this
is where the progressive saved us in the late eighteen
hundreds the progressive movement I look at the idea in the
U.S. back to systems the movements that created our
institutions and the systems in which we operate under are
basically two and that is the enlightenment that created us
as a country and in the basic institutional framework and
then the progressives who came in and built other institutions
to buttress the enlightenment and these are the lady to
eighteen hundred progressives late eighteen hundred progressive
and early you know nineteen hundred I know nothing about
them and they're basically the people who got water to the
towns they got they got crime down in the cities they were
the ones who made the Federal Reserve they're the you know
they were the ones who in did an income tax that we're able
to finance you know improvements in the economy we should
we should I would like to at some point if you have the
time like just discuss do an episode on the the progressive
history I I I'm a I'm a big fan of actually the radical
Republicans because the progressives were the Republicans
and actually that's when you look at Lincoln Lincoln wasn't
a conservative he might have been an opportunist at early
stages but he was you know he came out of the progressive
and you get in you look at the political writings leading up
to the Civil War and you see the multiple parties that fell
into the Republican Party they were pushing a pretty progressive
agenda at the time and then the Republicans that followed
after that were like the ones who were getting you know creating
the middle class and getting crime down and getting water
taking care for cities so what I'm getting to the story is
when you get so popular so the left needs to be a conscious
of they once won this battle by being progressive and the thing
that right now and I'm going to Sam Harris and I lost his name
is a what do you when British Muslim oh Majid Nawaz Majid
Majid yeah the regressive the the progressives and the
regressives have not been dealt with yet as far as parting
the two and this is where my issue with so every movement
needs to have to regulate itself and we can look at feminism
gets a bad name because of the few bad feminists will the
feminism has as a movement needs to extricate these people
from the movement and make a very hard line that's not
acceptable and the same thing with progressives progressives
need to realize regressives are in their fold and they need
to get you know move these people out of it and they and a
lot of them haven't yet come to that term yet eat surprisingly
to me I think it's but so with that the what I'm concerned
with is it the left doesn't seem to really acknowledge one
their solutions that they have they have in their back pocket
to use and they also understand how bad they're losing I don't
know the number as of right now due to the last special
elections but just last year if you looked at the state
houses and the in the governorships that were completely
controlled by Republicans or by Democrats only six to seven
states had complete control by Democrat to only Republicans
had like 1720 I do remember hearing a lot of that Democrats
were getting really concerned that all the local elections
and local boards were being taken by Republican candidates
and so the Republicans are they are saying something that
people are responding to and maybe not on the in certain
pockets throughout the country not like Northern Virginia
or out here and you know you know any metropolitan area but
the Democrats need to broaden their base as an understanding
that people are being hurt in other parts and they're not
being heard and so how do you respond to that and they have
the solutions if they look to the past and they think of how
to apply them to the present it's not it's of course it's
difficult but it's not you know they want to forfeit the field
and I think in many respects what we got with no offense
I don't know how anyone in the room voted but Bernie was
he's a left-wing populist he was he was not a progressive
and the fact that the media portrayed him as everyone knows
that he's a left-wing populist right Anderson Cooper doesn't
have figured this one out yet and you have seen in saying
that did hit that Hillary Bernie make Hillary more
progressive like no she made he made her more populist going
to a base on emotional level which he seems to be capable
of doing emotional attachment to people.
And I think I'm bashing Hillary I don't mean to I mean
like well so you so you think the way to combat this takeover
of populism is through more like traditional progressive.
Yeah I think because this is the people.
So what is the traditional progressive policies.
I think so but it's something to back it up a little bit from
a Roseanne was recently all reared you saw that.
No I mean I heard about it.
Yeah do you see how many people turned in for it.
No no idea 18 million people turned in to watch a sitcom.
Is that a lot.
Yes OK stay in age just sit down and watch it.
There's a nostalgia factor it is Roseanne and it's from the
late 80s early 90s mid 90s.
But the thing about the show that got my attention is that
the promotion so she's her and John Goodman went on Jimmy
Kimmel and Jimmy Kimmel is riding her a little bit like
when you're a liberal person what happened.
And she's like I didn't change you did.
You kept moving and the one thing that I don't think the
left has really grasped how much is that they have moved a
lot of they think I'm the same one I'm the one who has
always stood for the right thing and I've done the same
thing and this the right has gotten more radical the right
has moved to the right.
There's no distance but the left has moved to my grandfather
is a great example of someone who as a conservative you
know Democrat but is it but he's like I was he wasn't
conservative he voted for you for Kennedy he was that
ground a guy he's a Kennedy Democrat and then the party
kept moving away from him.
So I think that's a cliche at this point but I want people
to pay more attention to how much their their views are not
lined up with where everyone else is because we live in a
country where you have to you are in a society you have to
think about what's effective if all I if every position I
take is only for what makes me think is best doesn't mean
I'm in and I'm going to lose I'd rather you make some
compromises somewhere I'd rather have a guy in Pennsylvania
be a Democrat on and vote against Pelosi or whoever he
say is going to vote against but still have someone who has
an active voice and that's how the Democrats are going to
win at this point.
I have and having and having having up progress is
valence I'm so actually so the reason I said the idea of
progressive and more an old school progress that sounds
ridiculous to say that way but is the importance of these
are things people are comfortable with right now and
giving them more new and more new and more extreme is not
something that people are comfortable with and I a lot
of the back to the system aspect is that people tell a lot
about gerrymandering.
Yeah, I'm fine with gerrymandering and looking
talking to people back home.
There's actually no one really cares.
Oh, gerrymandering is not an issue really what because
the gerrymandering for most states where they have of
course there are politically you have situations where we
are disrupting this and that and we are but particularly
for a state like West Virginia you have three you have three
districts and they're broken up by industry.
The north is lumber and and and you know so type of work
down the south the south is coal and the middle is commerce
it's so it runs right through the center from the eastern
hand handle down through the capital so keep so keep it
and keep it in line with the idea that I don't want to get
into gerrymandering.
The thing is it more important and what people with these
people see that I talked to back in what in Appalachia is
the primary system and this is backed up about there's even
538 that talks about this you want a bigger bang for your
buck the primary system and so the back when my grandfather
is old enough to remember when to work for the state road
you had to be the of the party of who's in power huh?
Yeah, that sounds kind of weird right?
Yeah, but that's how it works back in the day and so moving
forward now that unions have lost their sway.
Yes, but the parties have lost theirs this starts with the
Democrats in 1968.
Yeah, I wanted to ask you about this because this is something
you posted which like I felt not personally attacked by but
you said that a policy is the purview of parties and so if
you are not part of a party you are removing your voice from
from the and like that I mean because I recently like stepped
away from the the feminist like group as a as a general
grouping and like and I have always been independent my
entire life even though I've voted Democrat in almost every
single election and position that I can think of I still I
don't like parties and you're saying that I am basically
disenfranchising myself by not being part of a party.
Absolutely.
Can you explain that like why is that policy because okay who
makes policy?
I lawmakers?
No.
No, well I guess think tanks.
So the people who you propose policy come through parties
they come through think tanks providing a federal level and
then of course you have some party issues that people pick
up on it at a state level but mainly you have to have people
doing the research giving you the numbers giving you the
arguments of the politician.
So the legislation is built out of what academic was our
what the academics that which is funneled through the think
tanks and so once you don't have a sway to it even if you
might be a middle of the road person you're not going to have
any impact if you're not a part of the system as in the system
is Democrat Republican you might have some libertarian people
who will use a Cato argument you know somewhere along the way
but yet so when you're when you're not a part of a party
you have you don't have a say in what policy happens and
what the bigger thing I find is but you don't have a middle
as middle has gotten larger.
You don't have to say even if you are part of a party it's all
the elites that make the decisions.
You can just vote for one party or the other and they both
suck but you don't you're not tempering the edges.
You are not signaling to the Republicans that they need to
stay moderate you know they don't need to go so culture war
about about who's who kneels at a football game and you don't
need to be on the left saying that you know yet you know
putting a cancer warning on Starbucks coffee is kind of
stupid California.
I mean like this is the extreme is I mean so what happens
is as the right moves to the right and the left moves to
the left and this is back to the party this election process
the primary process as we keep make move only the radicals
or the more devotees of the party in it because move further
to the right now the people who are more moderate in the
party move to the to the center as independent and there's
a nobleness to being the moderate and actually not
really not moderate but being independent back up so there's
a nobleness to being independent to one thing to be moderate
it's another thing to be independent and so by by
disfranchising yourself voluntarily by not being a party
you're not signaling to the people in power through your
vote and you're also not having any say if you're gonna be
in the policy realm about what what's what's concerned but
if the people in the power just expect my vote anyway no
they didn't know if this thing about I mean I was a
Barney Frank Barney Frank was asked this question but you
know what was the biggest fear we had like who did he he's
like my constituents I answered to know what my constituents
and this allude being a person who worked in DC and knows
quite a few politicians who would be there working to think
tanks is a misnomer to think that the parties you know are
the parties but the politicians are bought by corporate
interest or bought by lobbyists it's much more values and
because they're concerned by getting reelected and no matter
how much money someone gives you you're not going to get
elected if you vote for against what your constituents want
but how the hell do you do you tell your town hall
meetings if you're voting Democrat or voting Republican
hey I'm just and I'm just gonna go to town hall meetings
they're such a pain in the ass they are but you're vocalizing
your concern and this is where I think understand civics not
to you per se but the way of a voter has the ability to say
here's my values and here are my concerns think tanks offer
up well actually politicians go back to think tanks and
through whatever members of their staff and they say these
are the values and concerns I find reasons that there are
ways that can we can do this I think and tying back to what
Stephen and me were talking about before you showed up this
would be one of those great reasons to have a a homemaker
contract person like because I don't want to go to fucking
town hall meetings but maybe if someone else doesn't mind
it can handle that for the household like a representative
to go to town hall meetings for you right the family unit here
yeah we're gonna do a caucus thing but you have to make
your you have to share that you're a voting member and that
you're gonna that be valued in the primary and you got to
then get your voice your values and concerns and temper
people's views like like the issue like you know about trade
and which with China with it with doing tears I this is
something that much as I despise Trump for doing it and I
think it's it's why don't I know it's a faulty policy Obama
did it Bush did it this is not out of the norm for presidents
to do this and they do it because they have to appease the
voters Obama did it because of he had put he put tariffs on
cheap tires from China and in doing that we cost you know
you know I heard five thousand three billion dollars or
something is a nearly some don't like that but I was gonna
say that the but in doing thousands of jobs to a thousand
thousands because it was the myth to save a thousand tire
jobs in Ohio he made a campaign promise in this deal that
we actually track this politicians do keep the campaign
promises more times than not this is something that you know
go to political scientists and they do studies on this and
so keep it but maybe bring this back is that you know my
hometown is going to be affected by that by because China
was attempting a trade war you know response with tariffs on
chicken feet random thing but they didn't do it but now we
see a little more of this because it's a more aggressive
you know steals a bigger out you know export for China than
tires were I hate to do this but we did get started a little
late and I kind of have to wrap things up here in the next few
minutes I feel like we've got a round two in the works would
you be willing to come back for a second round talk about some
other things yeah well you totally I feel like it long
winded the big thing at the end is like trying to encapsulate
these things in conversation it's not about here's here's my
bullet point here's you know wrapping these things to people
in general and and what is their story with our neighbors and
so trying to exemplify that in some regards right now so yes
that'd be fine and you feel like we have learned quite a bit
more about you personally too but as you're saying with the
narratives and yeah and people well that's a big the big
thing is there's so many small and there's people yeah God
there's so many things I talk to people about back home not
just the me to movement not just about you know Trump is
specifically about his tweeting per se and about what where
of all the men gone there's a lot more that these people talk
about and a lot more about community that that matters to
these people and there's weird altruism and I hate the word
altruism but there is a sense of altruism out of it that people
are not concerned about what do you mean people they're not
so they can be doing well this is actually going to be a little
back to the side that the guys making knives out of their
you know and leatherwork these who are not concerned about
their jobs anymore they found the way to survive what they're
concerned about is their community and so and they're
concerned about the guy down the street they're concerned
about the kid they don't have a kid in high school anymore
but they're concerned about the kids in high school their
kid graduate and moved out but they're concerned about you
know the football team you know members but they're not about
keeping them giving their nose clean you're not tearing on
Christmas lights so yeah I had a English teacher in high
school who got got the book there and a bunch of the football
hairs did something ridiculous like that but great man really
they hit him hard and he grew up quickly and was it was one
of the best teachers I've ever had in high school but but
the point being the story is it is also understanding
narrative and people grow and there's redemption that's a
big thing also I find a lot people believe in redemption
and they believe in nuance much more in rural America than
people can credit for so much of what I come across by having
conversations you realize that no one really supports anything
100% any position you support sometimes it could be you know
55 and you see this with you know drug you know idea
legalization of marijuana and and that Bellaccia not a lot
people really support it on you know there's people who support
I'm saying there's a there's a good vocal side if you have
an argument you know the comparison with John K6 which
is it's hard to tell kids don't do drugs while legalizing
other drugs well and it's back to narrative how do you pitch
this right I think all the drugs should be legalized and
teach the kids what happens when you use them.
Well that's my grand my grandfather was very much about
else you bring brochures of like this is what happens or
here's a here's a photo of a guy we brought in it was on
meth last week.
I mean we already have legalized alcohol which is one of
the more dramatically bad for you drugs there's but there's
a cultural significance with this is another thing back to
narrative you know the there's a cultural significance of
alcohol that's different than a culture significance with
heroin sure with cocaine right and so but in terms of just
effects on your body alcohol is pretty high up there.
No I'm but again this is back to think again statistics and
reports do not convince people.
Okay.
So I'm sorry.
Go ahead.
Good.
What we're gonna say was not related.
One last thing I guess maybe this is not about role of
Appalachia but Tom in narrative.
So I write for a site called eraticus.co if you want to go
and check it out.
There's a lady who wrote on a piece about when she was in
Africa during the bull eye crisis and the important importance
of medical aid and medicine in general is not it was is
overshadowed.
I won't back that up.
So there's a Fargo back in the story mainly narrative matters
and so the lady wrote an article about being when she was
in Africa with a bull eye crisis and you have all the medical
treatment available and doctors and for trying to get people
vaccinated or kind of people quarantined and other different
things.
And without a narrative to tell people why they need to care
about the facts and they need to care about the medicine.
They need to care about their own health without care about
their children without a narrative medicine didn't work
and this is and so they had to develop this narrative structure
as aid workers to provide the medicine and the Ebola treatment
and available to these people and the same thing with with
Latin America.
Sorry with the rule of Appalachia nothing has hurt credibility
of doctors like the opioid crisis.
This is another thing of experts failing us doc you know we
have you have you know I have a friend who's in a band and we
really got to go.
Sorry.
All right go ahead quick.
All right friends in the band and they and it's a local band
and they are very popular around the area and they have a song
called white coat man is all about how doctors have hurt
you know the rural population.
So this is a very big you know thread right now is experts
are failing and not just in Africa but also in rural
Appalachia and that's been some narratives important to get
everyone out of this and so facts is not going to do it
statistics isn't its conversation and narrative.
I think the biggest takeaway for me is that the you know like
you said the the story that people have for themselves and
for what they're drives their beliefs is what really matters
it's not they're not they didn't hear a statistic on the news
and that's why they believe what they believe they have this
whole underpinning thing and there's this line that not you
know excuse me there's this line that every racist voted for
Trump but not every Trump voters are racist right they're not
all Tiki torch building Nazis don't be wrong none of the
Tiki none of the Tiki torch building Nazis voted for Clinton
but the overwhelming majority of Trump voters are just people
who you know aren't villains in most of our eyes you know but
they're but they're so they have they have stories that make
the sense for themselves and sort of the Nazis but the stories
that the the not Tiki torch people have have for their for
their motivations are the kinds of things that we can almost
all find common ground on you find something in the middle
and be like hey I care about that too I don't want I don't
want you dying of opioid addiction I don't want you
losing your job I don't want your society falling apart
that sort of stuff and you know there there's a huge collection
of everything that we all can care about together right and
I think I like humanizing people that we tend to disagree
with right it's really easy especially around the far left
to be like everyone over there is a monster and they're you
know they're they all you know wish they had swastika statute
on their foreheads or whatever it's like no they're they're
just people like you and me they just their their values
aligned a little differently from their from their narrative
history right yeah and that's the same few parts I mean of
course we like to look from the right to the left and everyone
to take your guns so yeah it's very much of you know my
sister and her husband voted for Trump and but they're not
homophobic they're not anti-Semitic they they voted
for not being talked down to and a lot of people they looked
at voting for Trump as an end of PC and censorship not about
his policies but not about his rhetoric itself but about
what Hillary responded to you know we're talking about what
Hillary represented and that's very similar to thinking
about what would you know Hillary presidency look like and
the counterfactual and I don't think a lot of people talk
about this you know Sam Harris had their first time yeah
and so yeah and so when you think about what the opportunity
is these people saw that and maybe you know just not being
talked down to for four years might help them and there's a
release valve of energy but you're lumping people that I
know who have the same values as I do who disagree on basic
like 25% here 5% you know 5% there and then they voted the
other way for someone who doesn't respect in my mind the
rule of law doesn't respect you know the norms of the office
or the dignity of the office doesn't have basic economics
on its side but with that said they're not bad people most
of the they agree on so many things back to the meeting
thing they agree there shouldn't be sexual harassment in the
workplace. They just don't see the narrative that is coming
across her Facebook thread or through the media as in the
one that reflects their reality. So there's a lot more
agreement but what we're doing is we are painting you know
people in one brush and say you're a Nazi or you are a
fascist and we're not actually getting much done from that.
Before we go is there anything you'd like to plug some place
people can hear your music or that website you're just talking
about.
So yes there's a website that I write for my buddy started
from DC called eraticus.co. It's just long form essays on
varying topics. There's a host of writers actually just open
up a poetry section recently. So we will link that on the
blog. Yeah. And that's besides that. No I haven't got my
flow cast up yet on YouTube. I'm working on it though.
Cool. Hopefully by the time you come back. Yeah. Thanks for
coming on man. I want to do this again if you're available.
