Well, we've now left our biblical ash heap and we're going to return to the European
world and embark on an examination of Stoicism, a philosophical school that arose in Greece
and proved to be very influential in Rome. We're going to see that Stoicism is going
to share some features with each of the positions that we've looked at so far. With the Gita,
it's going to share a concern for coming to terms with our own finitude in an infinite
cosmos, with a concern for controlling our emotions and for accepting the inevitability
of death. But we're going to see that the way that this works out in Stoicism is very
different from that that it does in the Hindu tradition. It's much more temporal, not nearly
so transcendental. We've surveyed three ancient traditions now, the Hindu, the Aristotelian
and the Hebraic. And as I've emphasized, they're very different from one another. The Hindu
tradition emphasizes individual duty, freedom from attachment, unity with the universe,
and the noability of reality. Aristotle, on the other hand, emphasized our social nature,
the importance of a cultivation of individual virtue in a moderate, happy life of rational
understanding and human activity. The Abrahamic tradition emphasized our limitations, our
inability to understand the universe, our inability to know the will of God, and our need for
a certain kind of humility. So now we turn to an important Hellenistic tradition. This
is a tradition that was so important in Greece and Rome, the Stoic tradition. And we're going
to see connections to the Gita, but also to Aristotle. And those, of course, are not at
all accidental, since Stoicism arises in the wake of Aristotelian philosophy. Let's begin
with a brief outline of the Stoic view of life before we enter into an analysis of a
few important Stoic texts. The Stoics argued that all of our knowledge is based in sense
perception. That's the foundation, things that we see, hear, smell, and so forth. But
that knowledge is always amplified by reasoning, that we go beyond what we ordinarily just see
by drawing inferences and by using logic. And the Stoics were extraordinarily prolific
in advancing logical theory. They argued that the universe is an entirely physical thing.
There's no second spiritual substance, but that it is fundamentally a rational place,
that it's comprehensible, and that the universe itself is intelligent, that it's a physical thing
with its own kind of intelligence. The Stoics argue that the universe is designed by a rational
deity called Zeus, and that Zeus permeates that universe. So in this sense, it's not
unlike the view of the Hebrew Bible, that the universe is designed by a deity and permeated
by it. It's a theistic system. And just like the Hebrew Bible, the Stoics thought that the deity
involved Zeus in this case is remarkably unconcerned with us. He doesn't really care about us.
But unlike the viewpoint that we saw in the book of Job, this deity is imminent. He's right here in
the universe, not transcended of it. And he's rational. He has reasons for what he does.
Reason, the Stoics argued, is always an exercise of freedom. And in that sense, we see a quick
link to the Gita. This need to be free in order to be rational. Only the deity, though, is completely
free and perfectly rational. Our rationality is a kind of fragment of that divine rationality.
And our freedom, hence, is limited. We're free only in so far as we're rational. Aside from
free rational acts, the universe is entirely causally determined. It's a mechanism. So the only
way that we can transcend a mechanistic life is through rational action. Stoics thought about us
that we, just like everything else in the universe, are physical objects. We're animals.
As physical animals, we're subject to emotions. And the Stoics emphasized that emotions come
upon us as passions. The word passion means something with respect to which we're passive.
They happen to us. They're intrusions from outside. And here we see the same idea in the Gita, right?
That when we experience perceptions or emotions, they come upon us and enslave us.
But, the Stoics thought, we can control our emotions if we exercise our reason and if we
get them under the control of reason. Emotions themselves are irrational. The onset of an emotion
is just like any other physical event. Just as when I put my hand in front of my eyes,
I'm caused to see it. When something happens and I'm caused to be angry, that's a straightforward
causal event. So, emotions come upon us. But, they still involve choice because we have a decision
to make when we experience an emotion. That is, do we accept that emotion and act on it? Or,
do we set that emotion aside and not act on it? Our highest nature is our reason. And so,
the thing that we ought to be doing if we're going to lead a life in harmony with that higher
nature, with that reason, is when we experience emotions to try to set them aside. And a great
deal of Stoicism is about gaining this freedom from emotions. Just as in the Gita, we try to
achieve a kind of freedom from being bound by sense perception. The Stoics also agreed with
Aristotle that we're first and foremost social animals and that is very much part of our nature
to live in societies and that many of our natural tendencies are determined by this. They emphasized
that we have control over our internal lives. Reason gives us that freedom. We have the choice
whether to act on an emotion or not. We have the choice about whether to perform a particular action
or not. But, because of the causal determination of the universe, the external world is outside of
our control. I can't control the weather, but I can control how I will react to the weather.
I might not be able to control whether something happens that will make me angry,
but I can control whether that anger will take possession of me and cause me to act. I can't
control what other people do, but I can control my reaction to that. They use the metaphor that
we actually introduced at the very beginning of this course of the Archer and the Target.
When I shoot the arrow at the target, I can control the release of the arrow.
I cannot control whether it hits the target. And so the Stoics urged, focus on the inward,
focus on what is within our control, and let go of what's outside of our control.
A happy life for the Stoics was a life that was lived in accordance with our nature,
not a life that fights with our nature. And so if we imagine what the components of that life are,
it's a life that is lived rationally because our nature is fundamentally rational.
It's a life that is lived undisturbed by our emotions, in which we fit into our social roles
and perform our social duties, another connection to the Gita, in which we are unconcerned
with the consequences of our actions and external events. Again, another echo of the Gita.
The Stoics sage then, the person leading this ideal life, is somebody who has natural concerns
with the reasonable aims. That is, with aims, with aims and objects that are within her control,
she attends to social responsibilities. She's not a hermit or a recluse,
but no attachments to the results of those activities. She withdraws from emotion and
especially reactions to emotions. That is, she has passions that come upon her,
but notice that other term, emotion, something that comes out of us uncontrollably,
right? The expression of anger as opposed to the anger. She notes her passions,
sets them aside and does not emote, does not allow these reactions to come outside.
She leads a life of reason and a life in human interaction, accepting her own finitude
and the inevitability of her death. This is the ideal Stoic life. So if we compare
Stoicism to the Gita and to Aristotle, we see that with Aristotle, we have an agreement that
our nature is fundamentally rational, fundamentally social, that our passions come from outside and
that our moral life requires a rational control of them. From Aristotle, we inherit the distinction
between external and internal goods, but there's a disagreement with Aristotle about the importance
of the external. Aristotle thought the external goods were essential to happiness. The Stoic
thinks they're irrelevant. With the Gita, we have the shared insight that the most important
aspect of our nature is that part of our nature that we share with the divine. For the Gita,
of course, that divinity was our ability to act or ability to perform as Vodhama and to be
in this kind of union with the cosmos. For the Stoics, it's this kind of rational union.
Our social roles are totally essential to the good life for the Stoics, as they are in the Gita,
and there's this profound agreement for the need to focus on the internal, not on the external,
even though the reasons may be very different. So now I'd like to begin to get more specific
about the Stoics, and we're going to focus on this great Stoic philosopher, Seneca. Seneca was a
Roman. He was born in Spain sometime around the turn of the millennium, about the same time that
Jesus was living. He was educated in Rome and wrote some important works in history. He was from an
upper-class family, and he became a Roman senator. He was a very respected orator. He was tutor to
the emperor Nero. Seneca was especially concerned in some of his writings with anger as an example
of an emotion. Anger is a great example for a Stoic, because it's outward-directed. We're angry at
somebody, and our behavior reflects that outward direction. But it comes upon us as a passion.
It seems to overtake us and then motivates action. It's fundamentally irrational,
Seneca argued, and it's very powerful. So Seneca focuses on anger as this kind of central case
of an emotion for analysis. Why? Well, of course, as we've seen, the rational control of the emotions
is central to leading a meaningful life if you're a Stoic, and anger is readily available, right?
That is, each of us has experienced it. We can follow the analysis. Moreover, to many of us,
anger seems okay. It seems reasonable to be angry in some cases. We talk about righteous anger or
justified anger. People talk about getting in touch with their anger. It's also hard to control.
And so the question you might ask is, well, what's wrong with anger? Seneca is going to tell us
there's a lot wrong with anger. First, he's going to argue that it's hideous, that it's just disgusting.
Second, that it's dangerous. It can cause real harm. Third, that it's unnatural. That might
strike you as surprising. But remember that for a Stoic, we are fundamentally rational,
and anger is irrational. That it's counterproductive, and it's overpowering. And so the question then
is, what can we do about it? We're going to see Seneca argue that what we can do is a number of
things. We can be skeptical about its causes. We can kind of suspend judgment about why we're
angry. We can be a bit more thick-skinned. We can be reflective about our responses to it.
We can rise above it. And this will give us the possibility of leading our meaningful life. That
is a moderate, happy, useful life. All of this requires self-control. And the great thing about
anger is that anger provides us with a great domain to practice self-control. Seneca writes,
anger is the most hideous and frenzied of all the emotions. The others have something quiet
and placid in them, whereas anger is all excitement and impulse, raving with a desire that is utterly
inhuman for instruments of pain and reparations in blood. It rushes on to the very spear points,
greedy for vengeance that draws down the avenger with it. So here Seneca is emphasizing the violence
of anger. He continues, anger is brief insanity, oblivious of decency, heedless of personal bonds,
obstinate, close to reasoning or advice, incapable of discerning fairness or truth.
It most resembles those ruins which crash in pieces over what they have crushed.
Now, Seneca here is emphasizing the violence of anger, but also the destructiveness of anger.
The fact that anger doesn't build anything, it doesn't provide benefits, it destroys what's
around us. He continues, now look at its consequences. No plague has cost the human race more. You
will see slaughter, poisoning, charge and sorted counter-charge, devastation of cities,
the ruin of whole nations. It's a really terrible thing. Moreover, Seneca argues that it's unnatural,
and of course this might take us as surprising, because we might think that it's natural to
become angry at some things. But listen to him on this. He asks, what is milder than man when he's
in his right mind? Man was begot for mutual assistance, anger for mutual destruction. The
one seeks to help, the other seeks to harm. Human life rests upon kindness and concord, bound
together not by terror, but by love reciprocated. So here we see Seneca resting on the premise
that we are basically social animals, that we're designed to live together in societies cooperatively,
and that anger hinders that. Anger makes that impossible. So anger runs against our nature,
because it makes it impossible for us to do what we naturally do, that is to live together.
Seneca also argues that anger is counterproductive. He writes, can it really be that anger,
although it's not natural, should be adopted because it is proved useful?
It rouses and spurs on the mind. Without it, courage can achieve nothing. So here,
Seneca is considering the possibility that even though anger is not natural, it might have its
uses. It gets up our energy, gets us to do noble deeds, and so forth. But he argues that it's not
true. For one thing he says, you don't need anger. What you need is reason to act effectively. If
somebody harms you and you want to redress that harm, you need to think carefully, and anger
undermines reason. Anger, he argues, is essentially free fall. You just lose control completely,
and you have no control over your actions. But if you want to act reasonably, you need control.
Emotion cannot be ruled by reason, he argues. Even moderate emotion is just a moderate harm.
So anger only inhibits our ability to act effectively. And anybody who thinks that
they can cultivate anger and then control it is only fooling themselves. You've got far greater
control over your actions, Seneca argues, when you eliminate the emotion and think in a cool
calculating way. As a consequence, Seneca argues, virtue doesn't require vice like anger to be
manifested. Vice undermines virtue, and passion like anger is always vicious. He emphasizes its
overpowering nature, and here he criticizes Aristotle. Aristotle says that some emotions,
if well used, serve as arms. That would be true, right, Seneca? If, like weapons of war,
they could be picked up and put down at will. But these arms, which Aristotle would give to
virtue, go to war by themselves. They possess us. They are not our possessions. So even if you thought
that anger was a useful thing and kind of motivating you, Seneca points out, it just takes over.
So the question then is, what does Seneca advise that we do about anger? What's the therapy for
anger? Well, for one thing he says, we can rise above it. We're often angry because we think
life is unfair. We think bad things have happened to us that we don't deserve, kind of like Job.
But Seneca points out, we often just expect too much of life and too much of others. Our enemies
are supposed to harm us, so we shouldn't be surprised when they do. We don't need to act in
anger. We can act in calculating redress. And our friends, even when they do bad things to us,
remember, they're fallible. People make mistakes. And it's not appropriate to be angry about mistakes.
Accidents happen. We should expect a certain amount of misfortune now and then,
because the world is a kind of thorny place. And once harm is done, Seneca points out,
anger does absolutely nothing to undo it. It's not as though the harm gets undone
by the actions of anger. He says, the cause of bad temper is the opinion that we have been wronged.
It should not readily be trusted. We should always give ourselves time.
Its passing reveals the truth. That is, the point is that oftentimes we find ourselves getting angry
because we've misinterpreted the behavior of others or the words of others.
We're angry for the wrong reason. Seneca points out that if there really are good reasons to punish
somebody, they'll stand the test of examination. And if the punishment will be much more effective,
if we meet it out calmly, if we meet it out in rage, we're going to punish people immoderately.
We might do inappropriate things, things that we later regret. And there's no way that we can
take the action to the words back once they are performed. Anybody who's a parent will recognize
the truth of this. And Seneca continues, Whenever our suspicions prove to be false,
we should reproach our readiness to believe. Such castigation will put us in the habit
of not readily believing things. We should be blind ourselves of the mistakes we make.
Seneca argues that we should be thick-skinned about these things. He says, Next in order comes this.
Do not be irritated by vulgar trivialities, a clumsy slave or lukewarm water to drink,
the couches a mess, or the table carelessly laid. To be provoked by such things is lunacy.
And you know what? If we think about it reflectively, we'll think that most of us will realize
that most of the things that provoke us to anger are that trivial. Seneca is pointing that out,
that much of our lives are led in the kind of arising of anger that's got no decent cause.
Think about road rage, for instance. And Seneca urges us to reflect on the causes of anger.
He says, We lose our tempers, either with what cannot possibly have done us wrong,
or with what can. The former includes objects without sensation, like the book which we throw
away because the script is too small. His eyes must have been like mine. How stupid it is to
be angry with them. They don't deserve our anger, nor can they feel it. So Seneca points out that
most often the objects of our anger are totally irrational. We can't control the external world,
and it's foolish to be angry when we fail to do so.
But the one thing we can control is our emotional reaction to these things.
The print might be small, but I don't need to become angry as a result.
And emotional reactions just cloud our reason and make it impossible to behave effectively,
like say to go out and buy some glasses. Let's Seneca. So now we'd like to turn to a second
Stoic philosopher, Epictetus, who offers some interesting contrasts with Seneca.
Whereas Seneca was a Roman aristocrat writing for other aristocrats, Epictetus was a Stoic slave
and spent most of his time teaching common people. So he's an unusual character in this tradition.
Seneca is more concerned with advice on how to live, but Epictetus was much more concerned
with how we should think about the nature of life, more reflective in the big picture, as you might
say. Together they provide us with a nice complete picture of Stoicism, reflections on the nature
of life, and recommendations regarding how to live it. Epictetus argued, as any good Stoic,
that we live our lives in interdependence, and that so much that happens to us is completely
out of our control because of our interdependence on others and on the inanimate world around us.
For that reason, he argued, we should accept the external conditions we find,
as well as the harms they cause us with good cheer. Good cheer because we're rational social beings
who have control over our lives and who can think and do philosophy.
And we should dedicate ourselves to the collectivities, to the holes of which we're parts.
Think again here about Aristotle, think also about the Gita. We should behave rationally
for the good of the whole, refraining from harming anyone, because again it's our nature
to live with others and to benefit others. And we should always bear in mind our finitude,
always bear in mind the inevitability of our death, and so take time seriously and ourselves
less seriously. I want to focus on that for a minute. I want to focus on that.
The focus on the inevitability of death is one that's very central to Stoic thinking.
This emphasis on our finitude, which for some might strike us as depressing. And of course,
we saw Job claiming that one of the problems with the world is that our lives are so short
and that so little opportunity is there. The Stoics argued that there's nothing wrong with
finitude. Finitude is the nature of human life, the nature of reality, and that if we focus on
finitude and take it seriously, we will understand how to give our lives more meaning because
they're finite, because they're limited. That death isn't a tragedy, death is an inevitability,
and that awareness of our death makes our lives more rich. So now let's look at some of
Epictetus' own remarks. Talking about external things and internal phenomena and what we can
control, he asks, so what is meant by saying that some externals are according to nature
and some contrary to nature? This is said to be so as if we were independent entities.
So Seneca's going to reject that idea that some external things are natural and some unnatural.
For I'd say, he writes, that it is affording to nature for the foot to be clean. But if you take
it as a foot and not as an independent entity, it will be incumbent on it to walk in the mud
and to step on thorns. Otherwise, it will no longer be a foot. So you might think he says
that the nature of a foot is to be clean because, you know, you take a look at your foot after a
bath and it's clean. But if you treat that as natural for the foot, then you won't be able
to walk on it because to be a foot is to be the kind of thing that you'll walk on through mud
and thorns and so forth. He draws the analogy now. This is what it is like in our case too.
If you look at yourself as an independent entity, it will be according to nature for you to live
to old age, to be wealthy, to be healthy, because of course we would like to be those things.
But if you look at yourself as a human being and part of some whole, then for the sake of that
whole, it is incumbent on you to get sick at one point and another to take a dangerous voyage,
to die prematurely. So Epictetus points out that if we pay attention to the big picture,
our nature is to suffer the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune. What happened to Job is
perfectly natural not because of who we are as individuals, but because of the whole universe
in which we find ourselves. Epictetus emphasizes our social roles as we're humans,
we're rational, unlike animals. We can understand the nature of life and live in harmony with it.
We're citizens, parts of communities. We have responsibilities. We're family members with
intergenerational relationships, with duties to our parents and to our children. So our
identities, like the identity of the foot, are determined by these contexts, universal contexts,
national contexts, civic contexts, filial contexts, contexts of friendship. And what we do in these
contexts is what gives our lives meaning, not irrational all emotions, not self-interested
action that takes us to be detached or independent. And then we need to look at what Epictetus says
about death, because now we get this real sense of the finitude. And I'm going to read you one of
my very favorite passages from all of Stoic philosophy. Epictetus writes,
go ahead and tell me that harvesting the grain is ill-omend. After all, it indicates the destruction
of the grain, but not the destruction of the cosmos. So let's pause for a moment. He's saying,
you know, you might think that harvesting the grain is like, you know, it's the end of summer,
fall's coming, winter's coming, it sounds ill-omend, that grain which grew so beautifully is now
going to be dead on the threshing floor. But he says it's not the destruction of the cosmos.
Staying in the same season, he writes, tell me that the falling of leaves is ill-omend,
or the conversion of grapes into raisins. For all of these are the changes of what was there
previously into something different. It isn't a destruction, but just an ordinary management.
So the point here, again, focusing on all of these autumnal metaphors. Epictetus is thinking
about death here. He's thinking about the autumn of life. When we think about the grain being
harvested, the falling of the leaves, the conversion of grapes into raisins, he's saying in each of
these cases, we don't have the end of something. We don't have destruction. We don't have something
to lament. We don't have something ill-omend. We just have an orderly management. And he continues,
and that is all that a journey abroad is, just a small change. This is what death is,
somewhat larger change from what now exists, not to what doesn't exist, but merely to what
doesn't exist right now. So again, when we die, we change from our current state to a different
state. The world around us and our communities changes from a state in which we're present
to a somewhat different state, to a state that doesn't exist right now, not to something that
doesn't exist. Epictetus asks, so will I no longer exist? No, you won't. Death really is death. It's
final, but there will be something else. After all, you weren't born when you wanted to be born.
Isn't that a wonderful, wonderful way to conclude?
Epictetus says, just as we don't get to choose the moment of our birth and the transition from
non-existence to existence wasn't something that we chose, when we die, we don't get to choose
the moment of our death. And the transition from our existence to our non-existence might not
be something that we choose. But it's not a great cosmic drama. People have been born. People have
died for millennia. The world changes. Part of the change is our coming into being. Another part
is our going out of being. There's nothing worse about that than there is about harvesting the
grain or turning the grapes into raisins. This is essential stuff to Stoic philosophy.
So where do we find ourselves now? We've been discussing the beginnings of Stoic moral theory
with Seneca and Epictetus. And we've encountered an account of the good life as a moderate life,
as a reasonable life, as a self-controlled life, as a rational life, a life that's lived in harmony
with the universe and that's lived in harmony with our society. And importantly, a life that is
lived with full recognition and acceptance of our own finitude and the inevitability of death.
In our next lecture, we're going to turn to what I consider the real flowering of Stoic philosophy,
when it gets joined with the closely related Epicurean tradition that we'll also examine
in the next lecture in the writings of the great Roman Emperor Marcus Aurelius. I hope you'll join me for that discussion.
