One respect in which Gandhi and Nietzsche are fellow travelers, and even fellow travelers
with Tolstoy, is their insistence that a meaningful life is a supernormal life, the life of an
extraordinary individual, and their admonition that we try to be that extraordinary individual.
But there's a difference. Nietzsche, after all, despite all of his advocacy of this
extraordinary life, lived his life as a university professor, a professor of classical
philology. That's actually a pretty conventional life when you come right down to it. I know from
Tolstoy, for all of his critique of normality in the death of Ivan Ilyich, and that wonderful
remark that Ilyich's life was normal and therefore terrible, led the life of a Russian aristocrat.
He was critical of the regime, but he led an aristocratic life right up until the end.
Gandhi, on the other hand, really did lead a supernormal life and led that life in public
as an example to everybody else, as an example of the proposition that a supernormal life
is not only desirable, but possible. Gandhi's life was supernormal in a number of respects.
He was aesthetic in the extreme. Gandhi deprived himself of all of the kinds of appurtenances
that anybody who was politically powerful or potentially wealthy could possibly have.
At the time of his death, what did he own? A pair of eyeglasses, an extra-doty, that
is, the kind of loincloth that he wore, a shawl, and a fountain pen. That was it. And
Gandhi, through most of his life, lived in extreme self-imposed poverty and also lived
a life of sexual chastity for most of his life.
Gandhi was devotional in the extreme. He was an extraordinarily religious man who devoted
an inordinate amount of time to prayer and to reflection and to religious retreat and
urged that his followers did so as well. Gandhi was courageous in the extreme. As we
said, Satchagraha was far from passive resistance. Satchagraha involved unarmed resistance committed
to doing no harm to one's adversary and a willingness to sustain injury, harm, and deprivation
at the hands of one's adversary in public as a representational act.
Many of Gandhi's friends and associates died in the course of the independence movement
as a result of Satchagraha. Gandhi himself was imprisoned many times and often engaged
in very public hunger strikes, sometimes hunger striking so close to death that he was very
nearly dead. So Gandhi was somebody whose physical courage and personal courage were
well beyond the norm. Gandhi was also focused, single-pointedly focused in the extreme. Once
he began the quest for British evacuation from India, the quest for Indian independence,
that is all Gandhi did. That's all he devoted his life to. And you can honestly say he devoted
every waking moment to that cause. Gandhi's life was also lived in public, in the extreme.
Gandhi was committed to the idea that every aspect of his life was representational. Every
aspect of his life was a potential lesson to others in the possibility of leading a
human life. And so Gandhi kept nothing private and allowed intrusion into every aspect of
his life. Gandhi's life, of course, was also nonviolent in the extreme. Gandhi very carefully
ensured that even though his actions often posed risks to himself and to those who voluntarily
undertook Satchagraha, they never imposed risks, harms or violence on anybody who did
not themselves voluntarily undertake those risks. And in particular, he never permitted
violent resistance to violence. Finally, we might say, Gandhi's life was successful
in the extreme. Who would have thought that one small lawyer using completely nonviolent
means with very limited financial resources could mobilize an extraordinarily diverse,
largely impoverished, largely illiterate, and extraordinarily disunified subcontinent
in rebellion against what was then the most powerful military force in the world and a
colonial power that had ruled India for hundreds of years. But Gandhi did that. It was an extraordinary
success and Gandhi took it to be the kind of success which demonstrated the value and
the meaning of leading a truly super-ordinary life. So Gandhi took his own example to be
a call to all of us to this kind of super-normality. Gandhi concurred or would have concurred with
Nietzsche in calling a normal life an ordinary life, the life of Ivan Ilyich. Or indeed,
I must say, my life or most of the lives of people that I know, he would call these
the lives of the herd animal, a life that is lived unreflectively, a life that does not
involve a truly authentic commitment to the kind of life that we in fact lead. It doesn't
involve a harmony of our deepest held values with the life that we in fact conduct. Normality
for Gandhi, this kind of ordinary life, involves an acceptance of heteronomy, that is a rejection
of autonomy. Gandhi thinks that in our ordinary life we all too often, unreflectively, accept
the social norms into which we're socialized, the political structures that we participate
in, the economic order in which we buy, sell, work and so forth, and in general, an entire
set of values that we imbibe from those around us, and that we simply accept those and absorb
those without thinking about them. It's an absence of responsibility. It's the abdication
of the responsibility for authenticity to which Nietzsche calls us. And it involves
exactly the kind of willingness to succumb to the tyranny of the majority that Mill so
eloquently criticized, and it's actually from Mill that Gandhi gets many of these ideas.
So we see a reflection of this kind of criticism of heteronomy by Mill and Nietzsche in Gandhi,
but Gandhi goes much deeper. Because as far as Gandhi is concerned, it's not only that
our ordinary life is this kind of inauthentic abdication, but he argues that it is fundamentally
and always an acquiescence to and a complicity in violence and oppression. Why is that so?
Because for Gandhi, industrial capitalism and the existence of militaries are themselves
inherently violent and inherently oppressive. They always involve the concentration of wealth
in a few hands, and the way that that is achieved, he argued, was the impoverishment of many.
They require maintaining labor markets with disproportionately low wages for working people.
They involve the concentration of political power in the hands of those who have the money
to buy elections, to buy politicians, to advertise their views. And because so much of our lives
are structured by capitalism and industrialism, most of our lives involve buying into these
as legitimate institutions. Every time we go shopping, every time we buy a brand name
object, every time we take a job selling our labor to a capitalist, or every time we hire
somebody else to work for us, Gandhi thought, we are simply accepting as legitimate, accepting
as morally OK, accepting as appropriate, a system that is inherently violent. And Gandhi
thinks that if we were to reflect on this, if we were to sit and actually ask ourselves
the question, do we think that it's morally appropriate for social institutions to be
set up like that, with enormous disparities of wealth, social systems in which some people
are fabulously wealthy and others are homeless, in which some people have access to top quality
medical care and others die for the lack of medicine, societies in which some children
are able to get education and others have to work as child laborers. Do we think that's
how society ought to be organized? Gandhi argues none of us would say that that's morally
appropriate. None of us would endorse that. Nonetheless, in virtue of actively participating
in societies just like that, we give aid and comfort to them, we accept them. And for that
reason, Gandhi thought, we live lives of deeply bad faith, lives in which we are alienated
from our own values and cannot take responsibility for our own actions. That's why Gandhi thinks
ordinary life is meaningless life. This isn't just Tolstoy, this is Tolstoy ratcheted way
up. Gandhi thinks that the only thing that possibly legitimates this life for us, the
only thing to which we can appeal in saying that our lives are OK, is its commonness,
the fact that everybody else acts like that. But that's not legitimation, that's just
description of a herd, a description of our membership in a society in which everybody
is so alienated and so heteronymous. The other possible justification, Gandhi thinks, might
be a serious defensive liberalism of the kind that, say, John Stuart Mill would advance or
the Kant would advance. But Gandhi thinks that's insufficient. It's insufficient because
it ignores all the harms. Mill, of course, is very famous for the harm principle. But
the harm principle, Gandhi thinks, is violated by liberalism itself because liberalism is
set up to make harm possible. So as far as Gandhi is concerned, liberalism is deeply
ironic. Liberalism argues for freedom, but the freedom that it guarantees and makes
possible for a few is bought at the cost of enslavement for many. And that's the only
way Gandhi thinks that that kind of freedom can be made possible in modernity.
So what is wrong, then, with normality as far as Gandhi is concerned? Several things.
The first one, of course, is heteronomy as opposed to autonomy. Normality gives others
authority over our own actions and over our own ideology. We don't act and we don't
think in ways that we reflectively endorse, but rather in ways that others describe as
acceptable and prescribe to us. Normality involves an abdication of responsibility.
Not only do we act in this way, but we are able to convince ourselves that we're not
responsible for it, that it's just the only way that we could possibly live. And Gandhi
emphasizes that we can take responsibility for these actions. We can act in resistance
instead of acting in complicity. Normality involves a rejection of truth, the rejection
of jnana yoga, of the yoga of knowledge, because it requires us to accept an ideology that
we know in our heart of hearts Gandhi thinks to be false. And it involves a deprecation
of our own value and of our own autonomy. And we know that at bottom we are autonomous,
but our lives can be valuable. And the only way that we can participate in this kind of
meaningless normality is to deny that, and that is to deny the truth. Normality, Gandhi
argues is inauthentic. We end up living a lie. We can't possibly endorse the lives we
voluntarily lead. And normality is harmful. It violates this giant idea of ahimsa, of
non-harming, because leading a normal life in the context of a political, social, economical
and ideological system that is built on the legitimation of harm to some for the benefit
of others involves leading a life that itself causes harm even if we don't intend to do
it directly. And of course, finally, in virtue of all of these features and in virtue of
a life that is in the end, a life that's just a cog in a vast industrialist machine, the
life becomes totally meaningless. There's no way, Gandhi thinks, to look at the values
we endorse, the lives we lead, and to see those lives as worth living at all. Gandhi
thinks that liberalism is in the end deeply ironic. And the liberalism that he has in
mind is the liberalism that we examined in our own discussion of modernity. It's the
liberalism of Kant and Mill. It's the idea that individuals are free, and that individuals
are caused, that individuals are called to gain knowledge, to be autonomous, to think
reflectively, to think for themselves, to choose ideas. This is the fundamental idea
of liberal democracy, and we saw that kind of valorization of pluralism, that valorization
of free speech, both in Kant and in Mill. Why is it ironic then? It's ironic, Gandhi
thinks, because in the end, when you start with these principles, and you follow them
out inevitably, and you look at what people do with them, they end up enabling capitalism.
They end up legitimizing capitalism. They end up enabling people to be free, not only
to say what they want, but to invest as they want, to sell their labor as they want, to
accumulate wealth as they want, to spend their wealth as they want. And this, of course,
moves from small petty capitalism quickly through efficiency to large-scale industrialism,
and large-scale industrialism necessarily concentrates wealth and concentrates power
in the hands of a few, that concentration of wealth and power thereby subverts democracy,
because these people end up being able to control the very mechanisms of democratic
polity, such as elections, such as parliaments and so forth. Moreover, it encourages consumerism.
It encourages the idea that we are made happy, and that the key to our happiness is the acquisition
of goods, goods that are packaged and sold to us through advertising and ideology as
the things we need, as the things that will make us happy, whether they're Barbie dolls
or new cars or new computers or new cellular telephones or whatever. None of these are
things that we thought we needed before they were manufactured, before they were advertised,
and before they were sold to us. But Gandhi points out it's the nature of consumer capitalism
and the nature of advertising to create these artificial senses of need. When we create
these artificial senses of need, we create more demand, we then reinforce industrialism,
we reinforce exploitation, we reinforce the division of classes and the concentration
of wealth, and we cause more and more harm all the time. So even a purchase in a shop
becomes an instance of a causing of harm and a reduction, not a creation of freedom.
So the central idea here is that what looks like the freedom to choose among many different
products, the freedom to lead our lives as consumers in liberty, becomes a freedom bought
at the expense of the reduction of freedom in many others. All of these facts end up
reducing the net amount of freedom. They end up reducing our knowledge as well, though.
They reduce our knowledge because Gandhi argued that capitalism and political oppression are
built on advertising and propaganda. And advertising and propaganda are there to convince us that
values that we don't actually endorse are actually okay, the products we don't actually
need are in fact necessary, and so forth. And so what they do is to gradually replace
what could be knowledge with confusion, with ignorance, and they decrease our autonomy
in the end because we end up being driven by these messages that come to us from outside
rather than from our own moral compass. This is why Gandhi thinks that liberalism is in
fact ironic. It's in fact a disguised attack on freedom, a disguised attack on liberty,
a disguised attack on knowledge, a disguised attack on human dignity, and that's what it
claims to value. Liberalism claims to be the way to make sense of human dignity, the way
to encourage freedom, the way to encourage the development of knowledge and progress,
but Gandhi argues in fact it subverts all of that. And the critique that Gandhi's advanced
is based entirely in the Bhagavad Gita. Because remember, the Gita saw the idea of Svadharma,
of one's own duty, as tied to caste or as we put it to one's social role. And that
makes a certain kind of sense. It generates an individual duty, and the Gita argued that
it's that recognition of that kind of duty and leading life in harmony with that kind
of duty that gives meaning to our lives. And then we saw the superstructure of the yogas
that make that possible. Gandhi takes up that idea of Svadharma, but he socializes it. It's
not a particular social role, not my role as a teacher or your role as a doctor or a
lawyer or a carpenter or a dentist that determines our Svadharma, but rather Gandhi argued that
our very membership in society gives us Svadharma, the same Svadharma, a collective Svadharma,
a Svadharma of service. That is the duty to bring our societies in line with the values
that we endorse on reflection. That's really important. Gandhi argues that if you reflect
carefully and to think about what you really regard as most important, it will be that people
are generally happy, that there is less oppression, that there's a reasonably equitable distribution
of the world's goods, that knowledge flourishes and so forth. And Gandhi thinks that our contemporary
societies are organized in ways that are a little all of that. What that does is it gives you a duty,
a Svadharma, an individual obligation as a member of the collective to bring your society in line
with those values, even though it's difficult, even though it's challenging.
Social goals, collective goals, hence for Gandhi, engender individual goals and individual duties.
And it's really interesting, by the way, to reflect on how Martin Luther King,
who was so deeply influenced by Mohandas Gandhi, takes all of this up in arguing that every individual
in a nation has a personal obligation, a personal duty, to devote his or her life
to the alleviation of repression, the alleviation of oppression, and the achievement of equality
and dignity for all human beings. So this isn't an idea that flourished only in India,
it's an idea that came from India to the United States as well in Martin Luther King's work.
Now, this kind of articulation of Sacha Graha, of grasping and insistence on the truth, and of
Svaraj gaining control of oneself and achieving genuine independence in a political and social
sense, truly are supernormal demands on us. Why? Well, in a practical sense, they each impose
on each of us that if the demand of Sacha Graha and the demand on Svaraj to engage
in constant social and political activity and struggle, they each impose this universal
responsibility on us, because we constantly find ourselves living in social orders and living in
circumstances in which we know that things are happening that are wrong, that we don't endorse,
and in which our collective social order does not match our deepest values. We take Gandhi
seriously, that recognition imposes a demand to struggle to alleviate that situation. That means
they impose a universal responsibility on each of us to lead a public life committed to these
goals. That's the practical demand. There's also a kind of ethical spiritual demand that takes us
well beyond the normal, because they impose an obligation on us to achieve this deep kind of
self-mastery, Svaraj, a mastery of ourselves, and that mastery for Gandhi is very much the
mastery of the Bhagavad Gita. It's the mastery of the yoga of action, the yoga of knowledge,
and the yoga of devotion. We are called upon to be deeply self-reflective, to be aware of our
motivations, to be aware of our values, to be aware of what they call upon us to do,
and we're called upon to a life of relentless non-violence, a life in which whenever we see
an action that could be harmful to others, to refrain from doing it, and to actively engage to
minimize harm. And we are also called upon to a life of enormous value consistency, to refining
our values so that they form a system and to living our lives in harmony with them.
The life of a Satyagrahi, of somebody who embraces Satyagraha in Gandhi's sense, is a hard life.
It's a life that rejects material acquisition. Gandhi was fond of saying that the world has
enough for everyone's need, but it doesn't contain enough for anyone's greed. The idea that he had
there was very simple, that most of us have a lot more stuff than we need, and having more than you
need is made optional by liberalism. But as far as Gandhi is concerned, it's morally impermissible,
and if we reflect deeply, we'll see that it is morally impermissible and undermines the
meaning of our lives. Why is that? Because if we think reflectively, we see that our material
acquisition is always at the expense of the possession of even enough to get by for some very
poor people. I have to look at the fact that my assets, if divided among the world's hungry,
could do a lot of good. By not dividing them, I'm actually accomplishing harm. Gandhi calls me
to relinquish possessions in order to do less harm. The Satyagrahi is called upon
to devote his or her life not only to this kind of austerity, but also to the act of alleviation
and suffering of those who are suffering, and to the act of achievement of political liberation
for those who aren't liberated. Because if we recognize harm and we recognize that it's wrong,
that imposes a constant obligation, not an obligation to write a cheque to our favorite
political party once a year, or even a lot of cheques to our favorite charities, but an obligation
to organize our lives in a way that achieves those goals. The Satyagrahi leads a collective life,
because it's a life that doesn't conduce to individual privacy. Individual privacy and
individuality require this kind of acquisition and fencing off that makes that life impossible.
It's a sober life. You don't have time to party if you actually recognize that there's a lot of
suffering in the world, and it is your constant duty to alleviate it. So it's a very sober life.
You might even say an almost monastic life, and Gandhi led most of his life in exactly that way.
So what we might say, oh, this is an impossible demand. Gandhi's life always stands there as the
demonstration that hard yes, impossible no. And finally, the Satyagrahi's life is a life of local
production and of local consumption, a life in which we really attempt to minimize our participation
in and reliance on global economic structures that we recognize to be necessarily harm producing.
It's a challenging life indeed. But here's the thing. This is what makes Gandhi so radical.
Remember, I said he was even more radical in nature. The thing is that for Gandhi,
this is the only kind of meaningful life possible. Anything less is utterly meaningless.
For one thing, the kind of self-discipline that is involved in this life, the kind of yoga where
to use the terminology of the Bhagavad Gita, is what gives us freedom from our unreflective
submission to mass values. Remember the Gita, the idea that yoga or discipline isn't somehow
antithetical to freedom, but it's through discipline that we attain freedom. And Gandhi sees our
actual loss of freedom in contemporary society as our factual submission and slavery to mass values.
That's our current source of unfreedom that is pervasive. The only way he sees
that we can become free from that is through this kind of discipline, through this kind of yoga
of Svaraj and Sajagraha. For another thing, this kind of life is meaningful and only this
kind of life is meaningful because only this kind of life really reflects truth as we know it.
That is, Gandhi thinks, if you reflect, you will see that the world is as he describes it.
And that kind of truth entails this kind of obligation. So this is the only kind of life,
Gandhi thinks, that you can reflectively endorse, that you can live authentically.
Remember what Nietzsche says in terms of a call of conscience.
Are you working in your life or are you turning away or are you just a spectator?
Gandhi's arguing that if you don't dedicate yourself in this deep and profound way
to social action, to Sajagraha, to Ahimsa, then you are at best turning away or living as a
spectator to your own life and not showing up for work. Moreover, this is a life, Gandhi argues,
that through service, through service to others, through discipline and yoga, connects us to something
broader than ourselves. It connects us to our fellow human beings. It connects us to our social
orders. It connects us to the only genuine sources of values. And so it's a life that actually serves
the values that we all endorse. Genuine freedom, not the artificial freedom of liberalism. Genuine
equity, not the equality of opportunity to strive to oppress others, but genuine equity in social
relations and real nonviolence. This is the kind of life Gandhi argues that serves the highest good.
And if we lead this kind of life, Gandhi argues, we can generate a civilization
that we could all legitimately endorse, the kind of civilization of which we would actually choose
to be a part. Remember how thinkers as disparate as Aristotle, Confucius and Nietzsche all argued
that what we really want to do is to live in a society whose values we endorse, the kind of
society we would want to achieve. So this might sound crazy. It might sound highly demanding,
but it's not as crazy as it seems because it seems to emerge organically out of values that we all
endorse. And as I said, Gandhi's life demonstrates that it's in fact possible. So while Gandhi's life
sounds inspiring but unrealistic, Gandhi argued that it's in fact very realistic and lived a life
dedicated to demonstrating that fact. If you think it's unrealistic, you have to ask yourself why.
Because the life that we've been looking at, this view of what a meaningful life is,
draws very heavily on many of the ideas that we have actually been exploring in this course.
Ideas ancient and ideas modern, and many of the ones that are most compelling. Ideas of community,
ideas of the value of freedom, of individual obligation, of the relationship between discipline
and meaningfulness, and of the connection of our own lives to lives of others into something
transcendent in order to give them meaning. But Gandhi really does challenge us to rethink
many of our deepest values and commitments. He forces us to really rethink the value of
modernity and the plausibility of the promise of liberal democracy. And he forces us to think
about a very profound question. Can we, without this kind of commitment to moral seriousness,
without this kind of seriousness of purpose, without this kind of dedication, can our lives
have any value at all? Gandhi argues that without this level of commitment, there's no point at all.
And it's hard to argue with that. It's a very challenging call to conscience.
This might be the most challenging text to our ordinary lives that we've encountered,
at least the most challenging since Job. Take it seriously. Think about it. And in our next lecture,
we're going to move from India, move from Europe to a very different tradition,
that of Native American reflection on the value of life. I look forward to seeing you in that lecture.
