Welcome back.
We're now going to spend two lectures examining the extraordinary view of the meaning of life
that's articulated by a great contemporary leader, both in spiritual, political, philosophical
affairs, the 14th Dalai Lama of Tibet, Tenzin Gyatso.
Let me begin by talking a little bit about who the Dalai Lama is so that we can contextualize
some of the views that we're going to be considering.
The present Dalai Lama, and by the way, the term Dalai Lama isn't a name, of course.
It's a title.
It's a title that was conferred by Mongol rulers of Tibet in the 15th century.
And present Dalai Lama is the 14th in that lineage.
It's a reincarnate lineage, which is something that Western people sometimes find a little
bit surprising, so that the 14th Dalai Lama is regarded as the rebirth of the 13th Dalai
Lama, who in turn is the rebirth of the 12th Dalai Lama, and so on and so forth.
When a Dalai Lama dies, after a few years, a search party is sent out to try to find
the rebirth of the next Dalai Lama.
In the case of the present Dalai Lama, that search party found him in a very tiny village
called Taksar in far northeastern Tibet, in the region known as Amdo, along the Chinese
border.
So when he was discovered, age four, he and his family were brought to Lhasa, to the capital
of Tibet, where he received a traditional Tibetan monastic education that culminates
in the Tibetan philosophical PhD or Geshe degree.
So he wasn't raised by his family, but rather was raised as a monk in a monastery from
the age of four.
Now this Dalai Lama lived in times that were very challenging, very difficult, and have
been very difficult for Tibet.
After the victory by the People's Liberation Army in China, and the establishment of communist
rule in China, the Chinese government set its sights upon the conquest of Tibet, with
the view that Tibet had traditionally been part of China from a Chinese perspective,
even though from a Tibetan perspective, Tibet was an independent country.
And so shortly after the success of the Communist Revolution, Mao's troops moved on Tibet and
very quickly, in 1949, overran a good deal of Tibet.
At age 14, the Dalai Lama, still being educated, still being groomed for leadership, was forced
to confront the invasion of Tibet, a very sparsely populated and poor and unarmed country,
by a very large, well-equipped and experienced army.
The Tibetan people insisted that he assume leadership at that point.
So at the age of 14, he became head of state and head of government of a country at war.
That's a significant challenge in life.
He led Tibet for about 10 years under Chinese occupation, trying to negotiate an accommodation
in which Tibet would retain its cultural autonomy, its traditional cultural practices and its
religious practices under this new Chinese sovereignty.
But Chinese rule tightened and became more and more oppressive, more and more difficult
for Tibetans.
And finally, in 1959, in March of 1959, there was a large spontaneous uprising of Tibetans
against Chinese rule.
It was hopeless because the Tibetans were certainly outgunned and outnumbered at that
point by armed Chinese.
But the suppression of the uprising was aggressive, quick and brutal, and in fact also included
an artillery attack on the residents of the Dalai Lama.
So the Dalai Lama, realizing that his own life was in danger as part of the consequences
of this uprising, fled Tibet in disguise and went into exile in India.
Many of his followers in Tibet, hundreds of thousands, followed him into exile in India
and have continued to escape from occupied Tibet right up to the present day.
Right now there's a large Tibetan exile community of a few hundred thousand, primarily in India
but also centered in Himalayan countries like Nepal and Bhutan.
But now also a broad Tibetan exile in the West, including a substantial Tibetan community
in the United States and in Europe.
The Dalai Lama, after arriving in India, very quickly moved to establish a Tibetan exile
leadership structure.
And so a government in exile was established, headquartered right now in the tiny Himalayan
town of Dharmesala, north of Delhi.
The Tibetan government established schools very quickly, and some of the best schools
in India in fact, but also monastic institutions, monastic universities, some quasi-secular
universities, a Tibetan medical care system, and all of the appurtenances of a government
in exile.
The Dalai Lama leads this government in exile as head of state, but it's important to note
that he is not now head of government of the Tibetan government in exile.
Because a few years ago, the Dalai Lama insisted that Tibetans, if they were going to live
in a modern world, needed a democratic government.
And so led a commission that drafted a Tibetan constitution, which paradoxically against
the will of most Tibetans imposed democracy on them.
So the Tibetan government now, under the head of state leadership of the Dalai Lama, has
a parliamentary form of government with an independent head of government.
Nonetheless, for Tibetans all around the world, and indeed for Buddhists all around the world,
the Dalai Lama is recognized as an important spiritual leader, somebody to whom people
return for advice, for comment, and for leadership.
The present Dalai Lama is not only informed by Buddhism.
He's somebody who has always been a champion of a Gandhian account of non-violence.
He was very enamored by the work of Mohandas Gandhi, the work that we've examined, the
idea of satchagraha, of insistence upon the truth, and of a refusal of violence.
Especially in recognition of his emphasis on democracy, and his emphasis on spreading
democracy through the world, and on his Gandhian non-violence, he was awarded the Nobel Peace
Prize to recognize this tremendous contribution to non-violent struggle, not only for Tibetan
independence, but his advocacy of non-violent struggle worldwide, and his advocacy of the
spread of democracy and fundamental human rights.
The Dalai Lama isn't only a Buddhist, and isn't only a Gandhian.
These of course are both, as we've seen, kind of anti-modern tendencies.
He's also a passionate modernist, and herein lies some of the complexity and the tension
in the views that we're going to be examining in this lecture and the next.
The Dalai Lama has been deeply engaged with science, primarily physics, but also cognitive
science, psychology, linguistics, computer science, and neuroscience.
He says that he finds extraordinarily important, and he has argued repeatedly that as far as
he is concerned, it's the deliverances of science that tell us about the fundamental
nature of reality, not classical religious scriptures.
And he's repeatedly said that we're Buddhism, or when any religion conflicts with science,
we should go with science, not with the deliverances of religion.
He's also, by the way, been committed to the view that the fundamental tenets of Buddhism,
though not all tenets of Buddhism, are absolutely consistent with modern science, and can be
enriched and informed by science, and that science can in turn be enriched and informed by Buddhism.
The Dalai Lama is also a superb scholar, a superb scholar of classical Buddhism,
with a very eloquent PhD, but also somebody who has studied Western philosophy very seriously,
and understands Western philosophy, Western religion very seriously, including Christianity,
who has written commentaries on Christian scriptures, and is somebody who is also a
real scholar, as I pointed out, of science.
He's the author of over 50 books, some of these are popular books on Buddhism,
some are deeply scholarly analyses of classical Buddhist texts,
and some are important philosophical texts articulating his own modernist synthesis
of Buddhism, democratic theory, and science.
The text that I'm going to be primarily relying on in my presentation of the Dalai Lama's views
is his book called Ethics for a New Millennium, published in the year 2000.
So let's begin with a broad outline of the Dalai Lama's view of the meaning of life.
The first thing to say is that while it is deeply inflected by Buddhism, and motivated by
Buddhist ideas, and incorporates Buddhist ideas, he intends it and articulates it
primarily as a modern secular vision, a vision that's going to have its roots in ideas of individual
liberty, in freedom of speech, in freedom of religion, and in democratic theory,
and in the importance of science as a source of knowledge.
He's going to follow Aristotle in important ways in seeing the highest good and the universal goal
of human life to be happiness, and to be even understanding happiness as a broad kind of human
flourishing. So we're going to see an Aristotelian emphasis in the Dalai Lama.
But the Buddhist underpinnings are going to guarantee that this happiness must and can only
be attained in the context of a thoroughgoing interdependence, of a recognition of the fact
that all human beings and all phenomena are interdependent in all of the ways that Buddhism
respects. And for the Dalai Lama, that is predominantly and preeminently,
going to include social interdependence. Like any Buddhist, he's going to see
the problem of life as constituted by suffering, and the task of a meaningful life as the solution
of the problem of suffering. But the Dalai Lama is going to follow Gandhi, and as we might also
say lame, dear, though he's never read lame, dear, in seeing the main sources of modern suffering
in consumer capitalism and industrialism. And he's going to see the sources of happiness
as lying very much in purposive action in a human context, in acting in ways that we can
reflectively endorse. He'll argue that acting in that way requires the cultivation of a deep
sense of compassion, very much in the sense articulated by Shantideva. We'll be talking
about most of the positive end of this in our next lecture. But in the present lecture,
we're going to really talk about the analysis of the nature of reality that underlies the Dalai
Lama's characterization of the meaningful life. So we're going to begin by talking about his view
about the goal of human life. And as we're going to see, that's going to be happiness. And it's
going to be his argument for that. Will remind us a great deal of Aristotle's function argument.
And we'll also see that he's got a very Aristotelian view of happiness spelled out as a very broad
sense of human flourishing. Though for the Dalai Lama, the account of happiness is not going to
be one set out in terms of virtue, but rather in terms of satisfaction, in terms of lack of conflict,
in terms of material goods. So it's going to be a much more modern, much for more familiar
sense of happiness. And we'll then be talking about the components of happiness in a modern life.
Let's talk a bit about happiness right now. When the Dalai Lama argues that happiness is the highest
good and the goal of human life, his argument, very much as I suggested, follows Aristotle.
He doesn't follow Aristotle in talking about the function of a human being. But remember these two
fundamental criteria Aristotle establishes for something being the highest good or the
goal of life. One is finality and the other is self-sufficiency. That the goal of human life,
the highest good, should be something for which other things are done, but is something which
is never done for the sake of other things. That's the sense of finality. It's the thing we seek
for its own sake, not for the sake of others. Moreover, it should be self-sufficient. We should
be able to say if we ask is a life good, we should be able to say it's got that quality,
and not then ask what else it has. It should of itself make a life worth living.
And the Dalai Lama argues that it's happiness that does that. All of us seek happiness. We don't
seek happiness in order to become wealthy. We don't seek happiness in order to become powerful.
We don't seek happiness in order to get anything else. Rather, we seek other things for happiness.
Moreover, if I ask whether somebody led a good life and I say she was happy, that's enough. I don't
then ask, but was she also rich? Was she also powerful? But if I say she was rich, we might ask,
yes, but was she happy? She was powerful. Yes, but was she happy? So for that reason,
the Dalai Lama argues with Aristotle, happiness is really what we seek. And that happiness
must be understood as happiness in a complete life. What are the components of happiness in a
modern life? Well, there are things that we all want, the Dalai Lama thinks. Food, adequate food,
adequate shelter, personal physical security, decent education, which makes everything else
possible, access to health care, the opportunity for free expression of ideas, political ideas,
religious ideas, artistic ideas. We want to live in a democratic order. We would like to have freedom
of religion. We would like to have a certain amount of leisure and not be working all of our days.
We would like to have possibilities for the kind of personal development that we find important.
Now, why does the Dalai Lama think that these are the central components for happiness? Well,
the reason is simple. And it also follows a kind of Aristotelian framework. He argues that in fact,
we see that these are universal goals. People all over the world are willing to fight and strive for
democracy, not to fight in order to become oppressed. People are willing to fight and strive
to attain freedom of religion. They don't fight and strive to have their freedom restricted.
They might fight and strive to restrict other people's freedom, but nobody asks that their
own freedom be restricted. That is something that shows that we each really value freedom,
at least in our own case. People will strive for leisure. They don't strive to lead lives of
unending toil and so forth. And so it's the universality of these goals, the fact that
everybody sees these as components of happiness that the Dalai Lama thinks shows us that these
really are the components of human happiness and that this universality demonstrates the
importance of these goals in our human life. Now, of course, this is a Buddhist account of
the nature of reality. And so it's going to be rooted in the fundamental Buddhist doctrine
of dependent origination. This is an idea that we reviewed a number of lectures ago
in our lecture on the ideas of the Buddha, but it's worth reviewing them right now.
When we say that things are dependently originated or that things are all interdependent,
we mean that in three very important senses. And the Dalai Lama emphasizes each of these
in his analysis of the nature of human life. The first of those is causal dependence.
Everything occurs as a consequence of innumerable causes and conditions and every event produces
innumerable effects. Things don't just happen. Things aren't isolated. And that means that our
own actions, our own states of mind, our own emotional states and our own values also arise
dependent on innumerable causes and conditions. And everything that we do has innumerable effects.
That gives us both reason to examine the world around us and to care about changing it,
to care about making it the kind of world that will give rise to the kinds of lives we want.
But it also forces us to attend to the actions we perform because they are going to have
ripples of effects beyond the possibility of our imagination. That's the first dimension of
interdependence. Second dimension of interdependence is part-whole interdependence. Parts depend upon
the holes of which they are parts for their nature and for their functioning. Holes in turn
depend upon their parts in order to exist. The example that we used a while ago was the example
of an automobile. We only have a fully functioning automobile in dependence upon all of its parts,
its brakes, its steering wheel, its engine, its exhaust system and so forth. But to be an exhaust
system, to be a steering wheel, to be an engine, to be a brake is to play a particular role in
that hole, not simply to be shaped in a certain way, to be made out of a certain material or to
have a certain label. In human affairs, of course, this is extraordinarily important.
Human institutions, universities, hospitals, communities, armies, corporations, social clubs
depend upon their parts, depend upon their members for their functioning. But in order to be a member
of a chess club, in order to be secretary of a town meeting, in order to be a chief of medicine at
a particular hospital, in order to be professor at a university, those parts depend for their
identity and for their functioning on the holes. So we can no more reduce complex human affairs
to their parts than we can reduce parts to the holes. There's a mutual interdependence here.
And finally, the third form of interdependence is dependence on conceptual imputation,
that is dependence of things for their identity, for their function on the way in which we think
about them, the way in which we name them, the way in which we reason about them. This is extraordinarily
important in human affairs. So for instance, if I imagine one of those green frog skins
that lame dear talked about, a dollar bill, and I ask, what is it that makes that dollar bill
worth one dollar? It's not something in the value of the paper. I could analyze the paper as long
as I wanted to try to figure out whether it was worth a dollar. Instead, what makes it a dollar bill
is the place it plays in an entire complex banking system. So it's its partness in that hole that's
important. But more than that, it's the fact that we all agree to treat that dollar bill as having
the value of one dollar, that we're willing to give four quarters and change for it, that we're
willing to sell something whose price is one dollar for it, and so forth. That's conceptual
imputation. If we decided that these green frog skins were no longer going to be recognized,
suppose we decided to go to dollar coins, we were only going to recognize dollar coins, not dollar
bills, then no matter what part that dollar used to play, no matter how much that paper is worth,
it's now worthless because we no longer impute the value one dollar to it. So interdependence has
all of these three dimensions, causal, part-hole, and imputational. The Dalai Lama argues that
interdependence in this sense provides us with the deepest analysis of the fundamental nature of
reality. Everything around us and in particular our own lives and the lives of the communities in
which we participate is characterized by this three-fold interdependence. Moreover, he emphasizes
this is completely consistent with the deliverances of modern science. That physics demonstrates
that everything is part of a uniform causal hole and interdependent in all of these ways. If you're
worried about imputation, think about quantum mechanics and the role of observation in giving
identity and reality to quantum phenomena. But social science and psychology also reveal
that our cognitive lives, our emotional lives, and our social lives are interdependent in all
three of these ways. So the Dalai Lama argues that if our actions and our lives are to be meaningful
at all, they've got to be grounded in truth, they've got to be grounded in reality. Lives that are
grounded in a false vision of things are just a mistake. But if it's interdependence that gives
us the fundamental nature of reality, that means that a meaningful life has to be a life that responds
to, is grounded in, and reflects an appreciation of interdependence. Now, of course, the Dalai Lama
is not alone in this kind of insight that meaningful lives are lives grounded in an appreciation of
reality. We've seen Gandhi's idea, the meaningful life is constituted by Sacha Agraha, grasping and
insisting on truth. We've seen this idea from the Buddha, which is where the Dalai Lama gets it most
forcefully, that the four noble truths, or the four truths for one who would be noble,
are the foundation of a meaningful life. And of course, we've also seen this idea
worked out in a very different way by the Stoics, who argue that since the universe is fundamentally
rational, then a recognition of that rationality is what grounds our lives as rational and hence
as meaningful. Human interdependence, the Dalai Lama argues, is only a special case of this broader
truth. But it's a very important special case, and it's a special case that deserves special emphasis
because of the fact that what we're asking about is what is it to lead a distinctively human life,
a meaningful human life. Social reality develops for us special kinds of part-whole
interdependence. We're not just cars, so much of our lives are lived as members of families,
employees of institutions, citizens of cities, states, nations, members of clubs, social
organizations, political parties. And so so much of our identity is determined by holes of which
we're a part. And so much of our responsibility to each other is helping in our participation
to determine the characters of those holes. So part-whole independence plays a very deep part,
very deep role in trying to understand exactly who we are and what we are. Ignore that and you
can't understand your own identity even at the beginning. Conceptual imputation, the construction
of identity and roles of imputation is also quite salient in human affairs in ways that it's not
in physical affairs. When we say of somebody that they're a leader, it's because we impute
to them leadership qualities. We are willing to follow them. When we say of somebody that
she's a criminal, it's because we've decided that what she does is something that we don't like
and that it is our conceptuality, our assessment that gives her that role. When we decide of somebody
that they are a Nobel Prize winner, it is because somebody has conferred that prize on them. This
kind of conceptual imputation, this making decisions about identity, deciding that somebody's one of
us or one of them, which is often very important, is absolutely startling. Deciding that somebody is
a criminal versus an adversary in war. Deciding that somebody is a colleague versus a competitor.
All of these things determine the nature of our relations, the nature of our lives, the nature
of our happiness and they all depend upon this kind of social construction. Now, given that our
suffering and our happiness arise out of this matrix of interdependence, each of these dimensions,
causal independence, interdependence, part whole interdependence, the interdependence in terms
of conceptual imputation is implicated in the arising of suffering and in the production of
happiness. It's my actions that can cause pleasure for others, my actions that can cause pain for
others. It's my participation in a beneficial organization that can cause happiness for me
and others, my participation in a criminal organization that can cause unhappiness for
myself or for others and so forth. And all of these forms of interdependence give us the possibility
of having very complex effects in our actions. Everything we do ripples through societies
instantly and in countless ways and in ways that we can't always control but demand our reflection.
And so what this also generates is a set of complex obligations and responsibilities because
our actions have so many effects. We have obligations to make sure that those effects are
beneficial and we have responsibilities to those who can be affected by our actions.
So what are the sources of modern suffering, specifically the suffering that characterizes
modernity and the lives that we need, that we lead? Recall the trio of sources of suffering
that we examined in that first and second Noble Truth when we talked about the view of the Buddha.
We said that suffering is rooted in confusion or ignorance about the fundamental nature of reality
that gives rise to attraction to things that we want but can't have and aversion to things that
are present with us that we don't want. And so it's attraction and aversion that immediately
cause suffering but they're rooted in confusion. Modern capitalism, the Dalai Lama notes,
following Gandhi very straightforwardly here, develops these three sources of suffering to new
heights. Commodity fetishism again, just as lame dear would have agreed, add to this.
Advertising and the fetishism of objects as the sources of happiness give us this artificial
creation of need. Advertising artificially creates fear, creates fear of not having the best new car,
creates fear of having last year's model, creates fear of being seen as wearing last year's clothes
and so being seen as some kind of a dork, right? So advertising creates both need and fear,
attraction and aversion and it isolates us in a marketplace where there's me and the commodity
and I've got to make a decision. Do I need it? And the answer is always yes. So it's this kind of
engine of capitalism to create confusion and then to create attraction and aversion that the Dalai
Lama thinks creates much of our modern suffering. He also thinks that this commodification infects
politics as well because it creates politicians as commodities, creates ideas as commodities and
creates confusion that then generates attraction to ideas or politicians to whom we should not be
attracted, aversion sometimes from those we should. And so for this reason, the attraction and aversion
that permeate our modern lives begin in confusion and the Dalai Lama pinpoints
the mass media and mass culture as sources of this kind of confusion as well as of course
potential sources of its opposite that is of knowledge but at this point confusion and so
as sources of suffering. He has a wonderful metaphor when he says that what we do in advertising
by getting people to really want commodities to want the newest thing is we first create thirst
and then we offer the thirsty man a glass of salt water.
Now, so much for the sources of unhappiness in the modern world. What could the sources of
happiness be? Well, they're in a funny way the same things the Dalai Lama points out. They are the
interconnection with other people. This can facilitate our happiness and can constitute our
happiness because it's our interconnection that enables us to work together. It enables us to
produce the goods that we want, the material goods, the spiritual goods, the collective social goods.
So much of that requires collective action, not something we can do individually. And so it's
our interdependence that allows us to produce the goods that are constitutive of happiness.
It's also our interconnectedness that allows us to discover the truth because we can learn from
each other, learn from other perspectives, integrate other ideas. Interconnection also
constitutes our happiness because so much of our happiness is social. We're often happiest when we're
with friends, when we're with families, when we're engaged in social activity. And we become happy
when our actions actually match the goals and values we endorse, when we're living authentically,
in a way that Nietzsche recommended, in a way that Gandhi recommended, in a way that
lame dear recommended. And that's often only possible socially because so many of our goals
and so many of our values are collective social values. Interconnection makes happiness possible
materially because a lot of the material goods we want can't be produced by us alone. Hume pointed
that out of course. And interdependence facilitates happiness in a deep constitutive way because
the Dalai Lama argues, again, following Gandhi, integrity, authenticity, leading the kind of
life we could endorse is important in its own right. If we don't lead that kind of life,
we are always feeling uncomfortable and self-alienated. And it's only the interdependence and the ability
to interact with others that allows us to work out the kinds of social values and social ideals
that we would endorse. But this kind of purpose of action the Dalai Lama argues
requires genuine compassion, karuna. And as we said when we talked about Shantideva,
karuna is not an emotion, not a feeling, it's a commitment to act. The root of the word karuna
is kar, meaning action. And that means that happiness in this sense, a meaningful life in
this sense, according to the Dalai Lama, requires not just caring about others, but being committed
in our action. And this kind of commitment to action, this kind of compassion, even though it
has affective dimensions, arises as a commitment to act through the recognition and through the
understanding of interdependence. And through the understanding that only in interdependence
and only in compassionate action can we generate collective happiness. For that reason the Dalai
Lama thinks compassion is an absolutely essential ingredient both of happiness for others and of
happiness for ourselves. And for that reason as we're going to see in our next lecture,
karuna, compassion, the altruistic commitment to act for the welfare of other sentient beings
is going to be the foundation of a meaningful life.
