Greetings. In our last lecture, we were reviewing the Dalai Lama's conception of the fundamental
nature of reality and of human happiness. But of course, as Aristotle even said, to
say that happiness is the highest good is a bit trite and one needs details. And so we
spent a fair amount of time in our last lecture filling out the details of the Dalai Lama's
view of what human happiness is. We saw that the Dalai Lama concurs with the general Aristotelian
idea that happiness isn't a kind of fleeting emotion, but is the goal of human life the
highest good and constitutes a global state of flourishing of living well. But we saw that the
Dalai Lama differs from Aristotle. He doesn't see happiness necessarily as analytically connected
to virtues. Rather for the Dalai Lama, happiness comprises a broad set of goods, social material
that involves certain kinds of liberty, certain kinds of freedom, certain kinds of social
interactions and so forth. Nonetheless, for the Dalai Lama, we are very much aimed at happiness.
That is the goal of life. And for very much the reasons that Aristotle thought that happiness is
something we choose always for its own sake, never for the sake of something else, that we choose
other things in order to be happy, and that if you're happy, that's enough, it's self sufficient.
We also saw that the Dalai Lama as a Buddhist really emphasizes the idea that the fundamental
nature of reality is given by dependent origination in its three forms, causal dependent origination,
part whole dependency, and conceptual imputation. And we saw that that's especially true when
we think about social reality, the reality that we preeminently inhabit. And so the fundamental
truth about the reality in which we live, our social reality, is this complex network
of dependent origination. Dependent origination, we saw grounds both the possibility of suffering
and the possibility of happiness. When we think about dependent origination in its aspect
as the root of suffering, the Dalai Lama takes us back to the Four Noble Truths, or the Four
Truths for one who would be noble. What we find is a social structure, an economic structure
that through the ideology of commodity fetishism, through the activity of relentless advertising
and consumerism, systematically paints a distorting view for us of what we actually need, and
of what we should actually fear, of what candidates are actually desirable, and which ones are
scary, of things without which we cannot possibly live, or things that we must not do.
This fundamental confusion is what conditions most of our current desires and felt needs
and most of our fears, most of our aversions. And this source of suffering, this fundamental
confusion generating attraction and ignorance, generates a kind of cycle. And it's the cycle
that we metaphorically described as offering salt water to a thirsty man. We buy yet another
object, and that other object just leads us to desire one more.
So we saw that the Dalai Lama is drawing inspiration, not only from Buddhism, but also from critics
of modernity like Gandhi. We concluded by reminding ourselves that for the Dalai Lama,
the only possible solution to this is the development of a very deep kind of compassion.
Because our interdependence is, in virtue of being the nature of reality, not only the
source of actual suffering, but also the source of potential happiness. If suffering is grounded
in reality, happiness must be grounded in reality too. And so, the development of an
attitude that respects this kind of interdependence and commits us to the creation of happiness,
that's what we mean by compassion, is necessary in order to make life meaningful. Today, our
goal is to find out how that can be achieved.
The Dalai Lama begins his analysis through an analysis of our emotions. And by the way,
this is also a respect in which it makes sense to say of the Dalai Lama that even though
he's a great Buddhist leader, steeped in a Buddhist tradition, he's also very much
a modernist. Because the whole category of emotions, things that just come out of us,
right, emote, just move out of us, is very much a Western psychological motion. And there's
no neat translation of the term emotion into any Buddhist language. And so, the Dalai Lama
in adopting this framework is very much adopting a Western secular model of psychological life
in order to understand both unhappiness and happiness. And it's very much informed by
his study of Western cognitive science.
The Dalai Lama notes that our unhappiness, the suffering that we actually experience,
doesn't derive directly from external circumstances. Things may go wrong. We may even be in pain.
We may lose things. We may not get what we want. But that by itself is not suffering.
That's just adversity. Suffering arises from our emotional reactions to those adversities
or to our emotional reactions to not having what we want. Not having a Mercedes Benz is
not itself a source of suffering. But feeling bereft of something that I need, feeling a
deep hollow in my soul because I don't have a Mercedes Benz, that's suffering. But that
comes from the pathological emotion, not from the fact that I've got a Toyota, not a Mercedes
Benz.
The Dalai Lama points out that these emotional reactions and these attachments come not only
from attachment but also from aversion. That is, my adoration of somebody can become a
source of suffering if that person does not particularly want to be adored by me. So positive
emotions can also constitute attachments and become pathological.
Here we should be noting very deep resonances not only to Shanti Deva, who the Dalai Lama
reads very closely and whose text he teaches very frequently, the text that really animates
most of his moral thinking, but also to the Stoics. Remember that metaphor of the arrow.
We can control the shooting of the arrow but not what happens outside. We could control
what belongs to us, not what's outside. And so for the Dalai Lama, the important point
is that suffering has its sources internally, not externally.
So these pathological emotions, the emotions that cause our suffering, the Dalai Lama thinks
of as pathologies of attachment and pathologies of repulsion. And there are a lot of them.
Pathologies of attachment are things like greed, lust, this feeling of terrible neediness
that we need needing of approval. Pathologies of aversion, hatred, racism, distaste for
things and so forth. And the Dalai Lama's view is that these have individual as well
as social dimensions. That's really important. We are social beings. So many of the pathologies,
these kinds of pathologies, might just be individual psychological states. I really want that kind
of car or I really don't like that person. But there's also social dimensions. We don't
like them or as a country, we need this kind of military security. So there are collective
attractions, collective repulsions as well as individual attractions and individual repulsions.
But no matter what, the Dalai Lama urges that these set up a kind of self-perpetuating cycle
of emotional pathology. So you know, it goes like this. I decide that I don't like what
you've said to me and so I become angry. Notice what you said to me isn't a harm, it's just
something you said, but I become angry. Now all of a sudden I experience harm. And what
do I do? I project you as the cause of the harm rather than my own anger. So I say something
nasty back to you and the same thing happens. You become annoyed and you throw a rock at
me. Now I've got some blood coming down my forehead and now I'm really mad so I pick
up a stick and the escalation goes. So the injury generates anger that generates more
injury and we get this self-perpetuating cycle. In the case of attraction, we get the self-perpetuating
cycle of need that we have in, that advertising generates. And interpersonal relations, we
are certainly familiar with self-perpetuating cycles both of positive and negative emotions.
Positive and negative emotions that undermine genuine relationships. It's important to note
that we very often, in thinking about the emotions, mistake pathology for virtue. I think
this is a deep part of our modern predicament and it's one that the Dalai Lama really emphasizes.
So sometimes people will talk about justified anger or righteous anger and think of that
as a virtue. But ask yourself, when is the last time that anger did anything positive
for you or for anybody else that you know? Go back to Seneca who talks about the horrors
of anger and who thinks that if what you want to do is to motivate punishment, think calmly,
think calculatedly, think carefully. Anger only blunts your faculties. It makes you
behave rationally. It distorts things. Even love can often be thought of as a virtue when
in fact it's pathological, when it becomes obsession, when it becomes a fascination that
gets in the way of seeing another person clearly. Patriotism and honor sometimes sit that way
too. We think of somebody as deeply patriotic when in fact they may simply have fetishized
a particular policy or a particular country. So it's very important if we're going to
understand the nature of suffering but also if we're going to understand the nature of
happiness to be able to distinguish emotions that are indeed beneficial from emotions that
are pathological and very often they're so close to each other that it's very hard to
tell unless we actually engage honestly, reflectively and deeply with our own inner life.
Now the Dalai Lama argues that given that so much of our emotional life is pathological,
even if we don't experience it that way, what we need as an antidote are positive non-pathological
emotions. Pathological emotions, he argues, are grounded in confusion, right? Attraction
and aversion are grounded in misperceiving reality. Seeing something else as the source
of our unhappiness rather than ourselves, seeing something else as necessary instead
of simply an option. So here we're really reflecting ideas that we saw in Shanti Deva,
the idea that we really have an erroneous perception, a misperception of reality that
has to be the foundation of this kind of pathology. So if we're going to cultivate positive emotions,
this means that we need to cultivate not an erroneous understanding of reality, not a
distorted understanding of reality, but a clear, accurate understanding of reality.
And this clear, accurate understanding can't just be a kind of theoretical thing, right?
This is kind of important. It's easy having maybe read a book or listened to a lecture
or two about Buddhist philosophy or about physics or about cognitive science to convince
ourselves that it really is true that we live in a world that is completely interdependent
in which everything is causally conditioned and in which everything produces innumerable
effects, where parts are dependent on their holes, holes dependent on their parts, where
things depend for their identity, un-conceptual imputation, and the green grass grows all
around, all around. And we're able to mouth these words, we're able to say them, we're
able to engage theoretically and analytically with reality that way. Maybe we are even able,
reflectively, to say, damn, when I was angry yesterday, that's because I didn't make sense
of this, because I didn't understand this kind of interdependence, and I projected a
kind of special importance to something that I shouldn't have done. Or to say, I really
don't need that. I'm really reifying it in a way that's not necessary. But that kind
of theoretical engagement, that kind of abstract engagement, is not enough to constitute an
antidote to real emotional pathology. It's really just an addition of insight to injury.
If we're going to cultivate an antidote to these habits, what we need to do is to cultivate
clear, cognitive habits that is instinctive, spontaneous responses to things as interdependent,
as causally dependent, as part-hole dependent, as dependent upon imputation. And it's that
instinctive, innate, spontaneous cognitive habit that can be so difficult to accomplish,
so difficult to cultivate, and that's why it requires work. That's why the notion of
corona, of compassion, is so important. Because what corona does is gives us that commitment,
that altruistic aspiration to act, and an important part of the action is an action of
deep self-cultivation and the development of different spontaneous ways of taking up
with the world than those that animate most of our ordinary ways of taking up with the
world. The use of moral imagination is important, because we need to be able, for instance, when
responding to another, to understand that their interests are in a deep sense just like
our interests, that their pain is in a deep sense just like our pain, and to take their
pain as a motivation to act for alleviation, just as we take our own pain as a motivation
to act for alleviation, to take another person's need as a motivation to act to alleviate it,
just as we take our need as a motivation. And that requires the kind of moral imagination
that projects us into that person's perspective, and it requires habituation, it requires
practice, it requires doing this again and again. And note the echoes of David Hume here,
the idea that it's our imagination, and convention, and habits, childhood upbringing, and reimagining
that enables us to extend the narrow emotions, the emotions that obey that inverse square
law into real emotions like compassion and real emotions like justice. And it's no accident
that the Dalai Lama has studied Hume as well as Shantideva. The Dalai Lama argues that
this kind of cultivation of compassion comes in two pieces. The first part he calls the
cultivation of restraint, and the second he calls the cultivation of virtue. These are
his terms. By restraint he means the holding back of instinctive negative reactions, actions
of anger, actions of greed, actions motivated by carelessness, and so forth. By virtue he
means the development of the positive commitment to do benefit, and he sees these as related
to one another, the first as the prerequisite for the second. Why is restraint so important,
and how should we cultivate it? Well, the Dalai Lama argues that restraint is actually
what cuts off their roots of suffering. Because remember, from a Buddhist perspective we think
of suffering very much as a positive phenomenon. It's attraction and aversion conditioned
by ignorance, and ignorance itself is a positive thing, not the absence of knowledge, but the
superimposition of a mistaken understanding on reality. So what restraint does is to cut
off those roots. And so restraint, this ability to stop the anger, to stop the greed before
it really moves into prominence in our cognitive lives, has to be cultivated, not just by telling
myself I'm not going to get angry, I'm not going to get angry, I'm not going to get angry,
or I'm not going to act on greed, I'm not going to act on greed, I'm not going to act
on greed, but by the reflection on causes. And of course remember, we saw the same kind
of reflection recommended to us by Marcus Aurelius and by Seneca. Think about what gave
rise to the other person's actions. Think about that and you will no longer be angry.
People aren't responsible for their own stupidity. People aren't always even responsible for
their own greed or their own thoughtlessness. It came, those emotions, those tendencies
were built into them through causes and conditions as well. As Shanti Davis says, I don't get
angry at a stick when it beats me, so why should I get angry at the intention that motivates
the stick that itself is generated by antecedent causes and conditions? So if we reflect on
causes, if we reflect on what actually gives rise to our suffering, then it goes down a
little bit. Secondly, the Dalai Lama urges, we need to reflect on impermanence. We need
to reflect on the fact that these things that we want so badly are going to disappear and
dissolve at some point. They're not all that permanent. They're not that important. That
these things that are causing us the experience of suffering right now themselves are impermanent
as well. And that our own emotions, our own mental states, those are impermanent too.
We don't need to care about them so much. We can let them go. We can watch them proceed
one after the other, just like everything in the universe proceeds one after the other,
arising, enduring for a moment, and passing away. And finally, by reflection on selflessness,
by reflecting on the fact that we ourselves are not substantial entities that are disconnected
from and distinct from everything else in the world. Now, that might seem like an obvious
point, but it's not an obvious point. It's not an obvious point for the following reason.
Our ordinary cognitive habit, our ordinary way of taking up with the world is to think
of ourselves as subjects, everything else as object. The first person pronoun encodes
that. There's I and everything else. And when we do that, we think of everything else
in relation to ourselves. There's me and my friends and my enemies. There's me and my
car and the cars that aren't mine. There's me and the stuff that I care about and the
stuff that I don't care about. And everything in the world becomes experienced instinctively,
not reflectively, but instinctively in terms of its relation to me, the subject. But what's
wrong with that? What's wrong with that, you might ask? After all, I am the person experiencing
all of that. There is, of course, something deeply wrong with that because that way of
taking up with the world, however natural it is, reflects the nature of reality as determined
by a bizarre polar coordinate system with me at the center and everything else arrayed
in terms of its relationships to me. To think that reality is really like that, I have to
really think that I am pretty damn special. The problem, of course, is that everybody
thinks that way and there's where conflict comes from. If we're each the center of the
universe and the center of the universe can only be in one place, conflict naturally arises.
By reflecting on selflessness, by reflecting on the fact that the universe does not revolve
around us as we saw in the book of Job, we are able to take our own importance less seriously.
I'm not right here and everything else there. From another standpoint, I'm over there and
I'm just one passing phenomenon among many passing phenomena.
So we see in this kind of method for cultivating restraint, this method for undermining the
afflictive or the pathological emotions, the Dalai Lama is offering kinds of remedies,
recommendations that have Buddhist roots because they've got these roots in the understanding
of selflessness, impermanence and causal interdependence, but they also have very much stoic roots.
Roots in the understanding that what we can control is what's inside us, our emotional
reactions and also the stoic idea that really it's understanding reality rationally that
enables us to bring our emotions under control. An idea that we saw develop not only in stoicism
but also in Buddhist moral theory in the hands of Shantideva in how to lead an awakened life.
So much for restraint. Why isn't restraint enough? Why do we need to move beyond it to
positive virtue? Although Dalai Lama argues that we need to move beyond it to positive
virtue because while restraint keeps us from doing bad things, it doesn't by itself motivate
us to do the things that are necessary for our own happiness or for the happiness of
others. To do that, to do that we need to cultivate generosity, the willingness to detach
ourselves from our possessions and to give because others need things from us. Generosity
comprises not only material generosity, giving of physical gifts, but the giving of our time,
the giving of our attention, the giving of our concern, the giving of our knowledge,
the willingness to be beneficial. And this is so important because we live together and
we benefit together. And if others don't benefit from us, we don't benefit from those interactions.
Virtue requires patience. And as we saw in our discussion of Shantideva's Bodhicharya
avatar, that comprises not only patience with others, which actually isn't that difficult
to cultivate once you practice, but patience with oneself. Noticing that the moral perfection
that we come to demand of ourselves when we adopt this understanding of the nature of
our lives isn't acquired in a moment. That kind of moral development requires time, it
requires work, it requires meditative practice, it requires accustoming ourselves to certain
ways of thinking, and that means that we need to be patient with ourselves as well as patient
with others. Virtue, the Dalai Lama emphasizes, requires attentive concern. Not just idly
thinking, yeah, it's really important to me that other people be happy. Not just thinking,
yes, I want to make sure my kids go to good schools and that other people's kids go to
good schools too. Not just concern that, oh, it's a bad thing that people are suffering
in that place, whether it's Darfur or Chad or Haiti or wherever, but actually attentive
concern. And attentive concern involves two different dimensions. One is the dimension
of attentiveness and the other is the dimension of concern. The dimension of attentiveness
commits ourselves to really understanding the nature of the problem, to thinking about
it, to thinking about what's going wrong and what would be necessary to rectify it.
Concern means actually being committed to do it, not just saying, oh, it's so sad that
those children are suffering, please turn off the TV, I can't take any more, but rather
an actual commitment to do something. That's part of the root of virtue in this sense. Mindfulness.
Mindfulness in the sense that we need to be able to pay attention to our own emotional
states, to our own reactions, to our own motivations, moment to moment, in order to cultivate the
virtuous ones instead of the non-virtuous ones. And finally, we come to discernment and compassion.
And I treat these two together, as does the Dalai Lama. Discernment is necessary because
we need to really understand in any particular situation what the details are in order to
act. What are the causes? What are the conditions? What are the effects? What kinds of mental
habits are imputing the kinds of characteristics that are causing difficulties here? What are
the whole networks and what are their parts that are important? But finally, compassion.
What is compassion? Compassion here, as I keep emphasizing, it's not an emotion. It's
not a feeling of caring about others. Compassion in the sense of karuna is an altruistic commitment
to act. An emotion that just says, I feel so awful, I wish somebody would do something.
It's not compassion. It's what the Dalai Lama likes to call floppy sympathy. That doesn't
get us anywhere. All it does is compound somebody else's suffering with your own. Better not
to even notice. Compassion is this commitment to actually doing something. But for the compassion
to be genuine, for the compassion to be efficacious, the compassion has to rest on discernment.
Because to be committed to doing something, and for that something to make a difference,
you'd better be committed to doing the right thing. And that's why compassion isn't just
I've got to do something. But compassion rests in a commitment to develop this deep analytical
understanding of suffering in order to alleviate it, where that means in each situation a deep
analytic understanding of the nature of suffering in that situation in order to alleviate it.
Compassion in this sense is not just abstract understanding and not just abstract desire.
The union of compassion and discernment is a union of moral perceptual skills where when
we see a situation, we see the sources of suffering, we see the possibilities for happiness,
and the interpersonal skills that allow us to see what kinds of interventions will be
most useful and commit us to those kinds of interventions. And the Dalai Lama emphasizes,
this kind of compassion, if we really cultivate this altruistic attitude, entails a kind of
Gandhian universal responsibility, a responsibility for the welfare of all. Why? What could a limitation
on compassion be? What could it be for me to be compassionate for these people, but not
for those? That could only originate in a pathological distinction between, say, my friends
and my enemies, back to that polar coordinate system. That's then not genuine compassion.
Whatever I feel for these people becomes then a kind of pathological attraction or a pathological
attachment. And what I feel towards these people is a pathological anger or detachment.
Compassion has to be rooted in the de-centering of the individual. For that reason, distinctions
between individuals becomes impossible as objects of compassion. And this is what generates
universal responsibility and an unlimited scope of compassion. That's an idea that we
saw in Shantideva, that karuna, compassion, requires the resolution that I be the source
of benefit for all sentient beings. That's what universal responsibility is. That's why
what we're seeing here is a modern version of the bodhisattva path. While the Dalai Lama
might be a modernist in many ways, and we've seen all of those ways, the reliance on science,
the reliance on a very modern conception of the nature of happiness, and a modern understanding
of the nature of suffering, it all comes back to the bodhisattva path. The altruistic resolution
to act in every way that I can for the benefit of all sentient beings as the only kind of
state that could possibly make my life worthwhile. And that's not just an affective state, not
just an emotional state. And it's not even just a co-native state, not just a state of
desire, but it's an affective state, a co-native state, and a rational understanding of circumstances
coupled with a resolution to be a source of happiness and not a source of suffering. It's
a superlative moral standard, a moral standard that's as superlative as that of Gandhi's,
even if it's a little bit more modernist in its field. But this is a moral standard that
connects us as moral agents to a universal community. And in this way, it harmonizes so
beautifully with so many of the positions we've seen. It has the same kind of universality
of commitment that we saw in the Gita, the same kind of universal context that we saw
valorized by the Stoics. So while we're seeing an enormous modernism in the content, the
specific content of the recommendation of the Dalai Lama for a meaningful life, this
recommendation for a meaningful life based in compassion is also deeply traditional and
rooted in very ancient traditions that animate his way of thinking and show us how the traditional
can enter modernity. So what is a modern Buddhist view of the meaning of life? It's a meaningful
life. A meaningful life is a life that is lived in recognition of truth, of the fundamental
nature of reality. This echoes ideas we've seen from as far back as the Bhagavad Gita,
but also in postmodernists like Nietzsche, who urges us to focus on the truth and live
in a way that has fidelity to it. It's a life that involves our realization that we are
fundamentally members of vast universal social totalities. In that way again, we remember
the Gita, but we also remember Marcus Aurelius, who asks us, what are you? You're a family
member, you're a citizen, you're somebody who's a member of a large universe, and of
course Gandhi. This is a view of a meaningful life that demands of us, if we're going to
live meaningfully, very deep cognitive, very deep emotional transformation. This does not
allow us to remain content with our ordinary everyday instinctive consciousness, but calls
upon us to deep personal transformation. It forces us to attend to the mundane circumstances
around us in order to be effective, just as male or human or Aristotle would recommend,
but also to rise above attachment to the mundane, as Tolstoy would ask us to do, or Gandhi.
This is what makes it modern and traditional. It also reminds us that a meaningful life
is in the end a life that's genuinely happy, and it's a life that's led in the context
of a genuinely happy community. And here we find our echoes of Aristotle and Hume, but
reflected through this Buddhist context. So in the Dalai Lama, we have this remarkably
cosmopolitan synthesis of so many of the ideas we've been examining throughout this course.
Next time, we'll try to do some serious summing up.
