These lectures are part of the Great Courses series.
They are produced by The Teaching Company.
The Great Courses cover a broad array of university-level disciplines.
The lectures in each course are either 30 or 45 minutes long.
By listening for less than an hour a day, you can finish even the longest course in just weeks.
Browse our catalog or website and imagine how much you could learn if you spent just 30 minutes a day for the next year in the best college classrooms in the world.
The lecturers are university professors carefully selected by The Teaching Company and its customers for intellectual distinction and teaching excellence.
These lectures are titled, Theories of Human Development, Part 1.
The lecturer is Dr. Malcolm Watson.
Dr. Watson is a professor of psychology and chair of the Social Science School Council at Brandeis University, where he has been teaching for over 25 years.
He received his PhD in developmental psychology at the University of Denver.
Dr. Watson was also the recipient of the first Michael Leibman-Waltzer Award for excellence in teaching at Brandeis.
Outside of his teaching, Dr. Watson is an active researcher.
His areas of interest include the development of symbolic play in children, the development of drawing and art in children,
children's understanding of family roles and family conflicts, and the causes of aggression and violence in children and adolescents.
He has published numerous articles and journals and books and has also edited several books.
His research has been funded by the National Institute of Mental Health and the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development.
Dr. Watson prepared the course guide that comes with these lectures.
The course guide includes a detailed outline of each lecture, a glossary, a timeline, biographical notes, and a bibliography.
To get the most out of this course, you may find it useful to follow along with the outlines or review them before or after each lecture.
Lecture 1 Introduction, The Value of Theories
Hello. My name is Malcolm Watson, and it's my pleasure and privilege to guide you through this course on theories of human development.
In this introductory lecture, I would like to accomplish several things.
First, I would like to give you some major objectives for the course.
I'm hoping that the objectives that I've come up with will be incorporated into your objectives as students,
and that these will be part of what you're looking for to gain from this course.
And then I'd like to give you the definition of two important concepts for the course.
The first is a definition of human development, and the second is a definition of scientific theories.
And then we will talk about the value of scientific theories, particularly as they apply to human development.
And then I would like to give you a set of criteria that you can use when you're judging any given theory to judge whether it's a good theory or not.
And we'll conclude this introduction with an overview of what we're going to cover in the rest of the course.
So first, let me give you these objectives.
As I see it, the first objective for you as a student is to grasp the value of developmental theories by becoming familiar with the six theories that I'm going to talk about.
These six theories have perhaps had the greatest and the most widespread influence on our current conceptions of child development,
of any theories that we've had, and on our thinking and our views of human nature in general.
The second objective is for you as a student to learn about sequences and processes of human development as you learn about these six theories.
We're talking about theories, but along the way, I hope you'll pick up some information about children and adults and how we develop.
And the third objective is for you to be able to be a critical judge of the value of these different theories.
I want you to come away being a healthy skeptic, so to speak, that you will see the value of different theories,
but at the same time, you can judge also the weaknesses of theories.
And you can compare theories and see where they converge, where we could actually integrate them, and also where they differ from each other.
So with that in mind, let me give you two important definitions.
The first is human development.
Human development can be defined simply as the sequence of stages and processes that bring about change and reorganization in humans from their conception through their entire life cycle.
Now notice I said the sequence of changes and the processes.
Human development discusses both the order of change, the sequence, and the underlying processes or mechanisms that explain how this change occurs.
Human development applies to both growth and also to reorganizations.
In terms of growth, if we add height or we get heavier, that's development, that's growth.
If we increase certain skills, for example, we increase our vocabulary size, that's development.
But I think the most important and the most interesting aspects of development really focus on reorganizations in our thinking.
Changes that in how we approach or the task in life, the strategies that we use, the reorganizations are not necessarily just additions or growth.
We restructure things. Let me give you an example.
This happened to me recently. I was observing a class of preschoolers and for about 20 minutes I'd been talking to one little girl and getting to know her.
And I was asking her questions and we were getting along pretty well.
And she was talking to me and she began to explain to me about her recent birthday that she had just turned four years of age.
And she talked about how on Saturday she had had this great birthday party and about all the gifts she had received and all the people that were at the party.
And then she paused, sort of shocked.
She looked at me and said, why weren't you at my birthday party?
And I sort of looked shocked and looked back at her and then I realized, oh, there's a kid.
And I said, well, you see, I just met you 20 minutes ago.
I didn't know you before that. I didn't even know you were having a birthday party.
Now, this is typical of kids of about three to four years of age.
They have what people call a lack of perspective taking ability.
What this entails is they have a real problem taking account of what somebody else knows and comparing that to what they know, the information that they know.
And they get confused about how much somebody else knows, how much they know.
In this case, this little girl got confused about what I knew.
If I were talking to her and we were friends, as she thought, and she's sort of like me, I think she did, then I should have been at her birthday party.
You see how she got confused with that?
The lack of perspective taking then is considering kids can take perspectives.
What they can do is coordinate them and look at the perspective they have in comparison and in coordination with the perspective or viewpoint that somebody else has.
Now, by the time they get to be five or six or five to seven in that time, they have practiced this, they've developed this, I think, cognitively there are changes, and now they're pretty good at it.
But this reorganization, then being able to take perspectives, is not really what you'd call growth.
In addition, it's really a shift in strategy.
It's a reorganization in the way they approach this particular task.
That's an example of development that I think is quite interesting and the people that study development are trying to assess.
Now, the reorganizations that we call development occur in many domains of our lives.
They occur neurologically, physically, cognitively, emotionally, and socially. All of this is development.
And although development occurs throughout the entire lifespan, most of the changes, most of the reorganizations that occur, happen during childhood and adolescence.
Change happens faster, and I think more of it.
So it should not surprise you that child development is really a large subset of all of human development.
Now, some people could say, well, I want to learn about adult development. I want to learn about development in old age.
But we really can't fully understand our human nature and what we're like as a species if we don't also understand our origins and how we developed,
and the processes and principles we went through of getting from the beginning to where we're at at any particular time or given point in our development, whatever age we are.
One needs to understand children and their development to understand the full human.
In fact, you could say in a metaphoric way, the adult still has the child within him or her, and the child always potentially has the adult already there in place.
We're all the same species after all.
The study of human development comes from many different disciplines.
It's truly an interdisciplinary kind of study. It comes from medicine.
People have contributed from biology, from education, from anthropology, from philosophy, and I'm sure I've missed some.
However, developmental psychologists have probably contributed the largest portion of research and theorizing about human development.
The six major theories in the theorists that we're going to study in this course came primarily from the field of developmental psychology.
Even if they weren't trained in developmental psychology, that is in fact where they were doing their work.
So expect to hear a lot of psychology and developmental aspects that come here, even though it's all mixed in with people from other domains.
In fact, I have to tell you that if you go to a conference of developmentalists today, in most of these conferences, you're going to find educators, physicians, sociologists, therapists, psychologists, biologists, a whole group of people.
Let me give you the second definition, that of scientific theories.
A scientific theory is a systematic explanation that unifies various observed phenomena and facts. That seems simple.
You see, we have a lot of information out there that we bring in through our senses, we have a lot of facts and data, but the theory is what puts it all together and tries to make sense of it.
The scientific theory is forever striving, as scientists are, to not only describe what's out there, but to explain the causes, what the processes are or mechanisms, and what causes lead to what end results.
Developmental theories, as do other scientific theories, provide us with metaphors, models, and formulas for understanding and predicting developmental processes and how development will progress under any particular given set of circumstances.
Even if we only have metaphors and they're not so precise as we'd like, they still can be extremely helpful in helping us to unify our findings and to understand our findings.
Now, no theory provides us with a perfect explanation or model of reality. Of course, that's true.
But without theories, we don't even make any progress in our understanding. We can't even use the facts that we've gleaned. I feel very strongly about that. I want to stress that.
Without a theory, we go nowhere. We cannot organize and unify the facts, the data, the phenomena that we observe. We have to put it together in some way that we can simplify it and organize it and explain it.
So whether you think of yourself as a theorist or not, we're all theorists and we all need theories. In fact, this is handy because I think it's part of the way we are built as humans.
It's part of our species to have this strong tendency to want to classify and organize the world. We can't help ourselves. We're constantly organizing things.
We are what's called in the field naive theorists. Not that we're also naive, but even if we're not trained in an area, we're theorizing. So we all do that, whether we recognize it or not.
Let me give you an example of this kind of reorganization that you constantly see. Somebody showed me this once. I thought it worked really well for me, and I think if you set up this experiment and did it for yourself, you'd find it would work for you.
This person brought in a string of Christmas tree lights, and the lights were different colors and they would flash and blink on and off randomly. The whole thing was blinking on and off.
But the person didn't lay them out in any organized order. He just had him clumped over his arm. It was this big cluster of this string of lights.
And we in the audience looked at it for a while. Not much happened. It was just random firing. And then he turned on some music, and first he put on a piece by Beethoven.
And within a very short period of time, within a minute, the music had this magical effect. It organized the lights and they started forming a pattern.
In fact, they were in complete concordance with the music. They formed the pattern of blinking that was in the same tempo as the music and went with the nuances of the music. It was sort of amazing.
But then he switched off that music and he put on a piece by John Coltrane, a piece of modern jazz, my favorite.
And within another short period of time, in less than a minute, the lights became reorganized again and started going to the temple of the new music and showing the nuances of the new music.
Isn't that amazing how sound can actually reorganize lights? Actually, it didn't happen, as you could realize. It wasn't that anything changed in the lights. It was in sight. It was in our minds.
And what happened for me happened for everybody else there, too. We reorganized our thinking because when we saw this jumbled mess, this random pattern, I would argue we don't like that.
We don't like confusion as humans. And even when we're not trying to, even when we're unconscious of it, we tend to organize our world. And that's what we did.
Our minds did it automatically, looking for patterns, constantly looking for patterns. So that's handy, since we have that tendency anyway, it makes sense that we're going to develop theories.
Now, I want to give you a test at this point. You're thinking, oh, darn, I didn't want to have a test on the first day of class. But here it is.
This is actually a quick test to determine, to help you to determine where you stand on some of the major issues in development.
Because I want to point out that I believe you all have naive theories already or conceptions, a sense of what children are like and what human nature is like, and aspects that relate to development in some of the theories that we're going to talk about.
And maybe this is a way, if you try to answer these, at least in your mind, if you answer these honestly from your gut level feelings, maybe you can figure out where you stand on this.
So let me give you the first question. These are multiple choice questions with alternatives.
So first, children are, A, creatures whose basically negative or selfish impulses must be controlled.
Or B, neither inherently good nor inherently bad.
Or C, creatures who are born with many positive and few negative tendencies.
If you have to choose, what's your gut feeling about that?
Now, if you chose A, creatures are basically negative and selfish.
Then in fact, you're in good company. There are many early theorists and conceptions that took this view.
And in fact, one of the theorists we're going to talk about, Freud, had this view, the foundation of his theory, that were selfish.
He didn't mean that really in a morally derogatory way, but that we have these inherent qualities that start us out.
If you had the alternative were neither good nor bad or neutral, you're also in good company because there are a lot of people early on that had this conception.
John Locke is one of the philosophers we're going to talk about that had this view.
And there are other theorists, including Bandura's theory that we're going to talk about and others, that really are based on this neutral view.
If you took alternative C, that children are creatures who are born with many positive traits and few negative, you're all again in good company.
John Jacques Rousseau had this view.
And some of the theorists we're talking about also are based on this foundation, particularly John Piaget's theory.
Let me go on to the second question.
Here it is.
People are basically, A, active beings who play a major role in determining their own abilities and traits.
Or B, passive beings whose characteristics are molded by either environmental or biological factors.
When I say active beings, I don't mean that we don't move around and walk and run.
Active beings who play a major role in determining their own abilities and traits.
Or are they passive in the sense that they're molded by their environment or their biology.
Now, if you said A, you then are following a line that's a view of the world and approach to human nature called the organismic approach.
That views people as actors and initiators of their own development and processes.
If you said B, you're following an approach called the mechanistic approach that looks as humans as more reactionary to things that then from the outside influence them.
And we're going to talk about the organismic and the mechanistic approach in a future lecture.
Let me give you the third question.
When we compare the development of different individuals, we see, A, mainly similarities.
People develop along universal paths and experience similar changes at similar ages.
Or B, mainly differences.
People undergo different sequences of change and have widely different timetables of development.
Both are there, right? But you're forced to choose.
What do you mainly focus on?
If you say A, that you're looking for similarities and universals in development, again, you're in line with an organismic approach.
And with the research and the theories of several important theorists such as John Piaget.
If you said B, looking mainly for differences and the different timetables and the different changes that people experience,
you're in line with a more mechanistic approach and with other theorists such as Bandura.
So we'll come back to this.
Let me give you the last question.
Biological influences and environmental influences are thought to contribute to development.
Look, anybody who's smart knows that we have both nature and nurture, biology and environment that influence how we develop and who we are.
We have both. Everybody knows that. Everybody always knew that.
But here's the question.
Overall, A, biological factors contribute more than environmental factors.
B, biological and environmental factors are equally important.
Or C, environmental factors contribute more than biological factors.
Now you recognize this as a question, issue of nature and nurture.
In the field of development, nature and nurture is a really big question and issue.
And as we go through different theories, I think you'll be able to see that some theories may be stress one over the other.
And look at these things.
I gave you these questions because I want you to see if you've really tried to come up with your views that you have viewpoints to begin with.
Without ever going through this course, you have some approaches to human development.
All of the theorists that we talk about in here have conceptions of children and they did have conceptions even before they came up with their theories.
We all have what are called these naive theories of human nature and of child development.
And you can then see if some of these issues come up again, as I believe they will, when you learn about these different theorists.
I also want to return to this by the end of the course and see if you change your mind on any of your views here.
Scientists use different criteria to judge whether a theory is a good theory or not.
By a good theory, I mean, does it work?
Is it valuable to us in organizing and explaining and unifying the data and the phenomena that we have?
I'm going to give you a set of questions to ask that if you keep this set of questions and as you go through and learn about different theories,
you can apply this and ask it about different theories and see if you can answer generally yes to most of the questions regarding a certain theory.
And you can make a judgment, well, that's a pretty good theory or it isn't a pretty good theory.
So here they are.
The first one is, does the theory reflect the real world of humans, particularly children?
You see, even before we start, a theory ought to have what's called face validity.
It ought to some way match your own personal experiences in your life and the experiences you've had with children and with other people as we've all had,
it should seem to make sense to you and match what you've experienced with them.
If it really seems like it's from another planet, you have to question, is it really a good theory?
Does that theorist, is that theorist, in fact, in touch with children?
Second question is, is the theory supported by convincing evidence?
Remember here, we're talking about scientific theories.
Anybody could come up with a theory.
It could be crazy.
It could be whacked out, again, from another planet.
A good scientific theory is tied to empirical observable evidence.
To explain it, it should match it, at least to some degree.
The third question for your criteria is, does a theory explain the past and predict future outcomes?
So theories are devised to explain what we already know, but a really good theory will also predict things that will come about later.
A good theory, like Einstein's in physics, predicted the pathways and orbits of planets, predicted things that would happen in the universe.
When the periodic table was developed, as a theory to explain the orderliness and organization of elements,
they could predict where new elements would be found and what those elements would be like, the characteristics of those elements.
It was a good theory, because it worked in that way.
Along with that question, the fourth question is, can the theory handle new data and new discoveries?
So a good theory ought to be able to handle whatever else comes along.
The fifth question is, does the theory stimulate new research and new discoveries?
Let me give you an example.
We're going to talk about attachment theory.
When Bowlby and Ainsworth came up with attachment theory to talk about infant-parent relationships,
that theory then stimulated a whole slew of articles, hundreds of articles,
to find how early attachment or the type of attachment a child had predicted outcomes,
either developing in a proper, I should say, optimal way, or developing some pathologies and some problems.
It stimulated that research and those discoveries.
The same thing.
When Piaget came up with this idea of perspective taking or the lack of perspective taking,
like in the example of the girl in the birthday party,
it stimulated hundreds of research articles and studies to look at how it would develop
and how that might explain things like how we learn to compete with others,
how we learn to cooperate with others,
how we learn to be able to make attributions and guesses on what somebody else is thinking
and what they intend to do.
All those things came out of his theory.
The sixth question is, is the theory clearly understandable?
Does it simplify rather than complicate the world?
Remember, it's supposed to simplify.
If you can't keep it in your head, if it makes no sense to you,
no matter how many times you go through it, you just can't keep it around.
I don't think it's a very good theory.
And the last question, number seven, is, is the theory self-satisfying?
That seems like a strange question, isn't it?
You see, a lot of the best theorists believe that theories just like art or music
have to have an aesthetic quality to them.
They have to move you emotionally.
That's what a good theory does to theorists.
And in some sense, we ought to have some self-satisfaction.
We ought to have some emotional reaction to a good theory.
It doesn't sound like science, but that's what other people use.
Einstein was coming up with a, trying to come up with an equation
that would explain this strange orbit of Mercury around the sun
and also to try to explain gravity.
And it became part of his general theory of relativity.
When he came up with an equation that in fact worked,
he was very excited, he was purportedly, he purportedly said to a student of his,
it would have been too bad for God if the theory had been subsequently disproved.
And later on he said, the equation was so beautiful it had to be true.
Isn't that a funny thing?
It was so beautiful it just had to be true.
He loved the beauty of it.
And Paul Dirac, who is a British physicist, went even further than Einstein.
He once said, it is more important to have beauty in one's equations
than to have them fit experiment.
We just said it's important to fit evidence, but for him beauty was everything.
Now theories, let me give you a caveat, a caution.
Theories are necessary, can organize and clarify our conceptions,
but they can also bias our outlooks.
They can blind us to additional facts, and they often do that.
That's the price we pay for having theories.
Somebody once said, a theory is a lot like a camera taking a picture.
By taking a picture, we bring into sharp focus what's in the picture,
but the picture then denies the existence and the reality of everything outside the frame.
You ignore it.
And in some ways that seems to be what we do with theories.
We take the good with the bad.
That's why it's important to evaluate them.
Sometimes the theory will oversimplify.
We want to simplify, but sometimes it will oversimplify the reality of the world.
Let me conclude now by just running through an overview of what the rest of this course will entail.
In the next three lectures, I would like to discuss the history of child study,
particularly in Europe and America,
and how we developed this sense and interest in studying children in a systematic way,
and how this history actually led up to the major theorists that we're going to talk about.
Because they each had a history and they each had a context,
a cultural context in which they developed and grew up,
and the history of child study and the history of each scientist made a difference
and entered into the biases and the ways they formed their theories.
So I think it's important to look at this history to begin with.
After we do that, then we're going to discuss each of the six theories in turn
and spend a few lectures on each one, and hopefully you'll learn more about them.
And then at the end, I'm going to make some final comparisons
and draw some conclusions regarding these theories.
The six theories that we're going to cover are first, the theory of Sigmund Freud, his psychodynamic theory.
This theory focused mainly on unconscious processes, the development of the entire personality,
and was the first one really to come along.
Second, we'll discuss Eric Erickson's theory, the psychosocial theory of development,
and how he modified and expanded on Freud's theory.
And third, we'll discuss an integrated attachment theory that came about from John Bulby and Mary Ainsworth.
John Bulby was a psychoanalyst, a Freudian, and he split from Freud's theory
and went a different direction to develop his own.
The fourth theory will be Albert Bandura's social learning theory,
and he stressed the importance of observational learning in development.
The fifth theory will be Jean Piaget's cognitive developmental theory
and will learn how he was part of a major revolution that considered cognitive processes as important in development.
His was the most grand and far-reaching theory of everyone's.
And the sixth and last theory will be Lev Vygotsky's cognitive mediation theory.
He provided a wonderful complement to Piaget's cognitive theory, but a theory that also included social constructs.
So next time, we'll start with our history of child study. Thank you.
