Lecture 3, Two World Views, Locke vs. Rousseau
In this lecture, we're going to continue our discussion of the history, the early history of child study.
If you recall, in the last lecture, we began by talking about the history of child study or the history of concern for children
as it started in the pre-industrial and industrial revolution in Europe and in America.
We talked about six phases in this study. Let me review these for you.
The first phase was a phase of no concern, a phase where children in fact were barely tolerated.
And then came a phase where children were seen, there was a concern for children and children were seen as being born evil in need of redemption.
The third phase that we're going to talk about today is the pre-empirical phase in which major philosophers had an influence on people's views of children.
The fourth phase is a phase of observational research. The fifth phase is a phase where theoretical science developed and reigned.
And the sixth phase is the phase of today of contemporary diversity.
And as I mentioned then, in today's lecture, we're going to talk primarily about phase three.
In this phase of our history of child study, we see some philosophers take a strong role in influencing the views that people had of human nature and of children.
Now this phase in reality began in the 17th century and it really overlapped with the changes that we've already discussed.
These phases were not lockstep in a chronological order.
Nevertheless, this influence began with some very well-educated people who, during the Enlightenment, eventually had philosophical ideas and influenced their friends,
and eventually this influence spread till the pervading influence influenced the masses of people in the population.
Today, very few of us read these philosophies and some of their works, but their ideas are still with us.
They have become part of our thinking. They have become part of Western culture.
There were two major philosophers that we're going to talk about that changed these prevailing concepts.
They had philosophies of human nature that have since been associated with two major and conflicting worldviews.
I have to explain what I mean by a worldview.
A worldview is beyond a specific theory.
A worldview is a pervading way that a person has of looking at reality.
It's beyond empirical testing or proof.
We can't prove or disprove a worldview and approach.
It's this general approach, this value or belief system that someone has.
In terms of how we look at human nature, people do have pervading worldviews.
These worldviews, then, can lead to specific theories.
There are often many different theories that don't always agree with each other,
that still fall under the rubric of one particular worldview or another worldview.
People argue, though, that if theorists and people have the same worldview,
we would expect that they would have an easier time integrating their theories, finding commonalities.
If the worldviews are diametrically opposed to each other,
there may be a lot more difficulty speaking to each other, coming to terms.
Now, scientific theories should be disprovable.
They're based on empirical evidence.
They're meant, as we've said before, to explain empirical evidence, to unify facts.
Worldviews are beyond this, but we still have them and we have to take account of them.
The two worldviews that we'll consider, not the only worldviews, but two major worldviews,
and these views are what are called the mechanistic approach and the organismic approach.
And I will explain what I mean by the mechanistic and the organismic approach.
But let me first go back to the two philosophers that we're going to talk about
and then show how they get into these worldviews.
The first philosopher was John Locke.
He was born in 1632. He died in 1714.
He was an English academic and he was a doctor.
Now, he's very well known for writing about different subjects, including politics and the way society works,
and he was one of the primary founders of a philosophy called English empiricist philosophy
that had a great deal of influence also in America.
I'm going to come back to a little bit to what I mean by this empiricist philosophy.
But in addition to everything else that Locke did, in 1690, he published an essay that is, in fact,
entitled An Essay Concerning Human Understanding.
And then shortly after that, he published a book entitled Some Thoughts Concerning Education.
These two publications eventually revolutionized the thinking of many people
about how humans develop and how they learn.
Locke was called an empiricist because, in his view, all that we become,
everything that we are, results from our experiences with the environment.
He challenged the pervading view that humans come into the world with many preform notions and skills.
And Manuel Kant had that view, that we're sort of preformed.
Certainly, he challenged the view that we're born evil.
That was a preformed view.
But for Locke, the supreme empiricist, everything we know has to come from our sensory input,
from what we can observe, what we can take in.
And that's also what we become.
What does that leave us with as our human nature?
What are we as a species?
Well, Locke coined the phrase, children are born a tabla rasa, a blank slate.
He meant by that metaphor that children are a blank slate that society and the environment then write upon.
In his view, a child can develop any skill or any personality,
depending on how the world, how other people, how the society influences that child.
So interestingly, we're born here having potential to become anything because we're nothing at birth.
And interestingly for Locke, he could take any given child, assuming the child has basically normal neurological functioning
and isn't highly damaged, he could take any child and he expected that he could do this
and turn that child into some evil person, some criminal, some scholar, some philanthropist and do what he wanted.
Now of course, if you take this view, you start focusing on the environment.
The environment is extremely important.
Locke didn't believe that we had no biology and that we didn't have certain ways that we developed.
Of course, he wasn't stupid, but the environment became supremely important.
Now, as we mentioned in the last lecture, remember people had been progressing from having no concern for children
to perceiving them as being born evil.
And Locke took this step one step, this progression one step further, they're born neutral and society molds them.
That's the point I want to make.
Locke's view that he held here became known and associated with what's called then the mechanistic approach, this worldview.
He was not the first to hold this view.
For example, Rene Descartes had a mechanistic approach.
But Locke applied it specifically to child development and the processes of child development.
It became his model and a model that others have fallen.
In the basic model of the mechanistic approach to humans, this worldview, the metaphor is humans are seen as machines.
That's why it's called mechanistic.
Now, when people started back in old days, they thought of a clock as maybe their prototypical machine.
I find it helpful to think of a car as the prototypical machine.
But most people today that take a mechanistic view think of computers as their prototypical model for how humans are.
Computer is the model for human or a car or a clock.
In some ways, of course, we are like machines in many ways, in fact.
But in some ways, we're not.
That's the screwy thing about these worldviews.
You can't ever say it's one thing or another.
It's a little of both.
But the idea is this metaphor of human as machine is used to describe human nature.
This is the focus.
One of the aspects is that as a machine, we have interchangeable parts.
We have components.
This is true.
My mother just had knee replacements.
And in fact, I think of a lot of the medical procedures today.
And it seems like we have a body that's essentially interchangeable parts.
We replace hearts.
We replace organs.
We fix things.
We put joints together.
Medicine even looks at the body and figures out very clever ways of fixing things that seem to act and function as if we're a machine.
So in many ways we are.
I used to say from the brain on down, we're a machine.
I actually think nowadays the brain is a machine.
The brain's the computer.
The rest of us seems to function like a robot, in a sense, with joints and such.
Okay, let me give you some important characteristics of this mechanistic approach.
And see, when you hear these, see if this makes sense to you, if this resonates with you, if this feels like an approach that you would take.
Most importantly for this model of humans is humans are seen as passive organisms.
I mentioned once before, when I say passive, I don't mean that they don't get up and move around and walk and run.
But they're reactionary organisms, just like machines.
Like machines, humans are inherently at rest.
They're stable.
They react only to stimuli from outside themselves.
Now, in fact, if you use my dog as the model instead of humans, I would have to take a mechanistic approach.
I, by the way, have a basset hound.
So if you know basset hounds, this makes sense.
He basically sleeps all day.
And the only time he seems to get up is when he smells food, or when he hears his name, or some such stimulation from outside that turns him on and makes him respond.
But are humans like this?
Think about it, and you decide.
In a second point about this mechanistic approach, like a machine, and I just mentioned this with a dog, something from outside has to turn them on.
You see, in a mechanistic approach, the environment plays a primary role.
And therefore, stimulation comes in through our senses.
We learn about things because of the stimulation coming in and turning us on.
You can see where John Locke's view of a blank slate for humans fits into this model.
We're nothing except for the potential to become anything.
And then the outside switches the switch, turns us on, we react to it, we take it in.
Now, this leads to another point, another characteristic of the mechanistic approach.
And that is, in order to know something or to learn something, we acquire a copy of reality.
In other words, we internalize facts and data and information from the outside world.
We react to what's being presented to us.
The real world is out there.
It's real, and it's out there.
And we have to sense it, and we have to learn about it.
So as an example, people with a mechanistic approach, when they talk about how humans learn to use symbols,
how children, in fact, learn to use symbols, they talk about symbols as being one thing that's a copy of something else,
or a model, or stands for something else.
Usually that something else is called a referent.
So there's a symbol that's a copy for a referent.
And what we do when we learn symbols is we simply learn the connections between these things.
Symbols are presented to us.
We use one as a copy for something else.
There's another sense of symbol development, and that is one that came from the approach that I'm going to get into in a minute,
the organismic approach, and was stressed by Piaget, who we'll talk about later.
And that is that we create the symbols.
We construct the symbols.
They're not copies in any sense.
We create our own symbols and our own reality.
We just don't make copies of the world.
Now, like machines, humans are seen as an organization of component parts.
So in order to understand humans, we need to break them down into the component parts.
Much as you would break down a car or a computer.
If you need to fix somebody, if something's broken, you fix the parts.
So if your car isn't working, you get in, you replace the brake liners, you fix the carburetor,
you tune up different parts, and now it's working fine.
And you do the same thing with humans.
I just said, in many ways, we do that with our bodies.
But in a psychological sense, you do it also with our learning, with our psychology.
The stress is on the different components of learning, the different aspects.
This has become, then, a reductionist model of humans.
By a reductionist model, I mean that all of the problems and issues are broken down into a reduced,
if you will, to component parts, and we look at the parts separately.
There is something called an information processing model of how we think.
This model is based on a computer as the example.
And when you see examples of how theorists have used this information processing model,
it looks like a flow chart for computers.
For example, they explain memory as some sensory input comes in through some mechanism we have,
like our vision, is stored in a temporary storage facility, in our mind, in a short-term memory store,
long enough for some other process to pick it up and go to other memory stores and pick up information
to see what it should be related to and where it should be then filed,
and other decisions, other pieces of information are brought in to make decisions on what you do with this piece of information.
Very often, reaction time is the measure they use to figure out what the process is.
If something takes longer, it must have gone through these memory stores,
and if it took a shorter time and went through these memory stores.
This way of looking at problem-solving and looking at memory in humans is certainly mechanistic,
because it's like we have these little component parts and the information is going through the system
and we see which parts are causing which problem.
For example, in memory, if we can't remember something, is it because it never got in in the first place to our short-term memory?
Is it because once it got into long-term memory, it decayed and everything fell apart there?
Is it because our retrieval part isn't available to bring it out of long-term memory to do something with it?
All the parts are there. You see that? That's handy.
It's a pretty good model for explaining memory, but it's a mechanistic approach.
I just want to point that out.
Another component, another aspect of the mechanistic approach is that the focus is on individual differences in human development.
It's how the world makes us into diverse individuals and what environmental manipulations work best to bring about a particular type of development.
You see, if we're focusing on individual parts and we're focusing on environmental manipulations,
we're paying attention to individual differences, which things cause this to happen and you develop this way
and which things cause this to happen and you develop this way.
So think about it. Is that the approach the worldview you have about humans?
Don't be misled by thinking, oh, I couldn't think of humans as just machines.
Machines are only the metaphor, the model for how humans function.
Now, let's return to our philosophers.
If Locke changed our view to children being born neutral, then the second major philosopher, Jean-Jacques Rousseau,
changed the view still further, what's left.
He saw children as being born good, but they were corrupted by society.
Jean-Jacques Rousseau was a Swiss philosopher. He was born in 1712 and died in 1778.
He came to espouse a view that was really in contradiction to Locke's view.
Now, from what I've read about Rousseau, I think he was a rebel rouser of his time.
Probably if he were around today, we would think of him as a cantankerous guy who caused a lot of trouble
and seemed to enjoy that.
He talked a lot about society also and about different issues.
He didn't really seem to be much of an expert on children.
There isn't a lot of indication that he knew them very well.
That could be dangerous if you're giving us views on child development.
But in 1762, he published a novel, a supposed novel, called A Meal.
And in that novel was really a vehicle for him to lay out his view of human nature and of child development.
He said, the natural state of humans at birth is that they're good.
They have inborn capacities that allow them to develop along an optimal path
and to become valuable and good adults.
They already have it in them that they're going to develop.
And in fact, there are many people today.
I sort of see this in kids.
The kids seem to have this self-writing mechanism that there's a tendency to be healthy,
to want to survive, to develop optimally, to make it.
And Rousseau focused on that aspect.
However, in his view, society and society's agents,
that is parents and educators and religious leaders,
because he did not like those religious leaders that we talked about previously,
these people usually channel and corrupt this natural developmental path.
And they cause problems in the children we see.
So society and their agents are the culprits.
So Rousseau believed that the correct obligation of society and parents
was to clear out the obstacles so that children could develop at their own rate,
in their own way, without the biases and the evils of the society being thrust upon them.
Society was there, but the ideal was for parents or society
to just make sure none of these obstacles, these biases from the past
were going to stand in the way of a kid being able to just follow his natural developmental course
and make it.
Now the paradox for Rousseau is that he thought society corrupts,
but he also thought society was needed to channel the way to make changes.
There's nothing in his writing that shows that Rousseau thought we should be noble savages
just be left to nature to run around naked and develop as we pleased.
He thought society was there and we ought to do something with it.
It was somewhat of a paradox that he thought society was so evil and yet it was necessary.
Let me give you two quotes by Rousseau to show his way of thinking.
This first one he's talking about how you teach and help and rear a child.
And he says, the mind should be left undisturbed till its faculties have developed.
In other words, isn't that interesting?
Lay off.
And here's his second quote.
And this he's referring, he's talking to somebody, if you will,
and giving this person advice on the person's child, the person's student, maybe an educator.
He says, oh wise man, take time to observe nature.
Watch your scholar well before you say a word to him.
First leave the germ of his character free to show itself.
Do not constrain him in anything.
The better to see him as he really is.
So do you get that sense of where Rousseau was coming from?
He really wouldn't take the view that children are miniature adults.
Not at all.
They're not blank slates.
They're not miniature adults.
He had the view that children were perfect organisms.
That is perfectly well adapted to the requirements of each given age or stage of life.
In a sense, babies were perfect to do what babies are supposed to do.
And preschoolers are perfect to be what preschoolers are supposed to be, as are adolescents and so on.
He then, because of this view, his focus went to qualitative shifts in development.
So it was from Rousseau that a strong influence came to many theorists later on
that they look for stages of development, if you will, for qualitative reorganizations or shifts.
Let me give you a sort of a funny example.
Picture in your mind a baby that now grows up to become an adult and so is my size,
but stays exactly in the same organization and proportions of a baby.
What would that person look like?
We would have a freak on our hands.
We would have this person standing next to me with a head that maybe is down to here
and these little scrawny, bold legs.
You know, if you just made a baby bigger, he would look very strange,
as would be the case if you made a preschooler bigger.
So even in growth, even in just physically maturing, we have qualitative shifts.
We change.
And it isn't that the baby is imperfect.
The baby is perfect for being a baby, but not the same as an adult.
There's no such thing as a miniature adult.
Okay, Rousseau's philosophy represents a second major world view
and this is the organismic approach, as I mentioned.
I'm going to take you through the organismic approach in the same parallel way
I went through the mechanistic approach by comparison.
So the basic prototype or model for the organismic approach is humans are organisms.
Well, of course we're organisms.
That goes without saying.
But the idea, the model for the organismic approach is that it's the whole organism
that's the basic model, the entire organism as it functions.
So let me talk about these key characteristics.
Rather than viewing humans as machines with different component parts,
the organismic approach sees humans as having one system.
And rather than seeing humans as being passive and reactionary,
humans are seen as active initiating organisms.
We are inherently active and changing, not at rest.
Our basic state is change, not rest.
We initiate our own actions.
We initiate change in growth.
We take it out.
And in fact, in the idea of an organismic approach,
to have nothing happening is not good, this stability.
Boredom will kill you and we become highly bored.
If everything is right, if we have all our needs met,
we're well fed, we're well rested, we're the right temperature, we're not sick,
we want action.
We don't want to just sit back and do nothing and shut down.
And this approach, this part of humans comes from this organismic approach.
With this active view, we seek out change then, and guess what?
It leads to a focus on internal influences, biological,
but more than biological, on influences that are part of our nature.
This is the way we're built as a species.
We seek out these things.
In order to know something, remember I said in the mechanistic approach,
you have a copy of reality out there and you take it in.
In the organismic approach, you actively construct what is known.
Rather than simply taking in copies like a sponge, we create our own reality.
To return to this example of symbol formation, we create connections between symbols.
We create the world that we see.
And so, when you get further down to theorists that came from this approach,
like Piaget, he argues that in our mind is the reality that we create.
It may or may not be what somebody else creates.
And it's very difficult to say whether it really matches reality,
because we've constructed our own mind and our own thinking.
And rather than studying humans in terms of their component parts,
the entire system or the structural whole is the focus.
In the mechanism or the organismic approach, the whole is greater than the sum of the parts.
Once you start looking at component parts, you miss something.
Let me give you some examples.
Even in medicine, even in dealing with the body,
very often if you give medicine for one problem, you throw off the system
and something else fails.
To give medicine, you have to consider everything that's happening
and all the medicines that are happening and the whole system.
In the treatment of infantile diabetes, people have learned
you just can't treat the medical situation and give the medication to be successful,
at least with little kids.
You have to give them a kind of therapy to help them to deal with what they're facing.
This lifelong problem that they need to deal with and work on and treat.
And you need to teach them how to deal with it, how to live with it, and how to handle it.
It's the entire system that's important.
The focus is on universals, norms and development.
Not all individuals are different, of course they are,
but the focus is on how we're the same, not how we're different.
Related to Rousseau's view of this noble child,
people with an organismic approach focus on figuring out what is typical,
what is the average or normal way that people develop,
rather than focusing on the environmental interventions that will cause us to change.
After all, we're all alike, but we're also all different.
Now these influences stay with us today, and these philosophies stay with us.
Whether you read them or not, Locke's view has influenced behaviorist theories,
it's influenced computer models, and it's influenced Bandura's theory that we're going to talk about in the future.
Rousseau's view and the organismic approach has influenced Piaget's theory,
and a lot of theories related to education, including pestiloteses,
Foybl, who developed the kindergarten movement, even John Dewey in this country,
and certainly Maria Montessori's approach to open education, to active learning.
In the next lecture, we're going to continue by talking about how these differences then carried over
to a study of children in a very systematic way, the beginning of science.
Thank you.
