Hello. In the last lecture, we introduced Erickson's theory of psychosocial development.
And we talked about the beginnings and introduction of what would lead up to his stages.
If you recall, he proposed that there were eight major stages of development for children, adults.
And in this lecture, we're going to describe Erickson's first four stages.
The stages which provide a foundation for the development of the child.
Now, you may recall that Erickson described each stage as a major.
However, infants, I just want to make this clear, infants and young children don't necessarily have to be conscious of what they're doing.
Following from a Freudian approach to development, Erickson also believed that even if we call it a crisis in the sense that it's emotional
and it compels a person to the issues at hand and to resolve these issues, a lot of this processing can still be unconscious.
And in fact, at any given age, a person may not be able to put a finger on exactly how she's feeling and what's happening to her.
A foundation for all development is having a sense of connectedness.
And this begins with the development of trust in others and trust in the world.
And then with this foundation of connectedness and trust, a child can branch out to develop a sense of independence.
And these two developments, connectedness, are the crux of stages and are clearly illustrated in these first four, you'll see this interplay here.
Let's begin then.
Erickson called development, development of a sense of trust, trust.
Now, a newborn comes into the world and of course is helpless in the sense of being able to feed himself to survive in basic ways.
And obviously, it must rely on other disturbance or apparent substitute.
As an infant experiences greater periods of consciousness, that baby may feel insecure, a lack of predictability about the world.
Certainly does not have control over the world.
That's not what she has and she has to control.
She has to be able to rely on other people.
The infant's parents are typically the first people that would provide this security and comfort.
When I talk about parents, though, I can mean parent substitutes that's taking care of this infant.
Now, when a parent consistently meets the child's needs, that child will develop purity and trust that his needs will be met with somebody there to take care of him.
So the first sense of trust is you just trust somebody else is going to be there to take care of you.
There's a second sense of trust.
In addition, the baby comes into the world with no understanding of causal relations, how the world works,
and therefore, in order to develop some mastery of the environment, the baby needs to learn about means and relations, what events will produce,
and then can use this knowledge to influence others and to influence what will happen.
So predictability and control of anything in the world is also part of a sense of trust.
When parents consistently deal with an infant, besides teaching the infant that somebody will be there for her,
the parent is also teaching the child there's an orderliness to the world, that there's some kind of predictability in the world.
So the baby learns not only to trust others, but also that the world is predictable.
And once you learn predictability, then you can practice control, manipulate the world.
So for example, a baby's hungry and a baby cries automatically.
Now what's the message that this baby's going to learn?
Well, if the mother feeds him every time that he's hungry, he learns to trust his mother, to love him,
and he also learns that his world's predictable. His crying brings food.
But even if his mother does not feed him every single time, trust her and trust the world.
Because very often we all know to delay gratification. You don't get everything you want all the time right when you want it.
And if he cries and he has to wait for food, he can also learn mom will always be there if I wait,
or he can start figuring out under what conditions circumstances when I get her to feed me,
what are the circumstances when she may not feed me.
So all of this information is important, but consistency seems to be the key word.
So as he develops this sense of trust, and remember that's also predictability and control of the world,
the child also develops a sense of agency. That means as an agent he initiates actions, he causes things to happen.
And this is beginning to come about after he learns to predict and control his world.
What if he doesn't have this consistent care and predictability in his world?
Well, according to Erickson he's going to find it very difficult to emerge from infancy with this sense of,
and in place of that he'll develop a strong sense of mistrusting others,
and a sense of lack of control or lack of predictability and consistency in the world.
What would be the kinds of situations that would bring about this sense of mistrust?
Well think of cases involving child abuse, or neglect, or abandonment of children.
Cases of war and deprivation, or cases of constantly changing caretakers.
So the child doesn't have a chance to develop consistency in trusting others.
It happens in cases where babies are bounced from one foster home to another foster home.
And you can think of many cases then where the foundation isn't there.
In this country I pretty tend orphanage to visit nowadays.
But I actually visited orphanages before in Germany in the early 60s, Vietnam.
And in both cases these orphanages or the children in these orphanages showed the same patterns.
It seemed like there were two. In one case they seemed to be just starved for affection and love,
and they would cling on anyliness towards them.
So if you entered this orphanage kids would rush to you and hang on to your legs,
and not want to let you out of their sight.
They would get extremely upset.
There were other kids though that seemed to have been completely detached.
Contact, if you tried to engage them and talk to them they would often look away.
They did not show emotion. There was no joy, no hugging.
It was like they were in a depression.
And I tend to think that these were the kids who may have given up.
In both cases though it would represent a sense of mistrust in the world.
They didn't have predictability.
In one case they didn't have confidence it would be there.
In the second case where they were detached it seems like they just figured nobody was there to trust.
And they didn't try anymore.
If the precious world that provides complete inconsistency,
then of course this sense of mistrust will develop.
But there won't be a foundation for the developed stages.
And so Erickson saw this first stage as extremely important.
He couldn't overstress the importance of this foundation of laying down this sense of trust for a child.
Let's go on to the second stage.
Erickson called this stage the development of a sense of autonomy doubt.
Let me explain how he means shame and doubt.
But after the child's developed a sense of trust you'll have the confidence to try out actions and learn about the world.
This is the basic idea here.
So a child now attempts self-control and tries to master tasks, many of them independent of her parents.
So if in the first child's identity is really tied to attachment to another person, usually the parents,
now her identity includes being separated from the parents.
So first you have to be connected, then you try to separate.
The child practices autonomy but has to always practice it.
So there's always trust and connectedness that makes possible the overlaying, the overlaying independence.
Let me give you some examples of this kind of autonomy.
If a child has, again, parents who take care feeder and such, you see this all the time.
Now parents, now children who are very pretty secure and feeling good about themselves want to do things for themselves.
So the child grabs a spoon from the mom and grabs the cup and tries to drink, tries to wash herself, pushes people away.
The stairs on her own, she gets into things on her own.
Everything she's trying as an older baby or as a toddler, she's trying to do on her own in this way.
Now this stage originated to Freud's anal stage, but Erickson pointed out that toilet training is just one of many areas
in which a child attempts to gain some self-control and mastery.
You see, development occurs outside the bathroom to a large extent.
One of the additions that Erickson gave us.
What happens if development goes awry in this stage?
Well first, if there's trust from the first stage, it's very likely that this child will have problems developing in this stage.
But another major roadblock to development during this stage occurs when children try things in an autonomous way and on their own,
and they're put down, they're criticized or they're punished for their attempts.
So if her parents punish her every time that she tries to do something on her own like she tries to feed herself or she tries to wash herself,
she's likely going to then develop a sense of doubt about her abilities.
Parents may opt for doing things wrong, such as having toileting accidents, and they'll criticize them too much or punish them.
And a child will then feel ashamed of what she can accomplish.
Of a basic sense of shame and doubt in oneself during this stage is the opposite and the negative side of what can occur,
and this of course is going to inhibit the child's independence.
Now if you go to the third stage and then later to the fourth stage, what you really see is a continuation of this development of independence.
Erickson called the thirds of a sense of initiative versus guilt, and again this is of autonomy.
And it continues to develop based on that basic foundation of trust.
If the child's been successful at attempting autonomous skills, in this stage he goes further in attempting to master even more extensive
scheme where the child then initiates and takes more responsibility for what he or she.
He looks for new ways to do things and to manipulate.
So a big aspect of this stage which happens during the preschool years is that children are trying to learn and trying to manipulate others.
He'll attempt to form new relationships with people.
He'll attempt to meet his desires directly, not waiting for the parents to take care of him or even waiting for them to tell him what to do.
For example, children will very often go out on their own and make acquaintances with peers, or they'll try out new roles, gender roles.
It's a time when what goes with being a girl or goes with being a boy.
And children influence others by being kind to them in a way that would seem like a bribe, very transparent as a bribe to parents,
although kids probably don't think it's, they probably think it's pretty clever where parents are saying, I can see this.
So there was this kid recently I knew who just said, Mom, I love you. Can I have a peanut butter and jelly sandwich?
It's pretty simple, and it's pretty unbelievable what he was doing.
And I think new development on his part once did this.
He went into the closet and discovered that his mother had all kinds of shoeboxes in there filled with shoes, of course.
And this would be a clever trick.
So he went downstairs and got a pair of scissors, went upstairs, emptied all of the shoes out of the shoeboxes,
and proceeded to cut up the shoeboxes, cut up doors, windows, and make a little village of buildings.
It was actually pretty, but his mom got extremely angry. She lost her shoeboxes, and he had to ask permission to do that at him.
He'd also gone stare scissors out, sharp scissors, that he wasn't supposed to use.
But the point is, in his joy and his passion to do something, he was going to do it on his own.
He didn't say, can I use those? He just did this kind of thing.
Kids can be frustrating, but this is a perfect example of the initiative that you see.
And compared to these kinds of real-life problem-solving tasks or issues that kids take on,
Erickson stage three really takes on a different focus than Freud's stage three, the phallic stage,
which was the basis for this stage for Erickson.
If you recall, in the phallic stage, Freud talked about the Oedipus complex development.
Now, Erickson subscribed Oedipal conflict, but in his reworking of this stage,
the desires, including sexual desires of the child, and attempts at mastery,
and attempts to develop this self-confidence go well beyond the conflicts involving...
That's just one among many of issues that a child is...
Essentially now, a child's identity includes being a self-starter, to do things on his own.
It's tied to pure relationships in a way that wasn't there before.
What can go awry at this?
Well, a child can be chastised for his drives and feelings of constantly being criticized
and acting independently and without permission.
A child may feel that he's never on his own, and when he does, it's because he's bad in some way.
So added to the shame and doubt that came from the previous stage,
Erickson argued that children can develop a strong sense of guilt,
because now a lot of the criticisms from parent morality,
child-only incompetent child's also bad, become a moral issue.
Now, Erickson called the fourth stage of development a sense of industry versus inferiority.
This stage was originally based on Freud's latency stage,
but there's really not too much latent about it.
As Erickson discovered, and as most people know during the school years,
they're pretty active and a lot of art for Freud was the sexual drives and desires that were guiding the stage.
They're probably there, but kids don't show them to adults.
Anyway, by industry, Erickson's way adds to this independent mastery and domains of knowledge.
In other words, the child is industrious.
It's interesting, though, that this stage coincides going to elementary school in western cultures and in our culture.
The focus of elementary school is on academic learning and mastery.
So this development occurs because of input.
The child is learning facts.
The child is learning to systematically classify our world,
learning academic skills in writing and math and addition,
and the child rules of sports.
So not only is the child mastering physical skills,
but if you've ever watched children learning sports,
shift from the preschool to the school years.
In the preschool years, kids are learning some basic skills,
maybe throwing and running and such,
and they have a very difficult time with the rules of a particular game,
and they're certainly not even paying any attention to strategy.
I had to teach a bunch of preschoolers to play football.
An impossible task.
Basically, football for preschoolers is sort of like a line of scrimmage.
Somebody centers the ball and then everyone runs amok
and tackles each other and bangs into each other,
and that's the fun part of the game.
But there's not such as actually two opposing teams,
and they have rules to follow,
and there are lines of scrimmage,
and you have these strategies for what you do.
One side defends, the other side is trying to get the ball forward.
That kind of stuff comes in during this stage.
And I use that as a silly example,
but that example is a sense of mastery of all levels that kids are trying to master.
In fact, I remember playing baseball and other games,
and in fact, we'd spend a good arguing about the rules.
We would spend a good deal of our time with elaborate procedures
on how to choose up teams.
These are examples of development during this period of time.
Just recently, in a school near us,
I observed several passions or obsessions, if you will, that kids had.
There was one kid, these are elementary school kids,
there was one kid who became an expert on everything Egyptian and knew ancient Egypt.
He built models, he read books,
he did a geography project on Egypt.
Everything about Egypt, he seemed to know.
Another kid was a weather expert.
New cloud formations, like the best of them,
and he asked with how people predict the weather and practiced it.
Now, many of you have seen kids who are experts at dinosaurs.
I've seen children who are superb paleontologists, if you will.
They have the ages of the earth marked out.
They know what's...
Now, the list goes on and on, but this is the stage then,
if there ever was a stage where mastery reigns supreme.
And it's in this stage then that Erickson believes
our identity is tied to what we learn, what we can master,
what we can do, if you will, to social relationships.
So part of the mastery is how a child fits in, how the child belongs.
There have been various clubs, who once peers are, teams that a person belongs to.
All of these things are also important in this sense of mastery.
In the social realm, a child may not need, may also need, excuse me,
to master fears and homesickness.
El may sleep over at a friend's house or go on a camping trip for the first time.
And the child has the idea of being away from the parents
for an extended period of time or with the parents not even in the vicinity.
And this is a form of mastery, being independent to this extreme extent
without, with still being a cool or a big person, not showing it, not crying.
Extremes in trying to figure out and define who they are in terms of identity
helps them to focus on who they aren't or what's possible, what is not possible.
One of the publications for kids during these school years is, there's an annual edition.
And kids focus tremendously, find it absolutely fascinating to see who did the most of something.
And this goes right along with having heroes, whether they're sports heroes
or people that did other things in almost an extreme or at the edges of ability.
So for any of this true sense of mastery and competence development,
one has to also take in the chance of failure.
You see, if you're going and you're going to meet a challenge, it truly has to be a challenge.
And you have to have the chance of also failing at this task.
So the other side of the mastery or the industry for Erickson was that you have the chance of
and if you consistently time and again, time and again experience failure,
develop a sense of inferiority.
This is an age when children use a lot of social comparison.
They're constantly comparing how they're doing to their peers.
In fact, we do this as adults as well.
Preschoolers don't do a lot of it.
But kids at this age do.
They're constantly thinking, how do I look versus this person?
Can I run as fast as this person?
How am I doing in math, in school?
How's my book report versus this person's book report?
And they're very adept at realistically assessing their incompetence without adults.
So adults can criticize a child and tell a child that she's not doing well
and then elicit this sense of inferiority in a child.
But a child who constantly fasts in school
or does his own social comparison to other kids and finds out that he's not quite...
will also develop a sense of inferiority.
So identity comes with what you can do in this case.
I have to mention social ability to assess yourself.
Some researchers have pointed out that children, when they're preschoolers,
tend to over assess their abilities.
They tend to be completely unrealistic in how much they can do,
what they can do and what they can't do.
And in fact, they very often will say things,
I can run faster than anybody else.
I can read. Now I can read.
Or as Mycenae, he was about three and his older brother was playing Little League baseball
and he could barely catch and throw, but he had a goal.
He was trying. He said, you know, I'm a professional baseball player.
He then said, I'm a professional baseball player that pees his pants.
That's what he said. He thought about it.
So it was at least some realistic assessment.
But the point is, is children in the preschool years over, not over assess,
they're completely unrealistic in how well they're doing and what their abilities are.
And gradually over time, as they experience more and more failures and successes,
them for steam and how well they're doing.
So it's during those school years that a sense of inferiority can develop
because they're more realistic.
I want to point out, though, that in the early preschool years, when they are unrealistic,
that there might be an adaptive reason for this ability to over assess one's abilities.
It means that kids will try.
Don't hold back and they don't have a coin. They can do anything.
And several people have pointed out, if we didn't believe we could do everything,
it probably wouldn't be as adaptive for us as a species.
In trying everything, it makes it possible to actually get there.
Let me give you one more example.
My son went away for a summer camp for the first time.
It was a two-week camp.
And when he came back, he, I think, was like a lot of kids.
He spent a lot of time talking about his experiences.
He sort of had to work it out and tell us everything that happened almost in real time.
And as he was going through it and telling about everything that was happening,
there came a point then that he paused.
And he looked at us, his mom and dad, and he said,
do you think I'm different in any way?
And we said, well, what do you mean? What do you mean, do you think I'm different?
And he says, well, do I seem like I was two weeks ago?
And we didn't know exactly what he meant.
But his mom, being sort of a student at this point, said,
well, let me think. You know, I can't put a finger on it.
In some ways, you have to say, but I don't know what it is.
It just seems like you're more mature, sort of more independent.
You just have the way you move in that that I can't explain.
He said, yeah, that's it. That's it.
And I think this shows something.
He had gone away, for him, it was fun, but it was also a challenge.
There had been a challenge that he had made it.
He'd accomplished this.
He'd been without us, wanted to be more independent,
more the interesting thing when you compare this to the sense of trust.
I think he wanted us to see it and to confirm it.
He needed the foundation again.
He needed the security and the trust that we provided.
So these last three stages that we've talked about,
autonomy, initiative, industry, I think are really all same development of independence.
And the trust never went away.
It was always there as a foundation.
So in our next lecture, we're going to take it even further.
We've talked about trust and now independence.
We're going to now talk about the next two stages,
very important stages in history where the child develops a straight independence
or identity to develop a new level of connectedness to other people.
Thank you.
