It's a sight and a sound that never gets old.
The world's fastest cars twisting and turning through the streets of one of its most picturesque
cities.
Each year, a country that's smaller than New York's Central Park builds a world-class
street circuit that spans a third of its length and sees its population grow by more than
500% overnight.
It's an incredible feat of logistics, engineering and temporary construction that requires some
serious planning and patience.
This is how the world's second smallest nation becomes a racetrack.
The Monaco Grand Prix is an event that turns an entire country on its head, from the resurfacing
of roads to the construction of stands, barriers, entire media centres and the small matter
of some 200,000 people arriving in a city that's normally home to 38,000, it's one
of the most impactful sporting events there is.
First held in 1929, the event made its Formula One debut in 1950 and has since become a
staple of the world championships, appearing on every season's calendar since 1955, apart
from in 2020 of course, when almost everything fun was cancelled.
The overall layout of Monaco's track has changed very little over the years, it's
a small country and there's not much else you could do.
Outside of the Grand Prix, the routes used as a public road and keeping that up to FIA
regulations is a serious job.
Prior to each year's racing, about a third of the 3.3km circuit is planed and resurfaced,
removing any deformations that could impact drivers on what's already considered to be
one of F1's most challenging routes.
It runs along some of the country's main thoroughfares, so these works and the line
repainting are carried out largely at night, in sections and over a three week period.
With the track established, things start to move up a gear with the construction of the
temporary facilities, about six weeks out from the racing.
Much of this is prepabricated away from sight, reducing the setup time in Monaco itself.
Relying on a team of highly skilled full-time engineers to keep on track, some 600 trucks
carry grandstands, pit garages, barriers, footbridges and more into the country, completely
transforming it.
While the pit facilities in Monaco are only temporary structures, they're no less high
tech than those at permanent circuits.
Arriving in 120 different sections, these modules are lifted into place by crane and
assembled over just 14 days, creating 450 square metres of space for each of the 12 teams
across three floors, divided into mechanical, technical and hospitality sections.
With limited open space along the circuit, the majority of the seating is located along
the waterfront of Porto Cule, with smaller stands located at key positions like the Monte
Carlo Casino and the entrance of the tunnel section near Portier Cove.
Of course, boats, rooftops and the terraces of surrounding hotels and restaurants all
act as VIP sections for fans.
The circuit's official capacity is 37,000, making it the smallest of any in Formula One,
but Monaco's unique landscape gives thousands of people views of the track and it has a
much larger, non-ticketed audience than the other Grand Prix events.
In a normal year, around 200,000 people come into the country for the Grand Prix and 100,000
attend the final Sunday.
With so many spectators near the track, over 20,000 square metres of safety mesh and more
than 21km of safety railing are installed to protect the public, buildings and the drivers.
While the pandemics forced some countries to hold their Grand Prix without spectators,
Monaco is allowing 40-50% of ticketed seats to be sold, marking the biggest return to
capacity since the disrupted 2020 season.
To keep the country connected while the race is on, a maze of footbridges and gangways
is installed.
Then, 670 event marshals are brought in to help coordinate the nearly 3,000 strong team
that it takes to pull off the event.
The organisers work hard to minimise disruption as far as possible and access to the circuit
is largely unrestricted.
It's only completely closed to pedestrians and traffic between 5.30am and 7.30pm on race
days.
That's a major break with other circuits like Singapore and Melbourne which remain closed
for the duration of the event.
After the racing, everything's cleared away again and the country returns to its more
peaceful self.
With its global reach, a place on Formula One's calendar is a highly sought after prize and
some emerging markets have managed to edge out smaller ones over the years.
Despite its size, Monaco's unique blend of history, prestige and atmosphere has seen
it attain a near untouchable status in the world of racing.
All enabled by an incredible team of construction workers and engineers who pull off this amazing
transformation.
Most years.
