Welcome to the Basin Conspiracy, I'm Inyash Brodsky.
I'm Stephen Zuber and we have a very special guest today.
Matt Freeman.
Matt is the co-host of one of my favorite podcasts,
the We've Got Ward podcast, where they expertly dissect the,
I can't remember the whole intro, the Wild Boas world of para-humans
and superheroes and random stuff.
That was my poor version of their introduction of their show.
Everyone should check it out.
And he's also the co-host of one of my new favorite podcasts as well,
the Doofcast, where they do the same thing with media of various kinds.
They've recently done it with Fifth Element and Bound,
which are movies I love and just did it with your name.
I listened to that one today and now I have to go see that.
Yeah, I recommend that one and you guys are going to make me blush.
Thanks for the introduction.
Well, thanks for coming. This is great.
And I love your podcast too, by the way.
Oh, thanks.
I listen to every episode.
We try.
Yeah.
Speaking of trying things and speaking of your guys' podcast,
I could tell from a few episodes ago that you guys shared notes before the episode.
And here we are, what, three years into our show and I'm like,
Inyash, we should start doing that before episodes.
We should have like a rough schedule of things to talk about.
What?
Not just fly by the seat of our pants and try to make up for it in post?
We've brought like personal notes a couple of times.
Working on this will be fun going forward.
And of course we do on an episode where we don't really have an actual itinerary
or something specific to discuss.
So now I've got hodgepodge notes for a hodgepodge episode, so buckle in.
Katrina used to be a big notes person.
Yeah.
She would always show up with like an outline and everything.
And we were like, that's awesome.
And then she left and we're like, well, I'm not taking that job over.
Well, I'm not doing it.
It can be a bit of a monster.
I think our first script was two pages and now our average script is like 17 pages.
Holy shit.
Don't let it get out of hand.
I don't think that'll be a problem with me.
Yeah.
How long after the arc comes out is it before you put out the podcast?
Well, now we're keeping up so basically every two chapters.
So once a week we put out a podcast covering the last two chapters,
the last week's source of material, whatever amount that was.
Okay.
So when we were doing worm, we would do one arc at a time
or we would do two episodes per arc.
But that was because that was all done and we were just making our way through it.
Yeah.
Which congrats.
It's fucking huge.
That was an epic journey.
Did not know what I was getting into when I started that.
Wait, I thought you'd already read it.
I mean the podcast.
I mean, yeah.
Oh, you didn't know what you were getting with the podcast?
Yeah.
No, those things surprise you.
Yeah.
You're like, it's an hour.
How long could it take really to put it out an hour podcast?
And in our starting, our first episode, we were like,
I think eventually we'll pick up the pace.
We'll do maybe two or three arcs per episode with the opposite direction.
But as Stephen was saying, very in-depth and insightful shit.
Well, thank you.
Yeah, it's things that I don't pick up on at all because I'm working.
I'm trying very slowly.
I should have gotten this in primary school, but I didn't read those books because I was
a bad student.
You guys dissect stuff in a way that you notice motifs and themes that I never would have
noticed on my own.
I've watched Bound a number of times and I never picked up on the focus on the hands,
which after you said it, oh yeah, totally true.
Nor on the fact that everyone is in boxes, both visually and metaphorically, and it's
about breaking out of those boxes.
It's like, oh my God, I have to listen to all your stuff now.
That little analysis completely escapes me on things, so that's why I find it really interesting
when I'm reading stuff on my own.
Yeah, okay, right.
That's why we have these podcasts.
Exactly.
It's usually being forced to think through and talk about the thing that makes these
things jump out.
A lot of these, Scott's actually better at noticing stuff like that than me, but almost
nothing jumps out at me when I'm watching a movie.
It's always later when I'm like, okay, I know I have to talk about this, so I have to think
about some of our things to say, or when we're actively talking about it, things will occur
to me.
How can I trick people into thinking I'm smart?
Exactly.
That's my whole life right there.
My way of doing that at work is there's enough people there that sometimes I only see some
people once or twice a week, so if I can say something smart in those five minute conversations,
then I'll just leave them for a couple of days.
Yeah, and they just assume you're always doing that every five minutes.
That's the trick.
Yeah.
That's what you're like.
Leave on a high note like a comedian.
Exactly.
What are we talking about today?
I don't know what order you guys wanted to take this in.
According to our notes here, I thought we brought this up at the meetup on Tuesday, which
was three, four days ago, about a day, so it's been a long week.
It's been three days to go now.
Gotcha.
That makes sense, because it's Friday.
There was the, I guess, thought experiment, or I don't know if it was a thought experiment,
or an actual proposal by Robin Hansen.
Probably an actual proposal.
But no one's listening.
He's not proposing this to anybody, just like to us.
Well, to anyone who'd listened, he put it on the web and it was like, hey, here's
just a thing.
Who wants political suicide?
I think it's a genius idea.
Yeah, but we're not the main voting bloc, right?
So yeah.
Fucking voting blocs.
All right.
So what's the idea?
I think we talked about this once before on the podcast, maybe, but it's the band of
things store, where anything that is banned by the government, there's a special store
in every city or every state or something, but not too terribly out of the way that sells
all the band things.
It's called the band of things store and there's skull and crossbones and it's like, buy these
things at your own risk, you could die and et cetera, et cetera.
But anything that is banned everywhere else, you can get there legally, because then you
cuts the feet out from under the black market.
And you know, sometimes people have a legitimate reason for wanting things.
Other times they just want their drugs, but that, sure, there's your banned things.
And it's, I mean, I would go there so much for prescription drugs, honestly.
He draw a caveat for like, obviously bad ideas like WMDs or, you know, bio weapons or big
bombs.
He didn't, but I think that goes without saying because those things, are those even like
banned?
Yes.
I'm sure that there's a law somewhere saying I can't have a nuke.
Okay.
I would certainly hope so.
I mean, at that point, you're committing an act of war, which is technically banned.
Is it though?
Or do they just fight you?
Would we go to prison?
You'd probably be killed by the army.
I feel like we're digging our way to find this.
So let's assume that there's no WMDs to stave off that obvious thing.
So yeah, I think a lot of it comes down to the price too.
Like if you're going to go to the banned things, like another thing is you automatically think
of like, okay, well, if you have it all in one centralized place, then you can keep track
of the people who are buying the banned things.
You can tax them heavily, which also helps and is better than that same, you know, funds
going to the black market, obviously, for what like you mentioned.
So you're simultaneously like defunding the whole criminal underworld and keeping tabs
on the kinds of people who want the kinds of things that the state doesn't like, which
could be viewed as a downside, actually.
Yeah, if you're going to go to the store to buy a WMD, everybody knows you did that
and they're just going to follow you.
But I think more than anything else, I like the idea because of all the, not even, well,
obviously I think the drug war is awful and recreational drugs shouldn't be banned at
all, but-
Inyosh just came back from Burning Man, so.
And I've held that opinion for a long fucking time, even before I ever did any drugs.
But just the amount of medical interventions that are banned, I think because, you know,
this might be harmful to people or that you have to go through a big ol' process to get,
I'd be like, sometimes I just want to take my chances, you know?
Yeah, I'm trying to organize my thoughts here.
So yeah, we'll get into the fun backlash that Yudkowsky got and that he responded to
in his last wrong essay.
Policy debates should not be one-sided.
But yeah, I'm in support of the idea too, at least in broad strokes, maybe.
I like, I'm not rejecting it out of hand anyway.
Like, I don't like the idea of having to go get a permission slip to go get a prescription
if I feel like I need it.
You know, like I'm not a medical professional, but if I feel like I need a sleep aid or an
alertness aid or, you know, to drugs and stuff or a painkiller, whether for pain or for fun,
I can get it.
It's just like, do I want to, or you know, psychedelics or something that you can't
tell what they are by looking at them.
Like the vast majority of things that are, not the vast majority, but a lot of things
that are banned are banned for the people's own good, you know?
Right.
If you take this, it would harm you, so we must ban it.
Or if you were to get this loan, it would take advantage of you, so we must ban it or
whatever.
And I am really, I'm a fucking adult and I can make my own mistakes.
And if I really look into something and I'm like, I can see how this is harmful for a
lot of people, but I want to do that harm to myself or I think if my situation is good,
fucking let me.
That's what the ban store is for.
It's for the things that protect, supposedly protect people from themselves.
I, whenever I hear someone say something like, do it for the children, which I also
mentioned at the meetup, I right away think that is a shit law and a shit reason.
And I am totally voting against this because I do not think we as a society of adults should
be constrained by laws meant to protect fucking five year olds.
I'm not a five year old.
Don't treat me like one.
Like a good example of that might be like residential speed limits, like adults are
smart enough to not walk in the street, but we have residential speed limits so we don't
hit kids.
Right.
Are you so, do you think that the speed limit on side streets should be 40 miles an hour?
Like they are on, on like throwaways?
No.
I mean, necessarily I also think that most streets have their own natural safe speed
limit that you say for who well, I mean, say for more or less everyone safe to be driven
on basically, right?
Yeah.
Yeah.
There's when a street is cramped and windy and small, people go slower.
I mean, that's how roundabouts work.
They, they force you to go slow because you have to make this turn.
And when there is a large, straight, flat, multi-lane road with a concrete median or
something in the middle separating the two opposing sides and no cross traffic and the
speed limit is set at 30 miles per hour there.
You know it's set at 30 miles per hour so they can rake in the cash.
That is a 45 mile per hour zone naturally.
Yeah.
You know, there's a town there.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I mean, yeah, it's, it's a trade off between safety and, and freedom, which is like an
ageless political question.
And yeah, I think, I don't know, I'm definitely someone who would prefer things to be more
on, on the freedom end of things.
You can think of examples of stuff like alcohol where that drug should definitely be illegal
considering what other drugs are illegal.
Oh yeah.
And, and it used to be, and exactly like what you, what you just outlined about organized
crime made it so that they were like, fine, fine, we'll make it legal.
That's just sort of a microcosm for all of the, all of the ways in which the nanny state
should probably back off, let people make their mistakes and then just tax things and
everything would be fine.
Although, I mean, there are some things where you can hurt a lot of other people like you
were saying with WMDs or in my opinion, no, people shouldn't be necessarily forced to
get vaccines, but if your kids are unvaccinated, I don't want them in a school or any other
public building where they come in contact with a lot of other people because they are
fucking playgrounds.
Certainly if they don't have a medical reason for not being vaccinated.
Right.
So, you know, you shouldn't be not allowed to attend public school because you have a
genetic issue that makes a vaccine very dangerous for you.
Yes, yes.
But since you're one in 10,000 or something, then that's fine.
But if, if it's super trendy in California to not get vaccines, then you get what that
measles outbreak a few years ago at what Disneyland?
Was it Disneyland?
Yeah.
It certainly should not be a lot of Disneyland.
Interesting tangent on that.
I mean, my, me and like, my kids mom and I, when we were having them, especially the first
one, we, we were kind of like, you know, let's look into the actual science here because
it's irresponsible just to be like, well, scientists say vaccines are safe.
So that's, that's fine.
Like, so we actually looked into it and we like ask doctors and they would be so dismissive
and like patronizing and I'm, I'm a scientist.
So it's, it's very irritating to me when it's like, no, no, I'm, I'm being epistemically
humble here and trying to find out the actual reasons why and you're actually making me
feel like I'm being scammed when in actuality, everyone should get vaccinated.
But you say that to a doctor because I think if you had said that sentence, they might
have immediately changed disposition because they probably get like, doctor, should I vaccinate
my baby five times a day because they get it from people who, you know, get their medical
advice from Jenny McCarthy, right?
So they're, they're sick of answering this question.
Granted, they should definitely be more personable and deliver this better, right?
Cause you get these, you know, standoffish, yeah, I've experienced similar things with
like, I had a kid get like a whole bunch of ear infections in a row and they had to be
on antibiotics for a long time.
And I was like, Hey, I'm kind of concerned at how long she's been on antibiotics and
the doctors like real, like immediately annoyed and dismissive.
And it's like, I'm not actually wrong to be worried about that.
It's just, he has a point that it's like, it's better than the disease, but I don't know.
I, it's, it makes me feel like they can't actually explain themselves, which is a problem.
I don't know.
I really miss my previous doctor.
He quit the practice to go into policy, but God, he was good.
And he would like take, at least me, I'm assuming he did this with everyone, just take me very
seriously, explain things, talk through things.
I was such a good doctor.
That's why I didn't shop around for LASIK was the guy I talked with for my
consult, we talked for like 90 minutes and he couldn't have been more patient and articulate.
And I asked him at the end, I was like, have you ever like, you know, delivered
lectures or anything on this or taught students, you know, in this music?
Oh yeah, I've taught, I don't know, a few hundred lectures and wrote like four books.
And I was like, that makes perfect sense.
Cause you've, what you delivered here to me was just perfect.
And, uh, that granted, you know, I'm not coming down on doctors.
I'm coming down their bedside manner for sure.
And they're like patient interaction, but like, you know, the profession, we're not
anti-medicine or anything, just caveat, but I guess never mind.
We know our audience.
They're not going to think we're idiots.
Yeah.
I mean, if, if I had a point, it was that I think there's a responsibility to like
actually represent the science and not just like badger parents into doing things, even
if they're the right thing, because this is why there are anti-vaxxers.
I mean, maybe that's a strong statement.
I feel like there'd be less anti-vaxxers if there was less dismissiveness.
Totally.
I think you're absolutely right.
Um, so this gives us a, uh, an opening to segue back into the bad thing store.
And so Yudkowski had this, uh, I think it was a comment on Hanson's thread on this
that, you know, sure, but then some, you know, poor mom of, you know, single mother
fives going to go in there and buy, you know, Dr.
magic snake oil of, you know, some, whatever, tincture and acid.
Yeah.
Sulfuric acid and dye.
And people took that as like, so you're against this, you know, what the hell.
And he's like, no, that's just what's going to happen.
And so it, I love, this was, this was the post of, uh, policy debate should not be
one-sided that, uh, and it's part of the, what, um, politics is the mind killer
subsequence or sequence because the fact that he's saying, this is a flaw with
this position, I still endorse it.
I'd, if you came down at four against it, I don't think it really matters.
But the point is, is that Hanson would probably readily agree to that.
Yeah.
Some, some people are going to die.
Um,
and that makes you look like a monster, right?
Like if even one person dies from the sulfuric acid snake oil, we should
get rid of this store.
Well, it makes you look like a monster, but it also pointing that out makes it
seem like you're against it when it's like, no, that's just an accepted
cost and people aren't able to do that with positions they agree with.
Yeah.
Whereas with the current system, with, with no band things store, um, we've
accepted the costs that are completely invisible and unclear, like the cost of
people going to find things on the black market instead, which is not viewed as
a consequence of our current policy.
It's viewed as people are cheating the policy and, but it is a consequence of
the current policy.
So yeah, I mean, you know, even just, you know, you mentioned buying things
like drugs, I imagine, you know, prescription drugs are still out there
in prints and everything that you could tell them, tell what they are.
But if someone is hypothetically buying illegal psych, currently illegal
psychedelics on the black market and not at the bad things store, uh, or the
band things store, then you don't really know what you're getting.
You, you can buy at home test kits and they're expensive and they're
somewhat reliable, but they use up some of your expensive product that you just
bought.
And so for the most part, you're just taking your dealer's word for it.
Um, I'm assuming hypothetically, uh, so you get this, you know,
bag of brown stuff and you're told, yep, go have a good time.
And it's like, what was in it?
It's what, it's what you bought.
Or it's what I told you it is and say, okay.
Um, so you would, you would get rid of a lot of that uncertainty, um, with
just safe access to it.
I don't think that it would be possible for anyone to accidentally buy fake
weed, um, cause it's pretty identifiable.
I think even to people who are probably first time buyers of, assuming
they Googled it first, but you know, medical or medical first and then
recreational dispensaries, you know, we live in Colorado.
They're bringing in a fortune.
And, uh, I mean, I don't think we've ever gone to a dispensary.
I've bought edibles and stuff there before.
Um, it's been a long time.
I used to help me sleep and it stopped, but, um,
I assume they look a lot like smoke shops.
Yeah.
But they're, they're actually pretty, like they're professional, like in a way
that like is also like super heavy and it reeks a pot in there.
But like, um, they're, they're there to talk you through the products.
Like I asked, you know, Hey, what do I need for sleep?
And, you know, if I, no, no, something, you know, maybe, um, that, you
know, what to kick in later, they're like, Oh, then you don't want an
edible, you want a pill.
I'm like, Oh, perfect.
You know, and that's not like a great, you know, medical degree
diagram or prescription there, but that's, you know, professional helpful.
Right.
So if you could have that for all the stuff.
I wonder if there's anybody who's in favor of the band thing store who's not
in favor of people owning guns, probably one.
And I bet I don't know if there's a, I don't, I don't think you could have
that level of, of, um,
contradiction.
Yeah.
Well, lack of consistency.
Hmm.
I'm sure you, I would like to say that.
I don't think it'd be possible to have that lack of consistency too.
But I bet I bet because if you ban guns, then they go in the band gun store.
Yeah.
Well, yeah, the WMD, um, example is, is instructive because it's like, look,
there's no reason for anyone to own this.
Like there's like even, even heroin, you could say, well, at least someone's
going to use this for their pain or something, but there's no reason for
someone to own a WMD, except to kill a lot of people, which is, which is illegal.
So, um, but I, I mean, I don't know.
I'm pretty sure second amendment is that's the right one.
Right.
Enthusiasts would, would say those blusters.
Lots of reasons to own guns.
So.
I think the second amendment is one of the worst reasons to own guns.
Just, I mean, so I, I mean,
you're just awesome.
That's why I would own one.
Yeah.
I'm, I'm, I'm more pro gun than my average friend, but, uh, I'm not pro second
amendment.
I, you know, there was a quote somewhere online that like, you know, the founding
fathers didn't even know what the fuck a germ was.
Like, what am I going to take their position on literally anything today?
Right.
So what, what, what do you have against the second amendment specifically?
I've, I have an issue specifically with saying these people 300 years ago
thought of literally everything that will happen in 20 2018.
I also like, like to hand away and say, Oh, I have the same issue with the,
with the fugitive slave clause in the constitution too.
Just as an example of something like, look, these guys weren't omnipotent.
If that's your actual claim that no, they were literally, you know.
Well, shouldn't you have that same objection to all of the amendments then?
I do.
Well, basically like to any, I, I don't think that's something's worth doing
because it's in the constitution.
I think, I think it's, it's important to have a, a guideline like that the
government sticks to, but to say that's the reason.
Um, I'm not a political scientist.
There's probably great reasons to say that, that we should just defer to
that in cases of concern.
But I think in any reasonable circumstance, there'll be other factors
to point to as to why that's the right reason.
Just like, just like I might say, because it's in the Bible is a bad reason.
I think that it's really good shelling fences though.
The, I mean, yeah, Bible is bullshit, but things like the, the actual government
documents, there's some things you just don't want to be fighting about constantly.
You know, it's been how many years, like 30, 40, 40 years now that with the
abortion debate has been going on back and forth and you know, every now and
then just settling something and drawing a line saying, look, this is settled
now, let's argue about something else for the next 40 years.
Sure.
And I, I'm, I'm glad that there's things like, uh, the freedom of speech
enshrined in the constitution because apparently we still have to fight
about that anyway, but, but at least it's there.
Freedom of speech is a good idea, not because it's the first amendment,
right.
But for a bunch of other independent reasons.
Exactly.
But it means that I don't have to fight as much about it because it is there.
That's, that's fair.
I mean, like I said, the fugitive slave clause was in the constitution too.
Right.
Right.
So not everything in there was literally perfect or literally everything
that was perfectly perfect.
So I, I think my, my position is just more like, uh, to the extent that
the fugitive slave thing in the constitution, it was taken out, but well, it
was taken out as, uh, after what, decades later.
Hmm.
Um, so, uh, I had this looked up before, but not in the last five years.
Um, what was I going to say?
Uh, oh, I don't know.
I, like I said, I can be on the right.
I can be on the same side of, of a, of a, uh, desire or a person
desires to own a gun, but disagree with their reasons.
Right.
I don't think that the idea that some, someone who's been dead for hundreds
of years said it was a good idea is a good reason.
Um, what they said, it was a good idea is like, have a musket that you
can shoot once every 45 seconds so that the government can't take you over.
Because that's all we have right now too.
Right.
So like, you know, people can get into the hysterics.
I think we're getting kind of derailed, but, um, I think that, that's,
that's all I'm going to say.
I mean, we should actually be allowed to own like Harriers, according to
second amendment, because we should be allowed to own weapons that can protect
us from tyranny.
And apparently, right?
So now, I mean, handguns and rifles are absolutely not going to cut it anymore.
So there actually should be these, you know, weapons of mass destruction in
the band thing store.
I've changed my mind because we have to be able to protect ourselves from
tyranny to the constitution.
They have all the bulletproof jets and helicopters and turret guns and stuff.
Right.
We need those too.
If we're going to, if we're going to withstand being taken over by the government.
Yeah.
An EMP in every house.
Oh, that's my platform.
I, I'm, I'm just trying to visualize society working when there's an EMP in
everyone's house.
Oh yeah.
Just like your five year old gets upset and he's like, fuck you, dad.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Don't like the result of the election.
Right.
The entire power grid of the country is knocked off line.
Oh, that big of an EMP.
Oh, I mean, like you get enough of them.
Spread around.
Right.
Yeah.
Yeah.
You think fortune would just coordinate to do the one of these like every three
hours across the country.
Right.
Yeah.
Oh, okay.
So you brought up the, um, by you, I mean, Matt, brought up the rationalist
community hub in Moscow.
Yeah.
So there was a less wrong post during the last week or so.
Um, and it was a very detailed, uh, description of what the rationality hub in
Moscow has been doing for the last three years.
And I, I unfortunately read it too long ago to really give a good summary of what
it says and it's very long and detailed too.
So I don't think a summary would quite do it justice, but I found it very inspiring.
And, um, I just kind of wanted you guys to glance at it as like a basis for having
a discussion about, I don't know, for a very long time, ever since discovering
the rationality community, I had this idea of like what it could be.
Um, and that's never really left me.
Uh, so I don't know if you guys ever, you can share that image of like, wow, this
could be, this could be an important, big, unique thing.
And, um, like I, and I want to be part of that.
You know, I don't know.
Pretty much constantly.
Yeah.
That's what got me into it.
And then when we had dinner with Robin Hansen, we was in Denver a few months
ago, he asked us a couple of times, like, so what does the local community like do?
And I'm just like, fucking nothing.
Well, I think what I, what I said was, you know, it's just a place for like-minded
people to get together and hang out.
We don't really have like an agenda.
And he's like, Oh, well, some places I go, they go to meet up and they'll do, you
know, they're working on a startup or they're doing this or that.
And what I wish I had said was like, no, it's a place to enforce like good, um, the
norms that we want, but the norms that we don't get, you know, in our day-to-day lives.
Um, I, I will say that I would be sad if we swapped out what we do now for focused
directed, that directed activities.
I would be happy if we added focused directed activities.
And there's been a couple small efforts to do that at our community for the last,
in the last few years, but they tuck her out.
Cause I think it's hard to, it's hard to dedicate the work.
And like one thing I did notice skimming over the, uh, the Moscow, um, community
was it is a long post, but I think they spend like $8,300 a month on like rent
and salaries and workshops.
And so they're clearly doing a lot.
We spend, uh, 20 bucks a month on pizza.
So like, um, it's a very different scale of, of what we're trying to accomplish,
but it is inspiring and there's, there's no, there's nothing stopping us from
doing something super awesome.
Cause like the guy who wrote the post, I believe is like a crypto millionaire or
something.
So, so he basically funded this.
I may be making that up by the way, but he basically funded this himself, like,
like put in his own capital.
I don't even know if he expects to get it back.
I think this might have even been just like, I want to see this happen.
So I'm going to do it.
It's like, yeah, we don't, we can't do that.
But still, it's fun to think about the possibilities.
Cause basically he, he like created, um, what they're calling like an uncafé or
something.
What was the word they used?
Anti-café.
Yeah.
Which, which basically is, um, for those who don't know, which I didn't know is
like a cafe, except instead of paying for the coffee and then sitting there and
using the internet, you pay for the internet or for the time and then they
have like other amenities that are free once, once you've paid for the time.
So, I mean, it's the kind of thing that, that I think appeals a lot to students
actually, um, but yeah.
He, he, if I recall, cause I read it earlier today, he got a nice stock
options from the company, possibly start up, not sure that he was working for.
And so he had about $100,000, which he sunk almost entirely into this over
the past several years.
So I'm just full of shit.
Thank you for correcting me.
Oh, well, no, that's okay.
But, but I, like, I, I just want to put that out there.
Like this dude is awesome.
He's put his life savings into this and that's, that I, you know, want to
give him his props for that.
Oh yeah, definitely.
That, that's really cool to put that much of his, his net worth into it.
But yeah, so the, the, um, anti cafe becomes then the hub of the community
and it's a lot more of a solid thing because it's like a permanent base.
And it's open 24 seven.
That would be really cool to do a lot of activities.
Uh, they, they have some games they play called, um, fallacy mania.
They do a CFAR style workshops that are like three days long.
Uh, not every month, but, you know, with some regularity and they
actually do charge money for those.
He said, and just a whole bunch of both directed activities and just hang
out and do whatever activities in four different rooms.
Uh, some of them just, uh, I think the smallest one was like a bedroom
size and largest one could hold like 40 people in a pinch.
So yeah, a whole bunch of cool stuff there.
That sounds like it'd be great.
Is somebody else did it here?
Well, I mean, the main, like, yeah, if I had a million dollars, I think
that'd be great to, you know, rent a place, you know, near down,
old downtown and probably suck up that million dollars pretty quick.
But, you know, somewhere that's easy to get to, that people are already nearby.
So that's why I was thinking downtown could start people hanging out and
they could, they could come in and do their thing.
And my biggest problem is the same.
It's the, I also have to work, you know, eight.
Well, I have to be at work eight hours a day, which means more like 10
hours of a day of my life is being sucked up by this.
And then you don't have that much energy left.
And these things really take a lot of time and energy to do.
I, I start to undersea, I start to understand why it's cool to have a priest
class that just gets a certain tide of the entire community's money.
He's like, this is my job now.
I'll take care of the community hub that has a big cross on it or whatever.
And I would do not want to actually do that.
But I see now the logic behind it.
Well, let's plant a flag in next.
We're going to talk about the culty aspects to rationality here coming up too.
So if we can work a tithing system into this, that'd be great.
Yeah, I'm wondering if we can like segue between those two, two topics,
because I actually think they're pretty related.
Like the idea of the idea of the fact that, okay.
Well, before, before we segue, he did say that he was like running out of money,
which is why he put the post up.
Okay.
And, and he like, what the things he explained that he was doing, I was like,
I would love to see this sort of thing spread and be in more places.
And like, I don't know how to start this sort of thing up at all.
Yeah.
Even, even if I had like the time and the money,
I wouldn't really know what to do.
And here he is out exploring, doing it, learning the lessons
and like putting down a blueprint, you know?
And I thought it would be a really damn shame for this to fold under right now.
And they have the Patreon going.
So I've thrown in my 10 bucks a month for, I don't know, hopefully at least a year
to, to just to keep them afloat and see if that institutional knowledge can be retained.
Because maybe someday we could implement this, this early test case on a wider basis.
Yeah, yeah, because it seems like he's basically creating a company.
And if it can support itself, especially if it's, you know, receiving ties,
which is basically what you described, then then it could potentially become,
become a thing that moves to other cities.
That would be, that would be really awesome.
It's now a good time to mention, speaking of tithing and Patreon,
that we do have a Patreon for the Bayesian conspiracy.
Oh, we do have a Patreon for the Bayesian conspiracy.
We, we speaking with Matt before the show, we were thinking maybe we should
introduce some other things as well to entice people to join it.
So maybe we'll be doing something like that in the near future.
Yeah. So keep an eye on the Patreon page, even if you're not a supporter yet,
yeah, or ever, you know, no pressure, I wouldn't call it tithing though.
And I was, I was trying to use that as the transition because, you know,
I want a lot more money from someone if they're calling it a tie.
Yeah, we're talking percentage points, not dollars.
Yeah. I mean, yeah, because like I was going to, my segue,
if that's, it's okay to do that is like, I think, I think what the
rationality community stands for and what it could be is very important.
And the fact that we're so phobic of seeming like a cult,
I think has held us back from actually like accreting any kind of identity.
We're, we're the community at large is so wary of being accused of being a cult
that we won't even, like people don't even say that they're part of the community
that because they're like, oh, yeah, I read less wrong, but I'm an aspiring
rationalist. I'm rationalist to Jason.
Yeah, I'm rationalist. It's like, shut up, shut up.
Like we're all, we're all aiming at basically the same thing.
Like why can't, and I think there's a very old Yudkowski post that's basically
like rationalists are very bad joiners, basically.
They're, they're the, the certain cluster of people in people's space
that hate to identify with things.
And like, well, that's a damn shame because we're all, we're, we all kind of want
the same thing, even if there's like a narcissism of small differences in terms
of how we can bicker about the details of that thing.
We're definitely all facing the same direction.
So it's a shame that we can't coordinate a little bit better.
And in terms of achieving the implicit goals in heading toward that thing.
I'm assuming we were all kind of social outcasts when we were younger, right?
That sounds right to me, Steven.
That checks out.
Okay. Yeah, me too.
And I, I, I get the feeling that that is a large part of it.
You don't, we don't, first of all, we don't have the social skills necessary
to cohere as a group and have that sort of mentality, but also just the fear
of having another society that can outcast us, you know, or at least that
is, that is where I'm coming from it.
I hope that's not a huge factor, although the second part makes sense.
I would like to think that the social skills are learnable by rationalist adults.
Yeah.
So, I mean, I'm, but every time I think of like the community that we have
going, I'm like, this is awesome.
And I am terrified about everything falling apart.
And right now I am very, I have learned how to be comfortable alone.
And as much as I would love the, the, it's just like the, the
Ada Palmer, Tara and Kakarita series.
Would you sacrifice this world for one that might be better?
I'm like, I don't know.
I want that better world, but this one works.
Yeah.
Can you give me probabilities on might?
Like, I can't.
That's the problem.
So if I could give you probabilities, I would have a much better decision matrix here.
Yeah.
I mean, I can definitely envision, uh, you know, if you literally take something
like the Moscow example, that just, I don't, nothing about that sounds bad to me.
No.
So, so I can't, I can't see the, I can't see the downside of that.
Um, I'm not saying that like, oh, we could just do that.
Obviously we can't, um, but we could do something better.
Can't help but feel.
I'm not sure why we're not, I mean, yeah, definitely the aspect of not wanting
to be perceived as being part of some cult, I think is part of it.
You know, we're having a conversation with a co-worker that I really respect
who's really, really bright.
I'd mentioned something about, uh, Slate Star Codex and oh, you heard of it.
It's like, I read some of this stuff, you know, I think we disagree on a lot
of things and it's like, oh, you're aware of like, you know, the less
wrong rationality community is like, yeah, I'm aware of it.
And he like, you know, like he had seen it and like, oh, they're, they're crazy.
I didn't, we didn't dive too much into it because I was kind of like embarrassed
because I don't want to lose space to this guy.
Yeah.
Um, but, you know, what I've, when I noticed that I made a point not to let
that happen again.
So, um, I, you know, some of my coworkers, it doesn't, you know, most of my
coworkers don't know anything about my personal life or they know very little.
So I don't, I'm not avoiding the topic, but I don't also bring it up.
But I, if it, if it comes up organically, I'm like, oh yeah, I coordinate
the local rationality community.
You know, it's, it's like the, uh, the, or I help coordinate the local rationality
community.
It's the, um, you know, meet space, meet up of an online community from less
wrong, uh, this, you know, online group that's been around for a few years.
And so I'm, I'm making an effort to overcome that because of that, that aspect
that I think there's not a, there's not a good reason to be worried about it.
Right.
This isn't, this isn't some weird creepy cult that we're going to be fired for
being a part of or something.
Right.
I mean, the, the only thing about it is the possible, like you said, losing of
social face, like, oh, you're one of those internet nerds.
And that's, that's some bullshit.
Luckily I work at a software development company.
So I mean, I'm like, okay, yeah, I'm one of those internet nerds.
Enjoy your three, your three times a week.
Wow.
Raids, right?
So like, yeah, I had a similar experience.
It was basically like less wrong.
Oh yeah.
The basilisk and I'm like, okay, that might have come up with this guy too.
Oh, and it's like that, that's, that has nothing to do with the cultiness aspect.
That's just a completely separate bad meme that's associated with less wrong.
And I'm, I'm just like, yeah, I, I don't have anything to do with that.
That's not, that was a thing that happened in the forums.
Yes.
That was like 10 years ago or something at this point.
So yeah, glad, glad that's still floating around.
Is that our biggest scandal?
I believe so.
All right.
Well, that's, that's not too bad as far as, as far as scandals go.
That ain't bad at all.
Yeah.
I mean, there's so far we don't have a child pedophilia ring or anything yet.
So we're not, we're not working on it.
Yeah.
We're not picking up to get tides.
We first, we got to get our own pizza place and then we got to build a basement.
Well, and I think like, to some degree, we have like a social autoimmune disease
because I mean, so did you guys, were you guys familiar with like the dragon army
thing that they tried to do in Berkeley or they did do in Berkeley actually?
Like I'm not catching me up.
So yeah, maybe you can help me summarize it.
But basically a handful of people, I don't know how many actually got together
and they were like, we're going to do one of these Berkeley group houses,
except they decided they were going to be almost like paramilitary about it.
I think I did know about this one.
Basically like this guy's in charge.
You have your responsibilities.
You have your obligations and expectations.
And if you don't stick up to them, there's consequences.
And it's like everyone who came came willingly because they wanted to be
imposed upon by this kind of like social structure with the understanding
that that's very motivating and makes you a better person.
And people freaked out about it.
Like they're like, this is, this is, this guy's a fascist nutcase.
He's probably a psychopath because you want, and it's like, okay.
Like he was just trying something new with volunteers.
It's like a trainer at a gym who's going to like encourage you to attend.
Right.
And the other people are your gym buddies.
And part, the part of the point of having that sort of that enforcement
is to keep you in it.
Right.
So it's part of the same reason that your parents, when you were a kid,
would say everyone eats dinner together.
It is good for social bonding.
Yeah.
It was all, it was pretty well thought out.
And like there were some like intelligent criticisms of it, but most of it
was literally just like smearing like, like associative.
Like this, this reminds me of things that are bad.
Therefore it's bad.
I'm like, that's, and the ratio of that kind of comment to the good kind of
comment was very high.
And I was like, this is really disappointing because basically tells me
that like the actual capacity for experimentation and growth has got to be
pretty low if, if we're, if we're cutting things off the table that are basically
necessary things for forming an organization.
And most of these criticisms came from within the community.
This wasn't all of them.
So I mean, it would have been more understandable if somebody from the
outside heard about this house.
We will get together and then wake up at six 30 and work out every morning or
whatever and then do this and that.
And they do it because they're part of this online group called less wrong.
It's like, Oh, that's interesting.
I've heard of other groups that do that.
Like Zion toilet, whatever.
Right.
P 99 X.
So, right.
P nine.
What is it?
The P 90 X.
I think it'd be 90 X.
Okay.
Um, I guess it would have been our send all from the outside.
So what did happen from the inside?
Why let's, let's try and.
I, maybe that's the right word.
Try and empathize with what was going on here.
Try and model the people who would attack this very fairly.
What was, well, if you were ripping them apart for doing this, what would
you have been saying, or why would you have said it?
I, well, I didn't say anything.
Uh, I think publicly I said something along the lines of God, I don't
remember if I've commented at all, I would have said something along the lines
of their, your adults do what you want.
You know, let these people try their thing.
We got to experiment and see what works.
Um, as an emotional reaction, I was like, Oh, fuck.
No, I'm staying the hell away from this because I very much have
the, uh, disliking of authority and anyone trying to, I want to like, I want
to want a, that sort of, uh, social structure where my brother was in the
military and he says, I was such an amazing thing to have this group
cohesion, you know, and I'm very sorry for him that he was in the military.
Cause that's a shitty place to get this thing.
But, uh, I'm not really rambling.
I'm not good with that sort of feeling that I am being imposed upon by an
authority figure and whoever was in charge of this would automatically
become the authority figure that I have to rebel against and be like, no, fuck
you, I ain't going to do this cause you told me to do it.
Do you think you would have felt the same when you were like 20?
Oh yeah.
I've been feeling this way my entire life because I feel like my feeling was
like, man, I wish this had been around when I was 20, cause I would have
shaved my head and been a space monkey immediately.
But like now I'm like, I'm kind of already got my personality kind of locked.
So, so I don't know if like,
like nowadays I might even try it just to try a new thing.
As long as I knew the barrier to escape was the barrier, the barrier to exit
was really low, but part of the point of one of these exercises is to make the
barrier to exit a little higher than most things.
So I still probably wouldn't have signed up, but that's like signing
it for bootcamp at the military that like, you can leave, you know, but the
idea is that it's, you know, there's some shame involved and there's probably
some paperwork or whatever.
Lots of incentives not to, you know, you lose your, your pay and benefits that
if you actually finish the program.
But that part of that is to keep you in it, right?
And it's like a, I mentioned stick before, I think on the last episode
with two Ks, not sure if they're still around, but the idea that you could put
up your own money to say, if I don't commit to going to the gym every three
times a week, then I lose the money and then that way it's good.
I'm glad they're still there.
I think the reason I had such a negative reaction to it is because it, I was
raised in a cult and not a mild cult, not, not a hardcore one, but right away
I was like, nope, someone who thinks that they're in charge.
I am allergic to all this.
Get me the fuck out.
But this wasn't actually a cult.
And you can see that it wasn't.
So I guess I'm curious, you weren't actually impassioned to, you know, go
to the keyboard and say this is a bad idea, but neither did you come out and
defend it.
So I don't remember if I came out and defended it, but I would have said we
need more experience, go for it.
They're adults.
They can do what they want.
I just personally had squished, squeamish feelings about it and would have
never touched it.
Yeah.
I think I, I don't remember, but I think I probably didn't say anything
because I was like, this sounds really interesting, but it really is possible
that this guy is like just like psycho who, who wants to put himself in a
position to power.
And then I will really regret having said this was a cool idea, which I now
feel a bit cowardly about because what was actually happening is like everyone
who knew him personally was posting and they were like, really, people have
this all wrong.
Like you're, you're mischaracterizing this and they would have been the
ones to trust about it.
I think so part of your whole, it's easy to assassinate people on character,
assassinate people online.
Yeah, definitely.
Yeah, that's the only part of that.
So my, the other way to spend that though is it, so why were, why was the other,
why were other intelligent rationalists speaking out against it so vehemently
if they weren't coming from a cult like background?
I guess I can't quite sympathize because just a general background of people
who've been abusive to them and, and pattern matching this guy's behavior too.
This is a controlling individual who just gets off on power and it's going
to become abusive.
It's going to become a, a Milgram experiment or Stanford prison experiment either.
No, Stanford prison is the one I'm going for, even though that one is apparently
complete bullshit.
Yeah.
Um, but I think that's probably the pattern match that's happening.
But aren't we better than that?
I mean, are we supposed to be better than that?
We're supposed to be better than that.
And, and as the thing was described, sounded to me like it was thought out pretty well.
So that's the weird thing.
It's like we, everyone signing up for that is in the rationalist community.
And so you would think, okay, these are people who are at least familiar
with rationalist skills.
They can maybe take care of themselves.
And yet everyone's still right away jumped on the, this is a cult.
People shouldn't do it because I guess the, the urge to protect people
from themselves is very strong.
Yeah, that's well put.
Yeah, it's like an expectation that once they get into this environment,
they're going to become brainwashed and not be able to leave.
And it's like, that's a pretty low expectation of human beings in general.
And how, when were you born roughly ish?
85.
85.
Okay.
I remember in the late eighties up through the, I think mid nineties, there was
the whole satanic panic and the cult thing in the U S maybe the, you know, younger
generations coming after us won't have quite this mentality.
Cause dude, I absolutely remember the, yeah, you, if you play dungeons and dragons,
you're going to end up murdering your friends in a basement cause you're going
to get brainwashed into thinking that you're the, the, you know, people on these
adventures and when your character dies, you got to kill the player too.
Keep it realistic, you know,
but that's the average idiot.
That's not the average rationalist.
So as long as we're talking about how we're not a cult, we can say that there
are aspects of the rationality culture that are better in some respects than
culture at large.
Yeah, but I think it's so hard to internalize that that just the, the impulse
to, to, to paternalism comes so naturally to everyone.
And admitting that makes a sound culty because every, every subgroup will say
that, right?
So, and I don't know those guys.
So they could be, I mean, like, I feel like even if you're like a Mormon, which
is a fairly close knit thing, like I've, I've definitely, I've like my Facebook
wall right now is, is alive with people who were like Mormons arguing with
Mormons about this scandal that's happening.
The details aren't really that important that I could go into it.
But basically, I am slightly interested.
There's a Mormon scandal right now.
Yeah.
It's this idea that there's some interview that's part of their process of, of
going through the process of education indoctrination, however you
want to phrase it.
And the interview is always like one of the church elders alone in the room
with the kid, a teenage kid who may be a woman or a man.
And apparently there's been, um, allegations that this context is being
taken advantage of for abuse, which we've seen in other churches.
That never happened to the church.
Right.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And, and then, and so a lot of the Mormons are saying, like, you know, maybe,
maybe there just needs to be two people in the room for these things.
And like the response of the Mormon church is apparently like the head of
that movement is like going to be excommunicated.
So it's like, that's not a, that's not a good look.
Um, but, but like, yeah, this is tangent from what my point was, which was
just like, I'm not going to, I'm not going to vouch for some other guy who
claims to be part of the rationalist community.
Um, but I'll vouch for my community and the people I know.
And I think that's kind of how religions work is there's webs of, of smaller
communities of people that are linked by shared ideology across space and they
form a global mesh that way.
But it only works if you have the local, uh, web.
Yeah.
I, that actually brings something to mind.
Uh, I'm not aware of anybody who's been excommunicated from the rationality community.
Has that ever happened to anyone's knowledge?
You'd have to have an excommunicator.
Well, so I mean, you know, other than being banned by Yudkowsky on less
wrong or something, um, or on the Facebook group or something.
So to that extent, I do actually know somebody has been banned from the Facebook
group.
Me too.
Yeah.
Uh, I think we talked about that on the show.
It was, it was a complete misunderstanding, but it was so plausibly not a
misunderstanding that I totally get it.
Yeah.
Um, so, you know, to the extent that we're not, well, A, we don't have the hierarchy
in place to do that.
So that's, that seems like a point in favor of us not being culty.
Um, but there's also not even like a social banning that I'm aware of, right?
I wouldn't mind if we had a hierarchy, that's kind of where I am.
Like, I wouldn't mind if we had a hierarchy, we had leaders, we had like, uh,
like a level system, you know, of like, of like, you've taken the CFAR classes and
that entitles you to like a certain rank.
I mean, I know that, I know, like, this is probably setting off alarm bells, but,
but like for me, it's like, why, why cut things off the table, um, that could
potentially actually cause it to be something that people would want to join
instead of just like, oh, it's just a bunch of people who talk about a topic.
I think my, my initial, I, you know, having just considered this for the
first time, I only have one or two quick thoughts.
And one of them is that I think one of the appeals of the community is that
it's okay to say that, Hey, you'd cast me.
I think you're right on these things.
I think you're wrong on this one.
And that's on a banable offense.
Sure.
But so I'm pretty sure you can make an organization where that was the case too.
Like I can say the president of the United States is wrong about everything.
And I don't get kicked out of the country.
So you just have to have a good system of, of power instituted.
What is the point of those ranks though?
I mean, so in response to this whole, to a CIFAR class, I mean, that gives you
some status among your peers, but you don't, there's no churches or anything.
Well, I think it means a surprising amount to have that feeling of belonging.
So, so like I was in response to this whole, like I had a, I had like a bad
online argument a few days ago and I was like, I want to learn how to be more
persuasive.
So I really like a book on persuasion.
And part of it is like how much humans enjoy and are susceptible to the feeling
of belonging and group norms.
I mean, we, and we all know this already.
Like this is part of our community kind of literature anyway, is how, how
powerful that can be.
So it's like, if, if your goal, and then maybe this is not, maybe you guys
don't have this goal, but like if your goal is to spread the ideas of clear
thinking, um, arriving at the truth more effectively and pursuing our goals in an
effective way, spread those ideas as goods unto themselves, then you should
want to make an organization that can actually do that.
In order to have that, it would help to have some kind of actual, um, structure
such that human brains would be like, oh, that's a, that's an organization.
That's not just a bunch of like minded people.
Like, and I totally understand if people are like, no, Matt, I do not want that.
I do not want an organization.
I want, I want a loose band of like minded people because that's my thing.
And I'm like, well, I actually empathize with that very much.
And, um, everything I'm saying is very take, take very lightly, take what I'm
saying very lightly and as just like blue sky thinking about potential, not,
not like I want everything to be the way I want it.
Cause that's the opposite of what I'm trying to say here.
No, no, I think I get it perfectly.
Um, you know, I don't know what, what about all these microphones and recording
equipment would make you, would make you think that we want to spread these ideas.
Um, but, uh, no, I think, um, I think I heard you perfectly.
And I think everyone's going to enter.
I mean, I, maybe I'm biased, but I think I interpreted that, uh, generously
enough to not think that you're wanting to, that you're arguing for this so
that you can essentially yourself as the one, two dictator and, and, uh, although
if it worked out that way, you know, uh, well, if you say so, there
could be worse dictators out there, right?
But I think, um, I remember back when I go to skeptics, uh, like I was more
involved in the skeptic community and went to a few conferences.
Um, I can't remember if this is one of the talks that I went to or if it was one
online, but Richard Dawkins talked about how he was at a skeptics conference.
Cause he had said something about how getting skeptics, maybe it was atheists.
It doesn't matter getting, you know, woke folk back in the day.
That meant something different rights, you know, um, uh, to all cohere and work
together in a, a focused way was like, like hurting cats.
And he said, and I think that's a compliment.
And in a way, I could totally see where he's coming from.
And I think, I think you can too, but in a way like, sure, it's a compliment
and that we're hard to corral, but in a, in a totally also legitimate way.
That's the way that we, we, since we can't corral and, and coordinate, that's
why we don't get anything done.
Yeah.
That's why I never go to the moon.
If you're all bunch of cats everywhere.
Well, yeah, but I mean, focused effort to get to the moon.
He used the example of like, you know, politicians climber to get the Jewish
vote, even though they're like 2% of the United States population or something.
And there's no one trying to get the atheist vote of 15% right.
Because we're hard to coordinate, but if, if, and, and part of that's,
but it would go against the whole point.
Yeah.
It would go against the mindset of the, the atheist in general, because at
least back in the way, the way most people got to atheism was by not going
along with society and by breaking out of those organizations and being like,
fuck your social systems.
Fuck your sense of belonging.
I care more about being right about this thing.
Yeah, but, but that, I think it's, it's an over general, over generalization
of that instinct to not be a joiner.
Cause it's like, if we're talking, I was talking about Dune earlier.
Sorry to anyone who doesn't read Dune, but like, if there was such a thing as
the Ben A. Jesterit or the Mentat, I would join that, even though it's cult
like, because it's like, well, the thing they turn you into is an amazing
godlike thing.
So like, if, if there were a rationality community that actually made you like
Jeffrey Sy from, from Malaysia's stories, I would join that in a heartbeat.
Even as a like person who wants to be free thinking, cause it's like, well,
you've, you've got the proof.
You've demonstrated that what you do is actually valuable right now.
We don't really have that.
So, and I don't know, and it's actually pure conjecture that we could even have
that, like it's, it's science fiction of me to think that, you know, if we
had a rationality organization, then we could train people to be, to, to
perform better and et cetera and be Mentats.
It's like, well, maybe not.
Maybe, maybe you teach people rationality and you improve their
performance 4% on specific things and not, not otherwise.
I don't know.
I don't know.
Hmm.
What do you think about Mentat, Steven?
Well, actually, I haven't read the books, I haven't read the books, but
Mentat is what they call the smart drug and follow games.
So, if there's anything like that, then I'm a big fan.
Um, I'm assuming that's on purpose.
Probably a reference.
Yeah.
I mean, Mentat is just someone who's been trained to serve, like to be so good
at thinking that they can serve the function of a computer at need.
So.
That sounds dope.
Yeah.
Now, I'm sure there's great drawbacks because it's a book, but.
Well, Dune is just about, like it's about human potential.
Like that's what, that's the whole theme of the book.
So it's like, if we're riffing on the idea of like what, what you could be if
you were more rational, that's kind of where my mind goes.
That all sounds appealing.
I think, I think people don't necessarily, like, unless you're familiar
with like the sequences, I think people don't necessarily understand what.
It would mean to be more rational.
Like they don't understand how not rational they are.
Does that make sense?
Yeah.
Or what the perks are.
Yeah.
I'm getting by, I pay my bills, I've got a job and stuff, people might say, but
I mean, the hard part for me is like, I didn't get to live the counterfactual
where I didn't get involved in any of this stuff, but my life's a lot
better than it was five years ago.
And I think that's because I have more tools to make better decisions and
come to realizations that I wouldn't have come to otherwise.
So I, I've got a selling point for myself.
I could, I could probably convince myself of 10 years ago that I should
get started on this earlier, but I don't know how, you know, this is obviously
a hard, harder problem than I've given enough thought to, but I don't know
how you go to somebody who just isn't really interested and say, look, here's
why this is worth, you know, uh, reading 3 million words and studying some stuff.
Yeah.
Well, and I haven't succeeded.
Like the friends that I have who've read the sequences are the people who
are going to read them anyway.
And the people who I've tried to convince who aren't in that class for
whatever reason, I, I, a variety of reasons, probably they're just, you know,
no, thanks.
It's like, if you had a book on the shelf of Barnes and Noble that was like,
this book will make you smarter.
I would, I would first of all, just doubt the premise of the book.
I'd be like, this book sounds like a lie.
I'm not giving you my $10.
And I think that's a great point.
Like, like there's, there's a certain incredulity to the whole thing where it's
like, uh, you say that it made you more rational or whatever.
You say you get a lot out of it, but everyone's, a lot of people say things.
Maybe that's why people think of us as a cult.
Cause they're like, this doesn't really help your life at all, but the
fact that you keep saying it does makes you sound like you have been, you know,
you've drunk in the Kool-Aid.
You have bought into this system where now you have to tell everyone how much
better it makes their lives, though I don't believe it does.
Unless you look at the content of it, it's, it's just like the secret or
something where it's like, no, no, really trust me.
Like, well, no, I don't, I don't trust you.
On the plus side, I'm not saying, you know, trust me, read these and give me
$10,000, right?
So we have, we have that going for us, but I think that's part of what
Seafar was trying to do and maybe still is, but I, I don't know if they've
published anything, uh, certainly nothing that's come trickle down to us yet that
has shown the only downside too is that because of, you know, how small they are
and how necessarily small their sample sizes are and how hard it would be to, you
know, do, um, any sort of controls.
I know they've done some, you know, they'll, uh, they'll call some, you know,
they'll do follow-ups and stuff, but for the most part, it's self-selected people
who want, who want to do this.
I think if I remember correctly, this is either something they did or thought
about doing or making this all up, but they thought about, uh, paying for some
people to come.
So you guys pay, you guys are the ones who really want to come and get this.
So we'll see how you guys do and it'll pay for you to come and you guys will
come do that.
Well, guys, you'll guys will do the same thing and you'll see how you do as well.
But that's not even really true blindness because those, I mean, if, uh, if the,
um, you know, whatever church of Mormon wanted me to come join them for a
three week course, unless they're going to, you know, set me up pretty nice for
three weeks, I'd probably just say, no, thanks, right?
So that's already a pretty small self-selected group.
It's pretty interesting that as far as I know, the single most effective way to
get people into rationality has been Harry Potter and the methods of rationality.
I'm glad that came up.
Yeah.
It's like, I believe last time I was to see how they, uh, had a survey,
like 30% of the people who first found out about rationality found about it
specifically from reading that and then being like, Oh, this sounds
interesting.
Yeah.
Nice.
That was essentially me.
Yeah.
It feels like it's a great filter for finding the kind of people that do
like this kind of thing.
Yeah.
I would have been rationality adjacent back then because I was listening to
rationally speaking and you know, it doesn't get much more adjacent than that.
Um, but I was, I was in that group of people that would have, you know, like
you said, would have read it anyway.
Um, I just needed to, I didn't know it existed.
It's showing people what life is like through demonstration, which is, you
know, one of the things fiction does best, but going back to my old cult
ways, um, one of the things we often heard in church was like, just live a
good, happy, successful life.
And other people will be like, what's that person doing?
That's so successful.
Oh, he's Jehovah's Witness.
Maybe I should look into that.
And so, I mean, you were always, always on display.
It's one of the reasons that I don't have any bumper stickers on my car.
Identifying myself as an atheist because I kind of drive like an ass and I
don't want people to think, Oh, atheists drive like asses.
But yeah, my entire life, everywhere I go, I'm always under the, you know,
feeling I'm a representation of the group I'm most people, most strongly
identify me with, which has been a large part of the reason why I try not to
advertise the groups I identify with.
Yeah, that's understandable.
I tend not to advertise myself at all.
Like I tend to wear darker colors or like nothing with a brand's name on it.
I don't have any bumper stickers.
Not because I don't want to be identified as something, but mainly
because like if I got pulled over and I have a Hilary bumper sticker and
they're a Trump, the cop is a Trump voter.
I don't want to get a ticket for that reason.
So I'm going to be completely neutral to everybody all the time and I can
blend in quietly and no one will talk to me or bother me.
But I mean, the cool thing is, especially back in the days, like when
Christianity was being persecuted in the Roman Empire and stuff, if you had
some secret way to identify other Christians, all of a sudden you guys
got this really tight bond, you know, like, Oh shit, you're a Christian.
Yeah, no, go off without a ticket.
And do you need any help with this?
You know, how are your kids doing?
It is, if you can find the other people that you identify strongly with,
there's much more coordination, even just like out in the world, you know?
Yeah, maybe like a vague bumper sticker then in my car of like
something only another rationalist would get.
A big yud.
Yeah, sure.
Or just, you know, Harry snapping his fingers like that little logo or
something.
Yeah, that'd be awesome.
Um, yeah.
And then, you know, the one cop who pulls me over is like, Oh my god,
you had methods of rationality.
Oh man, you're not going to get a speeding ticket.
Here's 50 bucks.
I don't know how that works.
Yeah, I like, I like that you brought up the methods of rationality because
like that at the meetup, actually, one thing we were talking about was
this idea that number one, I feel like there should be a more concise
resource than the sequences.
Like, like there is actually benefit to having to get through millions of
words because it sinks in deeper, I think.
But also I feel like there should be like a 100 page rationality handbook.
And I, which I wrote two pages of since that meeting.
But anyway, I feel like there should be more on ramps because like methods
of rationality is a great on ramp.
But there could be many different kinds of on ramps and HPM or like it's
controversial is one thing about it.
Like it, it sucks in a lot of people, but it filters out a different subset of
people.
And I'm like, well, what if you had this other thing over here that was
rationalist propaganda, frankly, I mean, I can say that that's what we're
talking about, except in a different voice without Yudkowsky's idiosyncrasies,
which, which I personally love, but a lot of people don't.
Like, and I'm not just saying that idly, like I seriously think about like,
I've thought many times actually over that's what Slate Star Codex is, right?
It certainly, yeah, yeah, that's, that's another one.
That's a very different animal that it, but it is.
Yeah.
Um, and I've thought about like, what would I make?
And it's like, well, I never quite get there actually, but it's fun to think
about anyway.
I've thought of like pamphlets for the same reason.
And there's a PDF on the Facebook page for the group that isn't so much of
like a here's more of like a, if this is your first meeting, you know, you
can read this, I don't know how long of how many words on a pamphlet, but like,
you know, somewhere in like the low hundreds, you know, you can read this in
you know, 10 minutes and you'll be able to follow some of the lingo or something.
Um, we have something like that on our Facebook page, don't we?
That's what I'm saying.
Yeah.
Like a two page thing.
Yeah.
So we have that.
Um, but it's not a, here's why you should be rationalized to say, here's a
way to, you know, keep up with the conversation at the meetups.
Um, I don't know how you could make something that short that would inspire
people that wouldn't just be any generic, here's our cult.
Um, no, no, no, I mean that like, not, not a pejorative way.
Um, cause you know, when you're saying a hundred page thing, I'm thinking
that's way too long.
I'm not going to be able to convince somebody who has no real
interest to read a hundred page thing.
Um, and I think it's great.
And if, you know, if you have any interest in making a collaborative effort,
I feel, feel like that's something our group could do.
Yeah.
That, that, that occurred to me because basically to make it as like a
collaborative Google doc.
Um, and, but, but like, like you said, there's so many kind of design
questions, if you will, that go into it, like, okay, what is this?
Is this an instructional?
Um, does this contain rationality, rationality techniques?
Does it contain theory?
Does it contain both?
Um, is it more of a persuasive piece?
Is it more of a, this is a, this is why, this is why you should bother with this.
Like influence science and practice.
Um, have you read that?
That's literally what I started reading this week.
So perfect.
I was going to say, if you haven't, there's that.
And then he co-authored another book called, uh, yes, exclamation point, 50
ways to get people to agree with you or something.
Um, and it's just 50 little anecdotes, but yeah, that's a great book.
I strongly recommend it.
Cause I think we're all on the same page in that it's like, we don't
want to persuade people.
We want to trick them.
We don't want to trick people.
We want to portray what we actually genuinely view as the worthwhile things
about it.
Cause I don't think that document exists.
I don't think the, here is the essay on why you should actually check this stuff out.
I don't think that does exist.
And to be clear, I was shilling for influence, not for yes, the book, uh,
influenced, written by Robert Sildini.
And the fourth edition is available on Amazon for a penny.
So you just pay shipping.
I'm not sure if you can get it with prime or not, but it's, it's cheap as dirt.
Cheaper than dirt, probably.
I don't know about dirt.
Um, depending on the quality of the dirt, it can be expensive.
Right.
So the, one thing that you can do, like this brings to mind when you said, you know,
how is it, there's, um, I forget the name of the technique when you're designing
an app or like designing how to, uh, cause we're, I'm building, like I said,
a mobile app with some friends at work.
Um, you put on like user personas and you think, okay, this is as this kind of
user, here's what I want to be able to do.
And as this kind, I want to be able to do this.
And you can think of a couple, three, four types of people who might be using
this kind of thing and you can tailor it to all of them.
Um, but you're, you're doing it by thinking first, uh, kind of of your
target audience, you know, who's this four and what are they, what are they
going to use this for?
Um, so then that helps you write to that, to that, um, to that end.
Yeah.
I'm worried about being too bland.
Uh, one of the things that he did bring up in the Moscow, uh, Moscow
community hub article was that there are a lot of anti cafes in Moscow and
they generally charge about five times more per minute than he does.
And, uh, those cafes are, they have a lot more people in them and they, you
know, have a lot of like playstations and, uh, uh, soccer and stuff like that.
And, and he says, I realized that I could make a lot more money on this by
doing the same thing, by appealing to a much wider audience, but I don't want to
do that.
I want to keep this place filtered for the people who are, you know, more
like the rationalist people who spend a lot of time on introspection and
thinking about thinking and stuff like that.
And yeah, it's, it's not the financially best idea, but it also keeps the
space the way I want it to be.
And I don't know, are we trying to appeal to literally everyone?
Because I know there's a, there's got to be some cutoff as to the market that
we actually can feasibly, uh, sell to.
I don't, I don't like to use sell, but still remain who we are and have
our, our mission be what it is.
I think those are two separate points though.
Who will buy our thing and who are we trying to sell it to?
And those should be kind of the same question, but they're not, right?
So, um, I think at the end goal, we don't want to have this elite.
Well, maybe we do this elite class of rationalists who we've become an
exclusive club with a high barrier to entry.
Um, you know, we're not going to raise the sanity waterline by staying at
being 0.08% of the population or something, right?
Or whatever we're at.
I just think that there's growth may need to be a little bit slower than
right away, open the doors to everyone because we need to open to everyone.
Yeah, they are open to everyone, but there's a lot of filters in that
prevent most people from coming.
Yeah, I think that's a really great point that like, I haven't thought
about it for five minutes, but I would say that, that our, our target
would be anyone who would have a good time hanging out with the type
of person who enjoys rational stuff, um, but who otherwise wouldn't
join the rationalist community because of any number of reasons.
Like I run into people all the time online who, um, won't name any names,
but like some people who I'm just like, man, you would fit in like this.
You would like this and, and, but you've, especially if they're an internet
person, they already have some prior impression of the rationality community,
which is negative or yeah, usually negative, honestly.
And I'm like, even for very, very superficial reasons, like, oh, it's
a bit arrogant to call yourself a rationalist, isn't it?
I'm like, come on.
But, but like that's, that's the level on which I'm like, you say, like even
you saying that makes me think that you're the kind of person who thinks
in terms that I could appeal to if, if I could get past that wall.
Yeah.
It's, it's really disheartening.
I think it was, was it Greg Egon?
I think it was Greg Egon who's written some amazing books, which are just
considered like, you know, near the top of rational, um, fiction canon, right?
Uh, and he is so anti the movement that he wrote in a less wrong analog
in one of his books as villains.
And I'm like, dude, you're right there with us.
Oh my God.
How did we miss the boat on that one?
I'm just guessing having not read any of his books or read this one in particular,
but I bet Pete, I bet rationalists loved that.
I mean, we had a rationalist analog as the best villain ever in methods
of rationality.
Well, yeah, but they were not, they were not good villains.
They were like the, they were like the, the nerd trio from Buffy season six.
I think it was season six.
I haven't seen, I've only seen most of season one of Buffy, but maybe we'll
say like Spock.
No, no, no, not at all like Spock.
They, they, they were inept socially incompetent.
Uh,
Oh, Sheldon's.
Yes.
Okay.
Well, that sucks.
Yeah.
So he couldn't even do this, the justice of not straw manning us.
Right.
Weak.
But I mean, there's, for some reason, he's coming to that impression, right?
It just drives me crazy because like, in relative to the actual overton window
of like what is talked about as mattering us and Greg Egon are on the same page.
Oh yeah.
Like, so, so it's so destructive and pointlessly wasteful to, for like, it reminds
me of all the like David Chalmers attacks on rationality.
I'm like, dude, you're, you're one of us.
Come on.
Yeah.
Oh wait, we did a, um, we haven't done this episode yet.
We did, can we do a vocab drop?
What was an overton window for anyone who's not familiar?
Overton windows is, is, um, the, the domain of political or even perhaps even
non-political topics that it's acceptable to talk about in society.
Um, at a given point in time.
And so the point is that the, the, the boundaries of the overton window shift
over time, um, to exclude certain things.
At one point it was not at all okay about talking about gay people.
Like, I mean, you basically couldn't even mention it back in the day.
And then it shifted a little and you could talk about it, but only in terms
of like those are bad people.
And, and, you know, it's gone more and more to the point where now people are
like, yeah, those trans people are awesome.
You know, which is not the same thing as gay, but you know, it's, it's, it's past
that term in terms of for the general public.
That's one step even past that historically anyway.
Yeah, for sure.
So yeah.
And, and similarly, no longer acceptable to talk about certain racial things
that were acceptable in the past.
So yeah, it's, um, but I mean, like the, the actual overton window of,
of discourse doesn't even like, like what we want is like orthogonal to that.
And as far as I can tell, like, if I have, like, I honestly think the
closest thing I have to like political convictions is that humans should
like think more clearly, figure out the truth about things and then pursue the
right answers.
It's like, well, Matt, that's not a political philosophy.
It's like, well, yeah, no, I mean, uh, apparently either side of the spectrum
is equally inimical to actually just finding out what the truth is.
So I guess I'm in neither of those camps.
That's me in half my moods.
And then last two years, my, I've developed the second mood.
I want to make a quick interjection for the record.
Uh, we had technical issues and had to stop recording for a little bit.
We have now come back and are recording again.
Uh, that is why there was sort of a disjoint in the conversation here.
Yeah, we went downstairs and politics came up.
So that's where we came back up too.
But I wanted to, uh, finish up the episode.
We've been on it for almost a couple of hours.
So it's about time to wrap it up, but we had in that note section, I mentioned
at the top of the episode, a, uh, subheading called side topics, uh, to
indulge Steven slash to stir the pot.
And there's at least a couple of these I wanted to get around to if we have time.
Um, do at least one.
All right.
Well, the one we get, this one is the one you most want to do because we may
not have time for a couple.
All right.
Well, one's 30 seconds.
Okay.
One, I saw Deadpool two, uh, for the second time, cause like, uh, someone had it on
their server and I was able to watch it at home.
And I tried to watch it this time.
Um, I had somebody critique the first one when I showed them cause they didn't
watch a lot of like movies and stuff.
They're like, yeah, I don't know.
It was okay, but you know, I didn't even pass the bedshell test or anything.
And I'm like, okay.
So I, anyway, I wanted to watch Deadpool two to see if it did.
And I don't think it did either.
But so then I, I mainly was just thinking like the bedshell test, you know,
Terminator two and aliens didn't pass it.
And like, no, no, no alien specifically did pass it.
That's the strip that invented the term bechtel test was referencing alien.
Aliens wasn't, wasn't she the only woman in that movie?
No, there was, uh, Vasquez, no aliens had Vasquez, but the original alien also
had a second female.
Okay.
Well, fair enough.
So Terminator two then.
All right.
But whatever, I was going to say that like, sir, sir, mix of lots.
I like big butts passes as a bedshell test.
Yes.
And so I, so I guess I brought that up because I think that's a bad test.
Yeah.
Well, the Bechtel test was never intended to be an, you know, a one-off test on
a single movie to determine whether it's a good movie or a bad movie.
It's more of a barometer of the entire movie seen as a whole.
And so taken in broad strokes across the entire industry, it is indicative of
something in any one given movie.
It's like taking the temperature any one given day.
You can't say, oh, global warming is real.
A global warming is fake because the temperature is higher or lower than it
was yesterday.
You look over a large span of time.
Also, I'm pretty sure Sarah Connor has a conversation with one of the psychiatric
ward women about opening the door while she's holding the man hostage.
Boom.
There we go.
Was that a woman?
All I remember was that pasty doctor.
No, you're right.
You're right.
It was, uh, yeah, yeah, the woman was she had the, the drain on his neck.
Yeah.
She, she had the drain on his neck and she's saying open the door.
Or I'll kill him.
It's they're talking about a man, right?
Oh, my God.
Do I win on pedantic points there?
I'm sure we can find another woman somewhere in that movie.
I don't know.
Um, we can't find his wife.
We can't find a bigger badass than Sarah Connor in that movie, which is kind of
the point of what you're saying that it's not, it's not a fantastic test for
judging a movie's merit.
Cause it's like, she's the like protagonist.
So yeah.
Anyway, I, that was my just random thought I had anyone.
Anyway, everyone should watch Deadpool two and add one minor quibble.
You guys saw it.
No.
Oh, Deadpool two.
Yeah, I'd loved it.
You haven't seen it.
Oh, then I'll save it.
No, no, that's fine.
You're good.
You should see it.
Is this like a big spoiler?
Um, are you familiar with the premise?
Uh, you know, just, it doesn't matter.
I don't care about spoilers.
Are you quite sure?
Yeah.
Okay.
Fine.
Cause it ruins one of the funny things, but cables watch, let them teleport
through time.
He uses it initially to like teleport back in time.
And then he uses it later to revert to a younger version of himself.
Does he?
He uses it in the final fight scene.
Yeah.
And he doesn't, there's not two cables in the, in the final fight scene.
The second time, there's just the one.
Oh, yeah, you're right.
And then half the time that Deadpool uses it, he, he does both.
Yeah, they were inconsistent about that.
This is a movie that rakes the fourth wall though.
So it does hard to feel too bad about it, but it, but if Deadpool had turned
to the camera and said, I know what this isn't consistent, out of
and fine with it, maybe he does.
Maybe it's one of the fast lines to get away with or something.
Maybe he does say like, why weren't there two of you?
I don't know.
Uh, my other thing that I put on the list was very, very, very fast.
Cause I wanted to get into it, but I'll be quick.
The James Gunn slash Guardians of the Galaxy three movie, uh, Guardians of
Galaxy three was put on permanent or on indefinite hiatus because James Gunn put
out some bad tweets eight years ago.
And while he was working for trauma, no less.
Yeah.
Are you familiar with trauma?
No.
Oh my God.
Okay.
So trauma is totally the sort of production company that would
want you to put out those tweets.
They made, uh, like the toxic Avenger and Sergeant Kabuki man and
Tromeo and Juliet.
And it's basically extremely bad taste, campy horror.
That was popular in the eighties, popular in quotes.
I mean, they had weird cults followings, but yeah, it was all about like gore
and boobs and just everything you think about like eighties, cheap B movie
horror, that was their thing.
And they leaned right into it.
They were like, we love this.
This is us.
We're going to have exploding tits on the screen and like in one movie,
like they found a script about, uh, about a movie and there was like tits
explode on page 97.
They're like, this is terrible movie.
What the fuck?
And then 30 minutes later in the movie, somebody's tits explode when she's
shot in the back from a shotgun.
It's ridiculous bullshit, but they're totally the kind of production company
that would want him pushing those sorts of tweets.
So that makes me more in, in his camp.
I'm, I'm, I'm, so the Guardians of the Galaxy, I'm referring to the actors
now, but I'm going to, it's no surprise that I'll side with the Guardians of
the galaxy, um, uh, in both the jokey sense and the real sense.
They all signed a letter saying, look, who he was eight years ago.
Isn't who he is now?
He's totally awesome.
And we all agree.
You guys should, this is, you know, a joke, adding to that, the fact that this
was a deliberate character assassination by an alt-right nut job.
Cause gun was insulting President Trump kind of makes this a whole dangerous,
precedent, scary thing.
Um, so it's been a dangerous, precedent, scary thing for a while now.
People have been getting
impacting the MCU.
So now the stakes are right now.
Steven's getting up and he's ready to join the fight.
Okay.
Um, uh, you know, there, I'm, it's funny that I'm joking.
It's late and I'm tired, but anyway, I thought there was something, there's
more interesting stuff to explore there.
But the point is, is like, I think that, uh, I was going to say he was an
asshole making bad jokes eight years ago.
If now I know that he's working for a place that like, you know, was leaning
into this kind of humor, granted, this dark humor, no one, no one, no one
today should find it funny.
And you know, most people, I'm assuming that sort of production
company are already the sort of edge of Lord asshole type.
There was the kind of that, like that sort of humor.
So yeah, he could have still been sort of an asshole making bad jokes,
but that was, that was part of the thing happening.
Right.
And Disney news history.
Yeah.
Yeah.
It's stupid.
Yeah.
The main, the main thing was that like now that this is out there, there's
not even going to be a conversation.
We need to, we need to placate immediately.
Right.
So, I mean, you know, you were talking about using dark arts and I'm like, with
the current climate, we should just continue to whine about this forever
because it'll probably work.
Well, because like companies are, are, are actually, you know, complying
with, with Twitter mobs.
This is happening now, which is ridiculous, which is ridiculous.
And I'm not happy about it.
But if it's happening anyway, maybe we can get James Gunn back on Guardians
three.
I think that'd be great for, for not just for having a good Guardians three, but
also for the other societal benefits.
I personally am very happy that Guardians three got put on permanent hiatus
because I think stealing it from him was really wrong and it would not be the
right movie without him.
Totally.
Yeah.
That for that's, in that sense, I'm glad it was put on a hiatus.
I gave you a very angry look when you said you were glad it was taken off.
No, no, no, I wouldn't be happy if it came back with him.
Okay.
Yeah.
But I'm glad that they didn't continue on like taking it from him.
Yeah.
Right on.
Uh, I definitely want to hear about, uh, your recovery from your migraine issues.
Yeah.
Um, I don't know, I'm trying to think of what, whether to, how to frame this, but
like I basically had chronic migraines for like between six and 15 years,
depending on how you count, um, depending on whether you count from my, from when
I was diagnosed or from when I probably started actually having it, but didn't know.
And for people who've been listening for a while, um, Matt was actually on our
episode about rationally raising kids or rational parenting, uh, and had to leave
maybe 20, 25 minutes in because the migraine got so bad he couldn't stand
up without vomiting anymore.
Yeah.
Um, and that's, that's kind of what my life has been like for many, many years.
And the reason I'm bringing this up is like, first of all, I never do talk
about this normally because it's like, I don't know, you don't want to seem weak
and, and pathetic and like stigmatized, but like, I've finally found this drug
that's actually like cured it.
Um, and I haven't had any headaches in a month, which is like the first time
that's happened in, in six years at least.
Awesome.
Um, so it's kind of amazing.
And I don't know if I had any, like a point other than just like, it's, it's
really quite a, quite a thing.
We're happy for you.
You have a great quality of life improvement.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And I, and I get not wanting to be, you know, talking about that sort of thing.
Um,
What is the drug?
Is it like some kind of experimental new thing?
It's newly approved by the FDA.
Um, and what it does is basically it's like a neurotransmitter blocker for a
particular neurotransmitter channel that just like stays in your body for, for
a long period of time.
And, um, it just worked like, it doesn't work perfectly for everyone.
And in fact, most people, it, it helps a little bit, but I just happened to be
someone who had basically cured and it's a, it's a really weird, it's really
weird time.
It's an early weird month.
I like one thing I was, I was saying to people is like, I kind of feel like I
just got out of prison because there's like, like you would naively think when
someone gets out of prison, that they're, that they would be overjoyed, but
actually there's like a mixture of bitterness about the time that they lost
and then like, um, paralysis at, at like the possibilities before them.
That's kind of my actual state.
I'm not trying to be negative about it cause I'm, I'm actually thrilled, but
it's a, it's a subjectively interesting experience to be cured of something
that you've had your whole life.
I can only imagine.
And yeah, I'm overjoyed.
That's awesome.
Uh, thanks.
Is this, I guess if you said it doesn't have a very high success rate for the
average person, maybe it's not worth plugging the drug, but it's called
aimovig.
Yeah.
I'm really sorry about cutting you off.
I literally thought the question was just going to be a quick, what's it called?
Aimovig.
Okay.
And back to you.
So I didn't mean, didn't mean to steer that away from you.
When, when you were saying, uh, I kind of understand about the whole not wanting
to look vulnerable.
Oh, sure.
I, I mean, yeah, I was going to raise a related thing, but, um, yeah, it's,
I think it's a big thing in our, well, that used to be a really big thing in our society.
I mean, I think up until the modern era, it was by modern era, I mean, the
past 20 years, it was a really big thing to hide any weakness you had and always
try to look as strong and, and fit as possible.
And I think that might have been somewhat toxic because it's important for
everyone to know that we're all struggling with shit.
And it's, it's good to, to be able to commiserate with other people and comfort
them and say, yeah, I got bad things too.
And you, you know, otherwise everyone feels like they're the secret loser and
everyone else is awesome.
You know, but on the other hand, I think we're also in a weird place in society
now where in some cases people are like fighting to look as disadvantaged as
possible, which is just a thing that has been blowing my mind.
Yeah.
Just, just like from my point of view, like you don't want to, you don't
really want to tell your employer how, um, uh, impaired you are.
You don't want to be the one in every social situation who needs to basically
be taken care of or, or, or, uh, no, I can't go eat there for this reason.
No, I can't do that activity because it would wear me out too quickly.
So you just try to soldier through and hide it.
And, um, which is frankly, from my point of view, it's, it's better to soldier
through and then collapse than it is to just never try.
Um, but I'm glad I don't have to struggle with that anymore.
But I don't know, I guess, I guess the reason to bring it up is like, like you
said, it's, I think it's good to be aware of how much like every person is
fighting their own battle and, and suffering a lot that you don't see.
And, um, it's, I almost feel ashamed that I'm only able to talk about it now
that I'm like out of it, but, uh, I think it's worth saying anyway.
And I'm, I'm glad you did.
And I guess there's another lesson to draw from that, that, uh, how many
of the other things have you tried over the last six to 15 years?
I mean, I couldn't even enumerate them.
Right.
Yeah.
So, and that's what I was going to guess.
And so I guess this is something that if you're dealing with something on, if
someone else out there is dealing with something that they've, well, I've tried
10 things, it's, you know, maybe number 11, maybe number 12, you know?
So keep, keep looking, keep trying.
And you might find the thing.
And, you know, then you'll have the bitter, bittersweet experience of having
found the thing and you wish that number 50 had been number one, but, uh, you
know, it's, I guess it's a light message for hope.
Kind of contrasting to where I was at 10 minutes ago talking about politics.
Yeah, definitely.
I mean, I've literally had that, that like thought of, of, of, you know, in the
past been like, this, this is really, this is really rough, but like, I, I am
just going to continue to hope that someday they will figure this out.
I don't know when, but, uh, someday.
And, and I almost didn't believe it, but just the idea that it might be possible.
Kind of, I don't know.
It seems dramatic to say it kept me going, but it kind of did.
So kept you motivated at least.
Yeah.
Yeah.
No, that's.
And guys, fucking someday, the entire human race, race
will be like this for everything.
Yeah.
And that, that's, that's a worthy connection to make.
Cause it's like, this is a bit of a transhumanism thing.
It's like I was broken and I'm fixed.
Yeah.
So.
Yeah.
I got LASIK, which is a very, that's my weak argument for transhumanism.
I've mentioned the glasses thing before, but now I don't get to make that point.
Now I get to say, I wasn't content with the eyes nature gave me.
So I got laser eyes.
Yeah.
That's awesome.
Well, it's not, not interesting.
And right now I'm seeing slightly worse with glasses, which is driving me insane,
but I've got a few more weeks before I need to go complain to my doctor about it.
So, um, but just the, the transhumanism point that, you know, it, you know, and this
is transhumanism and never literally everything else.
Don't settle, you know, if you're not happy with where things are, you know,
get out there and crush it.
Right.
So.
Life gives you lemons.
Don't make lemonade.
Get mad.
Great life.
Take the lemons back.
Get your engineers to build lemons that are combustible.
So you can burn life's house down.
Demand to see life's manager.
Or make one of those.
I really got to memorize that whole thing.
I had it all.
I have it all on my phone because I'm a complete nerd.
I have all 11 minutes of cave Johnson's dialogue from portal to
I'm not familiar with this.
Oh, portal to, I never actually played.
I had the entire speech framed on my wall up until the thing.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Awesome.
I think portal one was the better game, but portal two had more memorable moments
like that, like cave Johnson portal.
Portal one was fun for like the ingenuity.
Portal two was fun because it was engaging for all the other reasons.
The dialogue was insanely awesome.
They had Steven merchant do the voice of like the little robot that's guiding you around.
And one of the best things to do in that game was just like to just stand there.
If you said to do something and just, just see what he said.
They recorded so much dialogue room to sit there.
Like, well, I guess if you're ready to get around to it, we can go do this.
Are you there?
Okay.
Like there's just so many random, plenty of things like that.
And then like random, not random, just creative ways to drive home.
Hilarious jokes.
Like, you know, there's different chapters of the game and it'll show the bottom
like chapter this or whatever.
And it's like, you know, you're going along and then, oh, no, I think this is the
part where he kills us and then chapter eight, the part where he kills you.
And then he's big there on the screen.
Hello, this is the part where I kill you.
And then you get a 50 point achievement, the part where he kills you.
Just little funny meta jokes like that were hilarious.
Did you, did you play the first portal?
I played the first portal, but not the second one.
Yeah, no, I love, I love, I mean, I should, you know, I got a, I finally
got a computer that can play games.
So maybe I'll go get that.
I'm sure it's super cheap.
I'd check it out.
Yeah.
Many, many, many years late.
It's probably, yeah, a dollar.
The gaming experience is the same.
So go nuts.
Cool.
I will.
All right.
You know, we, we took a couple, your turn to do something.
So my thing.
Okay.
Uh, so I, I know that a number, a large, large, a decent fraction of our
audience anyway is interested in stoicism and stoic philosophy.
And, uh, we have a friend who was on the podcast before Thomas Elliott.
Uh, he was on the podcast about Burning Man and he talked about like, why would
you go to Burning Man when you can just go to like, to all the ancient
ruins directly and see these great cultural things and talk with the actual
masters of the stuff.
And I was like, well, some of us aren't as adventurous and awesome as you are.
Um, but, and that would take more than a week, a year, maybe.
Yeah, that too.
Yeah.
That, that was an entire lifestyle for him for a number of years.
Uh, but right now he has made it his next product, uh, product, his next project
to translate the, well, in curidian.
Yes.
In curidian.
Is that he pronounced it?
He is in curidian.
Yeah.
Okay.
And I mean, it has been translated before.
Oh, quickly.
The in curidian is a stoic philosophy manual, circa 125 AD, uh, by epic, epic, epic
Titus, epic Titus.
Thank you.
You're on top of this shit.
At a stoic phase.
Nice.
Okay.
Uh, and yeah, there, there have been translations in the past, but he was not, uh,
content with them.
And so he is starting a Kickstarter right now to find this translation thing that
he's doing.
Um, and it hasn't launched yet, but the Kickstarter will launch by the time this
episode airs, I believe.
So we'll have a link to it.
Um, as an example, he said, he gave this, my translation of lesson 40 of the
inquiry in cur, in cur, in curidian.
Yeah, I think so.
Of the in curidian is really different from the prior ones.
And I think it is a good representation of why a new translation can be important.
I think my translation is not only more suited to being understood by modern
ears, but is also actually significantly more faithful to the original word choice.
I recognize that, of course, my translation is going to be colored by my
current historical biases, but I honestly believe they're less than the previous
ones, at least in this instance.
So previously lesson 40 women from 14 years old are flattered by men with the
title of mistress, therefore perceiving that they are regarded only as qualified
to give men pleasure.
They begin to adorn themselves and in that place all their hopes.
It is worthwhile, therefore, to try that they may perceive themselves honored
only so far as they appear beautiful in their demeanor and modestly virtuous.
My translation, women as young as 14 are catcalled by men.
This can give them the impression that the only thing they're good for is sex.
And so they put all their hopes in making themselves look good.
Instead, you should compliment women on their behavior and virtue.
Yeah, one of those is a lot more understandable.
Yeah, yeah, I mean, the first one just strikes me as a really lazy translation
because it's like it seems almost verbatim.
It has the weird horrible structure of Latin, whereas his translation is like
sounds like English.
So yeah, that's awesome.
And I can only imagine that at the time the original translation was made, it was
the fashion to do it, you know, as close as possible, which there's a
virtue to that probably.
But yeah, definitely if you want someone to actually read and like it, it's better
to have it more palatable.
So yeah, he's starting the Kickstarter for that.
Thought it'd be interesting to a lot of people.
Also a slight self-interest in this.
If the Kickstarter reaches a certain stretch goal, he is going to pay me to
do the audiobook version.
It's only 8,000 words, so it's not very long.
But you know, you might be able to get to hear my wonderful voice reading things.
Well, that'd be awesome.
Yeah, I'll definitely contribute to that.
That sounds fun.
Cool.
Yeah, sounds good.
Be sure to put that on the, on the episode.
Yeah, I didn't know you had a stoic face.
Yeah.
Was this like in high school?
A lot of phases.
No, it was probably like four or five years ago.
Oh, awesome.
Yeah.
It's good, it's good stuff.
I think it overlaps with rationality quite a bit too.
In terms of, in terms of the outlook mainly.
I think that's why there is the, yeah, the overlap that we have.
I like it.
I had one last thing from our AMA thread that I put up at the end of the last episode,
which we recorded almost a month ago, exactly.
It's been a long time since we sat down to do this, so it's good to be back.
So we have exactly one post on there so far and somebody with an incomprehensible
Reddit handle, but they said, hi, Eli, assuming that's their name.
Wanted to know if we're doing, well, this is to you, but it's on our subreddit.
Are you going to do an unsung audio book?
No, partially, well, mainly because someone is already doing an unsung audio book.
In defense of doing another one, I checked on that and it like has been
stalled for a long time.
I haven't checked on it recently, but it was, it was backlogged by a while
and the person said that they were, as far as I could tell, it was uncertain
whether or not it was going to finish.
Oh, how far did they get?
I'm not sure.
I checked back when I was reading on songs like two years ago.
Okay.
I did, I did like what they had going.
Okay.
Let's, let's double check.
Yeah.
If it, if it ends up having been abandoned, then yeah, maybe possibly in the future.
Am I doing an unsung audio book?
Assuming, of course, it's fine with Scott.
Sounds like a plan.
Oh, I did have also, what was the thing?
Oh, um, yeah.
Masain points out that the left strong study hall is $120 a year.
They do have a two week trial and if you aren't happy, there's a 30 day
money back guarantee, so it's not completely free.
Cool.
But yeah, since we mentioned that in our last episode, it was probably good
to put, uh, mention that as well, that there is a cost to it.
The guy whose name I couldn't figure out how to pronounce M-K-A-I-W-W.
And I was like, can you, uh, apparently call me Kai.
The M and the W's on the end are ignored.
So nice.
Just yeah, putting that out there.
That might have been the same person who wrote in on the last one.
I'll have to double check.
Oh yeah.
There's also someone don't recognize who that has an unpublished draft, less
wrong post titles, something like, why don't motivation techniques work?
Yeah, who would write such a thing?
I think we should motivate him to, to write that because it's, uh, it sounds
really interesting and you say that you've read a bunch of these books and
you've never found, uh, you've never found anything to be really motivating.
Yeah.
Um, that's accurate.
I, uh, don't, uh, I was basically in the post as it stands in draft form is
like sketching out this idea that like, kind of seems like your mind adapts to
every motivation technique that you learn and like finds a way around it.
That was kind of the point that I was making.
And I was like, first of all, why, why is this?
Um, and then, and then how, how could we address this?
I've honestly been having a lot fewer problems with motivation ever since I've
stopped being in horrible physical pain all the time.
So that's maybe coupled to the fact that, um, motivation techniques don't seem
to work for me in the past.
I've noticed that it's much easier for me to do things as well when I'm
feeling more physically and emotionally healthy.
Are we onto something here, guys?
Maybe health is awesome.
Yeah.
Uh, and finally, Will Landu, uh, wants to plug, uh, Deep Work, a great
book by Cal Newport, uh, he does mention a number of things.
Uh, but the, the main thing he hits on is that distractions really suck and can
destroy the, the deep focused work that you need to do a lot of important productive
things.
Uh, he says that's a problem with many contemporary workplaces, too many emails,
meetings, men's instant messages, open office plans, random interruptions, just
feeling that you're always being watched.
And it's just antithetical to productivity.
And so he is on, uh, my side, uh, says, I strongly agree with even
it's Eneosh and Steven, that it takes too much time to recover from interruptions
and would advise against tools like timers that pull you out of your work every 20
minutes.
And yeah, I've also found that I'm really much more productive when I just go
hard for a number of hours.
And to be, to be, uh, clear with my position on that, I've never tried one of those
tools, so it might actually work really well for me, but my suspicion is that it
might not, it might depend.
We also, uh, and Jess agreed to this too.
Like it depends on what we're doing, right?
You know, if it's something that requires you to stay in the, in the zone, and
like if you're, if you've got all this in your head and you're trying to get it
down, then, you know, being pulled out of it is just going to have to make you
rebuild that web again.
So it's interesting.
Even when I was doing, uh, renovations, which is not mentally taxing, it takes a
little bit of, you know, mental work, but it's mainly physical skills.
I still found it much easier to keep working once I'd started working.
If I had to like stop for 20 minutes for stop for five minutes every 20, I don't
know, man, it would have been awful.
But I, I guess I should not knock it before I've tried it.
So at some point I'll give this Pomodoro technique a shot.
Nice.
Oh, and to be clear, Kai was the same one who wrote in with the, um, unsung question.
Oh, okay.
The comment says hi, comma, Eli, comma.
I'm not sure.
Maybe he thinks my name is Eli.
That's a generous misunderstanding of Enya's, but it happens.
Uh, I, I've, I've lived with this name for so long, I've heard everything.
Eli is not too far out of the box.
I just feel like it's too short to even sound like, but yeah, it could be.
That's all right.
Anyway, thanks for the comment, Kai, both of them.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Are we done?
I think so.
Okay.
We just have to thank our patron.
Yes.
Uh, you want to do this next time?
Yeah, it, we've had a couple technical issues that have delayed us and it's getting, we're
well into three hours here and we usually, this is going to be like two hour episodes.
So, um, I think we'll save the, we'll do two patrons next time.
Okay.
Okay.
So instead, thanks to Kyle for putting up with our shit and making us sound good.
Thanks for having me, guys.
Yeah.
Thanks again for coming on and, uh, everyone should read Worm and Ward by, I
know some of the other stuff, uh, wild those written, but I haven't read
Twitter packed yet.
So, yeah.
Twig is good.
Okay.
So, uh, but when you guys do read those, listen to Matt's podcast.
Uh, we've got Worm and we've got Ward.
Thank you.
Appreciate that.
Yeah.
Anything else you want to plug while you're here?
No, no, that, that sounds good to me.
Sounds good.
All right.
Thanks everybody.
Bye.
