The following is a conversation with Eric Weinstein, the third time we've spoken on this podcast.
He is the wise turtle, Master Ugue to my Kung Fu Panda, one of my favorite people to talk to in
this world. A complicated and fascinating mind that I'm grateful to have the chance to accompany
in exploring this world through conversation on this podcast and on his, the latter called The Portal.
Quick mention of each sponsor, followed by some thoughts related to the episode.
First is Grammarly, a service I use in my writing to check spelling, grammar, sentence
structure, and readability. Second is Sun Basket, a meal delivery service I use to add
healthy variety into my culinary life. Third is SEM Rush, the most advanced SEO optimization tool
I've ever come across. I don't like looking at numbers, but somebody should, it helps you make
good decisions. And finally ExpressVPN, the VPN I've used for many years to protect my privacy
on the internet. Please check out these sponsors in the description to get a discount and to support
this podcast. As a side note, let me say that wherever this life takes me, I'm drawn to the
possibility of having many more conversations with Eric through the years. I think we have just the
right kind of contrasting worldviews and a deep respect and appreciation of each other's life
stories that creates for this magical experience in the realm of conversation that feels like we're
always looking for something that we never quite find, but are always better for having tried.
I'm not sure how or why the universe is connected to Eric and me, but it did,
and I would be a fool not to trust its judgment and enjoy the journey. If somehow you like this
podcast, please subscribe on YouTube, review it with five stars on Apple Podcast, follow on Spotify,
support on Patreon, or connect with me on Twitter at Lex Freedman. And now here's my conversation
with Eric Weinstein. Who's the greatest musician of all time, would you say? We were just off
camera talking about Eddie Van Halen. He unfortunately passed away. Who's the greatest musician of all
time? Yeah. Jonathan Richmond. Who's that? It's a weird question, so I'm going to give you a weird
answer. It's not because- Thank you. Okay. Jonathan Richmond, the reason I'm picking on him is that
he had a quote. He was the frontman of a group called The Modern Lovers, and his quote was
something like, we have to be prepared to play music when our instruments are broken,
the electricity is out, and it's raining, something like that. And I thought that that
quote was very interesting because what it said was, you have to be able to strip this thing down
farther and farther back to get to something that is intrinsically musical. So we were having
a conversation just now about virtuosity, and we're talking about Eddie Van Halen and his
recent passing, and that affected me emotionally. I don't know whether it affected you. I was never
Van Halen, the group fan, but I revered Eddie Van Halen's capacity for innovation. I saw him like
Rodney Mull in the skateboard. I had dreamed of having the two of them on the same podcast,
just to talk about what it's like to totally discontinuously innovate.
And he posted a video of Spanish fly, I think, and saying, I didn't know the guitar could make
those kinds of sounds. Like, what is this voodoo? How is it? Well, this is the thing,
the arpeggios that he did on a single string are so fast, and the attacks from the hammer-ons,
when they go at light speed, as he did, particularly, and the reason I chose that was,
is that I wanted to strip out the electronics, because part of the claim will be is that he's
a rock musician, and a lot of the innovations had to do with things peculiar to sort of the
electrified setup. His use of the whammy bar, for example, or the Frankenstrat that he built
from different pieces. All of those aspects, in my opinion, are just dwarfed by his
innovation and his musicianship. And that's why I chose Spanish fly, because everyone,
of course, will go to something like your eruption or running with the devil, which is the first
things that they heard that let them know that there was a new force erupting out of Southern
California that was Eddie Van Halen. I'm in love with the story of it.
You're often so poetic about music. It clearly touches your soul on many levels.
What is that? Is it deeper than just rocking out in your convertible Corvette 69?
I imagine Eric Weinstein is driving down the California highways, blasting some kind of music.
Is it just being able to be carefree for moments of time, or is there something more fundamental
that connects the theory of everything in physics and life and all of that?
How often do you have the chance, for example, to hear mathematics performed, as you do in Bach?
Something with that kind of precision and elegance that can't really be grasped,
to go back to Leonard Cohen's famous line, the baffled king composing.
It's such a good song.
It's such a good song, but it's also like individual verses of that song are insanely
important. The baffled king is how we often make music. We don't really understand what did we
just do that broke that person's heart sitting on the couch. It's a very strange thing that you
should be able to have. Think of it like you're a computer. You've got this weird open music port.
Port 37.8. It's not even supposed to be there, and suddenly somebody starts playing a guitar
and they're making you feel things. In particular, particular instruments like the violin,
it's so difficult. It's so unforgiving. When it gives up its secrets, it wraps its fingers
around your heart and won't let go. Sometimes I talk about head, heart, and loins. When something
can grab your head, heart, and your loins at the same moment and integrate them,
there are very few opportunities to live like that. If you think about Eddie Van Halen,
as far as your head, the musical innovations and the fact that he was drawing directly from
the classical canon really speaks to the idea that maybe rock is what somebody like Jimi Hendrix
saw it as being an infinitely extensible medium. In terms of heart, I always notice the smile on
his face. It's painful to look at an Eddie Van Halen solo now. Sometimes you'll see the
cigarette dripping off the side of his mouth, and you're like, that's going to fucking kill you,
and I'm not even worried about it for you. I'm worried about it for me. I don't even need to
hear you play another note. I just like knowing that you're in the world, that there is somebody
that everyone looks to that know, but I've never heard a guitarist say, eh, I don't know. I think
he was okay. I've never heard it. You can hate him, but you still think he was a genius. There are
very few people like that in the world. Then loins, those leaps, that guy was incredibly good-looking,
skin tight pants, super athleticism. He completely owned the male sexuality of the stage,
both being the completely dominant sort of mythical alpha male. I hate that expression,
but there you are. But also this kind of little boy with this mischievous smirk and the sense that
it all came together. How could you not eat that up? You could just imagine the millions of young
teenage boys who were just playing air guitar in their room, basically dreaming of being that kind
of God, the most perfect example of what a human being can be. It's fascinating to think.
It is. Then as in many of the cases with these bands, you get these multiple talents in the same
outfit. I think that the original configuration with David Lee Roth is such a hot mess at all times.
I would love you to talk to David Lee Roth. That dance would be just gorgeous.
I don't know. Can you handle it? Can you ride that?
Probably not. Probably not because I get the feeling that he's very smart and very
dysregulated. I don't know that I could bring him down to earth for a moment.
Well, I can also get pretty dysregulated. I don't know whether it could be magic.
It could be a shit show. I don't know what you thought of his appearance on Rogen. That was
an interesting one. I loved it, but Joe does this sometimes. Sometimes he just sits back
and listens and he just lets the music play, which works really well. I think you have a chance to
kind of jump into the chaos and then you'll just start. The places you will go, you may not even
talk about music for hours. It might just go to this because he I think lives in Japan.
Like there's a weird. He's been an EMT after he was a rock star he chose to be.
There's depth to that man that hasn't been explored by him either. That'll be an exciting
conversation. Can we go back to Leonard Cohen? The things I feel when I listen to Hallelujah
by Leonard Cohen or anything by him really, but that one.
Do you really want to get into it? Let's go. What does that song mean to you?
Is it love? Oh boy. Well, first of all, it's mystery. It starts off about mystery.
So what are you doing? You're doing this alternation between the two chords. So three notes at the
same time. One is called the tonic or you have the major and the relative minor and he's alternating
between them. There's only one note of difference between those two chords. One of them would be
feeling sad. One of them would be more joyous, typically described. And so by altering one note,
it's the minimal amount to take you back and forth between joy and happiness as that's encoded
in us. So he starts off with it. I heard there was a tune. David played the please a little bit.
You don't really care for music, do you? That's really interesting because he's using this technique
called bathos. So the alternation between the sublime and kind of the guttural or ridiculous
or the mundane, right? So he's like... There's a bitterness to it too. Is it just play? Well,
the way I hear it, again, a great song allows for different interpretations. You happen to be asking
me, so I'm going to impart some stuff that probably isn't in the song, but why it speaks to me. That's
what makes it great. The way I hear it is he doesn't believe the audience. You don't really care for
music, do you? Then what are you doing listening to this? You stupid idiots. Of course you care
for music. You're too cool to care. So I see through you and screw you. That's the energy
I get at it. Then he does this weird thing. It goes like this is where he should put the description
of where he is in the chord progression, which is the tonic, right? It goes like this and then he
hits the fourth and the fifth, which are the two other major elements, the subdominant and the
dominant in functional harmony. So he's describing the chord progression in real time in the lyrics.
There's two ways this can come about in other songs. We had this example of
every time we say goodbye. Do you know the song? Every time we say goodbye? No, I think it was a
Cole Porter, maybe, or Gershwin, maybe Porter. I don't know. I cry a little. There is no love song
finer, but how strange the change from major to minor, right? It's beautiful use.
Nice. Then there's times when it's duplicitous. So for example, you'll have,
I guess my favorite examples of this are Johnny Cash's Ring of Fire.
I fell into a burning ring of fire. Then what does he do with the lyrics in the tune?
I went down, down, down. He goes up. And so the idea is like, oh, okay, that was a head fake.
Right? And another one of these is Nina Simone's Feeling Good.
Oh, okay. So what do you get?
That woman's voice. She doesn't give a damn. And I was feeling it, but then what's the
thing? It's like heavy stripping music. You're not in a good place. You're probably in some
strip club with your money. You're drinking lousy beer, some bad situation. And she's feeling good?
No, it's funerial. It's oppressive, right? I never thought of that song that way. Wow.
Well, you think of it as joyous? Yeah. No, no, no. If you think about it, contrasted with Ray
Charles, for example, you know, do you know Lonely Avenue? Well, my room has got two windows,
but the sunshine never comes through. It's really depressed. It's the same sort of vibe as Nina,
but she's claiming that she's in great shape. So she's like a good case of the unreliable narrator.
Leonard Cohen to me is talking about the unreliable audience that's too cool to be with
the performer on stage. There are things that go with the music, like the Cole Porter stuff that
go against, like the Johnny Cash. I think these are the games that musicians play that the rest
of us only sort of notice subliminally. Okay. Fourth, the fifth, then he should say something
about the relative minor or the, he's giving you the secret, the baffled king. In other words,
he doesn't know why it works. Did Pockelbel know why Pockelbel's Canon would work? It was a discovery
and that's the whole thing. Like some music is discovered and some music is invented. And
he's talking about a musical discovery. He's talking about the Pythagorean power of the wave
equation and then superimposed. Like there's two genius intellectual concepts behind music,
one of which is the wave equation. Usually we solve it for a one-dimensional medium because
we're talking about strings or air columns. Occasionally, you're talking about things like
handpans or steel drums or metallophones or gamelons, whatever. And those have a wave equation,
too, that's much more chaotic. The other equation is this crazy thing that two to the 1912 is almost
exactly equal to three, which is what gave us even temperament. And so the tension between
those two things is, in fact, one of these most beautiful stories inside of that system.
That formula of the baffled king is a discovery. He's not really composing it. The reason he's
baffled, it's imagine that you took a little brush and you started brushing off a pyramid under
the sands. You might think that you created the pyramid by your brushing, but in fact,
somebody else did it. That's why you're baffled, right?
That's beautifully put. You're right. And as creating one of the greatest songs of all time
and as he's doing it, he's baffled. And he's within the song.
And he Leonard is baffled is my my contention, but he knows enough to know that he's baffled,
right? And so the idea is that he is composing. He has the audacity
to compose as David. He's echoing David at a minimum. And then in a later song,
which I really wish we would discuss that's totally dystopic and you will not like it at all,
is the future, which contains this line that I think I used in my episode with Roger Penrose on
the portal. Note the subtle plug. The portal, the portal. I'm the little Jew that wrote the Bible.
So there is this way in which Leonard Cohen, I think, is constantly coming to the idea of being
a biblical like scribe. And I think this is one of the great things that you see Dylan doing this
with all along the watch tower. You saw Warren Zevon, who we should talk much more about doing
this with a song called I was in the house when the house burned down. Do you know this thing?
No, this is embarrassing. Sweetheart.
It's a great day.
Warren Zevon is one of the most important songwriters of our time. And he's been largely forgotten
by this generation. But Bob Dylan would sing one of his songs in tribute. I've heard Bob Dylan
very small number of songwriters really move him. Woody Guthrie, Gordon Lightfoot,
and Warren Zevon. By the way, Bob Dylan, if you're out there, appear on either one of our podcasts.
We need to get your voice into a new medium for a new group.
Definitely.
This is a time for Bob Dylan, my friend. Honestly, you've been doing an amazing job in this space.
One of the reasons I'm super excited to do this podcast again is that I've learned some
things about what I don't do well. And I also have struggled with the question, should I do
those things better? Because I always use the same example of the fitted sheet when you're
trying to put a queen-size fitted sheet on a king-size mattress. He's like, okay,
I got that corner squared away, and then you get another corner that pops off,
and they have to go back around. I wonder whether I can improve my style in the ways in which
I think it's just a recognition of a difference. You do a better job of getting to the soul
of a really top intellectual guest and making them accessible and presenting them as themselves
for a huge number of people. And I'd give my eye tooth to be able to do that.
Do you ever think about this? Because I think about what is the greatest conversation I'll
ever have? In a sense, the portal, not to reduce it to anything, but there will be the greatest
conversation. You may have already had it, but it's very possible if enough people like me can
keep twisting your arm to keep doing the portal, please. There'll be an amazing conversation.
And one of the questions that I ask myself is, who is the person that I'm especially equipped
for some reason I'm convinced on Putin? There's something in my head that says,
I can do this man better than anyone else in this world. I got this thought in my head about it.
I don't know why, and I'm convinced, but I think the universe works in that way. If it tells you,
it's going to happen. The way I would say it is that almost everybody who becomes a Supreme
Court Justice believes at a very early age they're going to become a Supreme Court Justice. Many
people believe at an early age that they can do it, don't get there. But of those who get there,
almost all of them had this sort of, well, I call it pathological self-confidence. And
I do think you have pathological self-confidence, and you also have humility. And most people would
hear those as a contradiction. I think that you would not be able to get away with what you do
if you didn't have the humility. And so I think the great danger is that your equation becomes
unbalanced, that you either lose the humility or you lose the humility overwhelms the ego and the
drive. Because right now, you've got a Mexican standoff in your mind, and the rest of us are just
benefiting. That's beautifully put. My Mexican standoffs aren't as stable as yours. It's all
reservoir dogs all the time. But actually, the person who that describes is Peter Thiel.
Peter Thiel thinks more, people always say like, what does Peter think about X, Y, and Z, P, and
Q? It's like, well, do you want communist Peter? Do you want hypercapitalist Peter?
There's a couple of minds in there. Oh my God, right? On everything. That's why
he's successful is that he's got all these minds fighting each other. And so when people say,
Peter is this or Peter is that, I just laugh. Because nobody who knows him would describe him
as having thoughts at the level that people are claiming. And I do think that in my case,
you know, there's also pathological epistemic humility. Like just, I know what I know how
little I know how little I can do in one life. I know how many things I've screwed up. I know
how many things I've got wrong. And on the other hand, I know that if not, you know, it's like
Hillel's questions, you know, if I'm not for myself, who will be for me? And if I'm only
for myself, what am I, if not now when? You know, at some level, there's a question about
if I don't decide that someone is capable and that somebody is me. And if I apply that to
everyone else on the planet, then nobody's going to do anything. And so I do think that one of
the things that people like you and I get is who are you to say that? F that, man. Just
just sign me up for some Dunning Kruger. Yeah, but it's multiple minds. Like you said,
like this morning, I was feeling so good and confident about I couldn't think no wrong.
And I remember last night clearly thinking that I'm the dumbest human who's ever lived and nothing
I've ever said is worth anything. What the fuck am I doing with my life? Why am I scared? I was
terrified of this conversation. Who the hell am I? Because I'm an idiot. And because, you know,
Lex, it, but no, no, no, but this morning, I was the baddest motherfucker who's ever walked this
earth. So I was, I was very conscious. I think it was the coffee. I'm not sure. Maybe some sleep.
This sounds very Russian, and it involves multiple beverages, some of them being alcoholic,
others containing caffeine. There's, in fact, I can't share the story behind it,
but there is a bottle of vodka in the fridge. Okay. So I mean, I should have hit you for coffee
because this is a morning show here. So I put out a call that we get a chance to have this
conversation and people ask these wonderful questions. A few people asked about depression
and suicide. This is a Russian program, so we have to go there. And I think about Leonard Cohen
and one of the things that always kind of broke my heart and kind of suffocated the hope I have for
just, I don't know, for love in a person's life is to hear how much depression was a part of
Leonard Cohen's life and how much he suffered. I guess one way, I'm not sure where we can go
with this question, but do you think about the places that the mind can go, like these dark places?
Yeah. Is there something like where the only escape out is suicide, for example? That's the
darkest version of it? I really think suicide is a big place in suicide,
allidiation and self-harm. And we don't talk a lot about it. It's a similar problem to trying
to talk about trans. These are umbrella categories. And if the commonality is that somebody harms
themselves, but we don't know whether that's coming because of a problem in brain chemistry,
because of an event in their life, whether evolutionary programming for suicide is
weirdly normal, whether or not it might have a religious motivation. There's too many different
forms of self-harm. It's something like the 10th largest killer thereabouts.
And I think that you can look at it from different angles. I'm old enough to have
had Pete Seeger come to my college when I was at university and to watch his good humor in the face
of all adversity. I used to go to Odetta concerts. I don't know who she is. Okay,
this is going to be one of the better days of your life. Check out Odetta when we're done with
the interview. She was a civil rights figure, but also just had a profound voice and great
musicianship. These people were in the struggles, right? And they saw lots of bad things happen,
and they kept their humor about them. And the thing is that you can take on the Veldschmerz,
the pain of the planet, or you can try to do something else, which is to be a happy warrior,
even if the odds are terrible and the cost of failure is catastrophic.
So even once surrounded by darkness, but the thing is with Leonard Cohen,
is he created such beautiful music. And yet it's like Anthony Bourdain, the same.
And yet they go to this dark place. And it's easier to say it's just biochemistry.
No, there's a linkage between this highly generative creative
side and in some cases, dark depression. In other cases not. So you can't say that it's
tied. The genius and madness are always co-traveling, or that beauty and pain are one and the same.
What you can say is that there's a cluster of people that tell you that for that cluster,
there is a relationship between the darkness and the beauty. And I do think that in part,
it's squaring circles that can't be squared. We were just talking before about the inability
to serve two perfect systems, the perfect system of the wave equation and the perfect system of
even temperament. They're both perfect. They're not compatible. And once you realize that there is
perfection and an inability to make contact with perfection, I think you recognize that
there is no solution to this world. Yeah. That's weird with the poets and musicians.
Do you want to say this is a particular thing that you do? But then there's Spanish fly by
Van Halen. And then you realize, oh. Well, what do you get out of Spanish fly by Van Halen?
I think it's very singular because of the fact that it's purely acoustic.
For some reason, I couldn't imagine Eddie Van Halen separate from the band in front of thousands
of people just screaming and rocking out with lights everywhere. And Spanish fly made me
think like, you made me imagine him sitting alone in a college in a room.
I think that's who he was. I really do. Believe me, I get it. He was a rock star. He was a rock
god. Got it, got it, got it, got it. I'm almost positive that you can't get to where he got to
without being a complete introvert. Yeah. It made me imagine that there's some
half naked supermodel walking around hoping that they can do their thing together. And Eddie's
completely disinterested. He'd be with the guitar. He'd be with the guitar. Right? Yeah.
Because honestly, at some level, in one case, maybe you're conquesting, maybe you're pursuing
love and romance. In the other case, you're talking about a relationship to the order,
the creator, the almighty, whatever it is you want to call that substrate that is reality.
I believe that Eddie Van Halen and Jimi Hendrix and Paganini and Heifetz jacked into the
true essence of the world. Yeah, they did. I don't think it's as good as differential geometry.
I'm sorry. I do think it's amazing for other reasons. And thank God, because it's very
difficult to communicate differential geometry at scale. But the thing about eruption, for example,
what level do you want to come into eruption? Do you want just the sheer majesty and pageantry?
Do you want the theatrics? You could put them on wires and set his pants on fire or whatever.
It'd be totally in keeping with it. On the other hand, you want to have something completely
precise that shows off the virtuosity of what's possible with the Stratocaster.
Everything works, multi-axis. But there's a precision to it, which is very different than
Hendrix. There's a messiness to Hendrix that to me, somebody who has OCD has always been struggling.
How does Hendrix affect you? I mean, let's have the Jimi Hendrix conversation. I don't know that
we can do anything to it that hasn't already been done to it. Maybe that's not true. Maybe the idea
is that every generation has to have its Hendrix conversation, and this is a long time.
It's Jimi Hendrix experience. So funny. I hear you sold it from Joe Rogan.
There's so many details. One, it hurt my soul on so many levels that you can put a thumb over the
guitar to play a note, to hold a note. Because I wanted to be the Russian
virtuoso that sits with his classical guitar in perfect form, plays really fast with the fingers,
and then you want the thumb to be perfectly relaxed and supporting the neck.
That's the Russian conservatory student. Conservatory student, yeah.
Then there's the Russian wild man. Which one is that? Well, I haven't...
They're different Russian archetypes. So the completely idiosyncratic Russian is very different
in a weird way from the... I can do this backwards in any key, in my sleep,
and in any time signature that you just snap your fingers. We've discussed my
piano tuner in previous episodes. No, no. That was offline conversation. You told me the story.
I should tell you the story. You should retell the story. There it was in Darkest Manhattan,
with the world's shittiest... It wasn't even an upright. It was a spin-it piano.
A friend had given it to me. The piano fell out of tune and I would have to tune it. The only
tuner I knew was this Russian guy and I hated dealing with him. There was something about
his attitude that just really rubbed me the wrong way. Anyway, my wife says, tune that thing.
So we get the piano tuner to come and he's tuning this. He's like,
are you sure you want to tune this piece of shit? Okay, fine. He's like,
okay, it's your money. The phone rings and I have the phone ringer set on a landline to
Paganini Caprice 24. Immediately as the phone rings, he figures out what key the phone ringer is,
and which is not the key that lists composed the variations on Caprice 24. He starts going
into theme and variations on Caprice 24. At some level, I've never heard before, just jaw dropping.
The phone stops ringing. We have this awkward silence. I said, I didn't know you were such a
great piano player. Then he says one of these things that in Russian accent in English,
hurts in a way you can't imagine. He said, no, you are the piano player. I am merely the piano
tuner. It's just like, oh man, through the heart.
You know, it's kind of reminiscent. I'd love to hear actually your opinion. This is reminiscent
of the Goodwill Hunting story. What do you think about that?
That movie?
That movie. It's MIT. I guess when I think of that film, I think about Matt Damon as a young guy
risking everything, giving up Harvard. I think probably the most accomplished group of people
in the world are people who choose to give up Harvard voluntarily.
It's beautiful.
Right?
Bigger than Harvard. Ives was one of these people. Bill Gates, of course.
And then oddly, you know.
Zuckerberg.
What? Zuckerberg. But then Steve Jobs gave up a read, and read is like the weirdest,
craziest college in the world. People should pay much more attention to read. I'm sorry,
it's going through a hard time at the moment. But what it was before the current craziness is
really an interesting story. Irregardless, as we say in the 617 area code, I think that a lot of my
reaction is to the real story of Matt Damon having this vision and being the young guy to pull it
off. And you know, I also think about Robin Williams trying to explore heart through this
lens of acting. And you know, as you and I, you've hung out with comedians,
they know that they are a screwed up bunch of people. They do. They're proud about it. They
really are. The idea that Robin Williams, who I saw many years ago when I was in LA,
in the comedy clubs around here, you know, he was a straight up crazy, dysregulated genius in
tremendous pain. And his desire to do it earnestly through acting, rather than constantly by just
sniping, you know, or being a clown or showing us how fast his mind worked relative to ours.
I was really moved by that. I thought that he brought some authenticity and took a huge
risk for a comedian to be that real. And again, like you said, it doesn't always have to be,
but in that case, the madness and genius were neighbors. That one couldn't have been any other
way. Yeah. No, because his mind, the thing about seeing him in a comedy club was that he would
react to random stimulus in the environment. You know, it could be a heckler. Sometimes you
almost got the feeling that he wanted a heckler because it was, it gave him something to play
against, right? He was just, he was infinitely, instantly inventive. But I actually, to me,
the best Robin Williams is as he got closer and closer to the end of his life, because there was
a sadness and he's almost fighting the sadness with this improvisational, like the weapons he has
is this wit and humor and his dancing that he does with language. But and then sometimes when
you just fall silent, you can see the sadness. And I don't know, there's something so beautiful
about that. It's like this bird with a broken wing that's like trying to fly, you know, and it's
getting older and older. And I mean, those, he would have made a one hell of a podcast guess,
I'll tell you, I'll tell you that that's a sad. Yeah, I have some sadness that I really do think
that part of what we call podcasting is actually just getting to know a soul
over and over again. Like, yeah, maybe the idea is that this is talking about depression and
sadness and heavy feelings is not an American specialty. Seeing that in context with the beauty
of life is a Russian specialty. Like it is very much sounds like a diner menu. What the Russian
specialty? A big scoop of ice cream with tons of depression. I do think that we're in a really
terrifying and depressing time. And I think that part of it is that we don't know if something huge
is about to get started. And we don't even know what this is. I mean, we just sit here in this
weird world that is falling into some new state. And we're not even super curious. It's like,
what the hell just happened? Everybody's got an answer. And I'm positive that all of those answers
are wrong. Let's try to at least sneak up on the good answer. So the central core of the answer
is that the US seemed to be the greatest thing in the world in large measure because we hadn't
noticed that we were getting a benefit from having no plan, not having to make a plan for low growth.
As long as we had growth, we were in great shape. Let's imagine that you could run an
experiment. You have a billion copies of Earth and you start the initial conditions slightly
different. On some giant number of planets, a lot of the things that were discovered from the 1800s
through the end of the 20th century are discovered in a period of time because
a lot of that just has to do with once you crack the puzzle of getting better instruments,
you can see more. And the more you can see, the more you can make use of what you can see. And
it turns out there was lots of stuff to do with like germs or electron orbitals or spectrum,
electromagnetic spectrum. And so we got to do all of those things. And the US roughly
corresponded for a good chunk of its history with this bonanza. And so of course we look like an
amazing, genius country. We have no plan. Imagine that you could sell a car, you don't have to put
in seat belts, you don't have to put in airbags, you don't have to put in rear view mirrors or
sensors or rear view mirror. You could save a lot of money on a car by not putting in all of the stuff
to keep things from going wrong. And I think that's what we had. We had a machine
that as long as growth was insanely good, we plowed it back, the riches and spoils and
treasure back into the system and made more genius stuff. And we carried along a good chunk of
humanity, hundreds of millions of people. We did not have a plan for what happens when the
growth goes below the stall speed of our society. How confident should it be that the growth has
slowed in a way that is permanent rather than a slap in the face where we...
It's not the right concept. The right concept is I try to use the same words over and over again
in case people see mold because then the perseveration actually gets somewhere. So I use this analogy
of the orchard because everyone talks about low hanging fruit. They know the concept of
low hanging fruit, but they don't think in terms of orchards. So they say things like,
you think we've picked all the low hanging fruit, but I believe in the infinitiveness of the human
mind. It's like, okay, that doesn't even work as an analogy. What if the idea is we only picked
all the low hanging fruit here and then we're having this stupid argument about low hanging fruit
and we're not going and looking for new orchards. We're not planting new orchards. We're not looking
for forests. We're just sitting here arguing about low hanging fruit. So my claim is there's
probably a lot more low hanging fruit and it's not here. It's in other orchards. It's in other
orchards. One of those turned out to be the digital orchard. The digital orchard has not
been as stagnant as lots of these other like the chemical orchard. I have faith that there's a small
percentage of the population, but not zero that's looking for those other orchards. I'm excited
about one of those orchards, which is, I believe there'll be robots in everybody's homes and that
will unlock some totally new thing. Totally new set of technologies, ideas, the way we live life,
the productivity, everything. It'll change everything. So I'm excited about that orchard.
You know, I'm roaming that orchard and wondering how the hell you kind of bring back like the ant
that finds a new source of food. I'm trying to find an apple I can bring back to the...
Great. So you're in an explorer idiom.
And do you have faith that there's enough of those?
I don't think there are very many of us. I mean, I'm one of them too.
How many does it take? It takes one ant. It takes one ant.
What are you talking about? How many eelons does it take to screw in a light bulb?
Let's imagine that we went... Imagine some ant goes and finds a new source of food, right?
And then it comes back to the colony and it says, hey, I think I found a new source of food.
And the initial reaction is, you're not authorized to find new food.
What? Why would you try to go find new food?
We're going to remove you from Twitter.
And by the way, I think the fact that you think you're allowed to go find new food shows how
privileged you are as an ant. Get out of the colony. Kill him. Kill him.
Well, that's probably not a great model for finding new orchards.
And I think that what we find is that where there's a system that allows somebody to ascend
without a lot of gatekeeping, you can have that. But I saw this happen in hedge funds.
Hedge funds for a while hoovered up a lot of talent because they were places that had funding
and had freedom. And in general, really smart people want to be free and they don't want to
think a lot about how they're going to feed themselves. They want to get lost in their minds.
So you can either give them productive places to play, dangerous places to play.
You know, they're either going to break into computers or find vaccines for you
or build bombs or build companies. And we're not providing for the people who have to disrupt and
have to innovate and trying to channel that effort. We're so focused on this other thing,
which is like fairness and safety. And fairness and safety, by the way, are really important.
I don't want to denigrate them. But the singular focus on fairness and safety in the same breath
being focused on growth and discovery and creation is going to doom us because what we're
talking about is we're always talking about divvying up the pie that is as opposed to
the pie that will be. Imagine that you spent all your time trying to divvy up the 13th century pie
and you destroyed your ability to get to the 20th century. You'd be an idiot.
But one place I think I disagree with you is I don't think you need that many people to empower
the geniuses, the innovators, the people who refuse to spend most of their days in meetings about
fairness. This is good. Let's have a disagreement. I think podcast and whatever you call that medium
is just one little example of a tool that you can give power to. Like you and your podcast can have
the next Elon Musk and make them a star. Now I see where you're going. Okay. There has been a
series of places for people to play and be free. And we've lost them successfully.
What's a good place you remember? Because I just agree with you there, too. I think they're still
there. You can still play. You interviewed Noam Chomsky. Yes. Okay. Noam Chomsky comes from an era
where you can play. Where you could play. At MIT. At MIT. And you can't play. This is where I
disagree with you. We've already had this, but go check the clips channel for the Lex Friedman podcast.
I think I wasn't brave enough at that time and I'm not really brave enough now. Come on. Because I don't...
Where's the vodka? It's a feeling and the people are going to tear me apart. Oh, what are you and
you speak from emotion? In fact, the feeling... My podcast is yours. Yes. Okay. Tell the people who
are currently editing your brain because I saw that move right now. They should go find another
podcast. Right? Let's get rid of some of your audience right now. Please go find another podcast
if you're editing my brain. Nevertheless, all the self-doubt, they're sitting in that brain.
Oh, I can't stand to watch this, but all right. What is the self-doubt loop that you're in? The
thing is, when I walk the halls of MIT, there's bureaucracy. There's administrators that never
have done anything interesting in their entire lives. There's meetings. There's all the usual crap.
But there's, in the eyes of individuals, there's this glow of excitement that has nothing to do
with career. I understand this. And it's still a playground. There's little pockets of playgrounds
from which genius can emerge still. And they're unaffected by diversity meetings or fairness
meetings or blah, blah, blah. I love to hear that. Yeah? You don't think so? I don't believe it.
Because I've watched the change, Lex. I've watched people edit. We are all editing ourselves all
the time. I remember my old mind. I liked it better. All of this relentless focus on critical
race theory and critical theory, post-modernism, fairness, social justice, it's making many of
us into worse people. Do you think the mad daemons of the character is paying attention to any of
that? You think that has an effect? Have you seen what happened to Matt Damon himself? Matt Damon
has tried to say various things at various times. It seemed to be relatively innocuous. He can't
speak. Okay. Well, let's not mix up. Matt Damon is just an actor. Well, I don't know. He was just a
Harvard student who came up with his own genius screenplay, acted, and made it happen. No. We're
somewhere else. You don't think you can build a rocket company out of MIT still? No, I do think.
I think that there are things that you can still do, but we're losing them. We lose them. We keep
losing them. I would say the biggest problem here, let me just say what I think the solution would be
is to fire anybody who's not faculty, especially young faculty, should have way more power
and administration should have much less power. Because right now, the administration,
which used some of the whom used to be faculty, but they've lost the fire, the spark that gave
them, they've lost the memories of the playground. The people that admire and love the playground,
like you could see it in their behavior, should have way more power. We should create
a systems that give them power. Lex, you're very idealistic. You've got a huge heart.
It's a weird time because I don't want to dissuade you from believing beautiful things
because I see how potent you are. You do all these things, jujitsu, guitar, podcasting,
programming, computers, et cetera, et cetera. I don't think you're right. I think we're in a
really deeply screwed up place where even the tiny number, let me give you an alternate version
of this dystopia. I do think that there are people who are capable and there's still places to
play and cause things to happen that progress the story forward. But if you look at the fire that
some of the people are in who fit that profile, how much crap has Elon Musk taken? Quite considerable.
Right? And not much admiration from the- Craig Venter.
Jim Watson. These are very difficult people. Steve Jobs is a very difficult guy, you know?
Yeah, it is a bit heartbreaking to me. I mean, everybody is different generations. I just,
my mind is a little focused on Elon Musk because he's the modern person.
Well, you know him. I mean, he's a person to you.
It hurts my heart to see how few faculty and people with Nobel Prizes and so on
admire Elon. He gets a lot of fans from people who buy his products and young minds just excited.
But why don't we as an institute, why doesn't MIT say that somebody amongst us will be the
next Elon Musk and we want to encourage them? Say that. Say that in meetings. Say that. That's
success. No kidding. For us as MIT. Instead, there's this jealousy. It's like, did you hear what
Elon Musk tweeted? How responsible is what he's doing? He's just saying all these things that are
just dripping with jealousy and basically- I want what he's got. That's the thing, right?
Here's the weird thing. Rivalry has a different signature. You see, when you know that you're
never going to make it, that's the position you take. What is it in Kung Fu Panda, which you've
watched now? Yes. Yes. What does Tai Lung say when he's looking for the Dragon Warrior and the Furious
Five come to defeat him on the bridge? One of them gives up Poe's name accidentally and Tai Lung
hears it. Poe, so that is his name. Finally, a worthy opponent. Our battle will be legendary,
right? He's excited. Why is that? Well, you learn about this in boxing. Sometimes you'll see a division
or an MMA, which is lousy with talent. You can't swing a cat without hitting an amazing athlete.
Sometimes you'll have a division, which at that particular moment has one star and no real competition
in that weight class or something. That person is in bad shape because you can't build a legend
without the other. When you think of Muhammad Ali, what are the names that you immediately
think of? You have to phrase your- You have to think of the other. Listen. Listen. Right?
Yeah. So, those opponents are in part what made Muhammad Ali Muhammad Ali. That's why the
Mayweather McGregor revelation that this guy has got his opponent's picture in his house.
How weird is that? Well, because without the opponent, you may not be able to get there. Now,
I am not a huge fan of the wrong kinds of rivalries. Do you have examples in mind?
Well, there are rivalries where people take each other's credit and screw each other over. And then
there are other rivalries like the RNA Tie Club, where these guys were so in love with what they
were doing that they couldn't wait to share everything. And Nobel Prizes were so abundant
that most people got Nobel Prizes just for being a member of the RNA Tie Club and doing cool stuff.
And yeah, that's the golden kind of sweet spot. Most of these people can't do what Elon's doing
because they can't break rules. They can't take the pressure. I'll tell you what really concerns
me about your perspective. I think that there are a lot of genius ideas inside of people who don't
have the stomach for conflict and derision. And I think a lot of those people are female.
And I think that until we come up with a world in which we can swat down the trolls,
where we can actually cause the trolls not to ruin everything. And I don't necessarily mean
by shutting them up. I don't necessarily mean by being brutal to them, but somehow separating off
people who are working and people who are trolling. I think that we're losing a huge amount of human
genius in part because women in particular are not necessarily going to push an idea if it results
in 10 years of being derided. Very few men are willing to do that either. But there are some
of us who are so dumb that we will pigheadedly stick to an idea for 10 years, even if the world
collapses. I don't think that there are as many women who are going to make that calculation,
even if they know the idea is correct. And one of the things that I believe technology can help
us fight the trolls of all definitions of troll. I believe that a better Twitter can be built.
Interesting. I do not. I don't believe that a Twitter successor can be built that solves
most of the problems. I think you can always improve what we have. But I don't think that converges
in something that really works because I think ultimately the problem isn't Twitter, the problem
is us. For example, I recently made a very disturbing realization, which is academics and trolls
have very many similar behaviors. Absolutely. It's largely a trolling community.
I tend to believe that the trolls are not, it's like the Peter Teal mini-mind idea,
which in all of the trolls, there's the possibility of goodness. And all you have to do,
not all you have to do, what you have to do is create technology that incentivizes
them to embrace, to discover, to embrace, to practice the better angels of their nature.
And I believe that people actually want to do that. The trolls is a short-term dopamine rush of
childish toxicity that all of us want to overcome. I believe that deep within, we want to overcome
that. I try to keep myself from believing what you believe.
Because you'd be disappointed if it's not true. Because it's dangerous because a lot of these
people are implacable foes. And there aren't many of them, but when you meet somebody, it's like,
yeah, I just like screwing people up. I'm here for the pain.
I just believe even in them, there's a good... There's a wonderful book that I'm going to recommend
to you where I hope this comes from. Maybe I've got the source wrong, but in any event,
it's a great book called Maximum City about Bombay. And I believe the conceit is that the author
leaves Bombay as a kid and comes back as an adult, and he realizes he has to rediscover
the city because he can't live in the city he left. So he gets in contact with all of the
weird areas of the city, and one of them is the underworld. He hangs out with the police, but
in the underworld, he's talking to contract killers. And he says, you know, it's really
weird. Everybody pleads for their life right before I kill them. And they always say this thing
about, I've got two kids at home. He says, never say that to a contract killer because we have
terrible relationships with our parents. Doesn't it dearest you? And I was just thinking, oh,
wow. So there's a minus sign in front of that statement. You're sitting there saying, I've
got a three-year-old. It's like, okay, well, I'm going to take this
POS out of that kid's life. Maybe I'll have a chance. You don't know how people are wired.
And as much as I hate to say it, there are people whose wiring is so disturbing and so
different from yours that you will never guess why you can't reach them or how much pleasure
they may have gotten because they may have gone over a point of no return.
Nevertheless, you are just a smart guy who is using his intuition to make a hypothesis. You
do not know this for sure. And I'm a whatever the hell I am that has a different hypothesis that
even in the darkest human beings that seem to be only full of evil, there's a good person
there that could be discovered. One of the reasons I love doing your show is that you have
these beliefs even as a Russian. The Russian special. As you know, there is a weirdness
which is a total cynicism and total idealism locked together. That's very much a part of
the Russian character. The reason I was kept bothering you, kept bothering you to have this
conversation is I'm really worried about the next couple of months. No kidding. And if there's
anybody in this world that could help alleviate my worry by at least walking along with me through
this worry of mine, it's you. Do you think we're headed towards some kind of civil war?
Or some kind of division that explodes beyond just stuff on Twitter, but something that's
really destructive to the fabric of our society? Well, I believe we're in a revolution,
as you know. I've called it the no-name revolution or n-squared revolution. I've
been talking about it for years. I think waiting for this to be called a civil war is not smart.
Only history will call it such. Fine. I think that the problem is that you're encountering
things that you've never seen, trying to fit them into things that you already know.
But history repeats itself. Yes, ish. You don't see lessons from history? I do.
We see today. But I don't see it repeating itself. What about violence? The famous quote is that it
rhymes. It rhymes. I mean, the thing I guess I'm speaking to is violence. We're in there.
The abstraction of violence. Imagine you were coding up violence as an abstract class.
Thank you for speaking to the audience. Trying to lose these people. Come with me.
Go on. No, no, no. I've dealt with your audience and your audience contains the smartest people
around. I guarantee you, if I say some stuff, first of all, any wrong thing that I'll say,
they're going to detail. That'll be a little bit of catnip to bring in the smart people.
But they'll also digest it for each other. It's one of the great lessons of long-form
podcasting. If you don't waste all your time explaining things that's the job of the audience
to do amongst themselves, they're happy doing the work and those who aren't, they leave. Isn't
that great? They'll leave. The people who don't want to struggle will leave. You can get rid of
them. I think that the point is you would want to say violence is defined relative to a context.
Let's call it meta-violence so that we don't get into the problem. We already have a term for
physical violence. We have meta-violence and physical violence. I would say that physical
violence is subclassed for meta-violence. Meta-violence is the disruption of a system.
If a cell dies, it can die through apoptosis or necrosis. Apoptosis is controlled,
programmed cell death. Necrosis is just like, okay, this didn't work. That was a violent
disruption of the system. This meta-class is presumed in the documentation. Is it all negative?
No. What are you talking about? This is part of the problem in the madness of our age. If you
open up a drawer in your cabinet, in your kitchen, and you see knives, spoons, and forks, do you have
a sense that the spoons are good utensils and the knives are forks or bad utensils because they're
mean? If you start thinking in these terms, that knife is there to do violence. That's violence
you want done. When I cut a mango, I'm doing violence to the mango. The mango expects that
I will do violence to it because otherwise, I won't be able to get the meat and it won't get
its seed spread somewhere else. In part, violence is absolutely part of our story.
Okay. There's this meta-violence class. The meta-violence class is already,
it's a multiple inheritance pattern. Whatever's going on right now inherits from meta-violence.
No, but there's certain subclasses that allow evil to emerge. What I'm specifically worried about
is that- What's on your mind, Lex? What's really going on?
I worry that amidst the chaos of these protests or the chaos that could be created by
the feeling that the election does not represent the voice of the people saying that whoever gets
wins the election according to some kind of reporting of the numbers that come out that's not
going to represent what people actually want to be the leader. Something in that narrative
will create so much division that people will resort to literal violence, like protests that
really, that the United States loses its united aspect. Because of that, because of that chaos
and tension, evil people, evil forces, that my definition of evil is just cruel human beings
use that moment to attain power, the kind of power that ultimately goes against the ideal
of the United States. That could be Donald Trump. That could be another human being. It
doesn't really matter. My worry is that love doesn't win out in this. The unity doesn't win
out in this. I feel like you and I have responsibility. No kidding? Yeah, I know.
How do we let love win in this moment of potential chaos? We're going to have to fight for it.
You're going to have to become a fighter. You're going to have to throw some serious punches,
if that's what you want. You have to be Muhammad Ali here because the moment you start
criticizing anything, you have to be a masterful communicator because that's why you're here.
Look, Lex, in part, your decency is allowing you to do things that you couldn't otherwise do.
I saw that you had Michael Malis on your podcast. Now, Michael Malis is, I think,
of somebody who, at his best, is extremely shrewd and insightful, yes?
He's also got this trolling game, which he's quite open about and you talk to him about,
which I can't stand. This is the idea, oh, Grandpa doesn't get the internet. Well,
I'm Grandpa. I don't get the internet. I don't love the trolling. There are trolls of the past
who were incredibly good. I don't see any of the modern trolls as being that kind of genius level
trolling the people who deserve it in the way that they deserve it. Right now, what I see is that
anything that stands up gets cut down. It's like anything earnest. You have to turn into cynicism
and a meme. It's this idea that the people who believe that the world is chaos and has no point
are constantly trying to let you know, don't try to use the internet for meaning, for decency,
for goodness, because we are going to find out that that's all sanctimonious hypocrisy,
and we will make you suffer. I do think that there's a lot of sanctimonious hypocrisy in the
world, some of it mine, some of it yours, but we all have it. The trolls somewhat remove that,
but it's not a judicious, kind, constructive, compassionate, caring version most of the time.
A lot of those trolls, and I have this feeling about Michael Malis. I don't know whether it's
right, that there's somebody who deeply cares and loves beneath it, and that that's motivating
some of the trolling behavior. You and I don't seem to be doing that. I don't see you as almost
ever trolling. You and I, I'm very much against trolling. I'm very much against trolling. It
doesn't mean that it's selective. I'm not even, it's not even true. Everything we say, we say,
forward, I'm against it. This isn't my native language. I speak nuance. I don't speak this
internet shit. The more I have to communicate through internet shit, I almost never take
a tweet seriously if it contains the letters LMAO, LOL, R-T-F-L, F-O-L.
There's an interesting effect where people say stuff and then finish with LOL. You put it
beautifully that it indicates to me that this is a person, we've talked about why I wear the
stupid suit. This is to fight the LOL at the end of sentences. It's like stand out for the words
you're saying. Don't finish stuff with LOL, removing completely the responsibility of the
content of the sentence that preceded it. Also, choosing the outfit that worked both for Men in
Black and the Blues Brothers, not a terrible choice. We're not in a position to do this.
You need to be seated in a different chair. Your chair is the wrong chair. You're in the wrong
chair. It's been so long. I want to talk about you and Joe Biden. Joe Biden was a 29-year-old guy
with nothing particular going on so far as I can tell. I know people as impressive at age 29 as Joe
Biden. 12 rows back, 3D, doesn't matter. It's a huge number of people. None of them, my age,
can get to where he got to. We're all morons. Anytime somebody takes out, if you found Eddie
Van Halen in a guitar shop, you'd be angry. What is this guy doing repairing guitars?
Then somebody will say, maybe he loves to repair guitars.
Yeah. I mean, what is your Russian piano tuner doing?
What is my Russian piano tuner? That was the whole point of that story,
which is what is it that happened in that life that converted somebody? I find this, for example,
with Russian doctors who are technicians in offices now, there's a huge amount of talent
in the world that's not sitting in its proper seat. Quite honestly, I've gotten to the point
where my feeling is we've got to take the seats. Maybe we don't sit in them. Maybe the idea is
that we take the seats and we put some smart Gen Z person in the seat and say, look, no chanting.
I don't want to hear you say, no justice, no peace. If there aren't verbs, if it rhymes,
it's wrong. I used to have this thing, things that rhyme are more true. But in general,
if something starts at one, two, three, four, I don't want to hear what the rest of your sentences.
Yeah. But I feel like the responsibility that you carry that I carry,
this is where Joe Rogan generally removes himself from being, I'm just a comedian,
this idea of I'm just a comedian. I'll do that. But at this moment in history,
like history literally can pivot on the words of a tattooed,
ripped 50-year-old comedian. And I think the same is true with you.
Okay. Well, I'm interested and I care. Speaking of lyrics, there are many here among us who feel
that life is but a joke. That's not us. The hour is getting late. That's not us.
In the song, the joker and the thief are on opposite sides of Jesus having this conversation
over Jesus. You and I, we've been through that. That's not our fate. That's somebody else's fate
to throw spitballs at the internet. That's not your fate. You're in earnest sky. You're filled
with love. You're getting the most amazing podcast. Yes, you're broadcasting this.
But you can win over the internet. This is the point I'm trying to make,
that you're saying I'm just a grandpa. I don't get internet.
No, I'm telling you, you're going to get bigger and then you're going to get cut down.
You're going to keep ascending for a while, Lex. And then you're saying naturally there's-
I'm telling you, I watch the same process. People get up to a certain level.
And one of the things that's going on in my opinion with Joe Rogan is that when Joe Rogan
starts to talk about his misgivings about Joe Biden in a way that you find at any bar in America
about cognitive decline in a 77-year-old who's about to be 78, I believe in November.
We have never had anything remotely as insane as a 78-year-old person slated to win the White House.
And you're saying when that idea is being communicated, is there something about the disc
concept you talk about, the system naturally starts to-
Some bad thing happens to Joe or one of Joe's close associates.
The ability to destroy people who become inconvenient has been documented.
This is what we have done in the past. Whether we are doing it now,
we don't know because we are not doing this church committee too.
In order to know whether or not you are currently destroying American citizens
as we did in the past and as we have documented, as we found out in 1976,
the federal government destroyed Americans who had political beliefs that the government didn't
want to continue. And I don't know whether you are grasping that. One interpretation of why John
Stewart and why Joe Rogan and why Bill Maher, all these people, to some extent, hide behind.
It's a joke. It's because they're trying to find a protected class.
Is there some place I can stand and speak the truth which does not result in my being garbage
collected? Interesting. I guess you're right. My intuition is you can stand.
As you gain more power, you can stand behind Joe Rogan right now.
I mean, I've talked about it for a few years now. People did not understand how big that
program was. People didn't understand long-form podcasting. I was derided by people who I think
of as being very shrewd for believing in these podcasts as a major force. Most of the people
who derided me have said, wow, did I not get things? It's like if you started to propose,
you wanted to do the Sopranos in the era of 30-minute sitcoms. It's like, you don't get it,
man. The American people, they're not interested in these long plot storylines. That's your weird
thing. Nobody cares, dude. Everybody just wants short, fast, memorable. If you do that, you totally
miss the opportunity. The savvy people used to say, kid, let me tell you, nobody ever lost a dime
underestimating the intelligence of the American people. Well, that was totally wrong because
they didn't calculate opportunity costs. I have been talking about the problem of Joe for a long
time. The problem is that when the system wakes up, they're going to want to control it.
They come up with new different mechanisms of doing that. I guess one interesting one is
cancel culture. Well, look at the number of people around Joe who they've come after since
they've realized that Joe is really big. Joey Diaz, Brian Callan, Crystalia. Now, I'm not saying
that those are all related, but I do notice that there are at least correlations between when Joe
says something, when something bad happens in Joe's universe. It's easier for me to believe
that that's happening when it's happening around Joe himself. But I'm worried about my friend.
I don't necessarily want to push him towards being more if he doesn't want it. I don't want
to conscript people. He's got a great life. He's got a great situation. He's done a huge service.
How much do I owe Joe just for what he's done for you, to say nothing of what he's done for me,
or for Brett, or for Sam, or any of these people? I'd like to think that we all
try to give back. But I'm worried about Joe. He's not worried.
One of the inspiring things about Joe is, I mean, he's in this war alone, and the way he fights the
war is by just enjoying life. Well, that's his thing. As long as he stays close to things that
he loves. One of the things, he's honest about his drug use. He loves to hunt. He does a certain
amount of semi-vice signaling up front. And then you just also know him. This is why every time
they try to take him down, you use the N-word. Unfortunately, everybody knows who Joe is,
and yes, he doesn't act as if he went to a fancy finishing school. That's not his energy.
The fact that you've got some super smart guy who always pretends to be a meathead,
just like, hey, I'm a comedian. All these defenses and disguises. You've got this super smart guy
who he's admitted to most of the things that you can take him down for. And because everybody's
been effectively in his den or his basement, think about that studio as his basement,
people have hung out with Joe so many hours that you can't tell them something about Joe
or they're going to say, wow, I'm going to believe the New York Times and not the
hundreds of hours I've spent on the Joe Rogan experience.
But the cool thing is that this is what inspires me is that the way he's waging war against the
system is just by being a good person and talking enough hours in a week where that message
like bleeds throughout the words and the gaps between. And that's so inspiring to me that
the good people can win by just being good. And he's kind and he's tough. And he's no push
over. I always worry a little bit when I sit down in that chair.
You still get scared that he'll call you on some kind of bullshit that you weren't even aware of?
The first time I was on the show, the energy wasn't great between us. And it was in a sober
October situation. So I think I hadn't understood that. And maybe our egos got a little bit off.
I don't know. I mean, I was having fun, but maybe it was just too complicated life forms
getting to know each other. The first one was probably, yeah, that made me a little nervous
for the future. But then Joe and I become friends, although sometimes we have miscommunications,
like on Yom Kippur, I texted him and I said, Joe, I want to apologize for
ways of let you down as a friend that haven't been there for you and appreciate everything
you've done for me. I get this text back, like, what the fuck is your problem?
You're great, dude. I don't know what bad place you're in, but cheer up.
It's like, Joe, don't you have any Jews in your life? Apologize for what they've done.
He was just like, dude, if you lost your mind, what the hell's gotten into you?
Yeah. What do you think about the Spotify thing?
What about it? Ask me a question.
He's now, as opposed to being just a comedian with a podcast, he now is just a comedian with
a podcast who stepped in the middle of the center of cancel culture, which is like, I know Spotify
is in Sweden, but they represent Silicon Valley, they represent the very kind of structures they
contain and represent the kind of structures that threaten to destroy the elons of the world.
Hmm.
And he just, like, stepped, like, with his Alex Jones and his Joe Ideas just strolled
right into the middle of it. Yeah. I think it's awesome. I love it.
But do you think he's strong enough to?
Well, I don't know. I mean, I don't even know the right way to ask this, but
is he strong enough to persevere?
It's a bit interesting. It's like when Alliance decides, wow, that honey badger looks tasty.
I'm going to swallow it whole, see what happens.
Because I talked to him offline, he really seems to be willing to give away the 100 million,
which gives him so much power.
Oh, I don't.
It's a powerful thing to be able to say, I don't, yeah, to the honey badger.
He just strolls in, but he's willing to walk away from anything in this.
Well, he's going to walk out the other side of the line. I don't think he's going to go out the way
he came in. Yeah. Well, you know what it is? It's Tommy Lee Jones entering the bug.
This is like a giant alien. He just walks into it.
He just, he gets swallowed by the bug and he blasts out from the inside.
I have it as Tommy Lee Jones. Yeah.
But anyway. That's Joe Rogan to you.
Yeah. Is that my feeling is that Spotify doesn't understand what they're messing with.
I could be wrong, but I'm not. No, you're right.
I'm right.
Because Joe doesn't need anything, man. I mean, this is the weird thing about it.
It's like, I'm sure that he loves all his toys, whatever, blah, blah, blah.
He's a rich guy. Yes. He's got a few money.
He had a few money a long time ago. And you're not, you know, the other thing about,
it's a bit weird being friends with a dude like that. It just is.
Because like you call him up or he'll call you up and he's like, what's going on in your life?
And I'm like, I don't know. Kind of depressed, trying to get some math done. What are you up?
Oh dude, I can cheer you up. I just came off of a 29,000 person stadium.
It's like, oh, cool. How'd you do that? Oh, I don't know.
I just announced it on Instagram a few days ago and it's filled up. Just like, oh, damn.
Yeah. I mean, that thing is powerful.
So much love in that guy. That thing is so powerful.
Yeah. So there you go. I mean, you could be that too.
The instant Joe takes an interest in politics and saving the world.
You might destroy all that.
It's going bye-bye. I promise.
I just disagree with you.
Okay.
Because you have to do it. You've said this many times before.
I'll bet you. I'll bet you a bottle of Stoli that you can get,
if you get Joe Rogan to get highly politically active and call out the system for all the
bullshit that it is in a very pointed and determined fashion.
And he doesn't get destroyed. I'll give you the vodka.
The vodka?
Yeah.
That sounds like a pretty damn good deal.
You've said this.
No living heroes, my friend.
No living heroes.
No living heroes.
It's just difficult. You just have to be good at it.
I mean, if you just say generic political things,
you're going to be taken down.
The more heroic you are, the more beautiful you are,
the more you will be made to suffer.
And if they cannot get you on reputation, if Jesus himself came down,
I don't know if I ever read, I probably have never read to you the hit piece I did on Jesus.
You don't know about this?
No, I did not know.
I did hit pieces on all of the best people in the world.
So whoever it was who cured cancer, discovered new particles, whatever it is,
I did a hit piece against them to prove that I can do it to anybody around anything at any time.
Except Eddie Van Halen is what we're talking about.
Well, Eddie Van Halen is now dead. But if this was a situation hot for teacher, canceled.
Disrespectful.
Absolutely. Also, packaging female objectification for young men,
clearly Eddie Van Halen is one of the worst people alive.
But the skill, the incredible inspiration that is just
radiating from his music inspires so many millions that they will fight those cancel pieces.
They will fight those.
This is your thing.
Yeah.
You have this idea that there's a war between good and evil and the good has already been
designated the winner. It's not true. But your belief that it's true.
Take it till you make it, no?
It's motivating both of us. I also believe that we're going to win.
Because if I don't, then I can't get out of bed and it's pretty heavy at the moment.
Do you think 2021 can make us feel good about the trajectory of society?
Where we emerge from this year, feeling good. There's a smile and there are questions on his
face. And the next time we talk, we'll be doing some kind of duet on guitar and not having this
worried look on our faces. No.
Okay. But you've also promised that you're going to somehow end this in a positive.
So how do you turn the no around? What's the you turn from the no?
Until we get some actually decent people in the right chairs who are not constantly
thinking about their next paycheck, I don't see a solution.
Let me just say what the prerequisites for a solution are and to let you know why I don't
think it's coming. First of all, both of these political parties, the leadership of them
is disgusting and has to go. They're tearing us apart. They lack the will to be Americans.
They don't understand the subtlety of the project. They're simply the people who figured out
how to inhabit the seats and that is their great achievement.
I believe that in order to solve this, you need people who can integrate who are not partisan
at the level of the partisan warriors that we're seeing. People who believe in dividing
the pies of the future rather than the present pie as our main task as Americans,
because we are built around growth. I'm sorry to say it.
You need an ability to have subtle conversations and you need the ability to exclude.
At the moment, everyone knows inclusion is good, which it isn't. It's like saying,
well, water is good. If I say water is good, everybody will agree with me. It's not. People
drown. People need to get dehydrated. It can be lifesaving or life-ending. It isn't good or bad.
Inclusion is not good or bad. Inclusion is just inclusion. Exclusion is part of inclusion.
We've taught people that they can reason through the world as sub-cocker spaniels.
They just bark things at each other. I'm for safety. I'm for inclusion. I'm for growth.
Oh, really? Do you guys use verbs, dependent clauses? Are there compound, complex sentences?
Where are we in this sea of nonsense? You have to be able to build a place where you have smart,
talented people who represent a diverse group of correct opinions. You need to get rid of almost
all of the people who have opinions that are antithetical to what we're trying to accomplish.
You need to give them insulation, which we're terrified because we don't trust anybody. Everything
has to be transparent. If you're going to the bathroom, I want those walls to be plexiglass
so I can see what you're doing. It's like, that's too much transparency. We have too much and not
enough at the same time. In essence, you need to ensure that people aren't worried about feeding
their family every four seconds for being real. None of that is happening. Our billionaires,
our billionaires are pathetic. What is the point of billionaires if you're not going to do
billionaire-type cool stuff like saying FU? I'm going to throw $3 billion at the project of
restoring the national conversation. I don't grasp this. What is the point of creating
obscene wealth if we don't have anyone smart enough and caring enough to use it?
I agree with that last part for sure. Let me slightly push back on the idea that the leaders
themselves are broken. I feel like this goes to Joe Rogan, Joe Biden, and Trump having a debate
on that program. I feel like Joe Biden has a lot of really interesting ideas that he's almost
forgot how to communicate. He's been fake for so long within the system.
Hillary was fake for too long. I'm sure she had real ideas at the beginning that she
still was campaigning on decades later. If the system, if the platforms empowered you to search,
to be honest, to be real, to search for those ideas within yourself like long-form conversations do,
then even the Donald Trump and Joe Biden leaders we have now would take this country to a better
place that would unite people. We can keep the current Congress. We just need to create better
platforms. This is going to the intuition that there's good in Donald Trump. There is depth
and complexity in intelligence and the same with Joe Biden.
There's good in Joe Biden. We're not incentivizing.
There's several things I think are broken. One of them is Twitter. The other is journalism.
It's just the platforms of us communicating with each other.
One of the reasons that I try to come up with unifying explanations is that if you look at
the number of wildfires in California, let's say that we've just seen, if you treat them all as
spontaneous uncorrelated instances, it feels like, oh my god, it's just whack them all. Every time I
send a fire truck here, there's a fire over there. You want to come up with something like a central
theory, which is why do I suddenly have a problem when I hadn't had a problem before?
I look for these unifying explanations. I found one the other day that really speaks to me.
I mean, people are very frustrated because they've been trained to think about this incorrectly, in
my opinion. But here's the graph that you need to look at. On the x-axis is time by year,
and on the y-axis is something like average age of a human. The title of the graph is
any desirable situation involving institutions. That could be CEO. It could be tenured professor.
It could be who's getting grants. It could be the age at which people win Nobel Prizes.
University presidents, all these things go up. In other words, for a long period of time,
the average age of the person in a desirable situation has been increasing something like
nine months for every 12. Those graphs have to go down at some point. The specter of having
five people all born in the 1940s as the final entrance in the presidential context,
that makes no sense. Think about how bizarre a thing that nobody's even really talking about.
The last five people were all ancient by presidential standards, not one, not two, but five.
We are talking about a contest between somebody who is the oldest of the baby boomers,
at the very beginning of the baby boom, summer of 46th birthday,
fighting somebody who is in the silent generation. The silent generation guy in a town hall in Florida
gets this question from a Gen Z guy saying, what's going on with my future? Joe Biden has
the audacity to say, I'm a transitional president. You guys are the highly educated one.
When has any generation in history needed a transitional 78-year-old person to take office?
It's bizarre. It's preposterous. That graph is the graph we can't talk about. That graph is the
graph of our destruction. Because you can make a one-line argument, which sounds like ageism,
which isn't a very good argument. No. But what it does is it muddles the conversation.
And you always have to ask yourself the question, if this conversation becomes muddled,
who wins as a result of the muddling? It's a battle. Let's just win it. Let's win the battle.
Are you running? Sure. I'll run. I was born in Russia. But we Russians can hack elections,
so we'll figure it out. This is me officially announcing my run for president.
I was born in St. Petersburg, Florida. Lex, what is it that you really want to ask?
I want to put some responsibility on the portal that the portal gives
power to the people in that graph. Because you put it quite brilliantly, that the people that
move the world, their age has been going up. And not move the world, but put in the position where
they get the chance to affect the world. These new platforms, I think Twitter falls in them,
give power to the younger people. It doesn't have to be about age necessarily,
but the younger thinking people. So that's a promising thing. And you are like Gandalf.
You get to pick your photos, whatever. I'm not very good with the analogy, but the whole point
is for you as Gandalf. I don't know that I make that much sense. Gandalf makes sense.
I don't know if people know how to fit me into this ecosystem. I think there's something in my
presentation that people find very confusing. No, figure it out. I disagree with you,
but you need to look at the mirror and think, what is it? Maybe you need a mustache. I don't know.
But there's something about figuring out how to be a charismatic communicator.
And that's the responsibility. You said finishing sentences with the LOL is painful for your soul.
That's just how somebody lets me know. I don't have to take their opinion seriously.
Yeah. It's still the language, the way that people are communicating. And you're swimming
that wave. You have a big platform. I have a growing platform. It feels like this is the
place to give power. I agree. I agree. But we're going to get swatted down. I just don't think so.
You're wrong. Why are you afraid of the big... Because I've studied it.
Because I've studied... Let me ask you a question, Lex.
I believe that every society is supposed to have a collection of what I call
a break glass in case of emergency people. Yeah. These are people who are universally
loved and trusted by your society. For example, David Attenborough, the great British naturalist
and presenter, recently came on Instagram. He's worried about the planet. And I said,
you know, look, there are very few of these people left. Let's pay attention, find out what
he has to say. Maybe he's going to be an ass. Maybe he's going to be in it. Maybe he's going
to say wrong things. Don't know. Tell me about your top 10 universal American heroes.
This is not a rhetorical question. No. Give me five. Everybody looks to that person and says,
yep, the best of us. Not divisive. Well, everybody's an interesting concept. I mean,
Elon Musk is very divisive, right? I'm talking about overwhelmingly people would follow that person
if that person gave a rousing, intelligent speech that said we must act now because we're in dire
strides. I think a lot of people have fallen in that category. For me, it would be in the tech
world, in the engineering world. No, no, no. Elon Musk. Elon Musk. Elon Musk.
The rock. I'm thinking like, who is the most eloquent actor? So like, you think celebrities,
so people with platforms. I didn't say so everything. It could be well known.
I believe like, yeah, so this goes to Joe Rogan.
First two did not really impress me as being what I said, but okay.
Elon, several years ago, would have. Joe Rogan. Why do they fail? Why is
lots of people treat Joe Rogan as if he's some sort of right-wing racist because
they've never watched his program. They don't know who his friends are. I don't know.
Oh, but when I thought you said everybody, I thought you meant a large enough people where
huge change can happen, not actually literally everybody. Because I think.
I mean people who've pulled off, like people who've pulled off something where everybody's
convinced that that person just deeply. I mean, I think I've told you the story before,
but the one time I've seen the power of a figure like this. I mean, very few times I've been in
a large crowd and I've seen people just moved where they would do almost anything good, bad,
and different because they were primed. One was a Rolling Stones concert. The other one was Nelson
Mandela coming to Boston. And man, you've never seen anything like this. You check out the photos
from the banks of the Charles River when Nelson Mandela came. There are people that you need in
your dark hours and we can't agree on who they are. And as soon as they emerge, we tar them with
shit. We get out the shit breach. I just disagree with you. So I think.
What do we disagree about here? I think it doesn't matter who it is. I think
really good speeches are needed. I saw Killer Mike try to give a good speech.
Yeah, he did. In Atlanta, right? That was something. Very impressed. Even Killer Mike
immediately gets into this sell out. Yeah, but he didn't take up the responsibility,
I would say. He didn't. Of going bigger. So he was speaking to the community.
He was doing what he was doing. On this particular moment, he's exceptional at it.
And he was speaking to this particular moment. He didn't take it a step farther, which is
like giving the same speech, but bigger than race, bigger than this particular moment.
But more about the American project. You know the guy who landed the plane in the Hudson?
Yes. Yeah, there you go. That's a good example. So that guy until we screw him up.
Is the kind of thing that I'm talking about. Yeah, exactly. I mean,
Jocko maybe. That's another. Jocko's pretty good. Jocko is pretty good.
Can't really tell. Is he a Democrat? Is he a Republican? I don't know.
He's an American. That's for damn sure. Yeah. And I think there's a lot of folks.
And then, you know, no, I think Jocko, there aren't. That's one of the reasons why Jocko is so important.
Yeah. Your podcast, The Portal, is something in my little universe, is something a lot of people
really love. And it moves them. They draw a lot of meaning from it. And also, especially in difficult
times. And they, it gives them a comfort of through like this kind of, it's not just nuance, it's
there's like, even when you're talking about chaos, there's love underneath all of it. And I
think people draw a lot of meaning from it, which is why they are wondering why you haven't been doing
that many podcasts or you haven't done it in maybe a month and a half or two months
in this most difficult of times. Is there a good reason?
Yeah. There are lots of good reasons. So the first one is kind of weird, which is everybody assumes
that everyone wants to be famous. And if you say, I don't want to be famous, it's like,
oh, you're just saying that because you want to be, everyone to think you're famous,
you're not that famous. You know, okay. I don't love being as well known as I've become.
There's lots of things that are fun about it. It's wonderful that you can go to, I can go to
any city in the world, there are portal listeners there. All I need to do is put out a tweet and
20 people show up for a drink. And they're amazing people. And they're almost, I mean,
you can see my live Q&As on my Instagram page. If you go to Eric R. Weinstein,
I'd just pick somebody randomly. And I was really worried about it at first. And,
you know, maybe I should be worried about it. But in general, people all over the world are
just so positive. And thoughtful and deep and never story. Because they're self-selected.
But I don't like the fame. The thing we just described comes with the fame. It's a beautiful
thing. You don't, you're worried that it's getting. It's ephemeral. It'll, look Lex,
it'll turn on you in a heartbeat. It'll turn on you in a heartbeat. And the other
problem is I don't, I don't like my audience being my audience. I want to get closer to them.
I want to talk to them. I want to find out what, what is this doing in your life?
My house fills up with art that people send me. The lightest thing is an effects pedal
called something like, I don't know, it's a bow tie overdrive from a guy in Mexico.
Right? Yeah. You play electric, by the way, in a tiny little tangent. Did you play electric?
I have a Stratocaster, but it doesn't have a strap and I don't know what to do with it.
And I have a bad amp. So you should, you should, you should hook me up with the...
We'll find it a home maybe. Okay.
You're starting to sense that this is too much?
No, I want to be, I want to be here. I want to do the work very simply.
I don't have an ability to fully explain myself. I don't want to claim that I don't love the fact
how much love do we get from these programs? Generically, people are incredibly generous.
People have begged me set up a Patreon account and I haven't been able to do it. I should do it.
I've said to everybody, it's a business, it's a business, it's a business.
But they're so used to being defrauded when somebody starts thinking about monetary incentives.
My goal was to say, I'm going to keep talking to you about... You want to know why I started doing
ads on my show was because I wanted people to think from the get go, this is a business. This
is what I sound like when I'm selling. But you see, I've lost weight. A lot of that is due to
athletic greens. Athletic greens. Code... What's the... I don't know what my promo code is for
athletic greens. Probably athleticgreens.com slash portal. But doesn't advertise. But Fitbit,
who doesn't advertise, has also been instrumental as well as a guy named Steven Cates, who was a
fan from the show, found me on the street and just said, I'm a trainer. I want to help train you.
He's got me on a good path. So that's one paid advertiser and two people that I'm calling out
just because two outfits, Steven Cates and Fitbit, have changed my life. I wanted people to say,
you don't have to be afraid of advertising. If I do it in this way, this is powering your show.
But the whole issue of money is weird because people have these crazy feelings like,
oh, wow, I knew he was a shill. He's a grifter. I didn't love that. I didn't love the issues.
So I didn't set up a Patreon. The security issues for talking and being me are significant.
And I don't have the kind of money to hire around the clock. I mean, I desperately want to get to
a level of wealth where I don't have to think about money. I don't think it's... Some people want
money because they need it for status. I think I can handle status if I want it doing this.
I don't want the status necessarily, and I don't want... I'd want the status, but I don't want
the fame that goes with it. I want the money. I don't want to be seen as this is about money
because it's about a substance. All of those things. That's part of... I haven't solved these
issues. I've been feeling bad because people say, where's the Port Award? We're desperate.
These are difficult times. We have an election coming up. And it's just like,
do you think for a moment that I want to explain that I actually got really uncomfortable being
as well known as I was? And then what is it that I want? Because I want to be better known and less
well known at the same time. There's nothing the audience can do. I don't want the audience to be
the audience. That doesn't make sense to people. I want it to be a business, but I don't think
people need to fear a business if the business is open about being a business. And then that's
all to the side. What you're seeing now in front of the election is an incredibly
meta-violent period in our online existence. And I believe that anybody who attempts to say
these two parties are completely screwed at the moment the leadership of these parties is
unsalvageable, unworkable, everyone hears that from inside the two-party system.
Oh, I get it. He's trying to subtract votes off of Biden. Oh, I get it. He's trying to scuttle
Trump. Oh, I get it. This is a play for his show because he's trying to plug in to discuss.
There's a Bill Hicks routine on marketing. Have you ever seen this? Brilliant. I recommend it to
everyone where he comes out on stage and he says, are there any people in marketing and sales in the
eyes? Okay, great. Can you do us all a favor and die? And like everybody laughs. He's like,
no, I'm not laughing. I'm being serious. He talks about how marketing is horrible.
So you're like, where's this act going? Then he gets to the point where he's like,
oh, I know how you marketing people think. Bill's going after that resentment dollar.
That's good dollar. Let's get that resentment anti-marketing dollar. It's like, no, that's
not what I'm saying. I really hate marketers. Oh, that's good. It's the authenticity dollar.
You can't escape this kind of negative marketing thought. And I guess
that gets to the issue that I don't want to be destroyed in advance of this election.
I don't think it's a good use of my relationship to my audience
to be broadcasting how completely ridiculous Donald Trump and Joe Biden are as candidates for
the president of the United States, full stop. None of this makes any sense. These moderators
of these pseudo debates were in the wrong format with the wrong people. No part of this makes
a wit of sense. Can I try to push back several claims? One is I don't believe the systems as
they stand now can destroy the Eric Weinstein voice, the voice. You're a child. I'm sorry to
say that. Well, let me, well, it's also possible. Let's fight. It's entirely possible that you're
the child, okay? Because a child would say you would call other people a child. Yeah, get in the
first blow. It's a big reveal. It's a tell. Because the only power they have is to attack
you psychologically. No. Well, I believe that the army of people that love you is much more
powerful than mainstream media, than people that you might hear it say ridiculous things that you
just said, which is try to reduce you like the marketing thinking, I just believe there's an
army, maybe there's a better term, of people that see you for who you are and are hungry.
I'm not disputing those things. That's what I'm saying. I would venture to say as your therapist
that you're actually, the battle is all in your mind that you have found these demons in the system
and they're just a tiny minority and it's all in your mind. They cannot actually
remove, they're not strong enough to remove the voice of Eric Weinstein, to silence the voice.
I love this. This is some of the best fiction writing I've ever heard. Let me tell you,
I have relatives who've known me my entire life. Yeah.
We're one article in the New York Times. They will believe that over me.
My contention is that there has no power except to affect your psychology. What you have to do
is the Rogan thing, just laugh. You're not hearing me. Just laugh. I am laughing. I know, but more.
No, I'm telling you something. Yes. Okay. The way this works is through ruin.
Ruin can come to anyone. There's no one who cannot be ruined. Every single person
is signed up right now to be ruined by the system.
But don't you understand that you have more power than the system? You can ruin the system.
Your Twitter account, the podcast, that's not telling you about the army.
I agree that my Twitter account, my podcast, but what we've seen, for example,
you saw what happened to Brett's Articles of Unity project? Yes. Okay, what happened?
The unit on the Twitter side. On the Twitter side, what happened?
What happened? Well, actually, it's not an answer. Say the word.
It was blocked or removed from Twitter. Suspended. Sounds suspended.
And... Okay, I have a direct line to Jack. Yeah. Okay, so I'm talking to the CEO
who I am crazy enough to still believe in. Good. I do too. I believe it. Somehow,
there's a very strange thing going on with Jack Dorsey. I cannot possibly reconcile the actions,
but the person I've... That is a next level mind in there. I don't know it well enough
to say that it's all next level. I'm not claiming he doesn't have any blind spots.
Every smart person I know has blind spots. I don't know what he's up against, blah, blah, blah.
There's no way that the Jack Dorsey that I've talked to and the Jack Dorsey that interacted
over Articles of Unity can be the same person. He is constrained by that company in some way that
doesn't make sense to me. Either that or he's the most deplicitest person on earth and I'm not
believing it. I just don't buy it. Okay? Yeah. Something horrible is happening.
I... My claim is I can remove you functionally from the chess board in a tiny number of moves.
No matter who you are, no matter how virtuous or how much of a bastard you've been your entire life,
it doesn't take more than three or four moves to basically neuter you as a force.
Yeah. And I disagree that if that's possible, that means I'm not very good at chess.
Like Unity 2020 was removed from Twitter because it's not good enough. Not within the system.
Like the army of people that feel the brilliance of the idea was too small there.
Okay. But fear, uncertainty, and doubt is the name of the game, the coin of the realm.
Psychology, though. It's not real power. It just affects the mind.
Okay. I have a reading assignment for you. Because you're Russian, you'll really enjoy this.
As part of the Great American Tobacco Settlement, the Tobacco Institute had to
discourage its archives of all of its strategies, all of its skull-duggery,
and put it on the web for all time so that we could all understand how the tobacco companies
got together and destroyed people. Right? You see, tobacco destroys people. You can see,
Scientology destroys people. There are various vindictive organizations that will not tolerate
reality in opposition to them. Let's take them down.
Okay. That's what I'm trying to tell you.
So why aren't you doing the podcast or return? Because that's one of the weapons of war.
Well, first of all, if you're at war, I don't want to discuss strategy on a podcast. Right?
But what did Montgomery say about Rommel? Wasn't his line, I read your book,
You Beautiful Bastard? It's like, why are you using the tactics that you already explained?
Okay. So one of the things I'm doing is I'm not having a strategic conversation with you in a
several hundred thousand of our closest friends.
I pulled back because this is not the battle that I know what I'm doing. I do not feel passionately
enough about defeating Donald Trump to elect Joe Biden, even if that's the way I'm going to
ultimately vote. Right? I don't believe in the Biden Democratic Party. I don't believe in the
Trump Republican Party. So yes, it's an incredibly consequential election. But to me, it's like
the Crips and the Bloods and the Latin Kings fighting over the right to extort, you know,
a business and the business trying to figure out who it wants to do the extorting.
But don't you think, listen, there's very few people that are as good with the English language
as you? Don't you think it's possible to draw a line that in between, that finds how we
find our common humanity that ensures a better 2021 without having to say like
Donald Trump is evil or Joe Biden is incompetent or any of that, just somehow draw beautiful lines.
I am seeing people in so much pain. This election is chewing up the integrity of
everyone who comments on it, Lex. Maybe they're not good enough.
They're not good enough. No, but that, okay. Do you believe in me? Yes. You do? Yes.
Listen to me very carefully. My spider sense, my intuition that has allowed me to survive in
the space, I've been mouthing off since the 80s, tells me this is a super dangerous time
for smart people to be spending the dry powder because the election doesn't make sense.
Doesn't mean that I don't have a sense that one outcome would be better than the other,
probably, but the variance on that. I'm not even positive that I'm right.
These two options are so completely inappropriate to the world of 2020.
What we need is so diametrically opposed to more boomers and more silent generation people,
trying to sort out a highly technical world being mediated through social media.
We need more exclusion. We need more actual elites. The people we've called the elites are
not the elite. They need to go. We need excellence, competence. We need people who can be trusted
behind closed doors, and we need to close the doors so we can't see what those people are doing.
Here's the thing. Imagine that you had a bunch of people who'd all seen action in combat,
had all volunteered to be part of the armed services, had all come from backgrounds where
they didn't need to. So you were convinced that these people had put their lives on their line
for their country, not for a payday. Imagine you had 10 of these people with technical backgrounds.
Men, women, black, white, Muslim, Jew, doesn't matter. I would trust those people and I'd close
the door. I don't want to know what they talked about. I don't want transparency into all of
their negotiations. I want to know that they're patriotic, that they see something in the world
bigger than themselves and their family fortunes. I want to know that they're courageous. I want
to know that they've got all of our well-being and I'm willing to roll the dice, and if they
screw us over, I'd rather go down like that. I disagree with you there because there's a
difference between those and Jaco because you're not speaking to people with credentials.
No, I'm talking about self-credential people. I view Jaco as self-credential.
But the powerful thing about Jaco is he's not only self-credential, but he's
been real with people. The magical thing about Jaco isn't his book, isn't his life story. He's
been talking on a podcast for a long time. There's something real that happens.
I agree. Okay, so if you took Dan Crenshaw and Tulsi Gabbard and you took Jaco Willing
and maybe Jesse Ventura, you can take Bernie Sanders, who's a lone voice.
You can take all of these people who've really just risked. Why is Catherine Hepburn the best
that Hollywood ever produced? Because she told Hollywood to go fuck itself.
Hard. They gave her four Academy Awards and she said,
Love you, sweeties. I'm going to use them as the doorstop for the bathrooms in my house.
See, that's skill. That's what you were talking about. Be Catherine Hepburn.
Audrey Hepburn is pretty amazing, but Catherine Hepburn is next level.
That's what you're trying to say to me. I'm trying to figure it out. I don't have the answer yet.
What I do know is that this election is chewing people up. I mean two separate things. One,
that parties don't have enough integrity, that if you comment either for or against,
there's a short sequence where you make a comment that's nuanced, you get referenced
to something. Take this thing about find people on both sides. That is non-resolved after in years,
whether the context should be reported or not. We are in some situation in which
Democrats and Republicans are primed to fight each other the way introducing two ants from
two different ant colonies always produces a battle. I don't want to be in that fray
because those people are going to kill each other mindlessly like robots. Until the election is
concluded, do I think this is dire? Yes. Could it be make or break? Absolutely. I'm not saying
that. Do I know which way this goes? I can make an excellent argument that we need to elect Joe
Biden right now. We've got a situation which can only be cured by voting for Joe Biden.
I can make another argument that we can have a situation that can only be
cured by defeating Joe Biden right now and all of the things that the modern democratic party
represents. It's not the lady and the tiger. We're choosing between the tiger and the tiger.
It's the Sumatran tiger versus the Siberian tiger. I'm trying to think, well, which tiger do I have
a better chance against? The key problem for us politically is that we have to divorce the concept
of the center and moderation from kleptocracy. Every time we try to say something like we need
more moderate solutions, we need more pluralistic solutions, people will say, wow, you just want
to hand us right back into the swamp, don't you? Those swamp people because the moderates and the
swamp people are the same people. Then we have these two crazy wings. We can't have crazy right
wing people. I don't want any tiki torch BS. We can't have crazy left wing. Don't attack my
courthouse. Really don't attack my courthouse. We can't have moderates. It's like, okay, how do we
install our children and rape pillage and get these speaking fees when we're out of office and
become cozy with the things when we're supposed to be regulating them and then become their lobbyists
immediately when we leave office. All of this stuff. We need an entirely different system.
I can't talk about that at the moment. When I talk, people say, oh, wow. You're going to sit
this one out because you're a pussy, because you're a coward. Great to know, Eric. We thought
better of you. Bye, click. I don't know what to do. Are you thinking of what to do?
Yeah. Oh, you better believe it. Brett had this idea of Unity 2020 and I told him it was a wrong
idea. I didn't tell him that Unity 2024 was a wrong idea. I didn't tell him that Unity
2028 is a wrong idea. If I were to make the case that he was right and I was wrong because he's
now shuttered the thing, right? I would say that the case to be made that he was correct was that
by doing this in 2020, we found out what we were up against. It's good to know that Twitter can turn
this off at the drop of a hat. Great to know. It's good to know as we learned that you cannot
have meetings of presidential candidates in a primary that are not approved of by the party.
They've got this thing figured out so we don't have any way in. Now, Unity 2024
makes sense because Unity 2020 was tried. I don't know that we get to 2024 under all
circumstances. In some we do and some we don't. There's a game theoretic thing that I'm not sure
you're counting for, but you probably are. Let me just make an argument. Is Jack Dorsey very likely
listens to your podcast? This is the power of these words. Something deep went wrong,
but we can change it with the power of words. Something went wrong at Twitter.
They have so much division on their platform. That's what I'm trying to say. They've gotten...
It's not wrong. They just don't know. They're understaffed. No, they have an insoluble problem.
Difficult to solve. They have an insoluble problem. The argue and I disagree.
Or I'd like to create a competitor. Give it to me. Create the competitor. Show me
that you actually have understood this because my guess is that most of the things that you'll
think about... I can tell you things I've talked to Jack about, which I know would make Twitter
much better. However, I think that this problem of instantaneous communication across the planet
and you subtract off all sorts of context and mutual self-knowledge. The problem is us.
It's not the platforms. You're thinking about a technological solution. I'm saying the problem
is that we are ultimately the product. I just disagree with that. That's probably
you could save that for tomorrow. I look forward to spending summers in your villa
when you debut this product. I would love to angel invest in it.
By the way, in terms of money, I'll never have a villa.
No, I will always give away everything I own.
No, sorry. Invest into things like you mentioned. Awesome things.
Invest fine, but a little bit of avuncular advice.
Don't pledge to be the person who disgorges themselves
of security. Money is freedom. That's what it is. It's a big hunking pile of freedom.
You can choose to use it as the freedom to imprison you if you don't. You can use it as
freedom to make yourself a prisoner of your money. Generally speaking, Lex, money is freedom
and your voice is important. At least retain the amount of money, security you need
to follow Joe's advice. What is the point of FU money if you don't say FU? The number of people
who have FU money who don't say FU indicates the number of people who chose the freedom of their
wealth to create a prison. They built a prison with the freedom they had and they walked into it,
locked the door. I think it's too difficult not to create. The reason I want to give away the
money is because I just know my own psychology and you create prisons. Our human mind just creates
those prisons. The FU money is enough for basic shelter and basic food. That's the optimal FU.
You don't have kids yet. Okay, this is the problem. This is why I'm sitting. So this is me,
single Lex speaking. Future Lex, I'm talking to Future Lex. Single present Lex, please don't
listen. Don't be an ass. You're going to need some money and don't make these pledges to say
on a podcast. I want to save you from yourself. You need money to do many of the beautiful
things that we're counting on you to do. Don't eff it up.
Can I talk to you about Roger Penrose? Sure. You've talked to Roger on the portal,
but also in between the lines and offline, just everything you've said about Roger Penrose. For
people who don't know, he just recently, a few days ago, won the 2020 share, the 2020 Nobel Prize
for Physics. But it's clear to me that he had a deep personal impact on you, a connection with you
in terms of both your love of mathematics, just the way you see the world. This is the
Eddie Van Halen conversation. This is clearly somebody who's profound in your worldview. Can
you talk about Roger? Can you talk about what it means that he won the highest of prizes? Just in
general, let's celebrate the man. Yeah. Okay. So first of all, there are two other people who
won this prize. I'm sorry, I just didn't happen to know who they were before they won.
Roger is a very, it is not Roger in particular, but the class from which Roger comes that is so
important. So I would put Roger in the class of Feynman, Einstein, Dirac, Yang.
Put Witten in there? I mean, Witten's a special case, but Witten is weirdly the reverse of the
Roger Penrose story, because Witten is the first physicist to win a mathematical fields
medal, the highest honor in mathematics. Penrose is in some sense a mathematician who's now won the
Nobel Prize. So it's a perfect sort of a couplet. Roger's class means everything to me. That's
the highest achievement of the human mind. I'd probably throw Bach in with Feynman and Dirac
in company, right? I think that he was so inventive. It was very frustrating to watch this
career. It was a little bit frustrating to watch Feynman's career. Feynman was so good,
and had he been born at a slightly different time, I believe his claim on physics would be
far greater. I feel like Penrose in some sense came up a very difficult path because, you see,
Einstein effectively solved most of the most important problems in general relativity right at
the beginning. As a result, the children of Einstein are impoverished because there wasn't as much to
pick off of the trees and sell at the market, whereas Bohr and Planck didn't do nearly as good
of a job with quantum theory. So there's lots to do in quantum theory. I think that Roger
affected me personally by a diagram that I saw in a paper of Herman Gluck at the University of
Pennsylvania. It was the first picture I'd ever seen of the hop-fibration sketched. Weirdly,
I brought that to the Rogan program in order to sort of convey the wonder. I was recapitulating
my own journey. I think I probably saw that at age 16 or something. It just flipped my mind.
Roger is incredibly visual. He's incredibly geometric. He's incredibly
sui generis. He just does his own thing. He's got lots of bets. None of them had really come
through the way you would hope, and I think they stretched the rules to be blunt about it.
To give him the prize. Yeah, I do. You said this thing on Twitter, which is beautiful,
that every once in a while comes a human being that gives value to the prize versus the prize
giving value to the human. Two different kinds of prizes. The reason that we care about the Nobel
Prize isn't because of Alfred Nobel. It's because it came along at the right time to reward
Einstein, Dirac, Schrodinger, Feynman. Most of the people who should have won
most of the awards are not good in the sense that they don't really follow.
The prize is used to rewrite history. That's the problem. You should have a love-hate relationship
with it, because on the one hand, it does focus the world on what really matters,
and on the other hand, it distorts what really matters. Both of those functions take place
simultaneously. In this case, I think that they violated their own rules slightly. It wasn't really
clearly a case of a prediction and a discovery in the typical fashion, but we better give this award
to somebody of that highest caliber to make sure that the prize is fully funded with prestige going
forward. That's my weird speculative guess as to what happened. Roger's getting on in years,
and the person should be alive. I think they've bent the rules, and I think they couldn't have
bent it for a better person. I hope they will not bend the rules out of weakness, but out of strength
in the future. It would be great to get Madame Wu and Emmy Nerder, a posthumous prize along with
Doug Prasher, George Sudarshan, and George Zweig, as well as Ernst Stuckelberg Nobel Prizes. There
have been some terrible omissions, the first two being females who revolutionized our view of the
world. I take a very dim view of people pushing for prizes for people from ethnic groups or genders
or whatever in order to make it plural and inclusive if it's not following the work. I feel
very clear that in a few cases, we know there was a real problem with the Nobel Committee because
we have stunning accomplishments. I'm going to try to get through a day as a physicist with that
Nerder's theorem and try to imagine the universe without Madame Wu's discovery that left and right
don't appear to be symmetric. These are terrible omissions, and they're a huge blot on science for
not being more inclusive when it matters. Just like you said, the Nobel Prize is plagued by
omissions as much as Distortions and dilutions. For example, Dirac and Schrodinger, where I believe,
given the prize in the same year, there's no reason that those two people needed to dilute
each other. The same thing with Dyson was an omission. Tomonaga probably got included in part
because we had an opportunity to show that something had happened on both sides of the
Pacific after the war. I don't think we needed to dilute Weinberg or Feynman or Schwinger.
It makes me somewhat sick. All of these people are such important giants, and it has to do with
the field, I think, not wanting to create luminaries and superstars who could have defended the field
from budget cuts and worldly pressures. I think it's really important that we have absolute superstars
because we produce superstars. We acknowledge them, we don't dilute them,
and that we bend the rules to make sure that the prize stays funded with the prestige that comes from
giving it to the Roger Penrose's Albert Einstein's and Paul Dirac's of the world.
Can we talk a little bit about evil? Sure. I haven't actually talked to you about this topic,
and it's been sitting on my mind mostly because everybody at MIT is quiet about it,
which is Jeffrey Epstein. I didn't get a chance to experience what MIT was like at the time when
Jeffrey Epstein was part of this, but I'd love to try to understand how evil was allowed to flourish
in a place that I love. Whether you think, maybe let me ask the question this way,
was it the man evil or was the system evil, or is evil too strong a word?
Because what I see is the presence of this particular human being
in the eyes of many destroyed the reputations of many really strong scientists, and also
weaken the institution of MIT by making everybody quiet, almost making them unable to say anything
interesting or difficult. Yeah. What is that? What am I supposed to? We don't know. Why is everyone
quiet about Jeffrey? We don't know. Obviously, I want to scream about it too. I probably have
said too much about Jeffrey Epstein. Look, something horrible happened. I don't know what it is,
but something horrible happened. The first thing I need to do is I need to get rid of this woke
crap about power differentials. In general, you can talk about
hypergamy and power differentials are Russell conjugates of the same concept.
Just the way particular proportions and symmetries are mathematically provable to be attractive
in females to males. Male attractiveness is largely determined by male competence and
ability to amass power and success and all these sorts of things. The relationship between
consenting adults is, quite frankly, not something I want to sort out. The relationship
between the sexuality of adults and minors and particularly the 17-18 issue,
that's very different than 12-13. We're talking about really sick depravity with respect to what
it appears that Jeffrey Epstein was involved in at some level. I believe this story is super
complicated in part because I think one thing which Jeffrey Epstein was doing was providing
money, encouragement, and support to scientists. Another thing he was doing, I believe, was giving
tax advice to very rich people. I believe another thing he was doing was hooking very wealthy people
up with young adult females. Another thing he was doing, I think, was doing stuff with children
that will curl your toes. There's an entire spectrum of different stuff. At the moment,
nobody can pull apart or deconflate anything because the woke thing comes over it and says,
I think it's disgusting that a 43-year-old billionaire would be partying with a 23-year-old.
I don't want to adjudicate that. I'm worried about 12 and 14-year-olds that we're not talking about.
I don't think MIT was deep into pedophilia. My guess is that that did not happen. I don't think
that the scientists were the targets of the really sick depraved stuff. It's my guess.
My guess is that what you're looking at was a government construct. It may have been our government.
It may have been a joint government project. It may have been somebody else's government. I don't know.
I believe that, in part, we don't really understand Robert Maxwell.
Sorry, who's Robert Maxwell?
Gilane Maxwell's father was very active in scientific publishing.
I don't know where peer review came from. I would love to run down the relationship
between peer review and Robert Maxwell. I would love to run down the missing fortune of Robert
Maxwell and the mysterious fortune of Jeffrey Epstein because I don't think Jeffrey Epstein
ever ran a hedge fund. I don't think he was a money advisor the way people claimed.
There's two things I want to talk about. One is the shallow conversations of
woke identity politics that you're referring to seems to be
removing everyone's ability. No, everyone's willingness to talk about what the hell is this
person and how is he allowed, most importantly, to how do we prevent it in the future?
From the individual perspective, the question for me is the same question I asked about 1930s
Nazi Germany. I've been reading way too much probably or not enough about that period currently,
is if I was in Germany at that time, what is the heroic action to take? When I think about
MIT with Jeffrey Epstein, what is the heroic action to take? We're not talking about virtue
signaling action. You wouldn't know what you're up against. You're not hearing me.
The problem here is what was Jeffrey Epstein? That question might be the heroic action to take.
I'm just trying to get my first question. You have to map the silence with Jeffrey Epstein.
What you're describing is a map of the silence at MIT. Is there a map of the silence in Washington
State around Jeffrey Epstein, the Bay Area, New York City? The amount of silence around
Jeffrey Epstein should be telling you everything. The number of dogs that don't bark is like nothing
we've ever seen. You're exactly correct, but I want to know what is it telling us,
because what it's telling me is not some kind of conspiracy, but more a disappointing weakness.
Not some kind of conspiracy? It's not some kind of conspiracy.
You've got to be kidding. You're so afraid of saying the word conspiracy that you don't think
it's a conspiracy? Personally, I just think it's people who I thought were my heroes just being
weak. No. Be of good cheer, sir.
A cheer? Be of good cheer.
Of good cheer. You think that there is a conspiracy?
I think there is a conspiracy.
That'd be a very impressive one. That's the scale of it. I tend to believe that large scale
can only be an emergent phenomena. Really? I find this so fascinating, because I always see you as
like a logic and love drive your soul. You're very logical. You're relentless. You've got a lot
of love in your heart. I believe that if you would review the video, where is it from? Dubai or Abu
Dhabi of the mysterious hit on the hotel guest? Have you ever seen this thing?
It's the assassination in 2010, 10 years ago, of Mahmoud Al Mabou, something like that,
in Dubai, where I believe 26 separate individuals on multiple teams are shown
converging, coming in from all over the world on false passports, pretending to be tennis players
or business people or vacationers. All of these teams have different functions,
and they murder this guy in his hotel room. The Dubai, I guess, chief of police,
security officer was so angered that he put together this amazing video that says,
we can completely detail what you did. We caught you on closed circuit TV.
We don't know exactly who you are because your disguise is in your false passports,
but yeah, 26 people converged to kill one. No, I don't believe you. I don't believe
after Cointel Pro, an operation paperclip, and Operation Mockingbird, I don't know whether
I should even bring up Rex 84. To not believe in conspiracies is an idiocy.
So you have a sense that evil can be as competent or more competent than-
First of all, when evil wants to operate at scale, it needs to make sure that people don't try to
figure out evil. When evil operates at scale, from first principles, you have to realize that
evil must not want it investigated. That's correct.
The most efficient way to keep yourself from being investigated, if you are an
evil institutional player who needs to do this repeatedly, is to invest in a world in which
no one can afford to say the word conspiracy. You'll notice that there is a special radio
activity around the word conspiracy. We have provable conspiracies. We have admitted to
conspiracies. You have been invited to conspiracy. There is no shortage. Conspiracies are everywhere.
Some of them are mundane. Some of them are price-fixing cartels,
or trade groups are generally speaking conspiracies.
The first thing you have to realize is that all of us are in a mimetic complex where you can be
taken off the chessboard by saying, conspiracy theorists. Good done. It's like a one-line proof.
We don't have to listen to Rex. He said he was a conspiracy theorist on this show.
That is partially distorting our conversation. If you want to ask me about Jeffrey Epstein,
you have to agree with me that that is a logical description of what you would have to have if
you wanted to commit conspiracies, is that you have to make sure that people are dissuaded from
investigating this. It's a very fascinatingly difficult idea then because the world with
conspiracy theories and the world without conspiracy theories to the shallow glance looks
the same. Well, my point, there is responsible conspiracy theorizing where you look at the
history of unearthed conspiracies. Just like you would with any other topic, just think about
how different the rules in your mind are for conspiracy theorizing versus X theorizing where
X can be anything. It's like if I say to you, I can say the statement that average weight is not
the same between widely separated populations. You'd say, yeah. I'd say average height is not
the same between widely separated populations. You'd say, yeah. Then I say, in fact, no continuous
variable that shows variation should be expected to be identical between widely separated. Of
course, Eric, like IQ. Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, hold on. We have a violent reaction to specific
topics. The first thing I want to do is just to notice that conspiracy has that built into
everyone's mind. That's really important to state. Yeah. It's very interesting
and as a prerequisite as you're saying, that would be the first step if you wanted to
pull off a conspiracy in a competent way. You would have to first convince the world of that.
I just watched the film 1971 about my favorite conspiracy of all time. I highly recommend it.
1971? Well, the film is titled 1971. It's about the Citizens' Committee to Investigate the FBI,
which was run by a student of Murray Gelman, a physicist, and broke into FBI offices in Pennsylvania
to steal files which allowed freedom of information requests that discovered a huge
conspiracy. It was a conspiracy that unearthed a conspiracy inside the federal government.
A double conspiracy story, which launched multiple conspiracies. I think that the problem with
modern Americans is that they are so timid that they don't even learn about the history of conspiracies
that we have absolutely proven. With that done, Jeff Epstein, in my opinion, represented somebody's
construction. It's kind of scary to think about. Yeah. Well, what part of the story isn't scary?
I in part did something which I imagine may get me destroyed because I was more worried about
being destroyed by somebody else I had a conversation with around Jeff Epstein.
Let it be known that I don't know anything more than I've already said.
Now, your friends at MIT, their problem is that Jeff Epstein showed up as the only person capable
of continuing US scientific tradition. You see, the US scientific tradition is a little bit like
the Russian. It's combative. We're a free society and we act like a free society.
We're a rich society and we research like we're a rich society. That is historically. Then came
the 1970s. William Proxmire and the Golden Fleece Awards and the idea that we're paying too much
and these are welfare queens and lab coats and blah, blah, blah, blah. We need more transparency,
more oversight. Everything went to hell. The national culture of US science was lost.
The thing that produced all this prosperity and security and power was lost. Then Jeff Epstein
shows up. A tiny number of funders, maybe Fred Cavley, maybe Yuri Milner, maybe who else would
be in this category. Peter Thiel, to an extent. Howard Hughes would be the largest of these
things, which has different grant structures than the NIH, gave people a modicum of risk-taking
ability. When Jeff Epstein showed up, everybody wanted to take risk in science. Suddenly, a
charismatic billionaire says, hey, I can make that work for you. Here's $100,000. Go research
something crazy. Well, that money was supposed to be provided by the federal government under the
terms of the endless frontier compact between the federal government and the universities.
The federal government and the taxpayers welched. That's one place to lay the blame for Jeff Epstein
as the failure of the federal government to honor its commitment. The university's
became psychopathic. It's not like everybody doesn't remember what we're supposed to be doing to be
moral, but the point was there wasn't enough money to be moral. It was time to eye each other as a
source of protein, as I like to say. In that process, Jeff Epstein said, hey, come to my world.
We can do it like we used to do. In part, my point is that almost none of your
colleagues at MIT have that religious commitment to science that they're willing to go down with
ship science. The Galileo Galilei thing became very important to science because occasionally,
you just have to say, look, this isn't about me and you. There isn't enough money in the world
to buy the legacy I want to leave to this planet. This is one of the great things about science.
Potentially, it's worth dying for.
Yeah. I'm glad you said it. Science is one of the things that is best that's worth dying for.
I mean, I'm not eager to murder myself, but I've certainly risked my health, my fortune.
I've destroyed myself economically over science. My need to oppose these sons of
bitches in chaired professorships who are destroying our system along with everyone else.
Let me bring in Grandmaster Oogway into this.
Oogway.
Oogway.
Master Oogway.
I think he's a grandmaster.
Oh, that would make him a chess-playing turtle.
So I've read some Wikipedia.
Uh-oh.
A Shifu's a master. There's apparently only one grandmaster. That's Oogway.
Anyway.
Is the phrase grandmaster ever uttered in the script?
I don't think so.
I don't think so.
But there's a story.
Oh, there's off script canon.
I'm going to call Glenberger right now and find out if any of this is true.
All right. You're not supposed to call out my journalistic integrity.
But Master Oogway.
Master Oogway.
He says a couple of things I'd like to bring up with you.
So one, as part of a longer quote, recommends that you should find a battle worth fighting.
We've talked about several battles just now.
What is the battle worth fighting for?
For Erich Weinstein in the next few months in the next year?
There's only one.
Oh, it's the Moses. It's the Moses thing.
It's time to go. It's time to leave.
This place is over.
To get off the planet.
Yeah, I freak people out when I say that.
But look at your world.
You just got introduced to the problem of a virus.
Wait until it's fusion devices and you understand what it means to have one interconnected planet
with no uncorrelated experiments happening anywhere else.
So do you see the foray, your work in physics and maybe the echoes of it in ship Elon?
Everybody who has a possible plan to avoid what is coming if we don't have one
should work on the plan that he, she thinks best, right?
So Elon wants to do rockets.
People misinterpret me.
Meta Erich says, I don't think that's a smart plan.
Regular Erich says, all people who have hope should do that thing.
Yeah, at least it's Mars, man.
At least it's the moon and Mars and maybe Titan and whatever.
And I don't think it'll work and it doesn't make sense and it looks silly.
But that's exactly the kind of fight or it's fighting.
But it's the kind of, it's for the same reason that I went on Brett's Unity 2020 thing when I
didn't think it had a hope in hell and people are making fun of it.
It's like, we got to do things that make us feel dumb and silly and childish
that possibly have a hope of working.
So everybody should do something.
My version of this, I'm the most hopeful about because
I wouldn't have chosen to do if I thought that Daniel Schmockenberger's
wisdom project was a better hope.
I'd do that.
It's more down to earth in a certain way.
I just think that it's more probable.
Look, we got from a powered flight with the Wright brothers and wind tunnels
to sending back images from the surface of Titan via Huygens Cassini in less than a century.
Okay.
What we can do if we can change the laws of physics
is something we can't even conceive of.
It may be that it buys us nothing.
And at least we will know why we died on this planet.
As a small aside, I think this is not the right time to take the full journey.
But I feel like you'll guide me like Master Wei did.
And I'm the Kung Fu Panda at some point.
They only have one conversation.
We're on our like, what?
Widdens?
Well, we're Jews and they weren't.
So we talk too much.
But the guide doesn't have to be with words.
You don't think Poe is Jewish?
It's debatable.
We'll have to go back to the Wikipedia.
Really like food.
Yeah, okay.
Is there that you would guide me through
some more intuition about the source code of our universe?
Can you comment on where, since we last spoke, where your thinking has been,
has roamed around geometric unity, around that work in physics in this fight?
I'm trying to figure out when to release it and how.
I mean, I've released the video.
And the video, quite honestly, I think it has a very bizarre reaction.
I think one of the things that I've learned from the video,
because the video is coming up on half a million views on YouTube alone to say
nothing of the audio.
But yeah, it produced a very strange reaction.
One of the things I don't think that I properly understood
is that most physicists don't talk in this geometric language.
I thought that more of the physics world probably had converted over into manifold
bundles, differential forms, connections, curvature tensors, etc.
And I saw a lot of the comments would say things like,
I have a PhD in theoretical physics, and I'm not even familiar with all of these concepts.
And I think that was probably a distortion coming from living in Cambridge,
Massachusetts for almost 20 years.
So what's the solution to that?
I can make this make as much sense as anybody needs to.
My problem is that my calculation is that as long as the boomers are still in charge,
the same people have these perverse incentives on them,
where they've invested in these programs that didn't work.
So they're extremely hostile and kind of difficult to deal with.
The fact that I'm not a physicist has its own set of issues,
which is that effectively it's like the Hermit Kingdom, they don't get any visitors.
And they don't necessarily want somebody rolling up and saying,
I know how to do physics.
So I'm always very clear, I'm not a physicist.
That said, if I wait too long, I don't know that theoretical physics is really going to exist
after the boomers, because everyone in you, I think you had Wolfram on your program.
I don't remember whether he said this to you or Brian Keating,
but he said something like everybody got discouraged.
It was too hard.
We can't do that, guys.
We cannot do that.
There's something about the renormalization revolution that
innervated the physics community, because it taught them,
just because you can see in this energy regime,
doesn't mean you can extrapolate somewhere else,
unless you understand how a coupling constants run and what kind of UV fixed points exist,
blah, blah, blah.
Somehow that discouraged people from guessing, from believing.
Everything became an effective theory.
The beauty of the effective theory wasn't taken to be really the beauty of the universe,
just the beauty of an energy level.
So I think that renormalization was one of the most important
revolutions that ever happened in science,
and also its interpretation by the physics community was catastrophic.
Well, the story I'm telling myself is that, in part, I'm waiting for them to get weaker.
But on the other hand, I don't know that we have any time left.
Are you also thinking about ways of, you know, the podcast medium is revolutionary for
public, for discourse, for what?
I mean, I don't even know the right words for it.
Are you thinking of revolutionary ideas for re-energizing the physics community?
So basically, for communicating geometry.
Look, I have a fantasy, okay?
My fantasy is that all of these things are the same problem.
And it goes back to this thing that I read about in Feynman's books,
about Tartaglia.
They asked him this question.
Like, what's the greatest thing that ever happened in math?
And he says, Tartaglia's solution of the cubic.
It's just like the weirdest answer.
So you're like, okay, I'll bite.
Why is it Tartaglia's solution of the cubic?
And he said, because it was the first time a modern person had done something profound
that the ancients had failed to do.
I was like, oh, I got it.
It's the thing that opens up new psychology that says maybe things are possible again.
It's a new orchard.
New orchard.
New farmers, new people who can find fruit that they can pick.
And once you have one person do that, very often you get many.
Like one of the things that we were talking about with Eddie Van Halen,
the reason that he created a revolution in somebody like Roy Buchanan did not
is that you could follow Eddie Van Halen.
You couldn't pioneer it.
And maybe you couldn't play as well and as cleanly and as fast and as inventively.
But you could follow.
Once you understand that there is a tapping principle,
it was just the beginning of something called percussive guitar.
My belief is that once we start innovating in the present,
everything will come because everything that around us is screwed up.
On that, let me with one last question bring back Master Oogway,
the probably the most famous quote of his, right?
With yesterday's history, tomorrow's a mystery, but today is a gift.
That is why it is called the present.
It's very beautiful.
Although I would have gone with quit, don't quit, noodles, don't noodles.
I feel like people need to know way too much context to make sense.
It's so absurd.
It's your audience just to hell with context.
Yep, they'll figure it out.
Well, let me ask, what are you grateful for today?
What is your present?
We've talked about a lot of dark things, but what are you brings you joy to your heart that
I can't believe I'm lucky enough to have this?
No, Nyla and Zev, my wife, Pia.
The fact that we've got our health, all the little things, saying grace after meals.
You're coming over for Friday night Shabbat dinner, so we'll bench together and say grace.
It's important to just like this bottle of water in front of me.
I made a point of just thinking about how wonderful it is that there's a quenching
bottle that happens to be placed in front of me because somebody cared.
That small thing made a difference to me.
I still have strength for the fight so far.
I think that's something I'm grateful for.
I can't believe that I'm not more beaten down after all of this nonsense.
I have the most interesting set of friends.
I really do.
I'm not that rich by monetary standards, but if there were friend billionaires,
Forbes would be all over my ass.
I just can't believe who I can talk to at the drop of a hat.
I'm really grateful.
I think this is the end of something profound, and it's the beginning of whatever is next.
Whatever is next could be terminal.
Whatever is next could be amazing.
Whatever is next could be a return to the horrors of the early 20th century that doesn't
manage to go totally catastrophic, but takes hundreds of millions of lives in the process.
I'm grateful to having half of my life in the rear view mirror.
Maybe it took place in a bubble, and maybe it was unsustainable, but it was nice to be able to
move around the world without a mask.
It was nice to be able to see a little bit of the world, even if it was from a
cot in a hostel in some country.
To fall in love.
Absolutely.
I mean.
It was a good life.
Find the last Indian Jewish girl left?
Who knew?
You're a lucky guy.
Well, let me just say.
Actually, that's something I wanted to just say before you get to that.
Yes.
I forgot to say something.
Falling in love with an intellectual collaborator is a special thing that not
everybody gets a chance to do.
I think when I met Pia, I fell deeply in love with her, all her normal characteristics.
She and I had an antagonistic relationship around geometry and economics.
Then weirdly, just like in a buddy picture where in the first half of the film they hate each other,
the two fields were fighting with each other, cats and dogs.
Then finally, the sexual tension clearly was so thick you could cut it with a knife.
We came up with geometric marginalism, which is this other theory, not geometric unity,
which allowed me to inhabit space with somebody who I already knew intimately and had fallen
in love with and to see the quality and beauty of their mind and to play and to dance.
It's sort of the intellectual version of the tango.
One of the most romantic periods of my life that doesn't fall into most people's
experience, that was a chance to see something totally unexpected,
haven't really had it since because she doesn't want to revisit the material,
but something I'm super grateful for that's very particular and unique.
But to flip the tables on you for hundreds of thousands, I think millions of people,
I can speak, me and them, are really grateful, one, that you exist, and two, sorry, for your podcast.
And I do hope your voice in some form continues to reverberate, I think, at least in the 2021s
and beyond, even if it takes a brief pause.
We're pausing at the moment. We've recorded some for future episodes and I'm recording for you.
I really appreciate that. I mean, earnestness trades at a discount at the moment because it's
easy to make fun of it. And one of the things I like best about you is that you and I are both
fairly earnest. We may joke and jab, but honestly, there's a project here in a world to win, as they
say. The thing that I want my and your listeners to know is that I'm not stepping away from the
podcast because I don't appreciate that people really want more. This is hugely financially
costly to me. I want to make sure you guys are getting the best that I can do and destroying
myself right in front of an election. I think Lex is incorrect. I think that the forces that are
trying to make sure that there aren't any planes in the sky that aren't either colored red or colored
blue is a big danger given how angry I am at the system. And I don't want to be removed from the
chessboard because if nobody's going to talk about Jeff Epstein, there need to be people.
If nobody's going to talk about various things that we've talked about on these programs,
I want to make sure that I'm there. Do I think that this is potentially an existential election?
Yes. Am I positive that I know that my way to bed is the right way out? No, I'm not. I don't
know people. I just don't know. And where we are right now seems so dumb and so catastrophic in
terms of how it is chewing up smart people that I decided it's really not about cowardice because
it's hard for me to restrain myself. I have so many reactions every day.
This is really about trying to plan for all of our futures to make sure that I'm around.
I had a huge concern that what happened to Brett's articles of unity was going to happen
to Brett. It was going to happen to the YouTube channels. I want to make sure that we don't have
all of our eggs in one basket. So if something goes wrong over there, that's the whole idea of
the Intellectual Dark Web, which is at some level a loose confederation. It can become a
strong confederation if somebody wants to back it and make it work. It can dissolve so that
there really isn't anything. The thing is to be hard to kill because ultimately,
when the hit pieces come, they don't come for what it is that they're angry at you about.
They come for where they can get you. And so it's very important that right in front of an election
yeah, I think that the desire of the old system to defend itself through reputational destruction
is one of the most pernicious aspects of the new America. And we have to fight
the ability to destroy reputations as a means of institutions keeping individuals with podcasts
and the ability to reach millions like through Substack out of their domain. I don't surrender
this domain to them. They have plenty of weaponry with which to fight us. And I believe that they
could remove you or me in an instant. By the end of today, if they wanted us off the chessboard,
we would be off the chessboard. I know that's not your perspective. My goal is to stay here as long
as possible to make sure that you have enough of a counterbalancing set of ideas and to let
and help other podcasters start. And my hope is that that works. But
long heroism, short martyrdom is a good motto for anyone. And I try to remember the short martyrdom
part of that. First of all, beautifully put. Second of all, way to end the conversation
and the disagreement, which is how you hook them for the next conversation to be continued.
When Lex says, Eric, it's a huge honor. Thank you once again.
Lex really appreciate every time we get together. Thanks buddy.
Thanks for listening to this conversation with Eric Weinstein and thank you to our sponsors.
Grammarly, a service I use in my writing to check spelling, grammar, sentence structure and
readability. Sunbasket, a meal delivery service I use to add healthy variety into my culinary life.
SEM Rush, the most advanced SEO optimization tool I've ever come across. I don't like looking at
numbers, but someone should. It helps you make good decisions. And finally, ExpressVPN, the VPN
I've used for many years to protect my privacy on the internet. Please check out these sponsors
in the description to get a discount and to support this podcast. If you enjoy this thing,
subscribe on YouTube, review it with 5 stars on Apple podcast, follow on Spotify,
support on Patreon, or connect with me on Twitter, Alex Friedman. And now, let me leave you with some
words from Leonard Cohen in the song titled, Hallelujah. Well, maybe there's a God above,
but all I've ever learned from love was how to shoot somebody who I'll drew you.
And it's not a cry that you hear at night. It's not somebody who's seen the light. It's a cold
and it's a broken hallelujah. Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.
