Lecture 8, Saving the Source of Funds for Investment
Saving is the source of funds that makes investment possible.
You will understand that expression very, very well by the time this lecture is over.
In June 2008, Car and Driver Magazine reported that General Motors was undertaking a strategic
review of its Hummer brand.
The very same article reported that GM had decided to go forward with production of the
Chevrolet Volt.
GM's plug-in electric car and would begin retooling the Detroit Hamtrami plant.
As events unfolded during the next two years, GM ceased production of the Hummer but rolled
out the Volt in the fall of 2010.
GM spent billions of dollars developing the Volt and retooling its production facilities
to manufacture it.
Where did all that money come from?
Some of it came from GM Profits, but you know, a lot of it came from ordinary folks like
you and like me.
This lecture is about the connection between saving and investment, between decisions made
every day by ordinary folks like you and I to put aside some of what we earn for future
use and, on the other hand, decisions by entrepreneurs and managers of firms to create new capital,
such as the capital needed to produce an electric automobile.
Along the way, we're going to do what economists often like to do.
We're going to take a look at some data that describes saving behavior in the United States
and elsewhere.
For most of the last 25 years, Americans have saved a very small fraction of their income,
but there may be a change underway.
One of the side effects of the Great Recession and the subprime mortgage crisis has been
a change in the saving behavior of American households.
U.S. households are saving more now than they have in the past.
Now, an increase in saving is typical during a recession, but preliminary evidence suggests
that the increased savings rate may continue after the recession ends.
At this point, you're naturally asking, what's the connection between the Chevy Volt and
saving behavior of the American household?
Well, as we will see, the connection is very, very important and we need to understand it.
While I will look at this connection in great detail, let me say at the outset that it's
simply fair to say that saving makes investment possible.
If there were no saving, there would be no investment, no new products like the Volt,
no technological advances in the workplace, and no growth in the U.S. economy or in the
productivity of the American worker.
And that is important to everyone.
It is growth in the productivity of the American worker, which over the last 75 years have
allowed our households to raise their standard of living.
While those of us who put aside a few dollars every month for future plans and dreams have
our eyes fixed on our own goals, taken together, our savings decisions make the Chevy Volt
possible.
Without us, no Volt.
Well, the very first thing I need to do is to make very clear what I mean and what I
do not mean by the word investment.
That's very important, both what I mean and what I don't.
When used by an economist, investment means the value of increases to the nation's capital
stock.
What's that?
Well, a nation's capital stock is its factories, equipment, computers, and other durable goods
used as part of the production process.
A nation's capital also includes human capital, training, education, and the skills of the
nation's workforce.
Many, many, many people use the term investment to describe the purchase of stocks and bonds
and other financial products that they purchase as part of a financial plan.
I will call those kinds of activities financial investment to distinguish them from the economic
activity that increases the nation's capital stock.
So I will use the term investment, plain and simple, only to refer to increases in
the nation's capital stock.
But I'm going to defend my decision.
And a simple example helps me get that done because it explains why it's important to
recognize the difference between investment and financial investment.
Every day, millions of dollars worth of shares in General Motors are sold on the New York
Stock Exchange.
However, the ability of General Motors to retool its plant at Hamtramig is unaffected
by these sales of GM shares.
You're surprised.
You should be.
The reason is that almost all of those sales are what I call Peter Paul transactions from
which GM drives no funds.
Peter sells the share to Paul.
Paul sells it to Jan.
Jan sells it to Fred.
Both Peter and Paul would describe their purchases and sales of GM stock as part of their investment
strategy.
But GM drives no direct benefit from the sale of those shares from Peter to Paul.
Now, the value of GM shares in the marketplace is certainly important to General Motors.
A rise in share prices indicates market approval of decisions made by General Motors.
And that's a good thing for GM, for its managers and for its workers.
A rise in the price of shares of General Motors does not, in and of itself, provide
GM with the additional dollars that it can use to retool or for any other purpose.
Okay.
Having defined investment, I naturally want to talk about how large it is.
And I want to do that by showing you data for two very different years.
2006 and 2009.
In the first year, the U.S. economy was operating very near full employment.
Workers were fully employed, plants were working at capacity.
But in 2009, as we all remember, the story was very, very different because the U.S.
was mired in the midst of a serious recession.
And investment data for these two years is very, very different.
Let's think about 2006 first.
Investment in 2006 was $2 trillion, $327 billion.
Gross domestic product, the measure of the total production of the United States, was
$13 trillion, just under $400 billion.
And so, as a fraction of GDP, investment was 17.4 percent, 17.4 percent.
In 2009, investment was only $1,589 billion.
GDP was slightly higher, $14,119 billion.
That ratio, the share of investment in our GDP had fallen to 11.3 percent.
Can we make sense of this?
Sure.
In 2006, the United States was growing and investment accounted for a little over 17
percent of every dollar's worth of goods we produced.
To explain that, just say that every dollar's worth of goods produced in the United States
had about 17 percent dedicated to the creation of new capital.
In 2009, on the other hand, because the U.S. was mired in the midst of a serious recession,
investment had fallen to only 11.3 percent of the United States' gross domestic product.
This lower share of GDP going to investment was a serious indication of pessimism.
The pessimism that business decision makers experienced about the near-term prospects
of the United States.
After all, if you think that the economy will stay in recession, you may, as a firm manager,
not think it's the right time to invest in new tools and buildings, not the right time
to grow your firm.
Why does preoccupation with investment with growth in the capital stock?
Well, economists care about investment because they know that investment is an important
contributor to economic growth.
There's a very strong relationship between a nation's capital stock, which is a cumulative
measure of all past investment activity and economic growth, which makes it possible for
citizens to consume more and higher goods.
If we were to look at data across different countries, we would see a very strong positive
relationship between a nation's capital stock and its productivity.
Simply put, nations with more capital are more productive.
This just makes sense.
It means simply that a nation where workers have access to more and better tools is a
nation where workers are more productive.
That's not surprising.
And this is not simply a size effect.
It's not simply a result driven by the fact that big economies are different from small
economies.
The data I have looked at controls for the size of an economy by measuring capital on
one hand as a fraction of gross domestic product and productivity on the other hand
as output per worker.
So I correct for size and nevertheless find this strong positive relationship between
capital and productivity.
Bottom line?
The bottom line is that investment in new buildings, new technologies, new equipment,
new information makes nations more productive and increases our national growth rate.
You should not find this surprising.
An economy where the typical worker has more and better tools is an economy where that
worker will produce more.
Another example.
In some economies, we know that stevedores and low cargo vessels by hand.
In others, stevedores use winches, pallet trucks and a variety of other cargo equipment.
You're not surprised that the equipment makes a difference and that stevedores who use it
move cargo faster in economic terms, those folks are just more productive.
I talked about saving being necessary for investment and it now falls to me to explain
what I mean by savings.
Saving is the difference between some decision maker's income and the decision maker's consumption.
Your economy saves when some household, some business or some sector of government consumes
less than the income that that sector earns.
Some examples.
Let's look at households first.
The Jones family earned after tax income, let's say of $90,000.
In the same year, the Joneses spent $85,000 on food, clothing, rent, fuel and other consumer
goods.
We would say, economists would say, that the Jones family saved 5,000 or 5.5% of what
it earned.
Perhaps this is not the way you think of the saving in your household.
Why not?
Well, you may think about increasing the value of the assets you own, for example, your retirement
portfolio as part of your saving.
But this is a case where a valid point of view for one is not a valid point of view for all.
It may be completely sensible for you to count your capital gains for the increases in the
value of your retirement portfolio when you consider your saving plans.
But the economy as a whole cannot do that.
The economy as a whole, as we shall see, only has funds for investment if households and
other sectors save in the traditional way by spending less than their income.
Let's do another example.
What would it mean for a business to save?
Let's create a business.
Frank's Espresso Bar and Cafe has yearly after tax profits of $150,000.
Frank has decided to use 50,000 of those profits to purchase new kitchen equipment and the remainder
to pay off some of the loans he obtained to start the company.
Frank's saving is $150,000.
It does not matter whether the business is using its saving to buy new capital equipment
itself or to lower its debt.
Both actions constitute savings.
Both actions will lead to investment, whether Frank undertakes it or whether someone else
does.
And finally, one more example.
The city of Why Not, North Carolina that really is a city called Why Not in North Carolina.
We have some great names for cities in the state of North Carolina.
The city of Why Not, North Carolina has revenues from city fees and sales taxes of let's say
$1.6 million and expenditures of $1.5 million in its most recent fiscal year.
Why Not has decided to add the remaining $100,000 to the town's rainy day fund.
The town of Why Not is saving and making investment possible.
So with those clarifications and those explanations about what investment is and what savings
means, it's now time to think about the connection between saving and investment.
One reason that economists try very, very hard to understand the motives that lead various
decision makers to save is the simple reason that for the economy as a whole, saving makes
investment possible.
It would be easy to miss the importance of what I just said.
So let me put it a different way.
Without saving in an economy, there can be no investment.
Without saving, there can be no growth.
The amount of investment spending that an economy can undertake in a given period of time equals
the sum of saving by firms, households, and governments in that economy.
Plus, any borrowing that economy is able to do from other economies in the rest of the
world.
I've said that several times, it's so important, but now let me unpack the statement and provide
you some intuition.
Every time we produce a dollar's worth of goods in the United States, we generate a
dollar's worth of income for someone.
For the economy of, as a whole, total income in a year is just sufficient to purchase all
the goods that we produce.
If every member of the economy, everyone who received income, spent all of the income they
received on consumer goods and consumer services, there wouldn't be anything left over.
In that kind of a world where no one saved, where everybody spent all of their income
on consumer goods, all of GDP would be consumed.
Our accounts would change.
Our industries would change.
We would have nothing but manufacturers of consumer goods.
The only way that our economy can release resources for the production of investment
goods is if consumers and firms and government entities spend less than their income on those
consumer goods and services.
That means that the only way that we can have investment, that we can have plants that
focus on the production of investment goods, if some households, some firms, and some components
of government release funds to them, release productive capacity to those plants and firms
that produce capital goods.
When households add funds to their 401k accounts, they are saving, or if you're like financially
investing, but I'm going to say saving.
But the act of adding to a 401k account does not in and of itself add productive capital.
What it does is release funds for the production of capital.
The data show again how this limitation, and by that I mean how savings limits investment
works, and I'm again going to consider data for two very different years.
Let's think of 2007 first.
In 2007, households saved $178.9 billion.
Savings saved more, $316 billion.
Our federal government, because it was running a deficit even back in 2007, saved negative
$236.5 billion.
So it ate into the total, right?
It used up some of the savings by households and firms.
It local governments ran surpluses and saved, but pretty small amounts.
The total saving for the United States in that year of 2007, $280.2 billion.
What was the investment that year?
$990 billion.
How do we make that work?
In 2007, we borrowed a lot of money from the rest of the world.
We borrowed over $725 billion from people outside the United States.
2009, not surprisingly, was a very different year.
As I already mentioned, household savings went up.
Indeed, it more than doubled to $458.6 billion.
Not surprising here.
Households were feeling that they needed to hedge additional risks, and so they saved.
Firms felt the same way, and they increased their saving, $423.4 billion.
So you're saying great news, right?
We're going to make more investment possible.
Maybe that's how we'll get out of this recession.
But sorry, the federal government's deficit increased from $236 billion in 2007 to $1,226.5
billion in 2009.
The federal government more than used up the savings provided by the household and firm
sector.
State and local governments not surprisingly ran deficits as well, but again, these were
quite small.
What was the total amount of saving in the United States?
Negative $363 billion.
What does that mean?
Did we have to eat up our capital?
Did we, you know, to finance that?
No.
Our investment fell to a very, very small amount, about a quarter of what it was in 2007,
$278 billion, and we financed the difference by again borrowing from abroad.
In the future, I'm going to talk to you a lot about this borrowing from abroad that
we've been doing, but today I'm simply going to set that aside, and I'm going to notice
here and point out to you for emphasis that investment is limited to the savings we do
and the funds we can borrow from abroad.
And I'm going to emphasize that the reason that is true is that investment is the production
of something, of capital goods, and we either have to release resources in the United States
or borrow those resources from somewhere else in the world in order to build that capital.
Now, these data are from the Federal Reserve Flow of Funds Accounts, and if you do the
math, if you do the arithmetic, you'll notice the total saving plus form borrowing does
not exactly add up to investment.
There are statistical discrepancies.
These are hard things to measure in a complicated economy like ours.
Typically, the data are revised, so you'd find that discrepancy is smaller for 2007
when the data have been revised and larger for 2009 when that revision is not yet complete.
Savings rates have varied a lot in the United States in the last 25 years.
Again, I'd like to take a look at some data with you.
Between 1993 and 2005, the household saving rate in the United States fell until it reached
a low point of less than 2%.
Until the gross saving rate oscillated, it remained above 14% until 2006, and then it
began to fall, and it fell more rapidly during the Great Recession until it reached a 20-year
low of just over 10%.
So when you look at these data, you would say that as a nation, we are at our lowest
gross savings point in the last 25 years.
Investors compete with households and government entities for funds.
Federal government deficits use up saving that could be used for investment.
Thus, government deficits curtail growth.
That's one of the reasons that we care a lot about them.
And deficits use up our savings, savings that could be used to build capital.
We borrow from foreign nations when we run on trade deficit, different from a fiscal
deficit, because a trade deficit means that the rest of the world allows us to borrow
their productive capacity by sending to us a volume of goods and services of greater
value than the goods and services we send back to them.
Just like they're lending us goods and services.
Foreign borrowing allows investment to be large and there would have been, but foreign
nations expect to eventually be paid back in goods and services, meaning that some place
at some time we will have to run negative trade deficits in order to pay back these nations
that have lent us funds.
How has U.S. investment fared over time?
Well, the chart shows private gross domestic investment in the United States as a share
of GDP from 1947 to 2010.
What you see is that if you were to compute an average, that average would be about 16%.
So on average of this period, we have committed about 16% of our gross domestic product to
investment, but it also shows that our investment fell dramatically to the lowest point in the
entire graph during the Great Recession.
And that makes that recession very special.
You can see other decreases, you can see other troughs, but no trough deeper than the trough
associated with the Great Recession depicted in the final years that the graph shows.
Household savings differ across countries.
The graph that you're looking at now shows household savings rates for a number of countries
in 2010, just to illustrate.
Savings rates vary a great deal with households in some nations saving as much as 12% of household
income and other savings very little.
The nations with the highest saving rates were Belgium, 12%, Germany, 11.5%, Ireland
11%, Sweden 10.2%, and Switzerland 10.5%.
The nations with the lowest savings rate were the Czech Republic at one and Denmark at minus
one.
Now I know that makes you curious.
The negative saving rate in Denmark meant that the Danish households consumed more than
their income.
That was possible because those households borrowed, as all taken together, they borrowed
to finance their extra consumption.
So they ate into the savings by Danish firms and Danish government.
Why would Danish households do negative saving?
Research suggests that Danish households consume more than their income in response to a large
increase in the price of the house, the typical house in Denmark that occurred after financial
markets in Denmark were liberalized.
Danish households felt richer and spent some of their perceived wealth increase immediately.
Again, for the individual households, when you feel wealthier, you don't save in traditional
ways.
You may try to spend part of your wealth.
Denmark is not unique.
Chases and the changes in the price of assets held by U.S. households are frequently cited
as one of the explanation for changes in savings in the United States.
Indeed, as house prices in the United States fell, it's natural to expect that traditional
savings in the U.S. would have increased.
The U.S. saving rate for the U.S. in 2010 was 5.7%, which was much higher than it had
been prior to the Great Recession, in part because low value of U.S. houses had made
individuals look to traditional saving sources in order to meet their retirement goals.
Low household savings rates in the United States that are enforced by large government
budget deficits imply that the U.S. faces an unpleasant choice.
It can borrow from the rest of the world in order to engage in investment projects.
It can allow investment to fall as a fraction GDP implying that growth in the United States
will fall and standard of living will eventually fall.
No other alternative is possible because, as a nation, investment must equal the sum
of savings by households, savings by businesses, and borrowing from other nations.
We end this lecture as we began it by considering the silver lining in the cloudy sky of the
Great Recession.
One legacy the Great Recession may turn out to be that American households rediscover
the virtues of saving.
American consumers had come to believe that growth in the value of their homes provided
a dependable source of wealth for growth in the future and led them to do less of traditional
saving.
The bursting of the housing bubble in 2007 may have taught American households that to
provide for their futures, they must return to traditional forms of saving, setting aside
something from every paycheck.
