Lecture 30, should central banks follow a policy rule?
In a speech on October 14, 2005, William Poole, longtime monetary economist but then
president of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, asked whether the Federal
Reserve followed a policy rule and whether it should. Poole said and I
quote, there is now a large body of evidence that Fed policy has been highly
predictable over the past decade or so. If the market can predict the Fed's policy
actions, then it must be the case that Fed policy follows a rule or policy
regularity of some sort. My purpose is to explore the nature of that rule. End quote.
At first blush, the issue of whether the Fed follows a rule seems like the sort of
thing that might concern an academic economist, but would be of little
interest to the rest of us. But that is not true. Whether or not to follow a rule
is a question that most of us face on a regular basis as we decide on how to
organize our lives and how, in particular, to parent our children. Here's an
example. In an attempt to teach your teenager about the work ethic, you say
that he or she must get a summer job to earn the funds needed to buy a new
computer for the coming school year. You tell your teenager that if they do not
earn sufficient funds, they will not get a new computer. Unfortunately, when August
rolls around, your teen has not gotten a job, and moreover, your teen has not
tried very hard. But in August, your teen says to you, don't you want me to do
well at school this year? If I don't have my own new computer, I will not be able
to do as good a job on my assignments. And what do you do? You stick to your guns
and say, no new computer? Or do you decide that this situation is somehow special and
you should not compromise your child's education in an effort to teach your
child discipline? As you'll see, the same dilemma faces policymakers in the big
stakes game of monetary policy. The case for following a policy rule was made in
an eloquent, really beautiful paper written by 2004 Nobel laureates Edward
Prescott and Finn Kiddland. Policy rules and policy discretion are two approaches
to the conduct of monetary policy. So we're always going to be talking about
rules on the one hand with the alternative being discretion. A policy rule is a
formula for determining policy. A policy rule specifies what the policy instrument
is and how settings of the instrument should respond to observable changes in
the state of the economy. Now, by policy instrument, we're going to generally mean
the federal funds rate, the rate that the Federal Reserve sets for the loaning
and borrowing of federal funds, and it sets it by buying and selling bonds as
we have already learned. But we are going to consider another case where the
policy instrument is the quantity of federal funds, which is sometimes called
high-powered money. Policy discretion is the conduct of policy that is not bound
by a policy rule. The use of policy discretion means that the policymaker,
the Federal Reserve, is free to regard each situation as a unique event that
requires a unique policy prescription. William Poole reminds us that policies
made by rules are predictable, while policies made by discretion are less
predictable and perhaps very difficult to predict. Okay, so the case on the first
hand for following a policy rule is in many respects a case against using
policy discretion. And to understand what is wrong with discretion, I'm going to
consider an example of a different kind of public policy problem. So, suppose our
government wants to establish a cogent policy governing the assistance it
provides to coastal property owners who suffered damage from a hurricane. Being
from North Carolina, I can warm to this easily. Now, the government believes that
the use of special building materials and special building procedures are cost
effective in hurricane zones and it wants hurricane property, excuse me, coastal
property owners to hurricane-proof their buildings. For example, the government
may want home builders to build on pylons of a certain minimum height and size to
lessen the risk of flood damage. And the government may want property owners to
use stronger roofing materials and procedures to lessen the risk of wind
damage. Well, the government also believes that it is in the public interest to
assist those who suffer hurricane damage to their buildings. In an attempt to
balance those two objectives, inducing good hurricane building procedures and
providing assistance where needed, suppose the government announces that it will
provide post-hurricane assistance only to building owners whose buildings were
constructed appropriately. That is a policy rule the government has announced
a policy rule. Suppose now that hurricane Zelda hits North Carolina with devastating
effect. In an outpouring of sympathy, the government suspends its rule and offers
assistance to everyone who suffered property damage without regard to the
way in which their property was constructed. Why? Well, the government may
deviate from its rule because it is sympathetic, genuinely sympathetic to the
pain and suffering it observes. Or the government may not want to be embarrassed
by reports that is withholding assistance from needy families. In short, the
government decides to use discretion and to treat Zelda as a special case. Now
Kidland and Prescott point out that the use of discretion in a case like this
one creates an unintended consequence. Coastal builders and property owners
learn from this government decision that if a storm, if a hurricane is really
bad, the government will help everyone. Now property owners and builders may
conclude that it is a better decision to avoid the added cost of hurricane
proofing structures as a result. And that is the unintended consequence. Well,
we're not just going to make a negative case for rules. That is, we're not just
going to say what's wrong with discretion. I'm also going to talk to you about a
positive case, an affirmative case for following a rule. And the affirmative case
for following a policy rule is that following a policy rule makes policy
predictable and leads private citizens to undertake desirable actions as a result.
When parents adhere to a policy rule, we describe that as tough love. What will be
the result? The result will be that your children undertake a more serious search
for their summer job when you link it by a rule to getting a new computer. If
after Hurricane Zelda, the government follows through on its public pronouncements
and provides assistance only to buildings that have been properly constructed,
then builders and property owners will realize that they can only expect help if
they stormproof their structures. The result will be better built buildings in
coastal areas. And if the Federal Reserve follows a policy rule, then everyone will
be able to forecast approximately when the Fed will raise interest rates and when
it will lower them. As a result, decision makers who make decisions that depend on
interest rates in important ways will respond not only to what the Fed does,
but to what they expect the Fed to do. And this will make monetary policy more
effective. If the Fed follows a policy rule, decision makers will not only look
in the rear view mirror for what's happened, but they'll use the rule to forecast
what's coming at them down the road. The case for discretion, on the other hand,
remember, if you're not following a policy rule, we say you're using discretion. And
the case for discretion and against adherence to a policy rule is based on
several important considerations. First, the real world is so complicated that it
is impossible to construct a rule that will allow for all the important
contingencies. Even if it were possible to specify a monetary policy rule that
allowed for all the possible contingencies, it's likely that rule would be so
complicated that private decision makers would not be able to use it to predict
future monetary policy. And therefore, we'd lose a lot of the benefit of the rule.
Indeed, if the rule were sufficiently complicated, it might be impossible for
private agents to even verify that the Federal Reserve was true to the rule.
The more complicated the rule, the harder it is to know if it's being followed.
Moreover, committing to a policy rule is easy to say and hard to do. How can we
commit the Fed? A credible commitment requires what policy analysts call some
form of commitment mechanism. One potential mechanism would be to make policy makers
take an oath of office in which they pledge to make only those decisions that
are provided for by the tough love or monetary policy rule standards.
This is not a foolproof solution because, remember, lawmakers could come under
pressure to pass legislation that would require policy makers to make an exception.
Set their oath aside. A second potential commitment mechanism would be to build
the rule into the Constitution. But that seems far-fetched. Constitutions aren't
about day-to-day monetary policy, and it's hard to believe that that would work at all.
A third option to create a commitment mechanism would be to insulate policy makers
from the political process by providing them with an independent source of funds.
Now, while the political pressure might mount, the policy makers would feel more
comfortable and more free to follow what they consider to be the rule.
I think it's important to consider two specific examples of monetary policy rules,
so we have an understanding of what we're talking about. The first rule is called a
K% rule and was the frequent recommendation of Milton Friedman. Friedman wrote that there
were two requirements that were necessary for monetary policy to make the contributions
to stability that it was capable of making. First, the Federal Reserve should base its
policy rule on some magnitude it could control, and Friedman favored a rule for the growth
rate of the money supply. And second, the rule should be one that assured that the Federal
Reserve would avoid, quote, sharp swings in policy, end quote. Now, Friedman means that
the Fed should not put itself in a position where it needs to quickly reverse course.
Friedman believed that the Fed should choose a money supply growth rate somewhere between
3% and 5% per year and then focus its efforts and all of its efforts on making the money
supply grow at the chosen rate. That's not trivial because the Fed hasn't complete control
of the money supply, but Friedman believed that a K% rule with K equal to 3% to 5% would
be the best thing that the Fed might do. Now, in his speech, William Poole argued that
the Federal Reserve follows, at least approximately, what has come to be called a Taylor rule.
The Taylor rule defines normal values for the federal funds rate as a function of two statistics
that describe the state of the U.S. economy. The Taylor rule is named for Professor John
Taylor of Stanford University, who first introduced it into the economics literature in 1993.
The policy rule that John Taylor argues the Fed should follow and does follow most of the
time is summarized by a fairly simple equation. This equation or formula has several variables
and let me explain them one at a time. First, we have a symbol FFR at time t. Remember our
parenthetical notation is a date notation. So FFR at time t is the federal funds rate
at time t, and let's say month t. We also have the symbol pi, which stands for the inflation
rate at time t. And we have a pi with a star on it, which is the Federal Reserve's inflation
target. So, for example, if pi star is 2%, the Fed is trying to hold the inflation rate
to 2%. But we know that the Federal Reserve faces a dual mandate in which it is supposed
to maintain full employment as well as stable rates of inflation. And that mandate is measured
by y gap at time t. And y gap is called the output gap. It's positive when the economy
is operating above full employment levels and negative when the economy is operating
below full employment levels. And finally, we have an anchor term. That's r star plus
pi star. Well, that's the policy neutral value or station keeping value for the federal funds
rate. And it has two parts. The full employment value of the real rate of interest plus the
target inflation rate. So if we believe, for example, that the real rate of interest was
3% and the inflation target was 2%, then the station keeping value would be 5%. Well, there's
more to the rule than that. There are also some coefficients, and they're very, very
intuitive. The rule says that when inflation is above its target value, the federal funds
rate should be raised by one and a half times the difference between the current and target
inflation rate. 1.5 is the coefficient on pi minus pi star. And when y gap is negative,
for every percent it is negative, the federal funds rate should be lowered by half a percent.
Now, Taylor came up with these two numbers, and they are quite intuitive. Okay, according
to the Taylor rule then, the Federal Reserve should anchor the federal funds rate at the
nominal rate of interest implied by the long-run equilibrium rate of interest and the inflation
rate. This means that the Taylor rule requires the Fed to set the long-run value for the
federal funds rate at a level consistent with long-run equilibrium market forces. Okay,
it honors those long-run forces. According to the Taylor rule, the Fed should raise the
federal funds rate whenever the inflation rate is above its target level. Moreover, it
should respond to increases in inflation by raising the federal funds rate by more than
the increase in inflation. And as I've said already, Taylor recommended a response rate
of 1.5 and warned that a response rate less than one would not succeed in damping inflation.
According to the Taylor rule, the Fed should raise the federal funds rate when the output
gap is positive. That is when we're operating above our potential and lower it when the
output gap is negative. Now, Taylor defines the output gap to be the percentage deviation
between real gross domestic product and a measure that the Fed computes called potential
real gross domestic product. A positive output gap means the economy is operating above
its potential, a situation that is likely to produce increases in the inflation rate
as producers compete for scarce resources. And a negative output gap means that the economy
is operating below its potential, and that would be a situation that creates unemployment
of labor and underutilization of capital. Now that we know the why and the what of policy
rules, it will be instructive to ask why William Poole believes that Federal Reserve monetary
policy during the Greenspan years was so predictable that it makes sense to say that
the Fed followed the Taylor rule. And the answer is, the answer is contained in the diagram
that you're looking at now. That diagram compares the actual federal funds rate, which is the
solid line. And that rate observed between 1987 and 2005 with the federal funds rate
that would have been prescribed by the Taylor rule. And those are pictured in the dashed
lines. Now there are two dashed lines in the diagram because Poole computed monetary policy
prescriptions with two alternative definitions of inflation. One that uses an index of consumer
prices and one that used that same index, but with fuel and food prices removed. In
the diagram, Poole used the Taylor rule coefficients described earlier, 1.5 on excess inflation
and 0.5 on the output gap. What we see in the diagram is that the Taylor rule prescription
provides a good approximation to the actual federal funds rate, which is the basis for
Poole's contention that during the Greenspan years, the Fed did follow a Taylor rule. Now
the diagram does show that the Taylor rule does not account for all the variation in
the federal funds rate. Now Poole points out that an adjustment to the coefficients will
slightly improve the fit, but he also acknowledges that it will still be true that the federal
funds rate is not completely explained by any version of the Taylor rule. How then should
we interpret the deviations of the federal funds rate from the Taylor rule prescriptions?
One interpretation is that the Federal Reserve believes that each situation is slightly different
and uses its own internal analyses to adjust the federal funds rate away from the prescription
given by the Taylor rule. That is, the departures are evidence that the Fed frequently uses at
least a modicum of policy discretion. But what would a proponent of discretion say about
the Taylor rule and about Poole's suggestion that the Federal Reserve follows a rule? Okay,
well the Taylor rule specifies that the federal funds rate should depend only on recent observations
for the inflation rate and for the output gap. Committing to the rule would require the Fed
to ignore other data that bear on the state of the economy, data like the recent behavior
of stock market prices and the recent behavior of housing prices. Now it's generally acknowledged
that the Federal Reserve forecasts future economic outcomes and conditions by using
very sophisticated models and lots of data that they believe provide a better characterization
of economic conditions than can be provided by looking at inflation and output gap data alone.
So there's a tension between accurate forecasting of future economic conditions and following a policy
rule. Accurate forecasting probably requires the use of a lot of data and of very sophisticated
forecasting tools. But obtaining the benefits of a rule on the other hand requires that the rule be
simple enough for the public to verify that the rule is being followed.
Even if the Fed were prepared to choose a target for the federal funds rate based only on inflation
and output gap information, one can still imagine many exceptional cases arising.
For example, inflation might increase because political unrest in an oil producing nation led
to a higher growth rate in oil prices. Following a rule would mean that the Fed ignored why the
inflation rate increased. But discretion would lead the Fed free to decide that the political
unrest was a one-time event and that cooling the economy by raising interest rates would not
be appropriate. A proponent of discretion would also point out that the Greenspan era
did not include a financial crisis as experienced during the Bernanke era.
And William Poole himself says quite clearly, and I quote, the above rules
are suspended when necessary to respond to a financial crisis.
But if a rule can be suspended, is it a rule?
At the end of the day, economists generally agree that the Federal Reserve does exercise
discretion, but has managed in recent years prior to the subprime crisis to follow a policy that
is sufficiently credible and predictable that private sector agents believe the Fed when it
announces a future course of policy. However, at the beginning of 2011,
the Fed faced a credibility challenge that is yet to be resolved. Although the Great Recession
had officially ended and GDP had begun to grow, labor unemployment remained very high at that time.
The Fed, in response, continued to stimulate the economy with both standard and non-standard
policies. It continued to keep the federal funds rate at historic lows, one quarter of one percent.
And it also continued with its plan to purchase billions of dollars of long-maturety securities
in order to lower long-maturety interest rates. Those plans translated into the creation of
many billions of dollars in federal funds. When a critic suggested that the policy was
inflationary, Ben Pernanke stated that the Fed could reverse course and soak up the extra federal
funds quickly. The Fed said that the Fed could reverse course and soak up the extra federal
funds quickly enough to avoid the onset of inflation. Economists who think like Milton
Friedman believe that the Fed's actions may rekindle inflation in the U.S. economy.
In the next lecture, I will explain the extraordinary policy measures undertaken
by the Fed during the extraordinary times of the subprime financial market crisis
and the Great Recession. Thank you.
