Here's a question for you.
What do financial markets and used car markets have in common?
Well, let's resist the temptation to conclude that both used car and financial markets are
places where shady practices are common and where con men prey on regular folks.
Used car markets and financial markets do have a lot in common, but what they have in
common is not so obvious.
My topic today is a concept called asymmetric information.
Simply stated, a situation where one party in a transaction has more information than
another party in the transaction.
To introduce that topic, I ask you to consider a couple of facts about financial structure
in the United States and the developed world.
These facts are surprising and lead to three important questions.
Fact.
Stocks and bonds are not the most important source of external financing for businesses.
Fact.
On the New York Stock Exchange, there are about 8,500 companies whose shares are listed
and about 3,000 different corporate bond issues traded.
But fact.
The U.S. Census Bureau reports that in 2002 there were more than 7,200,000 U.S. firms
with employee payrolls.
So here are the three important questions.
Why do so few firms use stock and bond markets to raise funds for investment, that is for
their capital development?
While large well-established corporations have easy access to securities market funding,
business firms borrow funds through banks and other financial intermediaries.
Well then that leads to question two.
What do banks have to offer that bond and stock markets do not?
Now earlier I pointed out that banks were middlemen that offered valuable services to
their customers.
One of those services is the ability to deal with asymmetric information.
Banks use a particular kind of contract when they lend funds.
And as we shall see, the so-called standard debt contract provides an incentive for firms
to tell the truth about their operations and about their profitability.
Question number three.
Why are banks so rigid in their loan practices?
Standard debt contracts typically require borrowers to post collateral and they may play
substantial restrictions on how borrowers may behave after they receive borrowed funds.
And to the uninformed, such bank practices sometimes seem absurd.
Consider the frequent lament of a would-be borrower.
If I had collateral, I wouldn't need a loan.
An understanding of asymmetric information and the problems it leads to will help us
understand why banks behave as they do.
So asymmetric information occurs when one party in a transaction has substantially more
relevant knowledge than another.
Often, the relevant knowledge is about the quality of the product being bought and sold.
Let's start with some examples of symmetric and asymmetric information and those examples
will help us understand what sort of information we are talking about and they'll also help
us appreciate the potential importance of information differences.
For many products and markets, it makes sense to assume that buyers and sellers have symmetric
information so that everything the seller knows is known to the buyer.
For example, if the product in question is a pound of flour or a pound of nails, it's
easy for the buyer, especially given labeling laws in the United States, to know everything
they consider relevant about the product.
Now the seller may know the location of the flour mill or the plant where the nails were
actually made, but for a product like flour, the information that buyers consider relevant
is typically printed on the label.
And as for nails, what the buyer wants to know is most often easily observed.
It's a nail.
But for many other products and services, it is clear that one party to the transaction
has important knowledge that the other does not.
The seller of a used car better knows how well that car was cared for, whether its oil
was changed on a very regular basis, whether it had all the stipulated services.
The buyer of health insurance better knows his or her health than the seller of the insurance.
The buyer of health insurance knows whether they exercised regularly, knows whether they
smoked, knows whether they went for regular checkups.
And the job applicant better knows her skills and her work ethic than the potential employer.
Nobel laureate George Ackerlof is widely credited for first studying the impact of asymmetric
information on economic markets and outcomes.
According to Ackerlof, asymmetric information leads to adverse selection in the marketplace.
I'll explain.
That's a situation that Ackerlof described with the shorthand phrase, the lemons problem.
Let's think about the lemons problem and let's think about it in the context of used cars.
The seller of a used car has more complete knowledge about the quality and maintenance
of the car than the buyer.
So the buyer rightly assumes that purchasing a used car is risky.
The car could be a lemon rather than what West Coast folks tend to call a cherry.
The buyer will only buy at a price low enough to provide that buyer with compensation for
the risk of buying a lemon.
Potential sellers who have well-care for and well-running cars, cherries, will be less
willing to sell them in the used car market because the price they are going to receive
is less than the price for their car, their cherry.
Because of asymmetric information, lemons will be therefore over-represented and cherries
will therefore be under-represented in the used car market.
The used car market is said to adversely select lemons.
Put another way, there is a disproportionate number of lemons in the used car market and
disproportionately few cherries in the used car market.
In a sense, the belief that the used car market offers lemons to prospective buyers becomes
a self-fulfilling prophecy.
Now Ackerloaf pointed out that the lemons problem actually creates a market failure.
Out there, there are owners of well-care for cars, cherries, who would like to sell and
there are buyers who would be willing to pay a fair price for a well-care for used car.
But given asymmetric information, welfare enhancing trades between those two groups of
people never occur.
This is an important market failure.
Keep in mind that what we are saying here is that if I somehow knew the car was a cherry,
the buyer and the seller could get together and have a mutually advantageous trade.
But the risk that the car is a lemon keeps that trade from occurring.
Now in recent years, entrepreneurs have found a way to make a profit for themselves by offering
information that will level the information playing field.
And CarMax and Carfax are two examples.
With car, if you buy from CarMax, you get a guarantee about the performance of the used
car.
If you buy, if you purchase a Carfax, you get a statement about the history of the car.
Both of those level the information playing field.
I've argued that the lemons problem affects job markets, insurance markets and lots of
other markets.
Buyers of health insurance have an incentive to hide the fact that they smoke from an insurance
company.
But in recent years, the nicotine blood test allows insurance companies to affirm whether
a potential insurance buyer is a smoker or a non-smoker.
Some firms may prefer candidates with degrees from prestigious universities, not because
they believe that those universities provided their students with superior skills or superior
education, but simply because they believe that those prestigious universities did a
good job selecting high aptitude students.
What then is the relevance of asymmetric information for financial markets?
Briefly stated, a potential borrower has more knowledge about how funds that are going
to be borrowed will be used than the lender has.
A loan applicant has an incentive to pay the rosiest possible picture of the investment
project that the borrowed funds will finance.
The lender is at a disadvantage because it will cost the lender something to gain even
partial information about the project.
And the problem doesn't end there.
After the loan is made, after the fact, the borrower often has an incentive to understate
the profitability of the project, and that would be true whenever an understatement would
lower what the borrower pays back to the lender.
Of course, the lender understands that it possesses less information and structures its lending
contracts accordingly.
That indeed is a big part of my point.
It's important to realize that financial firms which lend face two different types of information
symmetry problems.
We've already talked about one, adverse selection.
Adverse selection occurs before the lending transaction, and as the name suggests, the
existence of asymmetric information selects participants into the loan market in a provider
adverse way, the same way that the lemons problem adversely selected lemon used cars
into the used car market.
So, suppose economic data arrives suggesting that a recession of unknown depth and duration
may occur within the next few quarters.
Let's contemplate, in order to understand the asymmetric and adverse selection problems,
how a bank might behave in this case toward its prospective borrowers.
One possible answer, a very reasonable answer, would be that banks and other lenders would
raise borrowing rates to compensate them for the higher risk entailed in lending in a higher
risk economic environment.
However, it may be unwise for a lender to raise its lending rates when it believes that
investment projects have become riskier.
Why?
Raising borrowing rates may select higher risk borrowers into the applicant pool and
exclude lower risk borrowers from the applicant pool.
So that's one problem.
The second asymmetric information problem faced by banks and other lending institutions
is called moral hazard.
And moral hazard occurs after the transaction.
The existence of asymmetric information provides one party with an incentive to behave differently
after the transaction, then they promise to behave when they negotiated the transaction.
Suppose, just by way of a simple example, that the managers of firms that may borrow
funds receive bonuses that increase with firms' profits but never fall below zero, no matter
how great firms' losses.
Pretty reasonable.
Managers then have an incentive to tell a lender, a bank, that they will invest borrowed
funds in a safe project because that's the way to maximize the likelihood that their loan
is approved.
Aha!
But once the loan is approved, those same managers have an incentive to use the funds
that they've received from the bank to undertake a riskier project than the one they proposed.
If the project fails, the managers may receive no bonus.
But if the project succeeds, they're going to receive a larger bonus than they would have
with the safe project.
And it may turn out to be a good bet for the managers to take on riskier projects.
Because if the project fails, the bank suffers a loss, but the manager does not.
That's moral hazard.
Not surprisingly, I'm going to argue that the existence of asymmetric information explains
the puzzling facts with which this lecture began.
And I'm going to do so by explaining first the standard debt contract that governs borrowings
by firms from banks, the standard debt contract.
Why do so few firms use stock and bond markets to raise funds for investment?
Well, prospective buyers of stocks and bonds realize that they can never know very much
about the operations of a firm.
They're going to provide funds, but they're on the short end of the information stick.
On the other hand, if the firm is large enough, it will be profitable for analysts to study
the firm and sell their findings to prospective bond and shareholders, leveling the information,
playing field.
But imagine a small firm.
This will not be so.
It won't be worthwhile for any analytic firm to study a small firm because they won't be able
to sell the information.
There's not enough at stake.
Perspective buyers of bonds and shares in a small company also realize that it would be easy
for the company to understate its profits.
And they understand that the managers of those small firms have an incentive to convert funds
into bonuses and hidden compensation, turning dividends into costs.
Is a corporate jet justified by the increased efficiency it provides to high-ranking officers
of the firm?
Can you tell as a stock and bond owner?
Or is that corporate jet more like a tax-free bonus for the employees who get to use it?
Again, moral hazard.
Asymmetric information implies that adverse selection is likely to occur.
The PE ratios of small company shares, therefore, will be low in order to compensate the buyer
of stocks from the risk of owning a lemon company.
Lemon companies will be, therefore, overrepresented in the stock market.
And good companies that are small will be underrepresented.
In fact, it may be difficult, if not impossible, for a small company to issue shares or bonds.
Okay, so those small companies are, therefore, likely to seek an alternative source of funding,
and we know that that alternative source of funding is banks.
But what we don't know yet is what banks have to offer that bond and stock markets do not.
There are several reasons why most companies find it advantageous to obtain funds from banks.
Banks have designed a particular kind of contract.
It's called the Standard Debt Contract in the finance literature, and it's a very old idea.
And the Standard Debt Contract provides some relief against the problems of asymmetric information.
So what are we talking about here?
Well, in the Standard Debt Contract, the bank does not share profits with the borrower.
The very simple reason that the bank realizes that it would be easy for the borrower to understate the true profits
and hard for the bank to detect the understatement.
Instead, the Optimal Debt Contract allows the borrower to declare only two states of the world.
In the first state, the borrower reports that the borrower is able to repay.
Repays of fixed interest and principal.
The lender receives the same interest payment no matter how successful the project was in the first state of the world.
So there's no need to monitor how successful it was.
And the lender will not pay to monitor the success of the project in this state of the world.
But in the second state of the world, the borrower says something different.
It says, I cannot repay.
If the borrower says, I cannot repay, the lender pays the audit cost to discover how much the project actually earned.
Now, the project probably earned something even though the borrower said it earned too little to repay interest and principal.
The lender discovers as well as possible what the project earned and then takes all of that return from the project in partial compensation for the loan.
The Standard Debt Contract has two very important and I would say beautiful properties.
First, the Standard Debt Contract is a contract that makes it optimal for the borrower to tell the truth when the truth matters.
We call that a truth-telling contract.
The borrower either repays or says that she can't.
In the latter case, the bank audits the project and takes all the available proceeds.
It turns out that it's not in the interest of the borrower to ever lie.
The second beautiful thing is that the Standard Debt Contract is a contract that makes both the borrower and the lender better off whenever the firm's project is sufficiently profitable to justify a loan.
So it leads to loans being made in the right cases where the projects that those loans will fund are expected to be sufficiently profitable so that it's mutually advantageous for the bank and for the entrepreneur.
Okay, so we have an explanation of the preference by so many companies to borrow from banks rather than to try to issue stock or borrow in the bond market.
But we have another question.
Why are banks so rigid in their loan practices?
And in particular, why do banks and other lenders frequently demand collateral and frequently place additional restrictions on borrower's behavior?
Well, it turns out that the Standard Debt Contract is not a complete remedy for the problem of asymmetric information.
Even under a Standard Debt Contract, a borrower has an incentive.
To promise the bank it will operate a safe project and then, after the loan is granted, decide to run a riskier project.
Moral hazard is still an issue.
And remember, if the project succeeds, the firm earns higher profits.
If the project does not succeed, the firm is no worse off than it would have been if it had run the safe project.
For this reason, banks and other lenders understand that moral hazard is a problem even under the Standard Debt Contract and they seek remedies.
The requirement that a borrower provides collateral provides one of those remedies for the asymmetric information problem.
Why?
Well, the bank may be able to more accurately assess the value of pledged collateral than the bank can assess the value of the project that has failed.
Ah, by posting collateral, the borrower provides the bank with tangible assurance that it will use the funds as it promised to use them.
And to the extent that the collateral has a value greater than the borrowed amount, the lender no longer suffers from an information disadvantage and moral hazard will not rear its head.
But we know that lenders do more than demand collateral.
They frequently impose restrictive covenants on borrowers.
Well, mortgage loans require the borrowers to maintain homeowner's insurance on the property.
Auto loans require the borrower to maintain property insurance on the vehicle.
And homeowner loans frequently forbid the borrower from renting the property to a third party.
So, how is a bank loan like a used car transaction?
As we've seen, both suffer from the problem of asymmetric information.
The seller of the car knows more about its quality than the buyer.
The borrower of funds knows more about how the funds will be used than the bank.
This is why very few firms can obtain funds from stock and bond markets.
Asymmetric information makes profit sharing risky for the parties who know less about the firm's operations than the managers of the firms know.
Most firms and the great majority of small firms must borrow from banks and other professional lending companies.
But wait a minute, what do banks have that provides them with a remedy for the problem of asymmetric information?
Banks use a standard debt contract which mitigates but does not completely eliminate the adverse selection and moral hazard problems.
And to further mitigate those problems, banks design collateral arrangements and restrictive covenants.
Yes, banks are middlemen. And yes, they are specialists.
Banks specialize in assessing the creditworthiness of borrowers.
Because their evaluations are private information, banks can profit from their expertise the way Carmack's profits from its particular business plan.
Now we understand a bit more on the value of services offered by financial middlemen and in particular those that we call commercial banks.
In the next lecture, we will again use the concept of asymmetric information.
But we will use it this time to understand why those same financial firms and banks in particular are so highly regulated by government.
Thank you.
