Lecture 6. How inflation erodes the value of money.
Inflation is a lot like a snake. We know we're afraid, but we aren't quite sure why.
Let's explain that you can identify most poisonous snakes in the United States by the triangular shape of their heads.
But who wants to get that close?
Inflation is somewhat the same. Some inflation is benign. Some is poisonous.
And it's really important to know the difference.
In this lecture, we will learn that it is rational to fear high rates of inflation and, in particular, volatile inflation histories when the inflation rate swings between high and low values.
Why?
High rates of inflation erode the value of money.
Now, farmers who store their grains in silos know that rot will claim some of their grain every month.
Inflation is like rot. It erodes the value of our money by lowering the amount of goods we can buy with it.
Inflation is bad enough.
Volatile inflation, inflation that oscillates between low and high rates, is even worse.
Why?
Volatile inflation makes planning for the future very difficult.
We begin today's lecture with a report card of sorts.
A look at the inflation history of the United States over the last 100 years.
That history shows that there have been several periods where inflation caused real problems for U.S. decision makers.
These are periods where economists, and history, and probably you too, gives monetary authorities low marks.
But there are also periods from which we must learn.
We must learn in order to understand better how to control inflation in the future.
After looking at some history, we zero in and ask precisely what inflation is, and we investigate the connection between money growth and inflation.
And finally, we ask in some detail why economists say that inflation is costly.
In the post-World War II period, the United States had decades when inflation was very high and very volatile, and decades when inflation was low and steady.
In the high inflation decades, individuals spent substantial time and energy devising strategies that would protect them from unforeseen increases in inflation.
For example, and I'll talk about this more later, they bought larger houses than they otherwise would have, hoping that house prices would keep up with inflation.
In low inflation decades, individuals saved that time and that energy and planned for the future as if the inflation rate would remain steadily between 1 and 3%.
When it did so, their decision to not use precious time and energy to hedge the risks of inflation was warranted.
The graph shows the inflation rate for the US economy between 1913 and 2010.
What does it show?
It shows that our inflation experience has varied a lot.
Before the beginning of World War II, there were very large swings in the inflation rate.
A high in 1920 of 24%, and a low in 1921 of nearly minus 16%.
That's an enormous change over a very short period, a swing of 40% over a year or so.
You can understand that that widest swing between high and low growth in the price level played havoc with many businesses and household decisions.
During World War II, when wage and price controls were in effect and immediately after the war, CPI inflation again varied greatly, swinging from about 13% in May of 1942 to 0% in May of 1944 and then 18% in May of 1947.
After the 1940s, it appeared that calm had returned to the inflation history and that inflation was under control.
The inflation rate fell below 5% by the end of 1951 and stayed low for over a decade.
But inflation had not been conquered.
The inflation rate rose gradually in the 60s and was once more high and variable between 1970 and 1985.
During that period, the consumer price index inflation rate once more hit a peak of 15% in 1979.
When the Volcker regime took hold at the Federal Reserve, inflation once more fell and, in fact, fell quite quickly.
Since 1985, the inflation rate has largely been captured between the band of about 2% and 5%.
Economists refer to the period since 1985 as the great moderation and some of them talk about it as a period in which U.S. inflation was conquered.
But, as we will see in this lecture and later in the course, it never pays to assume that an enemy like inflation is vanquished forever.
So, what is inflation?
Inflation is a persistent increase in what I will call the general level of prices.
Now, right away we need a standard for this term general level of prices and I'm going to use the standard which is best known, known to you certainly.
It's the consumer price index.
But what's that?
The consumer price index is an index of prices of goods and services purchased by the typical household in the United States.
Now, it's very, very important for everyone to understand that the consumer price index is not the price of any one item.
Even an item as important as gasoline or heating oil or natural gas.
Instead, the consumer price index is properly thought of as the index of the price of a bushel basket.
A bushel basket full of the goods chosen by the typical family of four that lives in some city in the United States.
What do I mean when I say that the consumer price index is an index?
What's that mean?
Well, it means that the bushel basket prices in each month are each divided by the bushel basket price in some base year.
And that base year is currently 1983.
And we have a consistent agreement to set the value of the consumer price index to 100 in the base year.
So, when you see, for example, that the CPI is 180, you know that prices are 1.8 times larger than they were in 1983.
What's in the bushel basket?
Well, that's determined by you.
It's determined by a survey of consumer purchasing behavior conducted frequently by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the U.S. Department of Labor.
The items in the bushel basket are changed very, very slowly so that changes in the consumer price index are more due to changes in the prices of the items already in the basket
and less due to changes in the items themselves.
Now, that makes sense.
It's supposed to be a measure of prices, so we don't want to confuse things by having changes in composition of the basket, but that does have a downside.
For example, it took a while to get cell phones and cell phone services into the consumer price index.
It's important for you to realize that the consumer price index is not truly a cost-of-living index, and there's a good reason why, and it's important that we all understand it.
But first, let's make clear what that means.
If the CPI were to grow, say, by 5% in a given year, the cost of living would grow by a smaller percentage, two or 3%, or something smaller.
Why?
Savvy consumers will move away from the items that have experienced high price increases and toward items that are good substitutes and have experienced smaller price increases.
Let's do an example.
Suppose there's a frost in Georgia, and that greatly increases the price of peaches.
I like peaches, you probably like peaches, but if the price of peaches goes very much higher, I and you and consumers in general are likely to substitute nectarines or some other fruit for the peaches that are now very expensive.
Point is that the cost of eating fruit will not rise by the same percentage as the cost of eating peaches.
Now, this is important not only to you as you manage your own budgets, but it's also important in a public policy sense.
The Social Security Administration uses a different price index to compute cost-of-living increases that feed into increases in social security payments made to recipients.
And indeed, there is some talk in political arenas of further changing that formula to compute cost-of-living increases in social security payments.
Okay, so now we understand what the consumer price index is, and it's time to ask exactly what is meant by the rate of inflation.
Inflation is defined as the rate of growth in a price index.
So the consumer price index is a number. It defines the cost of a bushel basket at a moment in time.
The inflation rate explains how that number is growing, how high the growth rate is, how quickly those prices are rising.
There are many, many ways to compute an inflation rate.
One can choose a different price index than there are many.
One can choose a different period over which to measure changes in the chosen index.
And for that matter, one can choose a different formula for computing the growth rate.
Recall that I presented some data to you about the history of inflation in the United States.
What formula did I use and what data did I use?
The graph that you saw used the consumer price index for all urban consumers.
It defined the inflation rate as a percentage change in the current month's CPI index compared with that index 12 months earlier.
So those were annual growth rates.
By defining the inflation rate as the percentage change over 12 months, over than one, two, or three months,
I created a measure of inflation that would be less sensitive to very temporary price changes.
I want to clear something up about the relationship between inflation and important prices, such as the price of oil.
Let me say, with no equivocation, a one-time price increase cannot cause inflation.
It will certainly cause the CPI to rise, perhaps for as long as a year.
But an increase in the price of oil cannot cause inflation.
It won't simply visit itself within one month because many goods that we produce use oil.
And those prices of those goods will rise as the price of oil is incorporated into them.
But an increase in the price of oil, such for example as was caused by the OPEC price increases in the 1970s,
cannot explain persistent differences in the inflation rates that we have observed in the data that we viewed.
The OPEC cartel was able to raise the price of oil relative to other goods in the 1970s.
But it was not able to continue to raise the relative price of oil as the years and decades passed.
And if you would like to convince yourself of that, all you need to do is to create some data of your own
where the price of oil is divided by the CPI and then take a look at the graph.
What causes inflation?
I have for you one of the most famous quotes in economics.
Inflation is always and everywhere a monetary phenomenon in the sense that it is
and can be produced only by a more rapid increase in the quantity of money than in output.
These are famous words and they were written by a famous economist, Milton Friedman,
a Nobel laureate in economics and perhaps the most famous monetary economist of the 20th century.
What Friedman meant is that growth in the money supply is both necessary and sufficient to explain inflation.
Now, Friedman does not mean that all growth in the quantity of money causes inflation.
Growth in money at a rate that just keeps pace with the growth in real output, with the growth rate of our economy,
will not cause inflation.
In fact, that growth in the money supply will facilitate the growth in real production.
But Friedman does mean that growth in money in excess of the growth in real output will cause inflation.
I have some evidence for you.
The following charts show money growth rates and inflation rates for 79 different countries and for two different five-year periods.
1987 to 92 and 1992 to 97.
The data are from the International Monetary Fund.
And the results depicted in the chart are similar to results reported by many other authors and economists
who have studied cross-country variation in inflation and money growth.
Let's begin by zooming in on the left panel, which covers the period of 87 to 92.
Along the horizontal axis is measured the excess growth in the money supply.
That's Friedman's concept.
And here, excess growth in money means the difference between the money growth rate and the growth rate in real income in the country.
Along the vertical axis is measured the inflation rate.
Each point on the graph represents the five-year inflation and money growth record of one of the 79 countries included in the study.
So if you could count the dots, there would be 79.
The graph shows that there was a tremendous amount of variation in the inflation and money growth experience measured across the 79 countries.
Most countries experienced inflation rates of, say, less than 10%.
But some had inflation rates greater than 10%, some greater than 20%, and a few greater than 50%.
The graph has a line, and that is the best fit line, the line that fits the points better than any other line.
When you look at that line, you notice that it appears to have a slope of about one.
What does that mean?
Well, that means simply that every 1% increase in excess money growth is associated with a 1% increase in inflation.
This is what Friedman meant.
Higher money growth, higher inflation, and at about a one-to-one rate.
Now let's look at the right panel.
Everything in the right panel is the same as in the left panel, except that a different five-year period, remember it's 92 through 97,
is used to gauge the money growth and inflation experience of the 79 countries.
What one notices right away is that the best fit line for the right panel looks identical to the best fit line of the left panel.
That wasn't arbitrary, the data say that it's identical.
So looking across countries, we see the same positive, virtually one-to-one relationship between money growth and inflation in 92 through 97 and in 1987 through 1992.
The data positively and strongly support Milton Friedman's claim that inflation is always and everywhere a monetary phenomenon.
Countries with high excess money growth have high inflations.
Countries with low excess money growth have low inflation rates.
Put another way, excess money growth of any percentage rate you want, call it N, is going to cause N% inflation.
So why?
Why does money growth in excess of the rate of growth of a nation's productivity cause inflation?
Now, economists have lots and lots of models and lots and lots of explanations explaining why, but let's keep things simple.
Let's focus on the explanation that Milton Friedman himself provided.
What did Friedman say?
Well, Friedman said that an increase in the growth rate of money puts additional buying power in the hands of potential spenders.
For example, if the increase in money growth resulted from a decision by a government to buy additional defense-related products, defense contractors and those who work for them would receive additional money.
When the defense contractors and their employees spend the additional money that they have received, they bid up the prices of the goods they buy.
Since they buy a wide variety of goods and services, most prices rise and inflation results.
For that mechanism, the mechanism that Friedman has in mind to work as he says it does, an economy must be nearly fully employed.
That means all of its resources must be put to use.
If not, the increase in money could lead to higher employment without inflation, because as people spend the new money they get, they could just call unemployed resources back to work.
Friedman's rule, one-to-one between excess money growth and inflation, is meant to be a statement about an economy that's operating at its potential.
So, it's important now, having explained what a price index is, having explained what inflation is, and having explained the connection between money growth and inflation to explain something else and to explain it very, very clearly and convincingly.
Why do I and most economists argue that high and variable inflation is very costly to the members of society?
It's important to note that high and variable inflation tend to come together.
The original graph showed you that bigger swings in the inflation rate occurred when inflation was high on average than in post-1985 when it was low.
So what?
Well, high and variable inflation, and this is very important, makes it difficult for individuals to plant for their future.
Knowing how much one needs for retirement, for example, requires one to predict prices, my goodness, 30 years in advance?
Imagine how hard that is.
Imagine that you had planned for 2% inflation.
And then, after 20 years of saving, you suddenly entered a period where you believed that inflation would grow during your retirement years at 5% per year.
The dollars you had saved might simply be too few, and you may have, without choosing to, chosen for yourself, a retirement income that wasn't as large to support a lifestyle that you had wished.
Another example.
Knowing how much to save for college requires one to predict college tuition when a child is still very young.
That's a difficult problem, not only because inflation tends to drive up college tuition, but also because college tuition can grow more or less rapidly than general prices.
Hedging inflation risk is costly in the sense that decision makers do things that they would not do if they could be sure, if they could be guaranteed that inflation would remain low and steady.
And I want to elaborate on an example. In the 1960s, it was common advice to young home buyers that they should buy as much house as they could afford, and maybe more, because a house was considered a good inflation hedge.
Many companies would hold larger inventories of raw materials than they actually needed in order to hedge against the risk that those materials would grow in price.
In addition, individuals hold less money when they fear inflation. Now, money, as I've argued several times already, is a very useful economic tool. It facilitates trade.
But money loses value when inflation occurs, and people fearing inflation may actually hold less money than they would if they were guaranteed that the inflation rate would be low.
It follows that people use other strategies for transactions. Some economists describe these other strategies when they say that inflation leads people to bear shoe leather costs because it leads them to make more trips to the bank to move money between interest-bearing accounts and non-interest-bearing accounts.
That metaphor rings a little hollow in today's world because we do a lot of our banking electronically. But the basic point is still valid, although the shoe leather metaphor may not be.
It takes time and effort to sweep out our non-interest-paying accounts. We need to do that less often when inflation is low and more often when it's not, and doing so costs resources.
As we near the end of today's lecture, let's reflect for a moment on why all of us are better off when the inflation rate is low and steady, even though, as we'll see later, there are some times when it makes sense to bear the risk of higher inflation.
If inflation is low and steady, it's easier to plan for the future and to have confidence that our financial arrangements will work out as we planned.
We spend less of our resources hedging the risks associated with volatile inflation.
We live, for example, in houses of a size justified by our desires rather than by our fears.
We use more of that wonderful invention money. On the other hand, if inflation is high and variable, it's very difficult to know how much to save for retirement, how much to save for college tuition, and so forth.
If inflation is high and variable, we will invest more of our wealth in riskier assets in the hope that they will provide us some protection against inflation.
We buy more house in the hope that house prices gain in value and offset the effects of inflation. We may buy more stocks and bonds than we are comfortable with. We use less of that wonderful invention money.
In the next lecture, we will study inflation in extreme situations and will learn just how damaging high inflation can be.
In other lectures, we will study in greater detail the relationship between inflation and interest rates.
And we will understand how and why our Federal Reserve treats as its most important job maintaining the inflation rate at a steady 2%.
Thank you.
