Lecture 20 – The Term Structure of Interest Rates
Wouldn't it be great if we had a crystal ball into which we could gaze, and by gazing
obtain at least a partial understanding of the future course of our economy?
It turns out that in a sense we do have the ability to look into our economy's future.
And as I will explain, toward the end of today's lecture, looking into our economy's future
can be very useful for decision makers of all types.
As we have seen from our lectures on the bond market, Treasury bills, notes, and bonds
trade every single day in secondary markets.
That means that every business day, borrowers and lenders, and all market traders, interact
to produce prices on Treasury securities with one, two, three, and more years to maturity.
The focus of this lecture is on the fact that traders simultaneously determine prices for
Treasury securities of different maturities.
That is, securities for which the government will make its final payments at different
dates in the future.
Our ability to forecast the future course of credit conditions will rely in our ability
to interpret what economists call the term structure of interest rates and its graphical
representation, the yield curve.
Let's take a look at this animal in order to better understand it.
The graph you are seeing depicts the Treasury yield curve on November 22, 2010.
Along the horizontal axis is measured times to maturity, ranging from three months all
the way to the left, to 30 years on the far right.
Along the vertical axis is measured the annual yield to maturity measured in percentage points.
You can see we go from almost zero to 1.88%, 3.74%, a percent, and 5.61%.
Longer maturity yields are the yields on Treasury bills or Treasury bonds that are almost due
to mature.
The intermediate maturity yields are the yields on Treasury notes, or again Treasury bonds
that have aged some, and the longer maturity yields are clearly the yields on Treasury bonds.
So what?
Well notice, on November 22, 2010, the yield curve was upward sloping, and upward sloping
means that as maturity increased, the yield increased.
Put another way, the higher the maturity, the higher the yield.
Seeing the graph reveals that the yield on a five-year bond was about 1.88%, while the
yield on a 10-year bond was 3.74%, clearly higher.
Keep in mind, please, that all of the yields depicted in the graph are yields on securities
that are alike in all respects except for one, the maturity date.
Also keep in mind that the U.S. Treasury has never defaulted on a security that it issued.
So for these data, it's hard to attribute the difference to a risk premium due to any
possibility that the Treasury would default.
Nevertheless, as the yield curve shows, the annualized yields for longer maturity securities
are different, and in this case higher, than yields for short maturities.
But why?
Adding to the puzzle is the fact that at some dates in history, the yield curve had a different
shape.
You're now looking at the yield curve for one of those different dates, and in particular
July 20th, 2006.
The most obvious difference is that yields were higher in July 2006 than in November
2010.
But the difference that interests us in this lecture is the difference in shape.
Longer maturity yields were approximately equal to short maturity yields in July 2006.
The yield curve was flat, and again, we'd like to know why.
We will be interpreting the yield curve with the help of a famous economic hypothesis,
very famous, and that is the business of today's lecture.
The hypothesis allows us to explain the different yield curve shapes.
It also explains how we can combine the information in the yield curve to forecast future interest
rates.
That's the nature of our crystal ball.
And this hypothesis that we will use is called the expectations hypothesis.
It is our crystal ball.
The expectations hypothesis of the term structure of interest rates is the hypothesis that long
maturity interest rates are averages, in a sense that I'll make clear, are averages
of short maturity interest rates, current short maturity interest rates, and, and this
is important, expected future short maturity interest rates.
I am going to explain this in some detail to make very clear the meaning of what this
hypothesis says.
Now we're going to look at this hypothesis in several ways.
First checking the intuition behind the hypothesis, then stating the hypothesis in a formal way,
and then finally doing some examples that help us clarify the meaning of the hypothesis.
Now if you don't like mathematical notation, don't worry.
I'm going to use some, but keep in mind that the value in the lecture is in the intuition
for the expectations hypothesis, and that intuition is very clear and provides what
I'd call the lion's share of the insight in today's lecture.
So what is the intuition behind the expectations hypothesis?
It is the claim that all bond holding strategies that move money between the same two points
in time should provide a bond holder with exactly the same yield to maturity.
That's a mouthful.
We need to unpack that, and we'll do it with an example.
I suppose that Jane wants to move money between the present and a date exactly three years
in the future.
Perhaps Jane is nearing retirement, perhaps she's accumulating funds to pay off a mortgage,
or perhaps her son is now 15 and she's saving funds for the first year of college tuition.
The second strategy available to Jane is to buy a three-year treasury bond, which matures
in three years.
But Jane has other options.
A second strategy available to Jane is to buy a one-year treasury note, allow it to
mature in one year, use the funds she receives from the maturing note to buy, one year in
the future, a second note, allow that second-year note to mature after year two, and then buy
a third one-year note that will mature in one year and provide her finally with the
funds on the day she wants to spend them.
Jane's second strategy is to roll over one-year notes between the present and her target date
in three years.
So do we move funds between the same two points of time with each strategy you bet?
The three-year bond strategy bridges the entire three years with a single purchase.
The rollover strategy bridges the three years one year at a time.
A third strategy available to Jane would be to buy a two-year note, allow it to mature,
and then use the proceeds to buy a one-year note that matures under target dates.
And there are lots of other strategies as well.
But to keep things simple, I will focus only on the three-year bond strategy and the rollover
strategy involving one-year bonds.
Okay.
The expectations hypothesis says that the yield to maturity of the two strategies should
be the same since if it were not, Jane and every other person who buys government bonds
with the same horizon would choose the strategy that provided the higher yield.
Put another way, selfish bond traders all seeking the highest possible yields will buy
and sell one, two, and three-year treasury notes until their prices imply that the two
strategies have the same yield over the period, beginning today and ending in three years.
To make the statement of the expectations hypothesis more precise requires some new notation.
I apologize, but there's no way around it.
The first new symbol that I will introduce is capital R with two arguments in parentheses.
So capital R, parentheses, n comma t, closed parentheses.
R stands for a yield to maturity.
The two terms in parentheses remind us that the yield to maturity varies with the date
t and with the maturity n.
So r, paren, n comma t, closed paren is the yield to maturity of an n-year treasury security
at time t.
Example, if n equals 3 and t equals November 22, 2010, r, n, t is the yield to maturity
on a three-year note on November 22, 2010.
Likewise, r, 2, comma, November 22, 2010 is the yield to maturity on a two-year note
on November 22, 2010.
And r, 1, November 22, 2010 would be the yield on a one-year note on November 22, 2010.
So that's pretty easy.
On November 22, 2010, according to the first yield curve that you have already seen, the
yield on a three-year treasury note was approximately 0.78%, a little less than 1%.
In our notation then, r, 3, t was 0.0078 for t equal November 22, 2010.
Remember that we use decimal notation for percentages.
I have a second new symbol, and I really can't avoid it.
The second new symbol, I will call r hat, paren, 1 comma t plus n.
But what you are seeing is an r with a carrot symbol over the top of it.
But that's like a little hat on top of the r, so I'm just going to say r hat to remind
you.
r hat is the best possible forecast of the future yield of a one-year treasury note.
Which one-year note?
The one-year note that market forces will determine m years from now at time t plus m.
For example, consider r hat, 1 comma t plus 1, and I'm going to stop saying parentheses.
The first argument is 1, and the second is t plus 1.
This means that r hat, 1, t plus 1 is the current time t forecast of next year's yield
on a one-year note.
We don't know what that is yet, right?
Also, r hat, 1 comma t plus 2 is our forecast made now at time t of the yield on a one-year
note two years from now at time t plus 2.
If r hat, 1 comma t plus 1 is equal to 0.015 when t equals November 22, 2010, that means
that the forecast on November 22, 2010 of the yield on the one-year note that will be
determined on November 22, 2011 is 1.5%.
Okay.
Our new notation already provides us with a dividend.
It provides us with a hint of what that crystal ball will reveal.
That crystal ball will reveal forecasts like r hat, 1, t plus 1, and r hat, 1, t plus 2.
Forecasts of future credit market yields.
Okay.
As I said, the expectations hypothesis says that current long maturity yields are averages
of current and forecasted future short-term yields.
And now we need to look at an equation to make this precise.
On the left-hand side of the equation is r n t.
That is the yield to maturity at time t.
We can see this now of an n-year Treasury security.
What's on the other side of the equation?
We've got n different things in the numerator added together and in the denominator we divide
by n.
Ah, we're computing an average of n things.
We're dividing each of them by 1 over, dividing each of them by n, right?
What are those n different things on the right-hand side of that equation?
Well, r 1 t is the first one.
That is the one-year Treasury bill rate now, time t.
The next or second item, that's r hat, 1, t plus 1.
That's the expected value of a one-year rate to be determined in one year's time.
What's the third item?
The one-year rate to be determined by the market in two years' time, and so it goes
until the last item in the sum, in the numerator, is the last one-year rate that will put the
last link in our bridge between the present and time t plus n.
The equation says quite simply that the yield to maturity on an n-year bond at time t must
equal the average of n different yields, the current one-year yield, the one-year yield
expected to be determined by credit markets one year from now, the one-year yield expected
to be determined two years from now, and so forth, on up to the yield that will be in
place during the last year of the n-year bond's life.
Suppose we assume that Jane is making her decision on November 22, 2010.
For Jane's decision, the version of the expectations hypothesis that is relevant is r3t, remember
her horizon is three years, is equal to r1t, the current one-year yield, plus r hat 1,
t plus 1, plus r hat 1, t plus 2, where all of those three r's on the right-hand side
of the equation are divided by three.
That is, r3t is equal to the average of r1t, r hat 1, t plus 1, and r hat 1, t plus 2.
That's a simple version of the equation because Jane's horizon is only three years.
In Jane's case, the expectations hypothesis says that the 2010 yield on a three-year note
is equal to the average of the 2010 one-year yield, the 2011 one-year yield, and the 2012
one-year yield with the important understanding that it is the current expectation of the
future yields that belong in the equation.
Before doing this, this equation pertains to time t before the future is revealed.
The expectations hypothesis implies that the treasury yield curve provides a forecast of
future market conditions.
That was the whole point, right?
It's a crystal ball.
To see this clearly, let's again consider Jane's situation.
On November 22, 2010, Jane knows the yield to maturity of one, two, and three-year treasury
security.
She sees that.
So in our notation, she knows r1t, r2t, and r3t.
She doesn't need any crystal ball.
That's there.
The data show that.
Those are current market conditions.
By using the expectations hypothesis as a crystal ball, Jane is going to learn r hat
1t plus 1, so the one-year rate that's going to be determined one year later, and r hat
1t plus 2, the one-year rate that's going to be determined two years later.
The expectations hypothesis tells us two important and relevant things.
First it tells us that the two-year rate, r2, 2010, is equal to r1, 2010, plus r hat
1, 2011, those last two items divided by two.
Put again, it tells us that r2, 2010, is the average of r1, 2010, plus r hat 1, 2011.
It's clear we can rewrite this equation very simply as r hat 1, 2011, equal to two times
r2, 2010, minus r1, 2010.
Let's put that in words.
Our forecast, r1, 2011, on the expectations hypothesis is equal to two times the two-year
rate that we can observe in 2010, minus one time the one-year rate that we can observe
in 2010.
This means that Jane and everyone else can forecast the one-year bond rate to be determined
in 2011 by combining information embedded in both the two-year and the one-year bond
rates, which she can see in 2010.
That is her crystal ball.
The expectations hypothesis tells us something else as well.
It tells us that r3, 2010, the yield on a three-year government bond that we can observe
in 2010 must be equal to the average of the one-year yield in 2010 and the forecasted
yields for 2011 and 2012 on one-year yields.
Put in notation again, r3, 2010 must be equal to r1, 2010, plus r1 hat, 2011, plus r1 hat,
2012, the three last terms divided by three.
We can rewrite that in a simple way by noticing that r1, 2010, plus r1 hat, 2011, is actually
equal to two times r2, 2010.
But we know that.
That's why we rewrote it that way.
So what that tells us is that the three-year rate at times 2010 is equal to twice the two-year
rate at 2010, plus the forecasted rate of a one-year note to be determined at 2012, the
sum of those divided by three.
That's the second implementation of our expectations hypothesis, and it allows us to solve for
r hat, one, 2012.
r hat, one, 2012 is equal to three times the three-year bond rate that we can observe in
2010 minus twice the two-year bond rate that we can observe in 2010.
Now this may seem like number dazzled, but focus on how amazing that is.
The expectations hypothesis, which is itself so intuitive, tells us that we can forecast
the rate of interest that will not be determined for two years as a simple combination of the
information in the currently observable three-year rate and the currently observable two-year
rate.
This means that we can combine the information embedded in the three-year and two-year yields
observed in 2010 to produce the forecast that we want, the forecast of the one-year yield
that will be set by the market, by market forces of demand and supply two years from now.
So we have now used the expectations hypothesis to obtain forecasts of note yields that will
finally be determined in 2011 and 2012.
We've used bond yield information available in 2010, available to anyone.
This is the crystal ball.
How about a numerical example to help us understand what is exactly going on here, make it a little
more concrete.
Again we'll consider one, two, and three-year yields.
On Friday, November 19, 2010, the yields on one, two, and three-year treasury notes were
0.27, 0.52, and 0.78 percent.
These are percentages now.
Using our formula for the first prediction gives us our hat 1, 2011, our forecast of
the one-year rate one-year from now, equal to 2 times 0.52 minus 0.27 or 0.77.
So using the information in the yield curve in 2010 would have allowed us to predict that
the one-year bond or bill rate in 2011 would rise to 0.77 percent.
Using our second prediction formula gives us that our hat 1, 2012, the one-year rate
two years from now, should be forecasted to be three times 0.78 minus two times 0.52
or 1.3 percent.
So using the information in the yield curve in 2010 would also have allowed us to predict
that the one-year bond rate in 2012 would rise even further to 1.3 percent.
Thus, on the expectations hypothesis on November 19, 2010, one-year yields were expected to
rise from their current level of 0.27 to 0.77 by November 2011 and to 1.3 percent by November
2012.
In like manner, we can obtain the forecasts of all future one-year interest rates by
combining the information in even longer maturity bonds.
Let's not forget our erstwhile Jane.
If Jane believes in the expectations hypothesis, she will be indifferent between buying a three-year
government bond and holding it to maturity and rolling over a sequence of one-year government
bonds.
Why again?
Because the expectations hypothesis implies that the two strategies will leave Jane with
the same amount of money after three years.
The expectations hypothesis thus allows Jane to implicitly forecast the future yield on
Treasury bills.
Based on the expectations hypothesis, we now have an explanation of the shape of the Treasury
yield curve.
The Treasury yield curve slopes upward when short-term yields are expected to increase
in the future.
The Treasury yield curve is horizontal, flat, when short-term yields in the future are expected
to equal current short-term yields.
And every once in a while, the Treasury yield curve will slope downwards.
And when that happens, it implies that short-term yields in the future are expected to be lower
than current short-term yields.
Thus, we would conclude that in November 2010, the upward-sloping Treasury yield curve implied
that bond trader expected fairly substantial increases in short-term interest rates over
horizons between two and five years.
On the other hand, in July of 2006, when the yield curve was flat, we would have concluded
that the Treasury yield curve implied that bond traders expected short-term rates to
remain constant indefinitely at about 4.5%.
Does our crystal ball tell us important things?
How can folks who are worried about locking in a mortgage interest rate or locking in
a loan rate for their business benefit from the forecasting power of the Treasury yield
curve?
When the yield curve steepens, get steeper.
That is, when long-maturity bond rates rise by more than short-maturity bond rates, it's
a good bet that market participants believe that interest rates will rise in the future.
Those who wish to borrow funds should be forewarned that if they delay, the interest rate they
must pay is likely to rise.
When the yield curve remains flat, it's a good sign that market participants believe that
interest rates will remain constant.
And when the yield curve changes from one with a positive slope to one with a negative
slope, it's a good bet that market participants believe that interest rates will fall in the
future.
Some analysts would go so far as to say that a negatively sloped yield curve is a sign
of a coming recession, a time when few will want to borrow, and interest rates will be
low as a result.
Who would have thought that such a simple graph could tell us so much?
