Lecture 9 – The Real Rate of Interest
In September 1978, nominal interest rates were very high.
For example, the one-year Treasury bond rate was 8.6 percent, and it was on the way up.
Interest rates paid by private borrowers were higher, but they moved together with the Treasury bond rate.
The one-year Treasury bond rate would continue to rise until it peaked at over 16 percent in August 1981.
Then the T-bond rate and rates generally would begin to fall.
On the way back down, the one-year Treasury bond rate would again hit 8.6 percent in January of 1983.
So you might ask, what's the point?
What is the significance of the simple fact that the one-year Treasury bond rate was 8.6 percent in September 1978, and then 8.6 percent again in January 1983?
These apparently straightforward numbers embody a fascinating and perplexing puzzle.
But why? Why are they puzzling?
Because in a very important sense, that is the point of this lecture, it was much more expensive to borrow in January of 1983 than it was to borrow in September of 1978.
How can that be? How could this be so?
The nominal rates of interest were the same in those two months. I can hear you screaming it to me.
But the key to resolving this puzzle involves a concept called the real rate of interest.
What the real rate of interest is, how to think about it, and why it is the correct way to measure the cost of borrowing is the subject of this lecture.
By the end of this lecture, you are likely to think in a different way than ever before about the true cost of borrowing.
The real rate of interest is one of those economic concepts that house has the power to change the way all of us look at the world.
Let's begin on familiar ground with what economists call the nominal rate of interest, what we all think of as the rate of interest.
The nominal rate of interest is what we think about when we think of an interest rate.
The nominal rate of interest is typically expressed as a percentage, 5%, 6%, 7%, but in fact it specifies the number of dollars that a borrower must pay to borrow funds.
If the nominal rate is 10%, a person who borrows $1,000 for one year on January 2 must pay back $1,100 on January 2 of the following year, $1,000 in principle, and 10% of that $100 in interest.
By the same token, a person who lends $1,000 for one year at 10% will give up $1,000 on January 2 and receive in return $1,100 on January 2 one year later.
Why does the borrower pay interest and why does the lender receive interest?
The simple reason is that the lender gives up something of value to the borrower. In our example, the right to use $1,000 one year earlier.
Suppose Joe is just making ends meet but suddenly discovers that his automobile needs a major repair.
Joe could wait and save for the repair, but Joe reckons that he cannot function without use of his auto for a whole year.
So Joe pays interest and obtains the right to use in the present funds that he will not earn until a year later.
Continuing our example, suppose Jan is saving for her daughter's college education.
Jan has decided that she prefers purchases that she can make in the future, her daughter's tuition, to purchases that she could make right now.
If Jan lends funds to Joe, she will receive a reward for her patients.
Now, all of us know that in reality borrowers typically pay a higher rate of interest than the rate received by savers.
The difference is compensation received by financial institutions such as banks that function as go-betweens between the borrowers and the lenders.
We'll come back to that issue later in the course, but for now I'm going to assume that borrowing and lending rates are the same.
That will keep our story simple and it will do absolutely no violence to the points that we're studying today.
Now, you and I may think that the payment of interest when we borrow and the receipt of interest when we save is the most natural thing in the world.
But it's interesting that in some cultures and according to some religious codes, the payment of interest is wrong.
The view that collection of interest on a debt is somehow wrong or even immoral can be traced to the Greek philosopher Aristotle who argued that money does not produce anything and therefore borrowing money should not cost anything.
Now, Aristotle thought that someone who used another person's land should pay rent for the land because the person who borrowed the land could use the land to grow a crop.
But Aristotle argued that money was not like land and that ideally people should not collect interest from one another.
What Aristotle did not acknowledge and what is of great importance is that no one borrows money unless he or she intends to use it.
Like the land renter, the borrower does receive something of value, the right to purchase goods earlier rather than later.
And the opportunity to use funds sooner rather than later is something both valuable and productive.
The mutual benefit that borrowers and lenders receive when they transact is a very powerful force.
It is so powerful that it has led practitioners of religions that forbid the collection of interest to find workarounds that allow transactions to go forward but do not technically involve interest payments.
Let's think of an example.
An Islamic bank approaches home loans and home loan mortgages in a very different way than Western banks do.
They do not loan money to the home buyer and then collect interest. That is forbidden.
But yet, people who practice Islam wish to buy homes, how does an Islamic bank help them?
Well, the Islamic bank buys the home itself and then resells it to the buyer at a profit while at the same time allowing the buyer to pay for this home purchase in installments.
A workaround that, if we thought about it, would implicitly involve interest but does not explicitly involve interest collection.
So now we know that a borrower receives something of value, the right to use funds earlier rather than later.
But what does the borrower give up for that right?
And what does the lender receive for agreeing to spend later to be patient and to defer spending until the time that the loan is repaid?
Interest. You would tell me that I have already said that.
Ah yes, but the number of dollars paid or received in interest is an inaccurate measure of the cost of borrowing and an inaccurate measure of the reward from lending.
The right way to describe what the lender receives and what the borrower gives up is with that concept called the real rate of interest.
The real rate of interest measures the size of what I'll call a goods bonus that savers receive by agreeing to defer the use of income.
It likewise measures the size of a goods penalty that borrowers pay for the right to use their income.
Let's return to our example of Joe and Jan. Joe would like to borrow $1,000 from Jan at 10% interest to fix his car.
Jan would like to lend $1,000 to Joe at 10% interest because she is saving for her daughter's college education.
Consider the year that starts on the day that Joe borrowed $1,000 and ends on the day that he repays the loan.
Suppose during that year prices rise by 6%. Which prices? Well, rather than get bogged down and describing exactly what Joe and Jan consume,
let's simply say that they consume the typical bushel basket and that the consumer price index which rises by 6% is a measure of the inflation that they face.
When Joe repays the loan, he repays with dollars that have lost 6% of their purchasing power relative to the dollars that he borrowed.
That is, the dollars that he borrowed at the beginning of the year could purchase 6% more than the dollars that he repaid at the end of the year.
Similarly, at the time of repayment, Jan receives dollars that can purchase 6% less than the dollars she lent.
So a good estimate of the goods penalty that Joe pays by borrowing is 4%. The nominal rate of interest of 10% minus the inflation rate during the period of the loan.
And a good estimate of the goods bonus that Jan receives is likewise 4%, 10 minus 6%.
Okay, computation of the real rate of interest then involves adjusting the nominal rate of interest for the rate of inflation during the period of the loan,
during the time between borrowing and repayment.
There is a subtle and somewhat difficult issue that we must address, however.
At the time that Joe and Jan make their arrangement, they do not know what the rate of inflation will turn out to be.
And I'm going to return to that point in just a couple of minutes.
Now, data show that the nominal rate of interest rises and falls with the inflation rate and varies more than does the real rate of interest.
The chart that you are seeing tracks the one-year treasury bond rate and the rate of CPI inflation over 50 years between 1960 and 2010.
The nominal rate of interest is in blue and the rate of inflation is in red.
What you see here is that the nominal rate of interest largely rises and falls with the rate of inflation.
They move together through time.
We observe that the blue and red lines rise together and fall together, but they are not moving in lockstep.
There are times when the inflation rate falls by more than the nominal interest rate or times when it falls by less.
So what does that mean?
Let's zoom in to see the data for the years between 1978 and 1983.
Why would we want to do that? Well, remember our puzzle at the beginning of the lecture.
When we zoom in, we see a diagram with two black vertical lines.
And why? Well, those lines mark September 1978 and January 1983.
Comparison of the blue interest rate line and the red inflation rate line takes us a long way toward resolving the puzzle that the lecture started with.
In September 1978, the inflation rate was almost as high as the interest rate.
Well, wait a minute. That makes the real rate of interest very, very small.
But in dramatic contrast, in January of 1983, the nominal rate of interest was about five full percentage points higher than the inflation rate, which makes the real rate of interest very high.
The real rate of interest is defined as the nominal interest rate minus the rate of inflation expected on average over the life of the loan.
The graph that we just saw compares nominal interest rates and inflation rates at the same date.
Another subtle point, though, that comparison is not quite right.
Borrowers and lenders both care about what happens to the purchasing power of the dollars they borrow and land over the life of the loan.
The correct inflation rate to use is not known at the time that the loan is consummated.
Both borrowers and lenders must guess the future course of inflation in order to estimate the real rate of interest and the true cost of borrowing and the true cost of lending.
The next graph shows the real rate of interest between 1978 and 1983, assuming that borrowers and lenders had guessed the inflation rate correctly.
It's sort of a crystal ball exercise. What if they had known in advance exactly what the inflation rate would be?
Now, technically speaking, the graph shows for each month the one-year nominal interest rate minus the inflation rate that was realized over the year of the loan.
That inflation rate is computed as the percentage change in the consumer price index that occurred between the date the loan was initiated and the date the loan was repaid.
What we see in this diagram is that the real rate of interest was actually negative between 1978 and 1980 because inflation turned out to be higher than individuals expected when they agreed to the terms of the loan.
Beginning in 1980, nominal interest rates caught up and surpassed the inflation rate, and the real rate of interest began to rise until it peaked at just under 12% in 1981.
We now understand how to resolve the puzzle presented at the beginning of the lecture.
It would turn out that the real rate of interest was minus 3.5% for September 1978, but 4.4% for January 1983. The difference is a large, I would say, a whopping 7.9%.
How can individuals estimate the future inflation rate and thereby estimate the real rate of interest at the point of a decision to borrow and lend?
Well, any such estimate is just that. It's an estimate. So the real rate of interest can never be known for sure at the time that borrowing and lending decisions are made.
One way to understand why the real rate of interest was negative between January 1978 and September of 1979 is to observe that the inflation rate was rising over this period.
Had individuals known that the inflation rate would rise, they would surely have sought and received a higher nominal rate on their loans.
Now, there is a cautionary tale here. We have talked about the importance of a low and stable inflation rate in previous lectures.
One reason that low and stable inflation rates are so important is because when the inflation rate is low and stable, it is easier to forecast.
When the inflation rate is low and stable, it is harder for borrowers and lenders to make mistakes.
When the inflation rate is low and stable, we do not end up by fooling our lenders to actually accept a negative real rate of interest, a negative premium or goods bonus for lending their funds.
And of course, if those lenders are people who are lending now in order to save for their retirement, it's very, very crucial to understand why being fooled is very important to those savers and lenders.
When the real rate of interest is negative, they are actually receiving a negative return on their funds, that is, they are actually losing the ability to buy goods and services.
That's serious business.
Now, we don't have a crystal ball. We cannot forecast the inflation rate perfectly, and there are before-the-fact estimates of future inflation that are available.
The Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia surveys business persons and asks them for their inflation forecasts.
The next chart gives forecasts of CPI inflation since 1981.
We can see from the graph that inflation forecasts were falling in the months before January of 1983.
And as the first graph shows, it turned out that those forecasts were correct. CPI inflation did fall during that period.
It's not important for us at this point to ask how accurate those forecasts are.
What is important is for us to continue to emphasize the distinction between nominal and real interest rates and to emphasize why that distinction is important.
To understand the importance of real interest rates, it is sufficient to remember Jan's problem.
Recall, Jan wants to save for her daughter's college education.
Suppose Jan ignores inflation and bases her saving decisions on the nominal rate alone.
By making that mistake, Jan ignores the likely increases in tuition that will occur between the present and the time that her daughter matriculates.
And of course, that is a potentially disastrous mistake to make.
By using the real rate of interest in her savings calculations, Jan is using forecasts of CPI inflation as a proxy for changes in tuition.
The forecasts can turn out to be imperfect, but it's far better to assume that tuition costs would rise along with the consumer price index than to assume that no increases in tuition costs would occur.
Understanding the concept of the real rate of interest conveys an additional benefit to us all.
It also helps us better understand why it is crucial for the Federal Reserve to keep inflation rates low and steady.
If the Federal Reserve keeps inflation low and steady, it is far easier for borrowers and for lenders to estimate the real rate of interest.
At the point in which they make their credit transactions.
That means if I can depend on the Federal Reserve keeping the inflation rate at 2%, I can personally be guaranteed when I can earn, say, 4% on very long-term savings vehicles that I will actually receive a goods bonus.
That's an extremely valuable piece of information to have and helps me plan so much better for the future.
It also means that we will be unlikely to see again the puzzling situation that we saw at the beginning of today's lecture.
Think of how damaging that was.
In the late 1970s, individuals were willingly loaning their money.
And it would turn out that the rate of inflation was accelerating so rapidly that they actually received when they were repaid by the Treasury or by private borrowers.
Dollars that would buy less than the dollars they lent.
What kind of a bonus is that?
What kind of an incentive is that to save, to actually receive fewer goods and services a year or two or five later than the goods and services that you gave up when you agreed to let someone else use your funds?
Of course, it was a windfall for borrowers, a windfall.
They actually paid back dollars that had less value than the dollars they borrowed.
That's hardly giving up anything.
Now we understand perhaps better why our founding fathers were so worried about inflation.
They understood that inflation was a scheme that would transfer wealth from creditors to debtors.
We can understand also why, as we will see in coming lectures, most of us and certainly all economists believe that keeping the inflation rate low and steady is an essential goal for monetary policy.
Keeping the inflation rate low and steady is an essential goal of monetary policy for the very, very simple reason that we want borrowers and lenders to understand what the real interest rate will be over not a year, not two years, not five years, but perhaps as long as ten years.
We want individuals to know when they contract what they actually are receiving in interest and what they are actually paying in interest.
When people have that knowledge, when they can be confident about that knowledge, they are able to plan better, more efficiently, and the economy in all of its aspects is better off as a result.
So, I promised you a concept that would change the way that you look at economic issues.
Please always remember that the true cost of borrowing and the true benefit from saving is measured properly by the real rate of interest.
It's the most important concept that I have offered you today and it's probably one of my top five for the entire course.
Remember, too, what the real rate of interest means.
It's the actual nominal rate, which tells you what dollars you will receive, adjusted for the inflation that you believe you will experience over the course of the loan.
Don't forget that very important concept and thank you.
