Lecture 3 How Is Money Created?
Just how is money created?
Well, there was a time when producing money meant mining a metal like gold, getting dirty
and sweaty.
Indeed, one of my favorite movies of all times is Treasure of the Sierra Madre, which
focuses a lot of attention on exactly how gold is mined.
But the process evolved until today, it is true that money is created out of thin air
by the central banks of the world, including our own United States Federal Reserve.
While it is true that the United States owns gold, and stores that gold in Fort Knox,
we will see that the gold at Fort Knox is no closer to money in the United States than
the oil in our Strategic Petroleum Reserve.
One important point to keep in mind as we study the period of history in which money
was backed by gold is that gold discoveries are random events, just like in Treasure of
the Sierra Madres.
After all, Columbus came to the New World hoping to find gold, as did many Europeans
who followed him.
And it would be surprising if a gold discovery that significantly increased the world's supply
of gold had no disruptive effect when money was backed by gold.
Nevertheless, there are today public figures who believe that the United States should and
eventually will return to the gold standard.
The U.S. could return to the gold standard within five years, according to magazine
publisher Steve Forbes.
The former GOP presidential candidate told a conservative newspaper Human Events that
a gold standard would stabilize the dollar and restore confidence in the U.S. Treasury
bonds among foreign investors.
If the dollar was as good as gold, other countries would want to buy it, Forbes said.
Steve Forbes is not alone in his view.
Texas Congressman Ron Paul suggests that our Federal Reserve system where someone can
quote, push a button and create new money is flawed and that a return to the gold standard
would be preferred.
By the end of this lecture, you will have a better understanding of the costs and benefits
of our money creation system.
You will have a better idea of the costs and benefits of returning to the gold standard.
Now, why is this important?
As I've said before, money is an invention as important to the development of mankind
as was the wheel.
Without money, there would be very little trade.
Without trade, according to Adam Smith, there would be very little specialization.
And specialization is, according to Smith, the source of the wealth of nations.
So it makes sense both in the context of this course and in the context of our citizenship
ask whether we have the right system in place to manage the creation of money.
Today we will learn how paper money was created during the era when money was primarily gold
and other precious metals or backed by gold and other precious metals.
We'll see how the gold standard and arrangement where governments agreed to peg the value
of their paper money to gold.
And I'll explain what peg means, how that system worked and why it ended.
Now, in thinking about the creation of money, it's helpful to use T-accounts.
And these T-accounts are called T-accounts because they have the shape of the capital
letter T. So, what's a T-account?
A T-account is a graphical representation of the balance sheet of an economic entity,
a household, a bank, whatever.
The T-account lists assets on the left side and liabilities on the right-hand side.
It also lists the entity's net worth on the right-hand side.
Now, by definition, a balance sheet must balance and to accomplish balance, net worth is always
defined as the value of assets minus the value of liabilities.
Let's do an example in order to make sure that this is well understood.
So, Joe has just graduated from college and is taking stock of his life.
Joe owns an automobile worth $4,000, has $200 in his checking account, and $500 in his savings
account.
Now, Joe went to state college and graduated with no student loan debt.
Lucky Joe, but he does have some liabilities.
He currently has a $750 balance on his only credit card.
The T-account you're looking at depicts Joe's assets, Joe's liabilities, and Joe's net worth.
Under the assets, auto $4,000, checking account $200, saving his account $500.
Under the liabilities, credit card debt $750, and his net worth $4,700 in assets minus $750
in credit card debt, his liability, his net worth $3,950.
Recall that an early example of the creation of paper money revolves around London gold
smiths.
The earliest uses of paper money and western civilization were warehouse receipts for gold.
Now, gold smiths had good safes, and it became customary for their customers to leave gold
for safekeeping with the gold smiths.
In return for depositing their gold with the gold smith, the gold smith would issue receipts
to their customers.
They would learn that it was more convenient and safe to buy and sell goods using the receipts
themselves than returning the gold smith and reclaiming the gold.
Voila, the warehouse receipts for gold became paper money backed by gold deposits.
How could we use a T-account to explain the creation of paper money by a London gold smith?
Because indeed, that happened.
All right, let's do an example.
Let's imagine a gold smith who has initially gold holdings of 1,000 pounds, and by that
I mean not weight, but 100 pounds sterling.
And in exchange, the gold smith has issued 1,000 pounds sterling of warehouse receipts.
Gold smiths of 1,000, liabilities of 1,000, net worth of zero.
Now in a minute, we're going to have our gold smith make a change.
But what's that change based on?
Well, gold smiths and ours in particular quickly realized that on any given day, they held
more gold in their safes, their vaults, their safekeeping places, than they needed, either
for their own work or to satisfy whichever customers wanted to reclaim the gold and represent
their receipts.
Gold smiths were a clever folk, and they quickly concluded that they had a great opportunity.
They could create new warehouse receipts without more gold, and they could lend those warehouse
receipts to additional depository customers.
So let's return to our T-account.
After making such a loan, the balance sheet of our gold smith would look something like
the following.
Now under the assets, the gold smith would have 1,000 pounds sterling worth of gold and
a second asset, a loan of 1,000 pounds.
The gold smith would have as liabilities 2,000 pounds sterling of warehouse receipts.
That worth would still be zero.
Well, you're curious.
Why would the gold smith create new warehouse receipts if doing so didn't increase net
worth?
When the borrower paid off the loan, the borrower would pay back principal what was borrowed
plus interest.
At that point, the net worth of the gold smith would increase.
Now if the gold smith had used modern accounting rules, net worth would increase at the time
of the loan because it would reflect anticipation of the future interest payments, but that's
not important to our story.
These gold warehouse receipts are an example of a gold-backed paper currency.
The warehouse receipts circulated as money as long as the gold smith bank continued to
redeem the receipts for gold whenever customers demanded gold.
Each gold smith bank held its own gold reserves.
So think about that for a minute.
Each gold smith bank had created new receipts and yet the system would continue to function
provided the gold smith bank was never called upon to repay more gold than they were able
to repay.
Now banks continue to make loans with paper backed by gold well into the 19th century in
the United States.
Each individual bank held its own warehouse receipts and issued its own currency.
That is, each individual bank had its own store of gold and created their own kinds of currencies.
Keep in mind that those banks and those currencies could fail and often did.
So recall in our first lecture that our Kansas homesteader was legitimately worried about
whether those notes from a bank in Illinois would continue to be honored.
While this is a valid early stage in the gold standard, it is not what most economists mean
by the gold standard as we shall now see.
The gold standard, as occurred in most of the 20th century in the United States, was
an agreement upon participating countries to fix the price of each country's currency
in terms of an ounce of gold.
To understand the origins of this version of the gold standard, the modern version,
we have to again inquire about England, because England officially adopted the gold standard
in 1819, although truth be told, the English mint had been fixing the value of the pound
sterling in terms of gold since much earlier, 1717.
The United States adopted the gold standard in 1834 when it fixed the price of gold at
$20.67 per ounce and kept it there until 1933.
Under the gold standard, the government promises to buy and sell gold in exchange for its currency
in order to keep the currency price of the gold at the promised value.
So the gold standard is a promise.
If the promise is credible, that is, if the government's actions are as good as its word,
then the national currency is as good as gold.
And banks will hold that national currency in reserve.
The following balance sheets for an English bank and for the Bank of England explain how
the gold standard worked.
Keep in mind now, we are looking for a transition here.
We're looking to understand how the modern gold standard, where the Bank of England promised
to buy and sell gold at a fixed price, is different from the original gold standard when each
bank held its own deposits of gold.
So let's use this tool that we've taken the trouble to learn about in order to understand
how the gold standard worked.
What about the typical English bank?
What did its balance sheet look like?
Well, its assets included currency, pound notes, and loans, other things as well.
Most importantly, currency and loans promise us to repay by the bank's customers.
What about its liabilities?
Deposits with the bank, okay?
Notice there's no gold there.
What about the balance sheet of the Bank of England?
What did it look like?
Well, its assets included gold and any loans it had made to banks.
And its liabilities had predominantly one item, pound notes, the currency of England.
The typical English bank operated under the gold standard in much the same way as it did
when it held its own deposits of gold.
The bank held, instead of gold itself, British pound notes in reserves so that depositors
could convert their deposits to pounds whenever they wished.
The customers, that is the depositors, rightly thought of their deposits as equivalent to
pound notes and therefore as good as gold since the bank stood ready to redeem them
for currency whenever the customers wanted.
The banks used their extra or excess reserves to make new loans like the Goldsmith did by
creating new deposit accounts for borrowers.
Now, what is this term excess reserves?
Well the bank reckoned its extra or excess reserves to be reserves beyond the amount
required by law or by prudent behavior.
Sometimes banks would hold no more than the legally required amount of reserves.
They'd loan every sue they could.
But sometimes banks founded prudent to hold more reserves than required by law.
In that regard, the banks were behaving a lot like the Goldsmiths would behave, right?
It was important to be able to redeem a depositor's demand for gold when the depositor made it.
Today, banks want to make sure that they can give currency back for their deposits when
a customer a depositor wishes.
So in that regard, the bank's behavior isn't very much different.
The real difference between the gold standard and earlier times when each bank held its
own gold reserves centers on the role and the behavior of the Bank of England.
The Bank of England is the central bank of the British system.
It's the equivalent of our Federal Reserve, although it's very much older and we'll talk
about that.
Under the gold standard, the Bank of England held the gold that backed the British Pound.
Remember the balance sheet?
Did this fix the money supply?
You bet.
The gold holdings of the Bank of England placed an upper limit on the supply of British Pound
notes.
They limited the amount of currency.
How did the gold standard work?
How did the Bank of England fulfill its promise?
To peg the price of gold in terms of its currency.
How did the Bank of England behave so that the Pound remained as good as gold?
It did the following.
If the value of the Pound began to fall in terms of gold, how would we know that?
Well, if the price of gold began to rise in terms of the number of pounds it took to buy
an ounce, then the Bank of England would do one very simple thing.
It would raise the interest rate it charged on loans to banks.
And that would raise interest rates in England.
What would happen?
So what?
Oh, but people are selfish.
If England's paying higher interest rates, gold would flow into England in order to take
advantage of those higher rates, gold holders would want to deposit their gold in England
where interest rates were now higher.
What would that do?
Well that would make gold more plentiful in England.
The price of gold therefore would fall and the price of the Pound in terms of gold would
rise back toward the promise level.
Let's do the opposite case.
Because the value of the Pound began to rise in terms of gold, so the Pound price of gold
began to fall, the Bank of England would then lower interest rates and gold would flood
away from England.
That's called a gold outflow.
The gold would leave England headed for other countries where interest rates would higher
and the gold outflow would make gold less plentiful in England and make the price of
gold rise in England and the price of the Pound in terms of gold fall.
Okay.
We come now to the transition from the gold standard to the current system of money creation,
monetary creation.
Please recall that under our current system it is the law of the land that currency is
a valid form of payment for all debts.
We said earlier that paper money issued by England, by the United States, by the Eurozone
is valuable by fiat, by government declaration.
Let's return to our T-accounts one additional time to see what that means.
For the individual bank, the T-account is unchanged because each bank continues to hold
the national currency, the national money in reserve for deposits.
The difference is that after fiat money is established and the gold standard ends, the
Bank of England or the Federal Reserve no longer fixes the price of gold in terms of
the British Pound or the U.S. Dollar.
Therefore, it no longer has to increase gold reserves to levels sufficient to make credible
its promise to buy Pounds with gold.
The Bank of England, the central bank of the European Union or the Federal Reserve are
now free to create currency by making loans of currency to banks without having the additional
gold necessary to make an exchange of those dollars or Pounds or Euros for gold.
Banks in England that receive the increases in currency are in free turn to create new
deposits for their customers.
And there were and continue to be no limits to the creation of money beyond the self-imposed
limits set by the Bank of England and the Federal Reserve as it fulfills its responsibility
to its people.
Why did the world leave the gold standard?
The Bank of England and most other combatants left the gold standard temporarily during World
War I and World War II because it wanted to finance British war expenditures and U.S.
war expenditures and French war expenditures by issuing new currency.
The British Treasury, for example, created war bonds.
It sold those bonds in the open marketplace and used the proceeds to finance wartime expenditures.
Ah, but the Bank of England issued new British Pounds to buy some of those bonds so that
the interest rate on those bonds wouldn't rise too high.
After World War II, under the so-called Bretton Woods system, the U.S. fixed the price of
the gold at $35 per ounce.
Other nations held the dollar as reserve.
So this was our last return to the gold standard.
What happened is that the U.S. pegged the price of gold at $35 an ounce and the U.S.'s
promise was grounds elsewhere in the world for central banks to hold the dollar as if
it was gold.
Notice that now not every central bank is holding its own gold reserve.
Everybody's counting on the United States to make the dollar as good as gold and therefore
are holding dollars as if they were gold.
Led by the United States, the world finally left the gold standard on August 15, 1971 when
President Nixon announced that the United States would no longer redeem U.S. dollars
for gold.
The U.S. left the gold standard because the gold standard placed very tight restrictions
on the U.S. ability to increase the supply of paper money.
So what, you ask?
Well, these restrictions were incompatible with other U.S. policy objectives, not the
least of which was financing a new war, the Vietnam conflict.
Let's now come back to the challenge posed by those people who believe that the U.S.
and the world should return to the gold standard.
And let's do what economists always should do and examine the benefits and costs of returning
to the gold standard.
That would be the benefit of returning to the gold standard.
I'll signal one very important one, and that appears to be all.
On average, under the gold standard, inflation was lower than it was in periods when central
banks could create money without adding to gold reserves.
Put another way, under the restriction imposed by the gold standard, under the promise by
the central banks to exchange gold for paper money, central banks all over the world issued
less paper money with the result that the average inflation rate was lower, less senorage.
But there were costs.
Under the gold standard, U.S. prices were more volatile than in any other period, including
the period since we left the gold standard.
In addition, it's expensive to maintain a gold reserve.
Milton Friedman famously estimated the expense of being as much as 2.5 percent of gross national
product.
Why?
Well, it's expensive to maintain that gold reserve.
Maybe the most important cost is that under a gold standard, central banks are not free
to undertake so-called counter-cyclical policies.
Their hands are tied by keeping their promise.
They don't have the freedom to raise the money supply to stimulate the economy when that
appears to be warranted.
Under the gold standard, the nations all fixed the values of their currencies to gold.
What does that imply?
Well, the value of one currency to another is also fixed.
It can't adjust to market forces.
We all must keep in mind that gold discoveries are random events.
And the U.S. accounts for only a small share of gold discoveries.
For example, in 2009, the United States produced, how much do you think?
Only 9.1 percent of the world's gold.
China produced 13.1 percent.
South Africa produced 8.1 percent.
Russia produced 7.8 percent.
I close this lecture by considering what has happened to the price of gold since the U.S.
and the world abandoned the gold standard.
The blue line in the diagram you see shows the dollar price of gold.
It hit its all-time high in 2010 at over $1,230 per ounce.
The red line shows the real price of gold.
Now, that's the price of gold in dollars relative to a bushel basket of the typical goods consumed
by a household in the United States.
So I've defined that real price so that the nominal and real prices are equal in 1983,
but that doesn't mean anything.
Put another way, that real price of gold is adjusted for inflation, that's all.
What do I want you to see here?
What would I like you to notice from the graph?
The real price of gold has been highly variable.
This is not a surprise.
World demand and supply for gold varies a lot, and the real price of gold adjusts accordingly
to make demand equal supply.
If the United States were still on the gold standard, the United States would have been
trying to keep the price of gold constant when world market forces dictated that it
should have changed a lot.
Let me ask you a final question.
Are Stephen Forbes and Ron Paul right?
Should we return to a world in which new money could be created only if gold reserves were
obtained?
If gold production grew slowly, would the resulting slow growth in the money supply
drag down economic growth in nations that use gold for money?
Would the United States be better off in trusting growth of the U.S. money supply to the Federal
Reserve than to worldwide demand for and supply of gold, for which the U.S. produces less
than 10 percent?
You be the judge.
