Lecture 22, Stock Price Fundamentals
The stock market is an institution that has fascinated individuals and prompted commentary seemingly forever.
I thought it might be fun to begin today's lecture with thoughts about the stock market from some notable individuals.
The quotes are not only fun, they identify themes and questions that we will investigate in this lecture and the next.
Let's start with Mark Twain's view on the right time and the wrong time to play the market.
October. This is one of the peculiarly dangerous months to speculate in stocks.
The others are July, January, September, April, November, May, March, June, December, August and February.
Fun, huh? Philip Fisher was an American stock investor who founded Fisher & Company in 1931 and wrote Common Stocks and Uncommon Profits in 1958.
That book is still in print.
Fisher believed in buying and holding stocks. He famously bought Motorola in 1955 when it was a radio manufacturing company and held it until he died.
Of the stock market, Fisher said, the stock market is filled with individuals who know the price of everything but the value of nothing.
Kenneth Chang is a New York Times journalist who said of markets in general and stock markets in particular,
a market is the combined behavior of thousands of people responding to information, misinformation and whim.
So, exactly what determines prices in the stock market?
Are stock prices really determined by the behavior of individuals who know the value of nothing?
Is the stock market a place where people act on the basis of misinformation and whim?
If we knew what determined the price of a share of stock, the stock market would not seem nearly as frightening or mysterious as it does, at least to Twain, Fisher and Chang.
We will begin today with what economists call the fundamental theory of stock prices, and we'll go on to talk about the capital asset pricing model,
the work that was cited by the Nobel Committee when it awarded the 1990 Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences to Harry Markowitz and William Sharp.
These models are used by academics and professionals to think about how stock prices should be connected to economic events.
They are not used, let me emphasize, they are not used to forecast hour to hour or even day to day changes in stock prices.
Today's lecture will not help you become a stock picker, but it may help you avoid some stock market blunders.
The mainstream model of share prices, as I've said, is called the market fundamentals model in a nutshell.
The fundamentals model says that shares have value, and only because shares are claimed claims on future dividends.
The fundamental model is a hypothesis about how stock prices are determined.
It begins with the present value equation and can be written in a particular form.
The present value formula is essential to understanding the fundamentals model.
But don't worry, while the equation looks complex, its bark is worse than its bite, and I will make sure that the intuition comes through.
On the left side of the equation is a symbol P parenthesis Z comma T closed parenthesis. What do I mean by that?
I mean by that the price of a share of stock issued by firm Z, so the Z is an identifier for the company.
At time T, so the T indicates that we're talking about a particular time and let that be a particular year.
And I wouldn't have put that in there unless there were going to be some dynamic elements so that we needed to identify years in order to understand the formula.
So PZ comma T is the price of a share of firm Z stock as predicted by the fundamental model.
Now according to that model, the share price equals the discounted sum of future dividends that the shareholders expect to receive.
So now we're talking about the right hand side, everything to the right of the equal sign.
And what do we see there? A couple of different kinds of symbols.
First we see cap D, Z comma T plus one, we see T plus two, and so forth. T plus K is the general term. What is that?
That is the per share dividend that company Z will pay to shareholders in year T plus K.
So DZ comma T plus one is the dividend that the company will pay to shareholders in year T plus one.
Now while many companies pay dividends quarterly, we're going to simplify the formula and assume without any violence to the theory that dividends are only paid annually.
Of course, at the time of the purchase, the purchaser does not know and must therefore estimate future dividends.
I don't know today what my shares in Duke Power will pay in the form of dividends in the future.
So the future dividends that we see in the formula should be thought of as the best available forecasts of future dividends.
Now, notice that we have a sum on the right side of the equation and that the first term in the sum talks about dividends in year T plus one,
paid by company Z, the second term dividends paid year T plus two by company Z and so forth.
While the further into the future these dividends are going to occur, the more highly discounted they are going to be.
A dollar today is worth more than a dollar tomorrow. A dollar further in the future is worth less today than a dollar that we will receive at a date closer to the present.
And so we see that we're discounting each of these terms first by one plus symbol RR, then for something two years out,
one plus RR, the quantity squared, and one plus RR, the quantity cubed. But what's RR?
RR is the required rate of return. Let me repeat that, the required rate of return.
That is the rate that stock market participants use to discount future dividends.
It is the rate that stock market participants must expect to receive on the dollars they financially invest in stocks
in order to be willing to give up other investment opportunities like bonds.
And since stocks are riskier than bonds, RR will typically be greater than the yield to maturity on a long-term corporate bond
issued by company Z, which in turn will be even higher than a comparable treasury bond yield.
So the displayed formula gives the first three terms in the summation. The sum does continue.
It includes further into the future terms, as indicated by the symbols dot, dot, dot in the equation.
Of course, those further future terms are discounted even more highly, because they're further away,
and they will make smaller contributions per dividend dollar to the fundamental stock price.
As we build intuition, it's important to recognize several differences between the future payments offered by bonds
and the future payments offered by stocks.
The coupon and final payments associated with a bond are known with perfect certainty
in the case of a treasury bond and with a high degree of certainty in the case of a corporate bond.
In contrast, firms decide every quarter whether or not to pay dividends
and how large those dividends should be.
That is why those dividends have to be thought of as forecasts or expected values in the statistical sense.
And it is the forecast of those dividends that appears in the fundamental value formula,
and not in the bond price formula, because we know the future payments in the bond price formula.
Another difference, the maturity date of a bond is known and fixed.
A 20-year bond issued in 1986, matured in 2006, no doubt about it.
But there's no maturity date for a share of common stock.
Share owners are entitled to receive dividends as long as the company continues to exist,
and the owner continues to own the share.
So really, the sum in that equation has an infinite number of terms.
Now, if you were here, you might ask me, hey, shouldn't the sum run from the present until the future day
when I plan to sell the share?
You're right. The answer is yes.
But on that sale day, on the day when you plan to sell, the sale price that you should expect to receive
will in turn be equal to the present value of dividends going forward from that date.
Thus, the stock price equation is going to be exactly the same,
no matter whether or when you plan to sell.
The required return, RR, should be larger than the yield of maturity on a long maturity corporate bond
because stocks are riskier, and stocks are riskier because companies must pay promised debt
or bond obligations before they pay dividends to owners.
The fundamentals model imposes a tremendous amount of discipline
on individuals who buy and sell shares of stock, intellectual discipline.
Let's do an example.
Suppose you're a broker at Bylo Sell High Incorporated,
phones you up with a tip to buy universal widget.
If you truly believe in the fundamentals model of share price,
you should ask your broker to explain why she believes that universal widget will pay larger dividends in the future
than previously believed.
If your broker does not offer a good answer to your question,
you should either hang up or at least ignore the tip that you received.
I'm about to show you a more detailed illustration,
and I think it's very useful because it illustrates connections between firm profits and the price of a share.
And those connections between the profitability of a firm and the value of a share issued by the firm
are the absolute cornerstone of the fundamentals model.
The detailed model combines hypotheses about a firm's growth, its profits, and its dividend-paying strategy
together with the present value formula we've already seen.
And to make the notation simpler, I'm going to suppress the Z designation,
but let's understand, we're talking about one particular firm, Firm Z, even though we suppress its name.
So, let capital K at time t be the firm's capital stock per share of common stock.
K stands for all of the capital, equipment, and other physical property of the firm,
minus any debt that the firm has outstanding.
And all of that capital is per share, so the total value of capital is divided by the total outstanding shares.
Now, in a sense, this would never happen, but in a sense capital K at time t is what you as a shareholder would receive
if the firm ceased its operations and divided up the capital among all the people who own stock.
Okay?
We've got another symbol, Q.
Let Qt, remember that t is for time, be the firm's per share profits at time t.
And let's make that distinct from capital Dt, which will define to be per share dividends paid by the firm.
So right off the bat, the fact that Q and D are different symbols suggests the possibility
that the firm will not pay all of its profits out in the form of dividends.
The first equation of the more elaborate model describes how the firm earns profits.
It's a very simple equation, but it's a very powerful equation.
It says profits at a certain time are proportional to the capital stock, and the proportionality factor is the Greek letter rho.
Okay?
We, if we're owners, want large values of rho.
Big rows are good.
We don't like small rows.
That means that the company is not doing much with its capital.
So keep in mind, rho is just how profitable the firm is able to organize its capital.
The equation says that the firm earns profits in proportion to its capital, and rho is equal to the rate at which the firm earns profits.
We could add a random variable to the equation, to the profit equation, and that would acknowledge the effect of unforeseen events on corporate profits.
But I'm not going to do that.
It doesn't really add anything to our understanding, and I don't want to bear the burden.
The second equation in our model describes how the company will grow over time.
Remember I said that there was a dynamic element here.
Let's first look at the equation and then unpack it.
The capital stock in year t plus 1 equals the capital stock in year t plus some part of profits.
We'll call that part of profits 1 minus Greek letter delta times q.
The equation says that the capital stock at time t plus 1 equals whatever it was a year earlier, kt, plus the share of profits that the firm decides to use to grow its company.
In a big profit year, it'll save some of those profits to grow the company and pay the rest out in dividends.
And that leads us quickly to the third equation, which says that, in a sense, any dollar that the firm does not use to grow its company is paid out in dividends.
So if a dollar of profits is divided, it's divided between delta paid to the dividend owners and 1 minus delta used to grow the firm.
We can combine the above three equations to obtain an expression for dividends as a function of capital and the parameters, the delta, the rho, and the k.
And then we could use algebra to insert that expression for dividends into the present value equation.
And then we could use some algebra and some tedious work to obtain the equation you're now about to see for the representative firm.
Again, that equation has PZT, the price of a share of firm Z at time t on the left.
It has two terms on the right, a very complex ratio multiplied by the capital stock.
Please feel free to ignore the equation and take it on faith that the present value algebra spits that equation out if you do the algebra correctly.
What I want to do is to point out that while that equation involves a certain amount of discipline, its results are very intuitive.
And so what do I want to ask? I want to ask, how does market price vary with the profit rate, the required rate of return, the fraction of profits paid out as dividends and with the capital stock?
And indeed, in just a moment, I'm going to do a numerical example that will further reveal the intuition behind the formula and the fundamental model.
So, what does the equation teach us about fundamental values?
The value of a share is proportional to the capital with the share is titled to.
Makes sense. If a firm has more capital per share, other factors the same, our theory predicts that it will have a higher market price.
If the share is a claim to more capital, the price should be higher.
The higher the required rate of return, other things equal, the lower should be the share price.
This too makes sense for the simple reason that a higher value of the required rate of return that RR implies that future dividends that this firm can pay are discounted more deeply.
That means they don't have as high a present value. And the present value equation you'll recall is the cornerstone of our model.
Shortly, I will as an example assume that the required rate of return is 10%.
A higher value of that parameter rho implies a higher value of the price of a share.
Why does that make sense?
Well, this happens through two channels. The first channel is obvious and very direct.
A firm that has a higher rho is a firm that's earning more profits per dollar of capital and therefore is paying more dividends.
So, the dividend stream is bigger. But there's a second really cool indirect channel.
A higher value of rho also means that the firm can retain more earnings and can grow its company more rapidly so that the capital stock will grow more rapidly and profits and dividends will be higher in the future.
And shortly, I'll work on an example where the firm earns 12% profit on its capital.
Let's assume values for the remaining parameters and see what our formula says about stock price.
So, suppose that the firm pays ¼ of its profits as dividends and our delta is 0.25.
That means it pays ¾ of its profits to itself in order to grow the firm.
And as I just suggested, let's assume that the firm earns a rate of return on capital of 12% so that our symbol rho has 0.12 as a value.
And let's assume that the required rate of return is 10% so that RR is 0.10.
Already, your instincts tell you. This is a pretty good firm, right?
It can generate 12% when the typical stockholder only requires 10%.
Well, when we use our present value formula, we're going to get a very interesting and very intuitive result.
That result is that the price of a share of firm Z is 3.27 times the per share capital.
The share price of the firm is 3.27 higher than the book value of the firm.
Because this firm is earning higher than required profits, it actually is taking a dollar's worth of capital and creating $3 worth of value from it.
This is a great thing, okay?
Moreover, since the per share earnings are 12% or 0.12 kT and the share price is 3.27 kT, what's the price earnings ratio of this firm?
The ratio of price to annual earnings of this particular firm is 27.3.
So this is a very successful firm. This is a very successful firm.
Okay, the fundamental value model determines the price of a share of stock as a function of its dividends and the required rate of return,
which the stock purchaser uses to discount expected future dividends.
The fundamental model is silent on how the required rate is determined.
For example, how it depends on economic conditions.
So we turn to another model, the capital asset pricing model, which is widely called CAPM, CAPM or CAPM.
And CAPM fills this gap by providing insights about the required rate of return.
CAPM begins with a couple of important assumptions.
Stock purchasers are risk averse.
They like higher expected returns in the marketplace, but they dislike volatility as measured by the variance of those returns.
Stock purchasers hold portfolios of stocks, which they construct not only with the knowledge of future dividends or forecasts of future dividends,
but also with knowledge of how those dividends co-vary, how they move against one another as the economy moves through its business cycle.
So the correlation or covariance of returns is a crucial component of CAPM.
Note that the stocks of some firms will be highly correlated, and understanding this will help us understand CAPM.
So for example, share prices on a building's products company, like Lowe's or Home Depot.
And on a home building company, like American Homes, are likely to move together because events affect the companies in similar ways.
An event that's good for the home building industry is likely to be good for the building products industry, common sense.
CAPM provides a prediction about the required rate of return of a share of companies Z.
In formula form, it says the required rate of return for a share on company Z is equal to RT plus the product of two terms.
Beta of firm Z times R parentheses capital M comma T minus RT.
Now, I know, I know, let's unpack it, let's understand.
So, RRZT is the required rate of return on company Z shares.
It's the rate that the market uses when discounting expected future dividends of company Z.
What's RT? That's the risk free rate.
It is approximately the rate on a long maturity treasury bond.
Our MT is the market return to every stock traded in the marketplace.
It's the required rate of return on the market portfolio, the portfolio made up of all shares of common stock.
So, put another way, it is the rate of return that stock market purchasers require in order to be willing to hold a highly diversified portfolio of common stock shares.
You can't get any better in the stock market in terms of diversification than holding a little bit of everything.
So, what's this thing called beta, that third Greek letter beta that we're encountering today?
Beta of firm Z measures the correlation between the return on company Z shares and the market return.
So, now we're prepared to understand what the CAPM equation has to tell us.
CAPM says that the required rate of return on a share of stock equals the riskless rate, long term maturity treasury bond rate, plus an adjustment for risk.
And that risk adjustment is the product of two factors.
The market risk adjustment, RM minus RT, so the amount by which the return on the entire portfolio of stock succeeds the riskless rate, and that guide beta.
Multiply those together and you get the required rate of return adjustment for share Z.
If a share is highly correlated with the market, that is it tends to move up with market shares and down with market shares generally,
beta Z is going to be positive and the required return for share Z is going to be greater than the risk free rate.
But if that share is uncorrelated with the market, beta Z is zero and surprisingly that share, required rate of return will equal the risk free rate.
Now that's very strange, but the idea here is that that share is very valuable because it allows very important kinds of diversification.
And if per chance beta were negative so that the shares returns were negatively correlated with the market, then the required rate of return on company Z could actually be less than the risk free rate.
And that was the insight that so shocked the financial world.
But why?
Well, CAPM predicts that a stock that is negatively correlated with the market will be highly, highly valued because it provides such a great opportunity for stock market investors to hedge the risk of owning shares.
Well, how about these betas?
A couple of examples.
Beta on Duke Energy, 0.44, AT&T, 0.62, GlaxoSmithKline, 0.64.
Other side of one, Google, 1.13, Motorola, 1.76, and the Las Vegas Sands, 4.30.
So the fundamental value theory of stock prices in CAPM painted a picture of a rational and orderly stock market.
Next time we're going to see a very, very different kind of model, a model that talks about share prices that have less to do with dividends, less to do with profits, and more to do with human psychology.
In the meantime, thank you.
Thank you.
