Lecture 5 Local Currencies and Non-Standard Banks
In the last lecture, we learned that money and financial arrangements in the United States
were hotly contested in the political arena during the entire 19th century.
Would money be gold or paper?
Would money be gold or silver?
Part of the debate centered on whether the federal government had the right under the
U.S. Constitution to create a central bank and to issue paper money.
What we will learn today is that the institution of money is so important to economic welfare
that citizens sometimes take the matter into their own hands.
Today's lecture covers two sets of related ideas.
Both sets help us to understand and appreciate how financial arrangements, including money,
are important to the economic welfare of individuals.
They also underscore the idea that money in particular and financial arrangements in
general are cooperative arrangements, social contracts, as I have suggested before.
Let's start with a story.
During the Great Depression, a village in Austria initiated a controversial financial
arrangement in the hope that it would provide a solution to some of the economic woes being
experienced both by the village itself and by most of its citizens.
The town was Virgil, and the man who came up with the idea was, and this is a mouthful,
Michael Untergugenberger, the city manager.
Like most of the world, Virgil was experiencing high unemployment, greatly reduced tax revenues,
and deteriorating public facilities such as roads.
Virgil created 32,000 Austrian shillings worth of a new local currency that it called
Labor Certificates and used them to hire workers for public projects.
The town also paid employed civil servants some portion of their salaries with the Labor
Certificates.
The Labor Certificates depreciated at the rate of 1% per month to give the holders of
those certificates an incentive to spend them and stimulate the local economy.
Workers who otherwise would not have worked received the Labor Certificates and spent
them with local businesses.
Those businesses which otherwise would not have sold goods accepted the certificates,
made sales, and were able in turn to buy other local goods and pay taxes with the certificates.
Before issuing the currency, Virgil negotiated with its civil servants to accept some of
their payment in Labor Certificates.
Of course, newly hired workers understood in advance that they would be paid in these
certificates.
Various shopkeepers participated in the agreement because they understood that it would stimulate
business.
Virgil also agreed to convert the Labor Certificates to official Austrian shillings, but at a
2% discount.
And they kept a deposit of real Austrian shillings in a local bank for just that purpose.
The experiment ended when outside authorities, including the Austrian state bank, opposed
it.
The entire experiment lasted about a year and one half.
In a final report, the city manager documented that tax and fee revenues increased substantially
in Virgil as the result of improved economic activity and that many worthwhile public works
projects were completed.
No inflation occurred.
Ironically, some of the Labor Certificates never found their way back to Virgil, but
were kept as souvenirs, which was another benefit to the local community.
By issuing Labor Certificates, Virgil was able to coordinate improved economic activity.
To assuage concerns about acceptance of the certificates, Virgil provided for a conversion
of the Labor Certificates into Austrian shillings and agreed to accept them in payment of taxes.
In the Great Depression, Virgil and its citizens used a local currency to create mutually
advantageous exchanges that would not otherwise have occurred.
Well, the city wanted work done on public projects, but had no tax revenues.
City workers were willing to work and wanted to buy goods with their earnings, but they
had no earnings.
City shops wanted to sell goods and were willing to pay their taxes with the currency.
But none of these decision makers had the official Austrian shillings that would permit
them to initiate what I call a cascade of activities.
So Virgil created a local currency that permitted local decision makers to coordinate their activities
and permitted that cascade of activities to begin.
The Virgil experiment underscores that money is a social contract and helps us appreciate
the importance of financial arrangements for the functioning of an economy, and it helps
us to understand the difference between successful and unsuccessful financial institutions.
Let's take a look at a few more examples of local currencies.
They are very, very interesting, but they also can teach us quite a bit.
This is one of my favorite stories about an event that actually did take place during
World War II.
Prisoners in Stalag 7A, which was located in Moosburg in Bavaria, established an elaborate
trading system in which cigarettes were used as money.
Now, the camp contained about 50,000 prisoners of many different nationalities, and of course
then, many different tastes.
Red Cross parcels provided a somewhat regular supply both of cigarettes and of foodstuffs
to the prisoners in the camp.
Very, very quickly, prisoners began to use cigarettes as money.
Now, non-smokers were always willing to trade coffee, tea, and other foods for cigarettes,
knowing that they could use those cigarettes to buy goods and services they preferred.
That bears emphasis here.
Non-smokers accepted cigarettes even though they didn't intend to smoke them because they
knew that they could use them in turn to buy what they wanted.
So an advantage of the choice of cigarettes as money was that everyone, non-smokers and
smokers alike, would always accept them in exchange for food.
They understood that smokers would ultimately demand them, and that understanding led to
confidence that cigarettes would hold their value.
Now, there were disadvantages of using cigarettes as money.
The most important disadvantage is that prices of goods in terms of cigarettes would fluctuate.
When Red Cross parcels first arrived in the camp, cigarettes were very plentiful.
What would happen then?
Well, people were willing to give a lot of cigarettes in order to get, say, tin beef,
and prices would rise.
If a long amount of time had passed without new Red Cross parcels, smokers assured that
cigarettes were coming relatively scarce and then prices would fall.
These variation in prices made camp life somewhat difficult.
But keep in mind that cigarettes really did function as money.
They were accepted in trade not only by smokers but by non-smokers alike who understood that
they could later exchange them for things they wanted.
This is not simply playing house.
The cigarette money made a difference in the camp.
Many more trades were accomplished because of these cigarette monies, and those trades
were very, very important to the imprisoned officers who made them.
Let's look for a more recent example.
In 1989, Frank Tortoriello, owner of a delicous tessin in Great Barrington, Massachusetts,
wanted to move his deli and sought a loan from his local bank.
Unfortunately, the bank denied his loan application, leaving him without the means to move his
delicatessen.
But with guidance from the Schumacher Society, Tortoriello issued deli dollars, which promised
$10 worth of merchandise at the deli.
Tortoriello sold the deli dollars for $8 each to individuals who gave them his gifts and
purchased them for their own use.
He raised sufficient funds to move his deli.
Deli dollars were well designed.
They had staggered redemption dates so that the deli would not be forced to redeem them
all in a short period of time.
In this way, Tortoriello had an inflow of cash as well as deli dollars.
And this example seems to me to be an interesting combination of a local currency and a kind
of microfinance scheme.
Deli dollars permitted Tortoriello to borrow from his future customers.
The discount they received functioned like interest on the loan they made to him.
The promise of future meals provided security that the customers valued more than the bank
that had turned down Tortoriello's loan application.
Now while deli dollars resemble currency, there are no accounts that I know of of third parties
accepting them.
That is, the deli dollars were created by the deli owner sold to current and future deli
customers and then later represented to the deli owner in exchange for meals.
But I can find no accounts of the deli dollars being used to say buy goods at the Great Barrington
hardware store.
Ah, but I do have another example where a local currency certainly did and continues
to circulate his money.
In 1991, Paul Glover spearheaded the movement to issue Ithaca Hours in Ithaca, New York,
the home of Cornell University.
Glover issued two free Ithaca Hours, each with a face value of $10, to people who would
agree to accept them and to be listed in a publication called Our Town.
Face play on words, isn't it?
H-O-U-R town.
By 2000, according to Glover, thousands of Ithacans routinely accepted and spent Ithaca
Hours.
Now I can verify that.
I was able to acquire Ithaca Hours myself on the one occasion when I happened to visit
the farmers market in Ithaca.
Notice an important difference between Ithaca Hours and deli dollars.
Ithaca Hours are not sold by a firm that is trying to raise funds for its own use.
Glover gave Ithaca Hours a way to subscribers who agreed to spend them locally and accept
them from others.
Also, Ithaca Hours functioned like a real currency.
They traveled between various Ithaca citizens and Ithaca businesses and stay in circulation.
Deli dollars made a single round trip.
Deli customer deli.
Ithaca Hours keep traveling.
So what's that project all about?
Well, the purpose of the Ithaca Hours project is to promote the local economy in Ithaca.
Since Ithaca Hours are not accepted outside the town, indeed they're hardly known about
outside the town except for people like me who study them.
Anyone who accepts an Ithaca Hours certificate in exchange for some good or service is making
essentially a commitment to spend that certificate with another local merchant or service provider.
And indeed that's the point.
Ithaca Hours is a scheme to promote the development of the local economy in Ithaca.
Closer to my home, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, we too have a local currency.
It's called the plenty standing for Piedmont local economy tender.
The plenty is widely accepted in Orange, Alamance, and Chatham County.
And there is a catalog in which people and businesses who are willing to accept plenty
can indicate their willingness to do so in the catalog and online.
The plenty is a similar scheme to the Ithaca Hours.
It is meant to stimulate the rural community just to the west of Chapel Hill.
In addition to local currencies, there is another type of non-standard financial arrangement
that addresses the desire of individuals to coordinate their economic activity.
But now through the process of lending and borrowing funds, the motivation for this is
easily understood, but I'd like to capture the motivation in a parable.
Imagine with me for a moment a remote village without any connection to a modern financial
institution.
It might be in Polynesia, it might be in Africa.
You use your own imagination.
Most likely the village is going to be located in an underdeveloped country.
Or perhaps it was a village in a much earlier time.
Now that we've fixed our image, suppose further that in the village there are ten families.
Numbers are betrayed, but stick with ten.
Each family would like to own a bicycle, none has one.
One family would use the bicycle to haul vegetables to market.
Maybe a second family would convert the bicycle into a rickshaw and start a business.
I imagine a third family would allow their two children to ride the bicycle to a town
twenty miles away where they could attend a better school and so forth.
Back to their own devices, each of the ten families could save up to buy their bicycle.
Imagine a service of a bicycle cost about a hundred dollars, and imagine that in this
rural area each family could scrape together about ten dollars of savings per year.
Then all ten families could have a bicycle, but all ten families would have to wait ten
years.
Then all ten families would end up buying the bicycle at about the same time.
What a waste!
Each family would hide its savings in a secure place, waiting for the day when they had accumulated
the price of a bicycle.
For ten years, all those funds would remain idle.
After the ten years, the aggregated saving of the ten families would be a thousand dollars,
but only then would they be able to buy a bicycle.
One year before, they would have an aggregate nine hundred dollars, but none of them would
be able to buy a bicycle.
That seems like a real waste to me.
Is there a better arrangement?
Well, maybe there is.
Because the ten families made an agreement.
Each year the ten families would meet in the village center, perhaps sharing supper first,
but certainly bringing with them the ten dollars they had saved in the past year.
The families perhaps would draw lots, and the winning family would receive one hundred
dollars to buy a bicycle, ten dollars from each of the ten families.
After one year, one family would have a bicycle.
After the second year, a second family would have their bicycle, and so forth and so on.
Only one family out of the ten would have to wait the full ten years to buy a bicycle.
Now, other ways to decide the order in which families obtained their bicycles would be
possible.
Perhaps the families would bid for the right to go next, or perhaps there would be some
sort of meritocracy where the village headman would say, ah, you have made an important
contribution, you get to go next.
Not important now.
The important thing is that the accumulated saving of the ten families would be put to
work every single year.
This is something they could do together, and something they could not do family by family.
The cooperative arrangement seems clearly superior to the go it alone arrangement described
at the outset where everyone waits.
But will it work?
One potential flaw is that the families who have already gotten a bicycle have an incentive
to stop making their ten dollar annual contribution.
That's important because if any family doubts that other families will continue to make
payments, they may reach the conclusion that the cooperative arrangement is very risky
and never participate.
They would prefer to go it alone.
Can we solve this problem?
What sort of a mechanism could ensure that families would follow through, keep their
promise, and make their payments every year, even though they already had gotten their
bicycle?
Well, there are lots of possibilities.
One possibility would be that the village headman would ostracize any family that broke
the commitment.
A second possibility is that each family would agree in advance to forfeit the bicycle if
they fail to make their promise payments.
Other solutions are possible and you can think of them, but it's clear that some enforcement
mechanism would be necessary.
Sticking with this theme of cooperative financial arrangements of a non-standard sort, let me
point out that the benefits from providing even small loans to individuals are potentially
very large and institutions that embody the spirit of cooperation have sprung up to fill
this potential.
As the parable suggests, there are many situations in which every member of the group could benefit
from a coordinated arrangement to save funds and lend them out to group members.
The story also underscores another important theme.
There are many groups of individuals who, for a variety of reasons, do not have access
to traditional lending institutions.
Throughout the course of history, individuals who wanted to borrow but were unable to secure
loans from banks and other standing lending institutions sought alternatives.
I'm going to ask you next time you drive through your city to keep your eyes open and think
differently about something you may see, the pawn shop.
Pawn shops are very, very old institutions that have traditionally provided credit to
those who could not obtain it from banks.
How does a pawn arrangement work?
Well, to obtain credit from a pawn shop, the would-be borrower would bring some physical
object to the shop, such as a musical instrument, a piece of jewelry, a tool.
In the southwest of the United States, Native Americans traditionally bring handmade jewelry.
The shop owner, the pawn shop owner, would lend the borrower an amount less than the
estimated value the object offered in pawn and retain the object as collateral.
If the borrower paid back what was owed, the borrower would get the item back.
If not, the pawn shop owner would sell the item to recoup the amount of the loan.
And then we might have an opportunity to buy it as old pawn.
OK.
It follows that one mechanism for providing credit to an otherwise underserved population
are these non-standard arrangements popularly talked about as rotating, saving, and credit
associations, or ROSCA, R-O-S-C-A.
There are lots of examples through history and across place of ROSCAs, including Tontein
in the Cameroon and Tanda in Mexico.
These arrangements are alike in most respect.
They're cooperative arrangements where people gather together and pool their savings.
The way Tonteins are different from Tanda and other ROSCAs are that the enforcement
mechanism is different.
Two important issues faced by a ROSCA are how to determine the order in which participants
receive funds and how to ensure individuals fulfill their promises to make contributions
to the ROSCA.
Many ROSCAs use lotteries to determine who will next receive the funds, and they use
social consequences to enforce the contract.
Now I'd like to turn to a far more organized non-standard financial arrangement and tell
you yet one more story.
In 1976, Professor Mohammed Yunus, head of the Rural Economics Program at the University
of Chittagong, launched a project to examine the possibility of designing a credit delivery
system to provide banking and lending services targeted to the rural poor.
Now you may know that Yunus won the Nobel Peace Prize for his activity in 2006.
The result of Yunus' initiative is today called the Grameen Bank, and Grameen means rural
or village in the Bangla language.
The classic Grameen Bank model relies on group lending.
Grameen clients are too poor to offer collateral, but tend to have close ties to a community.
So Grameen borrowers must first form groups whose members monitor and support one another,
help one another to fulfill their repayment obligations.
Groups number five and two members of the group can receive a loan at any one time.
If a group defaults and doesn't repay what it borrows, every member of the group is barred
from receiving future loans.
Yunus realized that the marginal value, the marginal productivity of the investment that
was made possible by a very small loan to poor people, was very high.
Borrowers he believed could repay because the loans, although small, led to very profitable
investments, very valuable productive investments.
Another enforcement mechanism used by the Grameen Bank model is progressive lending.
Progressive lending makes available larger and larger loans to groups of individuals
who have successfully paid back earlier smaller loans.
Why is it incentive?
Well someone who receives a small loan, uses it and repays it, finds him or herself in
the position where their group can now seek bigger loans and undertake bigger projects.
The Grameen model has been hugely successful.
For example, in Bangladesh alone, the Grameen Bank grew from nothing to one million members
by 1991 and to 7.5 million members by June of 2008.
Recently, the Grameen Bank has come under scrutiny from a variety of government agencies.
Some critics question whether microfinance does have the beneficial impact on poverty
that the bank claims.
Our critics, especially those in government, are simply threatened by the growth of the
bank and the power of Yanis himself.
Still other critics claim that microfinance arrangements are wrong because they charge
high interest rates to their clients.
What we have learned here is that financial arrangements are not only the business of
Wall Street.
Citizens of Main Street understand the power of monetary arrangements to coordinate economic
activity.
And as our examples of local currencies have shown, they at times have themselves created
monies to accomplish local economic objectives.
Finance is just not the business of the wealthy.
The poor can benefit greatly from the ability to borrow and invest.
The microfinance model uses non-traditional ways to enforce agreements to repay and have
proved successful arrangements throughout the world.
Businesses of individuals have sought ways to coordinate their economic activity that
frequently transcend traditional models of money and banking.
Local currencies and microfinance arrangements are two types of institutions that thrive
even amidst a multitude of highly financed traditional institutions.
Thank you.
