We're going to start.
Do we sit on the monitor?
Yeah.
Welcome.
Oh.
Hello.
Hello.
Hello.
Hello.
Hello.
Hello.
Hello.
Oh, there it is working.
Someone's joining.
Test one, two, admit.
Okay.
There we go.
Okay.
So just leave room over here.
So squeeze in that way to the right.
To your left.
To your right.
Sorry.
This is the order here.
Good.
You guys, come on this place for it.
This is our room here.
Please.
Please space, space.
Don't be shy.
Say hello to your neighbor.
Do you guys want to?
Anyone else?
It's okay.
First off, thank you guys all for coming.
How many of you know why you're here?
How many of you know what decentralized science is at all?
Yes, some people?
There's some people?
Okay, yeah, this is decentralized science
in this vicinity here.
How many of you have been to a Deci NYC event before?
Oh wow, so many people.
We have a lot of return desires.
We're gonna issue a token at some point, which will be cool.
Like a Deci NYC token,
so you can memorialize your being on the blockchain.
Cool, well without further,
let's just do a quick picture.
We'll do a panoramic one.
Oh, someone's, okay, smile, smile, smile.
Smile, smile, smile.
This one's on the Twitter and such.
Okay.
Oh my gosh, I think this might be one of our largest ones.
And let me just do one more.
Okay, so we're gonna do it slightly differently this time.
So Michael Levin is going to speak first.
How many of you have seen Michael Levin
on one of his talks already?
Like when we were, wow, that's a lot of people.
Okay, one more.
When I was promoting this event,
we got a lot of DMs who said he's my favorite speaker.
Can you hear us, Michael?
Yeah, I can.
Okay, good.
He said, this is one of his favorite,
a couple of people messaged me saying
Michael Levin is one of our favorite
tech speakers that they've ever seen.
So that was just totally cool.
Can you see the audience here, Michael?
Yeah, yeah, I can.
80 people, right?
Yeah.
And then, what else did I want to say?
There was one thing, oh yeah.
If you guys post us on Twitter or on Instagram,
we'd be forever grateful.
It helps us read the word.
It helps to decentralize science.
It helps to get the word out.
So, I'm gonna let Michael speak.
But I'm just gonna say one thing.
If you like decentralized science,
we started a decentralized science company.
I'll talk more about it in a second,
but I know some people are gonna go.
But I just wanna say, if you're looking for a job,
we're hiring to do a decentralized science platform.
So, if this is interesting to you,
we have an in-person office in New York City.
We're looking to hire community managers,
developers, business people.
We pay really, really well.
And we have a great office and a great team.
And we're looking to grow.
So, if you're interested in this
and you're interested in decentralized science,
maybe you're an angry academic.
Maybe you're looking to change the world.
Maybe you're looking to see something better.
We'll do this.
I just wanted to get that before.
I'll do a little talk on what is decentralized science
after Professor Levin speaks.
So, without further ado,
Professor Levin is a professor at Tufts University,
super renowned in his field for his work on bioelectricity,
which was when I first heard about it.
I was amazed.
And I'll let you take it from here.
Yeah, thanks so much.
Let's give him a round of applause.
Thank you so much for the invitation.
And that's a very kind introduction.
And thanks for letting me share some ideas with you.
So, let me, let's see,
I'm going to figure out how to share a screen here.
All right.
So, I'm going to turn on my slides.
And when I do, I will not be able to see you.
So, if anything goes wrong,
just please somebody speak up, realize.
All right, here we go.
Okay, so what I'd like to talk about today
is the field of diverse intelligence.
And specifically the kind of cognitive processes
that go on in your body
and what this means for various other issues.
You can find all the primary work,
like the primary papers, data sets, software,
everything at this site.
And you can sign up for announcements
and get some thoughts beyond what I can say
in peer reviewed publications.
You can get that in my blog here.
So, there's four things I'd like to talk about today.
First of all, I'm going to talk a little bit about
what I mean by diverse or unconventional intelligence.
I will give you some examples of such,
looking at bioelectricity and how it functions
as a kind of cognitive glue that binds the cells
in your body into a kind of collective intelligence.
And this collective intelligence
solves problems in anatomical space,
also known as morpheus space.
I will talk about some biomedical applications
that result from thinking in these kinds of ways.
And towards the end,
we're going to touch on some issues about the future
and what I think it means for all of us.
So, this is a well-known classic painting.
It's called Adam is Naming the Animals in the Garden of Eden.
And I find this very interesting
because I think there's one profoundly wrong aspect
of this old story.
And also there's one very deep aspect
that I think is really right on the money
that we have to absorb.
The part that I think is wrong here
is that this gives you the idea
that these animals are discrete natural kinds, right?
You look at this and you say,
okay, I know what all these animals are.
There's a finite discrete set of individual animals
with specific shapes and specific behaviors.
And Adam is actually different than all of them.
He's special.
And so I think those two things
we're going to have to blow up in the next couple of decades.
That will, I think that's going to disappear.
The part that I think that's really deep here
is that in this old biblical story,
it was actually Adam's job to name the animals.
The angels couldn't do it.
God couldn't do it.
Adam was the one who was supposed to name the animals.
And I think that's for two reasons.
One is that he's the one that's going to have to live with him.
And the other is that in these old kind of mystical traditions,
naming something or knowing the name
of the real name of something
means that you've understood its true nature.
And that understanding is supposed to give you power
over that thing, right?
So knowing the name of something is really deep.
And I think this is important
because we are all going to have to name
in this kind of meaning.
We're going to have to name a whole large set of novel beings
that have never been here before
with whom we are going to share our world.
And I think that's really important.
So you no doubt have read all kinds of works of philosophy
and other more modern, maybe stories
about the difference between humans
and maybe machines and other things.
And what people typically have in mind
when they say those things is this,
kind of this typical adult modern human
that has this like a gentle special glow about them.
But we've known now for a really long time
that both on an evolutionary time scale
and also a developmental time scale,
there is actually a continuum of bodies
and we'll get back to this towards the end of the talk.
But actually if this form has very slowly
and gradually evolved from all these other forms
and originally a unicellular microbial ancestor,
then the same thing is true during your lifetime.
So whatever properties this kind of being has,
and so memory, true goals, preferences,
understanding, moral worth, responsibility, and so on,
we really, as scientists and philosophers,
we really owe some a story about how that arises.
Where in this continuum does that actually show up?
And is it better to think about that
as a kind of discrete thing,
you have it or you don't have it?
Or what I think is that it's actually a continuum,
the right question is what kind and how much?
And so I've been working on a framework
to enable us to recognize, create,
and ethically relate to a really diverse set of intelligences
that are very different from the kinds of things
that we usually recognize as intelligences.
So apes, birds, maybe an octopus or a whale or something.
But all kinds of other creatures,
colonial organisms and swarms like beehives
and ant colonies, synthetic biology,
engineered new life forms, AIs,
whether robotic or purely software,
and maybe at some point, aliens,
at some point maybe we find some exobiological life.
So we need to be able to talk
about all of these things simultaneously.
What do they all have in common?
And I'm not the first person to try
for a framework like this.
This is 1943, Wiener, Rosenbluth, and Bigelow
tried for a scale that goes all the way from passive matter,
so basically simple passive materials,
all the way up through these kinds of different stages
to the kind of complex second order metacognition
that humans have where they can think about themselves
and they know that they know things and so on.
So what we need is a story of scaling.
How do very simple information processing kinds
of acts become minds?
And whatever framework that we come up with,
it has to move experimental work forward.
It can't just be philosophy.
It's actually give us new capabilities,
for example, new biomedicine.
And it also has to enhance ethics.
It has to enhance our ability to understand our world
and relate to it with the appropriate kind of compassion.
So the fundamental fact is that all of us take this journey.
We've all made this journey
from what people call just physics.
And I really hate that term, but people use it.
As an unfertilized oocyte, you were once,
all of us were once a little blob of chemicals.
And when people look at that blob,
they say, okay, well, this is just a physical chemical system.
It obeys the laws of chemistry.
There is no mind here, just a bunch of chemicals.
But at some point, slowly and gradually,
it turns into one of these amazing kinds of creatures
or even something like this.
Here's Rene Descartes, who was fond of saying
that he was not a machine and had special properties.
And so that's fine, but we need to really then tell a story
of where does that happen?
And developmental biology offers absolutely no place
where you can draw a bright line and say, okay,
before that it was just a bunch of chemicals
doing the things that chemicals do,
but now bang, now it's a real being with a real mind
and preferences and goals and so on.
There is no spot like that in developmental biology.
So we really need to understand the scaling this.
Well, at least, okay, so that's a little,
that should be, if you take that on to really understand that,
it should be a little disturbing,
but at least we're a true unified intelligence, right?
We're not like an ant colony,
which people do describe ants and termites
as a kind of collective intelligence,
but we're not like that, right?
Like we are a centralized unified mind,
you know, we have a brain and everything.
Well, Rene Descartes thought so,
and in particular, he was fond of the pineal gland
because there's only one of them in the brain
and he felt that our unified human intelligence
should have one spot in the brain
that isn't duplicated the way that other structures are.
But if he had access to microscopes,
he would have discovered that actually,
there isn't one of anything
because in the pineal gland, this is what it looks like.
There are huge numbers of individual cells.
And if he had really good microscopy
inside each one of those cells, he would see this.
This is what's actually inside.
All of this stuff is inside every cell.
So actually all of us are collective intelligences.
Even we know no less than ant colonies
and beehives and flocks of birds,
we are all made of parts.
And in fact, I think all intelligence
is collective intelligence.
In fact, for us, this is the sort of thing we're made of.
Now, this happens to be a free living organism
known as alachromaria, but it's a single cell.
And you can see the amazing competency
it has at its local scale.
So with respect to single cell events,
it handles all of its anatomical needs,
its metabolic needs, its physiological needs,
no brain, no nervous system, no stem cells,
everything is handled by this amazing little organism.
And we are a large collective of cells
that have enormous competencies in different spaces.
And so if you look at our structure,
not only are we a set of nested dolls
consisting of various chemicals and subcellular components
and then tissues and organs and organisms
and then of course, societies and swarms,
not only structurally are we a collection
of these hierarchical levels,
but actually each of these has its own competency,
its own intelligence, its own problem-solving capacity.
So in other kinds of spaces,
not just in three-dimensional space that we're used to,
such as, for example, when mice run mazes and so on,
but in other spaces, the space of physiological states,
the space of all possible types of gene expression,
the space of all possible anatomical configurations.
In all of these spaces, the different levels
of your body structure are solving problems,
pursuing goals, storing and utilizing memories
and navigating those spaces with great ingenuity.
That amazing architecture,
this multi-scale competency architecture,
which currently our technology and robotics
and our typical AIs don't use anything like that.
No reason why we couldn't, but no one's done it yet.
But biology uses this amazing multi-scale architecture
and it allows some truly astounding capabilities
for living forms.
I'm gonna show you a couple of interesting examples.
One of the things that biology can do
is have a kind of, you can almost call it
a kind of beginner's mind concept
where it doesn't really make,
evolution doesn't just make organisms
that are solutions to specific problems.
It actually makes problem-solving machines
that come into the world with massive plasticity
ready to take on novel configurations.
So what you're looking at here is a tadpole.
Here's the mouth, here are the nostrils,
here's the brain, here's the tail,
this thing is the gut.
And what you'll notice here is that,
what's happening here is that there are no eyes
in the primary location where the eyes go,
but there is an eye that we induced on the tail.
And what you see is that these animals,
when we built this machine to train these tadpoles
in a visual task, and what you find out
is that they can see perfectly well.
And this eye, which is now located on their tails,
doesn't connect to the brain.
Here's the optic nerve.
Sometimes it connects to the spinal cord like this,
sometimes to nothing at all,
and they do very well in visual assays.
So just think about what this means.
For millions of years, this brain was perfectly adapted
to take visual input right here from the eyes next to it.
And now you've got this weird itchy patch of tissue
on your back that's providing some sort of electrical signal
onto your spinal cord.
Why doesn't it take many rounds
of evolutionary adaptation, mutation, selection
for this to work?
It works right out of the box, first time you do it.
It doesn't require any more evolutionary cycles.
And that's because this kind of creature,
as all of us, has massive plasticity.
There are lots of other interesting features.
For example, these are planaria, these are flatworms.
And what's interesting about these guys
is that they are incredibly regenerative.
So you can cut them into many pieces.
Each piece will regenerate
and become a perfect tiny little worm.
Now, one thing that James McConnell discovered in the 60s
and he got a lot of flak for it,
but he was actually right.
We repeated his work using modern automated methods in 2013
and he was completely right that if you train a planarian,
for example, to feed on these little bumpy,
at least little bumpy circles,
and then you amputate their head, including their brain,
and you get this tail left here.
The tail sits there,
doesn't do much of anything for the next eight days,
doesn't have any behavior.
But what it does do is it grows back a new brain.
And as it grows back a new brain,
you then can test these animals
and you find out that they've remembered
the original information.
So not only is the anatomy regenerated,
but so are the memories.
And actually, whatever, I mean, presumably,
they're stored in a tail somewhere we don't know where,
and kind of distributed throughout the body.
And then they are imprinted onto the new brain
as the brain develops so that they can demonstrate behavior.
So the movement of information through the body, right?
You're seeing here simultaneously
the ability to restore anatomical structure,
so anatomical memories,
but also behavioral memories and these things are linked.
And one of the most remarkable examples is this.
These are caterpillars and they have a particular brain
suitable for crawling around
using the soft body architecture
in a two-dimensional world.
And they need to turn into this.
This is a flying, hard-body kind of being
that has a completely different life
and it has a different brain because of that.
In order to do this,
it basically destroys most of the brain
during metamorphosis,
so many of the cells are killed,
the connections are broken,
and it refactors into a new brain.
But what has been found is that
if you train these caterpillars on a particular task,
the butterflies or moths that results still remember.
So there are two fascinating things here.
Not only is it amazing to ask,
where is the information that it's robust
to this incredible refactoring of the memory medium?
We don't have any technology like that.
If you start shuffling around
the pieces of your memory chips inside your computer,
nothing's gonna work.
But not only is the memory robust,
you actually, if you think about it,
you realize that you actually can't just store
the information,
you have to completely reinterpret it for a new context.
For example, if you teach these caterpillars to eat leaves
when you provide a certain color stimulus,
those specific memories are totally useless
to the butterfly because butterflies don't eat leaves
and they don't move around the way the caterpillars do.
They have to reinterpret those memories
in a brand new way suitable for this creature
in its three-dimensional new life.
So during these kind of transformations,
you see that memory,
biological memory isn't just stored,
it's actually actively, creatively reinterpreted.
These memory engrams that are made
are reinterpreted for their new lifetime.
So lots of fascinating things to be said
about behavioral memories and so on,
but I'm gonna spend a few minutes talking about
what we study, which is primarily anatomical memories.
So let's think about this.
This is a cross-section through the human body.
So look at this incredible complexity
of all the organs in the torso.
So everything is where it needs to be in the right place,
the right, you know, the right direction,
next to the right thing.
Almost all of the time,
where does this pattern come from?
Because we start life as a collection of blastomeres
and eventually these cells build something like this.
Where is that pattern?
People might be tempted to say DNA,
but we can read genomes now
and we know that is not what is in the genome.
What's in the genome are specifications of proteins,
the tiny molecular hardware that every cell gets to have.
But this structure is the outcome of the physiological software
that these cells are executing.
And so this information is no more in the genome
than is the actual structure of the colony of ants and termites
or the specific structure of a spider web
in the DNA of the spider.
So we have to really understand, okay,
how do the cells know what to make?
How do they know when to stop?
If something is damaged,
how do we convince them to repair it?
And actually, which I'll show you a little bit towards the end,
what else is that hardware willing to do?
What else can it build?
What can we make from the exact same cells
with the exact same DNA?
And now I like to think of kind of the end game
of our field here as this.
Someday, you're going to be able to sit down
in front of a computer
and use something called an anatomical compiler.
What's gonna happen here is that you will draw
the animal, plant, or a biobot, organoid, whatever
that you want at the level of anatomy,
not at the level of genetic circuits or anything like that,
but the actual anatomy.
And what the system ought to be able to do
is to compile down that anatomical description
into a specific set of stimuli
that have to be given to cells
to build exactly what you want to build.
Now, the practical reason we need something like this
is because imagine if you had the ability
to tell groups of cells what to build,
you would do away with birth defects.
You would be able to heal
and regenerate after traumatic injury.
You could reprogram cancer.
You could stop and reverse aging,
even stop degenerative disease.
All of these things,
all of these major problems of biomedicine would go away
if we understood how to get a group of cells
to build exactly what we want them to build.
Now, the key here is that this device
is not a 3D printer,
which is not about micromanaging cells
and trying to print body structures.
It's a communications device.
It's a way to translate your anatomical specification,
what it is that you're looking for,
into the gold states that these cells are accessing
when they build some particular structure.
Now, I'll tell you that we don't have anything
remotely like this.
And we can only do this in a few individual cases.
And the reason is,
is that here's where current state of the art is.
We're very good at manipulating cells and molecules,
processing information like this about
which genes interact with which other genes,
which proteins attach together and so on.
But we're really a long way away from what we really want,
which is complete control of large scale form and function.
Somebody is missing a limb.
We ought to be able to tell those cells to rebuild.
So why is that?
And I think it's because molecular medicine
has been largely stuck where computer science
was in the 1940s and 50s.
This is what it looks like,
that programming a computer used to look like.
You can see what she's doing.
She's interacting with the hardware.
She's rewiring the machine to get it to do something.
And you would all laugh if I told you
that on your laptops, nowadays,
if you wanted to go from Microsoft Word to Photoshop,
you would have to get out to soldering iron
and start rewiring.
The whole point of what we've learned
in computer science and information technology
over the years is that if your hardware is good enough
and the biological hardware is definitely good enough,
what you have here is a reprogrammable medium
that is much better off controlled by communication,
by signals, by stimuli.
And this is what we're still missing
out to a large degree in biomedicine.
We understand the hardware more or less.
We really have only begun to scratch the surface
of the software, the software of life, the intelligence
that's inherent in every layer of our body systems.
I'm gonna show you a couple of examples of this.
Well, first of all, we all know that development is reliable.
So most of the time, the egg will give rise
to a bunch of cells that build
the correct human target morphology.
But it's not just about emergent complexity or reliability.
It's actually much more interesting than that.
Because if you start cutting early embryos into pieces,
this is naturally how you get twins
and triplets and quadruplets.
You don't get half bodies,
you get perfectly normal monozygotic twins
and various multiples.
And this means that in this anatomical space
where you go from different starting states,
here's one, here's one, from different starting states,
all of them can navigate that space
to a particular ensemble of goal states
corresponding to valid human anatomies.
And sometimes they can actually avoid
all kinds of local minimum,
meaning perturbations that you give them along the way.
They can solve problems and get where they need to go.
This is William James' definition of intelligence,
the ability to get to the same end by different means.
This is what I mean by different types of intelligence
by navigating these problem spaces.
Now, some animals can do this throughout their lifespan.
So here is an axolotl and these amphibians
can regenerate their eyes, their jaws, their tails,
their limbs, portions of the heart and brain.
And what that looks like is when they bite each other's legs
off, no matter where that occurs,
whatever the piece is remaining,
these cells will build exactly what's needed,
no more, no less, to make a perfect salamander limb
and then they stop.
And that's the most amazing thing about regeneration
is that it knows when to stop.
And so this idea that you have a particular structure
and when you deviate from that structure,
the cells work really hard to get back
to that same region of anatomical space
and then they know that they've got there
and they know that that's their goal and then they stop.
So that is a kind of anatomical homeostasis.
It's the same thing that your thermostat does at home
where you set a set point.
And when the temperature goes off,
the system will work hard to get you back to that goal state
and then it stops, okay?
And by the way, this is not just this kind of regeneration,
it's not just for amphibians.
The human liver is highly regenerative.
Even the ancient Greeks knew that,
I have no idea how they knew that, but they did.
Deer every year will regenerate huge amounts of bone
and vasculature and innervation
when they regrow their antlers
up to a centimeter and a half of new bone per day they grow.
And even human children can regenerate their fingertips.
So if you just keep it clean,
these kind of amputations and kids end up
with a very nice cosmetic outcome.
So, but we're of course not as good
as salamanders or plenarium.
So I want to show you just kind of one of my favorite examples
to really try to bring home just how much amazing
creative problem solving these systems have.
This is a schematic of a cross-section
through a kidney tubule of a salamander.
And what you see here is that about eight to 10 cells
work together to build the structure
and then they leave a lumen in the middle
through which the fluid has to go.
One thing you can do is you can force these cells early on
to have way more genetic material than they should.
And when that happens, the nuclei get bigger
and the cells get bigger to accommodate.
When that happens, the resulting newt
is actually exactly the same size
because the cells adjust.
Fewer of these larger cells are now getting together
to make exactly the same lumen.
The most amazing thing happens
when you make these cells truly gigantic,
then it uses a completely different molecular mechanism
such that only one cell wraps around itself
leaving a hole in the middle
and still gives you the exact same structure.
So think of what this means.
If you're a newt coming into the world,
you don't know how many copies
of your genetic material you're going to have.
You don't know how big your cells are going to be.
You don't know how many cells you're going to have.
You have to figure out,
you have to use all the tools that you're disposing,
all the molecular mechanisms that you have
to solve this problem.
How do I get from being an egg to being an adult
despite all these novelties?
You can't count on anything.
You can't assume that your evolutionary history
has prepared you for knowing what to do.
And the same thing happens in the transition
from tadpole to frog.
They have to rearrange their whole face,
but these Picasso tadpoles,
which have the organs in abnormal locations.
So the eyes on the back of the head,
the mouth is off to the side.
These guys still make quite normal frogs
because all of these organs will move in unnatural paths
to get to where they need to go
to look like a good frog and then they stop.
So this means that genetics does not actually give you
some kind of hardwired automatic process
that just goes in the same direction.
What it does encode is a machine
that can do an error minimization scheme.
It can actually get to where it needs to go
despite all sorts of things going wrong.
So now this raises an obvious question.
How does it know what's right?
How do these things know what a correct frog face looks like?
So we've been studying this and the sort of
uncontroversial example of collections of cells
storing a goal state for behavior
is what happens in the brain.
So the way it works in the brain
is that you have these electrical networks
of cells that communicate electrically
via ions that go in and out of these little ion channels
and then they pass through these electrical synapses
and the computations that are processed by that network
result in the software that we see as behavior.
So basically here, this is a living zebrafish brain
that the commitment of neuroscience
is that if we knew how to decode
all of this electrophysiological activity,
we could read out the thoughts, the memories,
the goal states, the competencies of this animal.
Well, it turns out that this is not anything special
or unique to brains.
Every cell in your body has these ion channels.
Most cells have electrical connections to their neighbors
and evolution discovered that these electrical networks
were good for processing information
a really long time ago,
back around the beginning of bacterial biofilms
actually long before multicellularity
or brains or nerves or anything like that.
So then one can ask,
well, if the electrical networks of the brain
think about moving you through three-dimensional space,
what do the electrical networks of the body think about?
What were these cells thinking about before there were brains?
And what we've been studying is this idea
that what they're thinking about
is how to navigate anatomical space.
They're thinking about how to get from
whatever situation they happen to be in,
whether a normal egg or some kind of perturbed system
into the right kind of body for the environment
in which they find themselves.
So in order to do this,
we've developed some interesting techniques
using voltage-sensitive fluorescent dyes
to really literally read the mind of the body
to see all the electrical conversations
that cells are having with each other.
So these are not computer models.
These are real, you know, these are some cells
and this is an early frog embryo and the colors
are signals from a voltage reporter dye
that enables us to see what all the electrical states are.
We are reading it.
We then have all these computer models
that we use to try to understand and try to decode
what are the memories here.
And I'm going to show you some examples.
This is an early frog embryo putting its face together.
It's quite dynamic, but here's one frame from that video.
And you can see the bioelectric pattern here.
We call this the electric face
because it basically looks like a face.
Here's where it knows the eye needs to go.
Here's where the mouth needs to go.
Some other organs out here.
This is where the organs are going to be in the future.
This is a pre-pattern that it uses to figure out
where to put all the craniofacial organs.
Now, it's not just cells within an embryo that communicate
but actually individual embryos communicate with each other.
So you can see what's happening here in the group
that when this guy sets off a wave, they all feel it.
And here are a bunch of cells where you can see
there's some neural firing here,
but there are also some lots of activity
in these non-neural cells.
So these are pretty ubiquitous.
These electrical networks are pretty ubiquitous.
Now, observing these amazing bioelectrical signals
is fun in the reading,
but you don't know that the patterns mean anything
unless you can functionally alter them.
You alter them and you see what happens.
So we've developed tools mostly borrowed from neuroscience.
And I think one of the lessons we're learning
is that neuroscience is really not about neurons at all.
The deep lessons of neuroscience
tell us about all cells and body intelligence more broadly.
And what we do is we change these bioelectrical patterns.
We don't use, there are no electrodes,
there are no magnets, no waves, no frequencies,
no electromagnetic radiation.
What we do is we hack the normal interface
that cells are using to hack each other's behavior,
which is the ion channels on their surface
and the gap junctions that they use
to exchange electrical signals.
This is what we target.
So we control how cells communicate
with each other electrically.
And when you do this, you can do some really cool things.
For example, by injecting some RNA
and coding a potassium channel,
which changes the voltage of the cells,
we can induce a little spot in the sombrero
that looks just like that eye spot in that electric face.
But when you do that somewhere else,
for example, in cells that are going to become gut,
what you've just done is tell these cells, build an eye here.
You have not said anything about how the eye should form,
what are the components of an eye.
You haven't said anything to the stem cells
or to the specific genes inside of each one.
You're talking to the collective,
to the collective intelligence of cells
that are trying to navigate morphospace.
And what you've said is go to the region
that corresponds to making an eye.
And they know how to do this.
Here are all the internal tissues of these eyes,
so lens, retina, optic nerve, all that.
And they even have some other cool properties
that you find in other collective intelligences,
like ants, which is that,
so here's a lens sitting out in the flank of a tadpole
somewhere, if you inject just a few cells,
not enough to really make a whole eye,
so the blue ones are the ones we injected,
what they will do is recruit their neighbors.
They tell their neighbors that,
hey, you need to participate with us in making this eye
and they instruct them.
So we instruct these cells, you should make an eye,
they then instruct their neighbors.
So all of these competencies,
knowing how to make an eye,
knowing how many cells there are in recruiting new cells
if they need to, all of this is built in
as part of the competency of the material
that we're dealing with.
And we have extended this towards some regenerative
applications, there are huge numbers of people living
with limb and organ loss every day.
We need therapeutics that are not just going to be
for wound healing, but actually to regenerate whole organs.
And we can see here that what happens here,
normally frogs, unlike salamanders,
do not regenerate their legs,
but we've come up with a cocktail that triggers
not only pro-regenerative gene expression here,
but actually within 45 days,
you've already got some toes in the toenail.
But in our latest experiments,
what happens is that the treatment itself,
the bioelectric cocktail is applied for about 24 hours.
After that, you get a year and a half of leg growth
in the adult fraud.
You don't touch it at all during that time.
This is not about micromanaging,
this is not about controlling the stem cells
or 3D printing anything.
This is about telling the cells very early on,
go down the leg regeneration path, not the scarring path.
And so eventually you get a quite nice leg
that is touch sensitive and motile.
We are in the process of moving this to mammals now.
I should say that I have to do disclosure here
because Dave Kaplan and I have a company
whose job it is to try to move this
into a mammalian models and hopefully patients.
And David's group makes these wearable bioreactors
that apply the ion channel drug payload.
And come back to the plan area for a moment
because there's something really interesting here
about how we reprogram these pattern memories.
And I want to show you the plasticity of the material
that we're dealing with.
So here are the plan area that I was telling you
about some amazing properties
that we can talk about if people have questions
as far as cancer resistance, immortality.
I mean, these guys literally don't seem to age and so on.
But one of the things that we need to understand
is if they were to be chopped into three pieces,
so you got this middle fragment here,
100% of the time it grows one head and one tail
and you get a normal plan area.
So another question is how does it know?
How does this thing know how many heads it's supposed to have
and where the heads are supposed to be?
So it turns out that there's an electrical circuit
that controls this and we've characterized that circuit
and we've learned to rewrite it.
So that what happens here is that this bioelectrical pattern,
so this is the memory, this is literally the memory
of the collective intelligence of the body
as far as how many heads it's supposed to have in here,
one head.
So what we can do is we can change that pattern to say,
no, two heads, and when you do that in this animal,
after you amputate, then it goes ahead
and makes a two-headed animal.
This isn't Photoshop or AI or anything like that,
these are real animals.
And this bioelectric pattern is not a map
of this two-headed guy.
This pattern is the pattern that we
have incepted into this one-headed normal worm.
It's anatomically normal,
the molecular gene expression is normal.
Here's where the head genes are.
But it has a different internal representation
of what a correct planarian should look like.
We've rewritten the goal, the target state.
So this is not micromanaging the cells,
this is changing the mind of this collective intelligence
as far as what I should do if I get injured in the future.
So it's really a counterfactual memory.
And one planarian body, a normal planarian body,
can store at least one of two possible representations
of what a normal worm should look like.
And in fact, one of the most remarkable things
is that once you do that, the memory stays.
Two-headed worms cut again and again in plain water
will continue to regenerate as two-headed animals.
It's permanent, even though there's nothing wrong
with the genetics of this animal.
We have not touched the genome,
there are no trans genes.
This is purely bioelectrical.
I showed you exactly where the electrical memory is stored
and how we can see it.
And here are these two-headed worms.
And not only can we change the number of heads,
but we can actually change the shape of the head
to that of other species.
So the shape of the head of this triangle species
can become flat like a Pifalina.
It can become round like an S-Mediterrania.
Shape of the brain changes like these other species.
The shape of the position of the stem cells does.
So in this anatomical morphospace where you have attractors,
you have these deep attractors corresponding
to other species, they live there naturally,
but you can get a different species, such as this guy,
to visit these other attractors because it's so reprogrammable.
Not only that, you can take it further
and find regions of morphospace where you know,
machine learning folks will call this a latent morphospace
where you can build things that are not normal plenaria
at all, things that are spiky or cylindrical
or combinations like this.
So what I'm showing you is that the body is incredibly plastic.
It's reprogrammable at the level of physiology,
not necessarily the genetically specified hardware,
but we are not the only bioengineers
that can hack this kind of morphogenetic navigation.
This is what you normally see.
Acorns make something like this.
And you kind of get that this is extremely reliable.
This happens so often that you get the idea that, okay,
well, the oak genome just knows how to do this.
This is what the oak genome knows how to do.
That is what they do every single time.
But there's this amazing bioengineer, this WASP,
and it's a parasite.
And what the parasite does is using some kind of chemicals
that are still poorly understood,
it basically hacks the surrounding plant cells
to build something completely different.
Would you have any idea that these flat,
the nice, flat green leaves with a normal genome,
a completely normal genome,
were capable of building something as crazy as this?
We'd have no idea.
And people talk about developmental constraints.
I don't, you know, there's a lot of constraints
in our thinking about the process,
but I'm not sure we understand morphogenic constraints at all.
I think they're much broader than people think.
And this kind of hacking is ubiquitous in biology,
and we are just learning to do it.
And with this notion of what lies beyond
the normal morphology, you know, repair,
repair of the typical anatomy, but what's beyond that?
And I wanna show you this,
basically this last example, which is this.
If I showed you this little organism,
and I would ask you to guess what this is,
you might say we've found this at the bottom of a pond
somewhere, it's some kind of primitive microorganism.
If you were to sequence the genome of this,
what you would get is 100% Homo sapiens.
This is what we call these anthrobots.
They are made of adult patient tracheal epithelia.
So adult often elderly patients donate their tracheal cells.
We have a protocol that lets these cells
reboot their multicellularity and live an entirely new life
that has new shapes and behaviors.
They look nothing like any stage of human development.
And one of the unique things that they know
how to do, which is really shocking and surprising,
is that they know how to heal neural wounds.
So if you put down some human neurons in addition,
you put a big scratch through them,
these anthrobots will sit down in this kind
of like super bot cluster.
And what you'll see when you lift them up four days later,
what they've done is they've taken the two sides
of the neural wound and they knit them together.
Who would have ever thought that your tracheal cells,
which sit there quietly for decades in your airway,
actually have given the opportunity
to make a multi little creature that runs around on its own
and has lots of interesting abilities,
such as, for example, healing neural wounds.
And so this one of the biomedical aspects of this
is that this is a personalized medicine
where cells from your own body, not genetically modified,
there's no reason to genetically modify them,
can be used to heal your own body from with,
and no need for, for example, eye immune suppression
because they're your own cells.
They're not some sort of heterologous cell type.
So this kind of agential biomedical intervention,
these kind of biobots made from your own cells to heal
are, I think, a huge potential application for the future.
So the last thing I'll just say is that,
not only do we have these two continuum that remind us
that we are on an unbroken, slow continuum
with all kinds of other unusual forms, including cells,
and whatever you say about adult humans,
you have to ask, what can you say
about some of these other intermediate forms?
But also there's another continuum here,
which consists of now rational changes that are made
for various kinds of modifications and augmentations.
So both technological and purely biological,
I think that the future belongs
to a kind of freedom of embodiment.
I think that this standard form,
that evolution just sort of happened to drop us off in,
is susceptible to degenerative brain disease
and limited IQ and limited lifespan
and susceptible to all kinds of the dumb bacterial infections
and lower back pain and bad vision and all these things.
I don't think we have any particular commitment
or allegiance to any of that.
We are going to be improving some of the bad hardware
and some of the bad firmware that evolution has left us with.
And at every level of organization,
you can think about augmenting these systems
that were designed by basically a random walk with selection
with rationally designed materials.
So I think that in the future, all of you, young people,
and I think, even I will get to see a bunch of this, I think,
will be living with a huge number of alien bodies and minds.
We already have some people that are some degree of cyborg.
We will have hybrids and chimeres and synthetic life forms.
And because of that kind of plasticity of life
that I showed you, that interoperability is huge.
So pretty much any combination of evolved material,
engineered material and software
is some kind of living agent.
And all of these things are going to have diverse bodies
and diverse minds.
And we really better step up and go well beyond
very ancient and crumbling rules of thumb
about how we deal with each other
in terms of what are you made of and how did you get here?
Those are the kinds of things that we ask
when we try to understand is something
a quote unquote machine that we can do whatever we want with
or is it a living organism to whom we owe certain kinds
of moral stances, those categories are going to go out the window
because there are going to be all sorts of forms
that challenge those superficial categories.
And what I think we're looking for is a kind of ethical
synthbiosis with a bunch of life forms
that are nowhere on the tree of life with us.
So I'm going to stop here and just say that
if anybody's interested in diving more into this stuff,
here are some kind of academic papers.
There's much more sort of general purpose writings
on this kind of thing at my blog.
I want to thank the people who did all the work.
So these are all the postdocs and the grad students
who did the biology that I showed you today.
We have lots of amazing collaborators.
None of this is possible without our technical support
personnel, our funders.
Again, I have to do a disclosure.
These are the companies that support our work
and most of all the model systems,
the animals and the microbes and so on
because they teach us everything here.
So yeah, thanks very much.
Thank you.
OK, I think we have time for some questions.
So we will start here.
Thank you.
This was very interesting.
If I understood correctly, you state
that these morphological plasticity and regenerative
plasticity is not really encoded in our genome,
but more in the bioelectrical properties
and activity of the cells or the organism.
However, the bioelectrical properties of an organism
or of a cell depend on the channels,
voltage dependent or independent channels
that are expressed by a given cell,
which are encoded in our genome.
So in a way, the bioelectrical properties
and therefore the all the morphological
plasticity and regenerative capacity
is encoded in our genome.
Well, let's think about it.
So certainly you need the hardware for any of it to work.
So without the hardware, without the channels,
none of this is going to work.
But encoded is a funny word.
Imagine, I don't know if you've ever seen this thing,
it's called a Galton board.
You can get it on Amazon for about 20 bucks.
It's a toy.
What it is, it's just imagine a board
and you bang a bunch of nails into it, right?
And then you take a bucket of marbles
and you dump it into the top of the board.
So the marbles go bang, bang, bang, bang, bang, bang,
and they all land on the bottom.
What's the shape of the resulting marbles?
What you always get is this lovely bell curve.
It has a very particular shape to it.
And so you can ask yourself,
where is the shape of that bell curve encoded?
And so you can, certainly it's not going to appear
if you don't have the wood and the nails and the marbles,
but you can study the material of the wood and the nails
and everything else all day long.
What you're not going to find
is a direct encoding of that bell curve.
So the real question in all of this
is to go beyond the terminology.
I mean, I'm much less interested in terminology
and more interested in what kind of conceptual framework
lets us do better experiments
in order to get new capabilities.
So if you want to make changes,
if you want to induce repair,
you'll fix birth defects, normalize cancer,
which are all things we've done
that I didn't get a chance to talk about,
the question is that you're better off
thinking about the material, the hardware,
or are you better off understanding the software
that happens there and targeting that?
And that's exactly what I was trying to argue,
that all of modern molecular medicine
has done some amazing things with respect to hardware,
but most of what we are not able to do currently
is precisely because we've stayed at that level,
which computer science and information technology
left behind in the 40s.
So yes, the hardware is important,
but we don't all program with a soldering iron,
and that's exactly what I'm saying as far as these.
The reason we were able to do some of the things
that we've done, which had never been done before,
is precisely because we were able to adopt conceptual frameworks
from neuroscience and from other fields
that really take very seriously the guidance
of the final outcome, not by the hardware itself,
but by the software components
that are not actually directly encoded by the hardware,
but of course require it to function in the physical world.
Thank you.
Thank you for a very interesting talk.
My question was in relation to,
I guess you said it's not genetic,
it's more about the stimuli that you use
to change how the cells function
and turn into what they're supposed to be.
I'm wondering, like with those frogs
where you were able to reproduce most of a leg,
if you made generation one of the frogs,
which were able to, using the stimuli,
create this new leg,
would generation two of the offspring,
if you cut the leg, grow a new leg
because you've reprogrammed those cells
and at this point it is the genetic,
I know we're trying to understand the difference
between genetics and the stimuli,
but would generation two have the capability
and the cell memory to regrow that leg?
Yeah, great question.
We haven't done the experiment.
I don't really predict that it would
because I could sort of make up a mechanism
by which that would happen,
but I doubt it would be actually
that this would be transmitted to the next generation
through the egg and sperm and so on.
But there is an interesting example of what you're talking about,
which is in these planaria,
so we make these two-headed animals,
again, perfectly normal genetics.
That's another reason why the genome is insufficient for all this
because if you just sequence the genome of the two-headed
and the one-headed form, they're identical.
You would have no idea that you're looking at a two-headed worm.
It's simply not in the genetics for that reason.
Those two-headed worms, when they reproduce,
so the way these worms reproduce is they tear themselves in half,
so they just tear themselves in half
and they regenerate, now you've got two worms.
So that's their mode of reproduction
and under that mode of reproduction,
the offspring do in fact inherit the two-headed ones.
So that's how they form fission
and they create more two-headed worms permanently.
So you've made a permanent line of animals
that have a different anatomical structure
and you can imagine, we could throw it in the Charles River,
we wouldn't, but you could imagine
throwing it in the Charles River here in Boston
in a hundred years from now,
some scientists come along and they scoop up some samples
and they go, oh, cool.
Two-headed form and a one-headed form must be a speciation event.
Let's sequence the genome and see where the speciation event happened
and see the difference between them.
That is not where it is.
And so that kind of a thing does propagate
because the animals are not squeezing through a single,
kind of a bottleneck of a single egg cell.
So there's a chunk of the planarian
which now remembers that it's two-headed
and that chunk regrows into a new animal.
Can that pass through a single egg cell?
I don't know, we have no evidence that it can.
I could sort of imagine how it would happen,
but we haven't shown anything like that yet.
Hi, thank you for your talk.
My question is how you propose that this bio
or this electrical information is integrated in these organisms.
For context, I work on the PAC-6 regulatory genome.
So seeing these eyes kind of generate just solely
from electrical stimulus kind of makes me think
it's not the genes themselves, but the DNA outside these genes.
But I would love to hear your thoughts on that.
Yeah, great question.
So a couple things.
So first, just kind of a little inside baseball about PAC-6.
So in frog, and pardon me if you know all this,
but in frog, PAC-6 will only induce eyes
in the anterior rectoderm, right?
Just in the front of the head.
And if you actually look at the developmental biology textbook,
what they tell you is that while the anterior and rectoderm
are the only cells competent to become eyes,
because they probed it with the master iGinc PAC-6.
If you use PAC-6 as your stimulus,
it's true only the anterior and rectoderm can form eyes.
But if you probe the cells with a much more meaningful stimulus
to them, which is these bioelectrical states,
actually you find out that pretty much,
I mean we haven't found a region in the body that can't do it yet.
So these competencies, what we think of as competencies
are really relative to how much we've understood the material
we're working with and the limitations of the material
are often limitations of our understanding,
not the actual competency of the material.
So now how does it work?
So what we do know for all of these cases
is the molecular steps on a single cell level.
So we know that when we change the voltage,
we know the transduction machinery,
we know how that voltage is converted to second messenger pathways,
how those turn various genes on and off,
some of them have to do with other kinds of chromatin modifications.
We have all those steps.
All of that stuff, while it's important to know,
is really extremely unsatisfying
because the phenomenon itself is not a single cell phenomenon.
So what I'm truly interested in is not tracking down
how one cell's voltage turns on specific genes.
That's just part of the, I mean it's an important part,
but it's just part of the story because what you really want to understand
is okay, but why is the whole thing scaled correctly?
What's the difference between the hand and the foot?
Why the shape of a particular structure?
And so what we're doing now is we're using
computational models of network computations,
so not single cells but networks of cells,
that try to understand how the collective makes decisions
about its size and shape and things like that.
So there are for sure molecular stories to be told
about how the voltage turns genes on and off,
but what you really want is an understanding of
why a particular voltage kicks off,
eyes versus legs versus, and that whole conversation,
like what happens when we induce these eye spots?
There's a whole conversation that happens between those cells and their neighbors
because those cells are saying to their neighbors,
help us make an eye, and so we also need to understand
it's not enough to know why those cells turn on various genes.
We need to know what are they saying to their neighbors
and how many, and how do they know how many of them there are,
but those cells are actually saying back,
no, no, you should not be an eye, you need to be normal skin,
and that's a cancer suppression mechanism,
the cells that have weird voltages get told by their neighbors
through the gap junctions, they get communicated to try and normalize.
So there's a whole battle that's going on of identities
and it's not an identity on a cell level,
it's not stem cells trying to decide what cell type they should be,
it's large regions saying we are going to be an eye
versus we are going to be a leg or skin or whatever.
So it's a very multi-scale problem,
the same way that neuroscience is multi-scale,
where yeah, there are people who study synaptic proteins,
but there are also people who study psychiatric diseases
and psychoanalysis and so on,
and every step in between, all the network science
and in between those two levels,
this is going to be that kind of science, I think.
Thank you for your talk.
I have two questions.
One is what is the most frustrating thing for you
for this field to move forward, if it's not a secret?
And the other thing, maybe I missed it,
but did you mention how this electrical pathways
are programmed in the beginning, like initially,
because you changed them,
so there was something that gave them at birth?
Yeah, good question.
So in the frog,
we can watch them form from the moment of fertilization.
So what happens is that the process of fertilization
breaks symmetry and we've characterized this
from the very earliest stages,
how the various ion channels that are present
set up different kinds of electrical states
that start to perform different computations
and end up breaking symmetry,
amplifying that symmetry and then making decisions
who's going to be left, who's going to be right
for anterior, posterior, and so on.
So it's a combination of ways.
So where do these patterns come from?
Well, it's a combination of emergence
in the same way that Turing patterns, right?
So people who study chemical signals
have this formalism of Turing patterns,
which break symmetry and create order
out of well-mixed chemical media.
So some of it is emergent.
Some of it is, of course, constrained by the hardware.
So you need to have the appropriate,
as somebody was saying there,
you need to have the right hardware
that's sufficiently powerful to do it,
which means voltage-gated ion channels
and voltage-gated gap junctions and things like that.
And part of it comes from
wherever it is that mathematics comes from.
I mean, this is really a philosophical question,
but think about it.
If evolution...
Once evolution discovers a voltage-gated ion channel,
what you have there is a voltage-gated ion conductance,
which is basically a transistor.
If you have a couple of transistors, you can make a logic gate.
Once you make a logic gate,
you end up with a truth table that tells you
how information is processed by that logic gate.
You didn't have to evolve that truth table.
The truth table is given to you for free,
including things like the fact
that the NAND gate is universal
and various other cool computational properties.
All of that you get for free.
And you don't have to evolve it.
You get it from wherever it is that the laws of
computation, the laws of mathematics,
the same way that if evolution discovers
two angles of the correct triangle,
it doesn't need to look for the third.
It can save all that time.
You know what the third is going to be.
So there are all of these interesting free lunches,
in a sense, that evolution gets to exploit.
And I don't know where they come from.
Plato and Pythagoras
thought that they come from this platonic space
of universal facts
that exist separately from the physical world.
That's as good an answer as any at this point.
Okay, we have many questions.
So let's just keep the answers a little
so we can get everyone here.
Hi, my name is Angeline.
I'm currently studying neuroscience
at Columbia and
I want to know
I'd like to know what you think about
evolution as a mechanism
of design.
For example,
evolving a bot
like a bio bot
instead of designing it
or both designing
and evolving it
and
would you edit
hox genes?
Would you take advantage of epigenetics?
And also
you sort of preempted this
with your last answer.
What do you think
how do you think we can take advantage
of the vast computing potential
embodied in biological components
like membranes,
like as you just remarked
like logic gates
and ion voltage control
and voltage controlled ion channels
are basically the same thing
and there is a potential to program that.
Yeah.
Okay, so there was a lot there
and I guess I was asked to keep my answer short
so I'll do my best and just pick
one of the things you said.
So we are doing
a lot of work in programming both our xenobots
which are the frog version and the enthrobots
which are the human version.
We are not touching the hox genes.
We are not touching any of that stuff.
We are learning to
give them stimuli
and take advantage of the cell's natural
solving capacities.
We are training cells with rewards and punishments.
We are trying to understand
how they interpret various signals
that cause them to acquire
different shapes and functions
and we're trying to communicate that to the cells
and let them figure out
all the downstream molecular steps
that need to happen
to make it come through.
The thing with evolution
I'll just say one quick thing about evolution
which is that I think evolution works
completely differently
within a genital medium like this
that is able to solve problems
than it does with the standard story
of evolution
like over a passive medium
where the genotype determines the phenotype.
That middle software layer
that morphogenetic plasticity
that allows it to solve problems
makes evolution or dynamics completely different
because selection
has a hard time seeing actual genomes
than what it sees is the outcome
where you end up selecting for competency
not for actually better genomes
and that's an intelligence ratchet
that goes all the way from
developmental mechanisms all the way up
I think to behavioral intelligence.
Thank you for the talk.
I was wondering
if you consider like
moving the eye of the tadpole
from where it normally is to the leg
as a deviation from the norm
of deviations that can be handled
before the mechanisms just break down
and what's that threshold look like
if there is one?
We've never reached a threshold
I think that
I don't think there's
any kind of a threshold in that sense
you can certainly overwhelm
metabolically you can overwhelm the system
it needs a certain amount of energy
just to undergo morphogenesis
and of course
that plasticity is not unlimited
there are many things you can do to screw it up
so that it cannot fix itself
so birth defects are a thing
and that's because these are not infallible pathways
they adapt to a huge number of interventions
but of course it's not unlimited
so I think the limitation
is
it's not the number of things
things you change it's the kind of things
and whether or not you've broken the system's ability
to remember what the right shape is
and then act on it
Hi Michael
Fascinating topic, thank you so much
so
what I would like to better understand is
how do you think that such complex information
as the performance
of a task
can be encoded outside of the nervous system
since
in the nervous system we have synapses
and the fundamentals
of learning and memory
it's synaptic plasticity
the potential and depression
of synapses
so how do you think that such complex information
can be encoded
and modulated
through simply ion channels that don't have
synapses between them
to communicate information
well okay a few things
first of all I'm not suggesting that behavioral information
it relies entirely on ion channels
that's not what I've said
but they do actually cells
non-neural cells do have electrical synapses
between them, gap junctions
do store state and things like that
but overall
the story and I know this is the standard
story of neuroscience that it's this
synaptic plasticity and LTP and so on
that story, not from my work
but from lots of other people's work
that story is significantly cracking
at this point and I would recommend
the work of Sam Gershman
Randy Gallo still
David Glansman
to look at some alternatives because
I don't think that's
many people no longer think that that's the entire
story and overall
if I had to guess I think that
the vast majority of that machinery
that you're talking about is not actually for storing
memories I think it's for interpreting them
and I think that there are numerous
substrates within cells
neural and non-neural that basically act
like a
almost like a reservoir computing scenario
but a lot of the
actual degrees of freedom are in chemical
systems they're not necessarily
synaptic
and the neural
networks are actually there to try to interpret it
on the fly so that's
a long conversation
to have but look up some of those papers and you'll see
this is not my idea
this has been around for some decades now
Just keep your questions
and answers like we have like 10 more
questions so
Thank you so much for the talk
I'm curious
on your thoughts about
whether this electrical information
can be accessible
in higher order cognition and humans
might be in conscious perception
and other organisms that might look a little
different
Yeah I mean if I understood correctly
that's the project of neural
decoding so lots of neuroscientists
work on this idea of reading out
electrical information out of
mammalian brains or including
human brains to try and understand what the person
is thinking
Hi thanks for the talk I'm
I'm wondering when you say
all intelligence is collective intelligence
is there a sort of a principal
argument for that like can we imagine
intelligences that we haven't
discovered that could not be
collective like why are all
intelligences collective
Well
as far as we know
certainly on earth
every intelligence is made
of parts
I cannot I mean maybe somebody has
better imagination than me but I cannot imagine
a truly
sort of
homogenous monadic
single
single object that is not made of
parts that can change and that function relative
to each other and so on that could then
learn and
do the kinds of things we expect of intelligence
if it doesn't have internal parts that can change
state how is it learning anything
right it's not I just can't imagine
how you could possibly have a
intelligence that is
one indivisible thing that does not have
internal states that can change every intelligence
that we've ever seen every piece of
active matter and
intelligent living
thing that we've ever seen is composed of parts
composed of parts composed of parts
I just don't see how it would be
otherwise
good
hi yeah great talk
so I was curious about
have you done RNA
seek before and after for example
in that frog example
I'm curious if there are any
transcriptomic changes that you were able to see and
if so
what are your thoughts on oncogenesis
or oncogene activation
yeah we absolutely
we've done tons of RNA seek there are massive
transcriptional
remodeling events that happen after the kinds of things
that we do also naturally so
xenobots have a very different transcriptome from
frog embryos, anthropobots have an extremely
different transcriptome from
normal human
from the tissue that they came from
even though there are no genetic changes
no weird nanomaterials, no drugs, no trans genes
no certain synthetic circuits
so yeah massive
massive changes and as far as oncogenes
the story that I didn't tell you is that
there's a whole
way to look at cancer as a kind of
dissociative identity disorder of this collective intelligence
and what that means is that you can actually address it
not by trying to kill the cells
but by trying to reconnect them back
into the
into the electrical networks and so what we do
is we inject human oncogenes
like K-RAS mutations and so on
into these embryos normally they make
tumors but if we then
manage the electrical connectivity correctly
even though the oncoprotein is blazingly
expressed you don't get tumors you get
perfectly healthy tissue with cells that are
participating in the network activity
and doing what they're supposed to do so there is
there is a cancer therapeutic story
here as well
Hello Michael great talk
thank you very much so I'm a neurosurgeon
I have an interesting
observation that you might find
cool too
so we have had
patients that we operate on
say lose some function
speech and then
rehabilitate after six months they are back
they regain their speech back
and when we operate
on the same patient again
the same spot where we lost
speech last time
is completely
rejectable and no function change occurs
so this
this is very rare
I didn't I saw
this kind of phenomena happen three or four times
but I was
and I'm not familiar
with your field
but is there a paper
you can direct us something
that
describes what you are describing here
the morpho memory and
the regular memory
how do they work in the human brains
well
okay there are lots of papers
how they work in human brains
is very unclear because obviously
experiments are really hard
for ethical reasons you can't do this
in regular humans there is some clinical data
drop me an email
michael.levin at tufts.edu
send me an email and I will
shoot you some reprints of what we have
Hi professor what do you see is the biggest
problem we need to solve before
using this to program
organisms
the biggest problem is
conceptual the biggest problem
is developing an
understanding of
how we are going to
recognize and
communicate with a
collective intelligence
in the sense that even
we've done experiments with gene
even gene regulatory networks
without the rest of the cell
without changing promoters
without any of that just by their
dynamical properties have
6 different kinds of memory that they can do
including pavlovian conditioning
just grns on their own
the ability to recognize
that kind of property
and to learn to engineer with an
agential material not the way we've
engineered with passive materials
which we've done for millennia
but a material with an agenda
of goals and competencies
and problem solving skills
it's a completely different way of engineering
it's a communication and a collaboration
with your material it's not the kind of
micromanaging that we've been doing
since the beginning of the scientific enterprise
so those issues
are the biggest barrier
Thanks
I notice you guys mostly use endothelial
or epithelial tissues for like the xenobots
and from different species as well
is that just sort of purely methodological
opportunism or is there like a relationship
between behavioral plasticity
and the characteristic time scale
at which they divide it die and so on
yeah interesting
we've done everything
we've done mesodermendoderm
we've done human mesenchymal stem cells
the reason the bots are epithelial
is because
those are the tissues that are ciliated
and they have a little motile cilia
and that behavior
that allows them to swim
and to have visible behavior
now I also think that
there are many interesting behaviors that happen
in physiological and transcriptional spaces
but for our first outing of this stuff
it was important to have behaviors
that people can see and really recognize as behaviors
so for that you need them to be motile
which means cilia
which means epithelium
Thanks
Thanks for the talk I really enjoyed it
I had a sort of question about
the role of you mentioned membranes
were used to sort of predict the next
downstream series of events and
intercellular events that contribute to the gross
development what do you think of epigenetics
and how you would sort of encode that
in the computational model
and sort of what those next steps are
like methylation, alkylation
all those different types of things because
you accounted for membranes but not I guess
those types of changes and I guess more
basically how do you account
to encode those as
next steps that a computational model
might predict or even downstream
Yeah we have them in our model
so we know there are
acetylation and methylation events that are downstream
of the things we do
it's there
by itself it doesn't really add much
all of the
the kind of high level decisions
about what's going to happen
are made at least as far as we've
been able to see now they're made
at that electrophysiological level
all the gene expression changes
direct or indirect through chromatin
modification or downstream
yeah they're there you can model them
but they're not
they're not a great
target for modification
you know if you want
there's certain things that you can do that way
but typically if you want to make these large scale
changes you're much better off doing
it as high on that control
hierarchy as you can
by the time you get down to the chromatin modification
you are having to micromanage a lot
of things to get what you want
Hi
thank you for your talk
I was really interested in the conditions
of this kind of initial bioelectrical
field
you showed several examples
of for example cells
creating
like sending bioelectrical
signals amongst each other
in order to stimulate growth in a certain way
I'm wondering
when it came to maybe like the first
organisms or organisms in a vacuum
are we
kind of sending out certain frequencies
or electrical
stimuli
in order to simulate that
or what were those types of kind of
initial field conditions
Yeah, good question
I mean we are
living cells
put out all kinds of things across the electromagnetic
spectrum
ultra weak photon emission
all kinds of AC
weak magnetic
kinds of things
I don't study any of that
so I have no idea really
what the implications that would be
everything that I've shown you was
purely electrical there's no magnetic component
there's no waves
this is purely electrical and it propagates
through water so
the stuff that I showed you doesn't really
work through air
but having said that it is true
that living things do emit
electromagnetic radiation but I don't think
we know what it does
Thanks
Alright, last question
Thank you so much for this talk
just a quick question
about like because I guess you can
kind of call it
like a programming type of question
how would you
describe the type of bugs
that you encounter so to speak
in this situation so let's say you want to create
a worm with two heads
and the outcome is just different than what you expect
like how do you, first of all
I'm guessing you've seen that in a second
how do you deal with quote unquote debugging that
Yeah, great
the biggest issue here
is that you have to think
completely differently than you do
with regular programming because in regular
programming
at least most of the time
you're dealing with an obedient passive
medium so when you have a command
whatever that command may be
you are pretty much guaranteed that
the hardware is going to carry it out
it may be the right command, maybe the wrong command
but when you say add these two numbers
if your hardware
is not actually going to do it then
you don't have a good computer right
the whole point of hardware
is to isolate those layers so that
at the higher level you don't need to worry about
where the electrons are going you can assume
that the chip is doing what it needs to do
and it's going to get carried out
biology isn't like that at all so what's happening here
is that every level has its own agenda
so when you are providing certain signals
what you end up with are targets that
either aren't paying attention
or they are paying attention and they refuse
or they actually fight you on it
are they going to do something different
or they have some other thing that they want to do
and this happens at every level
it's not just behavioral
scientists know about this because
it's really hard to do experiments
because of individuality cells do this too
so you're dealing with a material that is not
a passive material that has
well separated levels
of abstraction where each
level can depend on the bottom level to be
perfectly obedient they are all pursuing
their own agendas they are cooperating
communicating with each other
interpreting each other
the computational paradigm that
Josh Bangar and I have come up with
is called polycomputing
and it's simply the idea that
you have a huge number of
coexisting
interpenetrating agents which are all
interpreting and hacking each other in different ways
so there's not a single
interpretation of what an event is actually
computing in our computing architectures
we all agree when there's an AND gate
this is this set of physical events that's an AND gate
it's computing it in biology you have
lots of little
observers inside the cells and the tissues
that are all
interpreting these events as completely
different computations and we as a third person
a sort of third party observer
often have absolutely no clue what they're doing
and that's really hard
it's a very different way of programming
amazing
well
what an amazing talk and
thank you so much for us give
another round of applause
thank you so much great questions
I really enjoyed the discussion
awesome
okay now
we will also talk a little bit about
decentralized science
and I'll follow up
you're welcome to stay or whatever is good
so
let me share this tab here
thanks everybody I've got to run
for the long day
thank you
thank you so much
great discussion
okay
so
let me switch over here
so
oh yeah so first off
decentralized science is important so the first
part of decentralized science is attracting more people
so if you enjoyed this event
or you wanted to share with
another person make sure to
and make sure to post it it really helps
us you can take out your phone
I hate to be annoying about it
but I want you to take out your phone and take a picture
and send it out to other people
it seems weird now
but
it helps
we have information about
I'm going to give you information on our neko
first
we want to thank the people who
gave us this space today which is alchemy
and they are
the most reliable way to build web3 apps
specifically
a keel college friend
who is very kind to
give us the space
don't need the space
so this is the dci nyc community
we have lots and lots of speakers
we've had this is the 14th one we've done
we've had
people on mushrooms
and blinded studies and b's
and ai and nft's
all sorts of things
and we have another one
we have a new community
now people take out their phone
we have a telegram group
so you can stay in touch
after the event with each other
just giving another hint here
if you have your phone out now
okay
we have a website so dci.nyc
we have all our previous events
there we have the videos
we record everything we post online
we have swag
other things like that
can you go back to the telegram?
oh yeah
cool
okay
this is our next event on august 1st
it's going to be amazing
there is going to be
it's on this guy who's like doing this like
he's like
supersize me remember that movie with like mcdonald's
and
he's going to be doing like supersize
supersize me but with like wearables
it's going to be really cool
I spoke with him a few times
and he's an interesting fellow
and he's developing like a new type of wearable
for your toilet
and he's trying to destroy
his gut right now and then heal it
and then track the process
and we're going to be the first ones to
hear about his poo
oh
this is one thing we're trying to do more of
like having like a volunteer group
right now it's
sort of like a
like a skeleton crew that's doing this
oh thank you brian for helping
tonight thank you
I love as well
problems on the video
and brian on the code also
and so
if you're interested in
volunteering
for the next event here
we'll get dinner, we'll assign roles
and you can help out the part more part of the crew
and pick speakers
what was it
I forgot to update this slide
okay so now I'm going to talk about
like why is
what is decentralized
I wanted to do this talk before
but he had a
professor 11 so we'll do this talk after
and I wanted to say
why is it important as
a society and as a humanity
that we like
decentralize science
so imagine like
right now universities
like science is like hugely beneficial
to humankind
so that's probably one of the best
metrics of progress
and right now like a lot of it
are done in like research and development labs
and it's done in
like universities
but the quality of the research
in these things is all very tightly kept
it's a secret and also
that
sometimes the quality of like
academic research is really bad
and it's like not reproducible
and imagine a world in which
like the internet was like a giant
lab where people could like
contribute data to it
and get rewarded for it
and I think that like this is not
too far off I think like
universities are you know not as important
as they were 30 years ago
where is that science and innovation going to happen
it's going to happen on the internet
and this is like extremely valuable
and the people that participate in it
should get rewarded for it
so with this sort of premise is like
if you want if you have this as your goal
what would be the easiest way to do it
is you would use this blockchain
instead of just for like
financial incentives or like
swapping tokens and like
you swap some bitcoin for some ethereum on uniswap
which is cool but like the underlying value
attached to each of the tokens is like
sort of arbitrary whereas if you
like instead use the blockchain
to assign each token
or assign to a research project or to
intellectual property or to a new drug
or to bio electricity
and then you allow people to like
swap those types of tokens
for the IP that's attached to those
or contribute to a research project
this could be really cool and
make new types of projects happen
and maybe fund things and I want to
emphasize that like this isn't far off
I don't think that we're that far off
from this sort of thing existing in the world
I think it could be within the next like two to five
years I think it's very possible
and then the other big thing that's changing around
like why this is possible now
is like
AI is like going to be a scientist
very shortly so the idea that
you're a PhD student and then you have
six years of knowledge and four years of
undergraduate in this very specific
domain is like passe
and now anyone can be a research
scientist with just
like access to charge EVT
and you can get up to speed very quickly
so in this like new decentralized
science thing I think
it's possible to have like a thousand times
the number of scientists that exist
today because
there's a lot of people who aren't part of
a university who want to become
like a scientist
people will be incentivized so that you don't have
to do it through like
like you get
like a crappy salary at a university
like no one wants that like people want to be
like incentivized to do really great work
and so I think
that this is very possible to have like
wealthy scientists and a lot more of them
and like similar to how like
maybe like 30 years ago or 40 years ago
like there's only a couple computer programmers
but then like computers became
cheaper, GitHub became available
tools became easier to use
and then there's like everyone is a programmer
today and I think the same thing is sort of
we're on the cusp of that for
science so
um
uh it's like
like d-science is going to do for science
like it's going to decentralize science but
how many people know what d-phi is just in general
decentralized okay a lot
d-phi is like decentralizing finance
so that's like the idea of that
instead of like opening a bank account at
Wells Fargo there's probably a lot of people
who can't open a bank account
who would like to be banked and so
having like an ethereum wallet
a bitcoin wallet address or an ethereum address
and allowing them to swap different tokens
opening this up to a lot more people
and also remove a lot of the middlemen
so
here's a little table I made
we call this traditional science on the right
and decentralized science
on the left and I
I start off with this is just sort of
the process of
um a typical science
application so
the first thing is funding so
I hate funding because like normally
if you're not getting funded as a scientist
it means like I've never seen like
a really talented scientist complain about funding
so it means like something else is wrong
but it's the first thing here so
I'll start with it so the funding is like
a lot of funding happens because
governments are fund a lot of research
so like um the national science
foundation or the national institute of health
and the problem with that is like
they just fund very specific things
and they don't go broad and they only
fund things that they know they don't fund moon shot ideas
but in d-side
um you have access to a lot more
people so you can crowd fund ideas
and you can do a lot more crazy stuff
publications
are very broken in traditional science
so
publications in traditional science
go through a peer review but the peer reviewers
don't actually read the papers they just sort of
look at it and move on
um in d-side
anyone can be a peer reviewer and you can like bet
on individual contributions
um then uh
data sharing so in traditional science
data is very locked and in d-side
the data sets are like open
and you can pay and reproduce experiments very easily
um community
uh like
in a traditional science setting like
you only have you only sort of do research
within the lab setting but in d-side
um you have a global
access you can access a lot more people
which is cool um IP
can be shared governance
is instead of just like a
the lab manager doing all the research
and directing things
uh everything can go up to a token vote
so if there's a question around
do experiment A or experiment B
um instead of just relying on one person
to do it you can you can issue
you can have like a vote on
uh snapshot and decide on what
does then use the collective intelligence to figure out
what the next step should be and then
the reproducible I think is one of the most important ones
like I think in a lot of research
today um
like most of the papers are not
reproducible because they're either too complex
they don't reveal enough about how their methodology
or uh it's
uh they p-value hack
and there's all sorts of issues but in d-side
all the because everything is
disintermediated between
physical entities everything is sort of logged
on chain so you can easily just like
replay back everything
and see which sort of science which
science is valid and which science is invalid
okay
um
so the way it works is like
if you want to create a d-side project
you first create you have an idea
and you say I want to create an idea around
sleep
and um everyone who contributes to that project
is issued a token
so maybe you contribute through
um giving sleep data
maybe you contribute through
uh doing an algorithm
uh developing some sort of algorithm
maybe you contribute through um recruiting
people and for each of these different
things you get tokens
um and these we have the
like data pools so people can sort of contribute
to a data pool
so if for example for sleep you can use
like the o-ring and contribute
to a data pool and that data pool
will then be accessible to anyone
who's interested in uh sleep
other types of data
pools that I think are really interesting are like
blueprint is very popular these days
so like longevity like how do
you determine if these types of things
these interventions work is you're going to need
like very very um like
broad data sets so
things around like spoo
um things around o-ring and things around
like genomic data are all
going to be really really interesting to determine
like uh these these are
these are prime data sets to figure out
like what's working and what's not working
um you can you can do a lot more with like
data quality so right now in a
research project um
people just sort of like put in things
like maybe the phd scene will like
look for outliers and remove those
and then sort of move on
but when you have like a decentralized
science system
people can like um stake
on data so when you submit
data to a research project
you can submit like uh
five dollars along with it
and why that's important is because if you then
if you contributed bad data
like you can get slashed so you'll
get your five dollars back so you sort of like
spam the system and then you
your data will be removed and so it's
incentivizing you to produce like
high quality data that can be verified
um and that's like these these are
the types of things that you can do
um with with like d-side but not with
like traditional science
um people can just like you could have
like a uh an exchange
sort of like coinbase you can
you can have like oh i want
to invest in or i want to invest but i want
to participate in um
like bitcoin or crypto
or like ethereum and similarly
it could be like oh i want to
participate in an hrv study
or a sleeve study or uh
a co2 study
so it sort of opens it up to
a lot more people um and then
this is one of the more interesting things you can
like instead of like how many
like how many people know what a prediction market is
okay so imagine
a prediction market it's just
like a it's like a betting market or
like you predict what's going to happen in the future
and if you're right you win tokens
and if you're wrong you lose tokens
and imagine like a prediction market
or like scientific experiments
so you're incentivized to um
think about like what types of experiments
are going to work and what type of experiments are not
going to work and this in this
like this is like this is very
different from peer review so peer review is like
i have no skin in the game i don't care if this paper's
been accepted or rejected now let's like flip that around
if i'm correct this paper is
correct i'm going to like earn tokens
now i'm like going to spend a little
more time reviewing it because it's like
you want to you want to do really good diligence on it
so
the upshot of this is like you're trying
to align incentives between like high quality
scientific research and
um like
the outcome for the individual
person
okay so basically like
we're trying to build a
platform that will like enable people
to participate in decentralized
project or to spin up one um we've started
it already it's called um water bear
got science and we're looking
where we're hiring so if people here
are interested in decentralized
science and um
um like
participants specific roles we need
are like we need like a bd and a community manager
person since it's a little we're
we're we're having like like a lot
of people inbound and uh we can't
really respond so we're trying to
grow uh we're
backed by uh like some
of the best investors in crypto so
if you're interested uh we're very
hiring here's our application
um it's very short uh we're in
person um we work
uh like normal hours
but it's all in person which i think is good
and uh i think this is like a great
community to pull from so if you enjoyed this
event and you want to participate more uh
definitely apply
and then
oh that's it
do you have any yeah do you have any questions
yeah
oh
uh dc.myc
yeah
uh so uh i have a question
so normally uh the government
uh so
some of the big resources of funding
for science and government comes from
uh dood defense
energy and medical
and uh a lot of times
they put the science right into
applications which generates
return for them uh what do you
see as the biggest uh the biggest
drivers for dc in terms of
funding
yeah i think there's a lot of people that are
just passionate about things like i would
fund uh michael levin research just because
i think it's cool like i would much rather give him money than
like some other like random
like charity
um so i think that's one i think people
that have a specific need for it some
like a rare disease like
people are much more interested in participating
in that sort of thing and if you give them
like a pathway to back
credible people and participate in that
type of research i think that's another one
um and and then people who are
just interested in science as well like
i think there's a lot of people that want to continue
education maybe have uh
knowledge and they enjoy doing it in that free time
that also i think the cost are decreasing so like
previously it used to be a lot harder
to do a science project but there's a lot
of like clinical research organizations
and a lot of automation and a lot of ai
that's happening that's i think bringing down some of the
costs associated with like traditional research
i mean i guess we'll make up a lot of
uh
uh yeah good um i guess
kind of like a follow-up but there's
usually a lot of ip coming out of research
to spin-offs and stuff
and so on um i
assume that that could be also framework where
incentives could be aligned
if you get part of that is that part of
the entire equation or yeah
so that's like
what's like how it works is you have an idea
around like let's just take an example
of
like mental health like so you create a mental
health now around a specific topic
and then everyone who participates it like that
sort of wraps that's the ip any ip
that's created as part of that group is tokenized
sort of and everyone who participates
and does work earns tokens
based on their participation so if you contribute data
if you contribute analysis
if you recruit patients if you publish it
you become you or you get these
tokens commiserate with your
how much you contributed
yeah and so that's
that's one of the things that's nice about d-size
like it solves the ip issue
so in like a in like a traditional
setting you'd work with the university's
tech transfer office and they take a third
and a third and a third and it becomes impossible
and a lot of people a lot of research dies there
for partially that reason but here it's much easier
like all the data is tokenized
and there's a lot of liquidity around it
so you can exit or
enter back in if you choose
you can also like
uh
invest some of the ip
so it keeps people invested in the project
like one of the projects one of the problems
now with like university
researchers people graduate and then they leave
but if they invest it over
maybe a longer investing period they might
want some advice to stick around
thanks Michael
you mentioned that if someone spams
the system with incorrect data that that could
be removed how would that happen
if it's on the blockchain
uh yeah it would just be marked
each um there's a couple different ways
of doing it one is to
allow any data and allow like some
agent to just
it finds on the research project the simplest thing is allow
all data and then use some sort of
ai or human to judge which is good
bad quality data um the second one
is to do like a community
voting so you have like a jury
and they vote on each piece of
data to see if it should be accepted or rejected
or maybe you could use something like a liquid
democracy approach where you can assign
your voting power to another
person and Dave can vote on your behalf
of if this data is good or not and you just
trust this person and then the
crypto economic way of doing it is to
um have people stake
money on their data so
when before you can contribute the data
to the data set you have to you contribute
it along with the five dollar bill
if your data is accepted by the community
you get your five dollars back you get
your data accepted into the community and your tokens
in return and whatever
benefits are associated with those tokens
but if your data is considered bad
by some standard then
the five dollars is removed
it's kept by the community
and um
the data is thrown away and
you might the next question you'd ask is like
um what prevents like
why would you contribute to what if there's a bad
community and uh
they just kept all the money associated with the data
that's come in and the answer to that is
like um all
transactions that have been submitted to the
DAO for to
accept the data are on chain so you could
review the previous connected to the previous
submissions and say like
they've submitted a hundred people
have submitted great quality data and it's all been
rejected this DAO is
um is
terrible I'm not going to participate in it
anybody else
cool
well um
thank you all for coming it's amazing
to see all you here
and uh I'd like to see you
on August 1st
we might do one in between and we haven't scheduled it yet
but the August 1st one is the next one
and if you're interested in decentralized science
or you know someone that is share with a friend
and uh recommend them
alright thank you guys
applause
