Welcome, everyone, to Fossett's biotech seminar series.
Really excited to have Michael Levin here again.
I discovered your work, I think, about five years ago
in one of your New Europe's presentations
on what bodies think about.
Was totally startled by it.
Could not believe what you were discussing there
until we had you on, I think, two or three years ago,
for Fossett's seminar a while back.
Also, I think the topic was taming
the collective intelligence of self
with a focus also on possible regeneration
and longevity implications.
Since then, I have contacted you quite a few times
to ask if you want to nominate Fossett,
because we really want to explore a little bit more
the longevity and, like, bio-angle of much of your work.
Since then, you have not stopped working.
In fact, quite the opposite.
You have now produced some really mind-boggling bits
on Xenobots and Amphobots ever since.
And so hopefully, we may get into some of that
also during the Q&A.
And then most recently, you were on a cognitive revolution
podcast and discussed some of the implications of your work
for AI, and especially for a new and bio-inspired approach
to intelligence.
That was really interesting.
We have launched our AI safety grant since then.
And many, not many, but a few of the applications
actually actively referenced your work in the AI applications.
So I'm just really excited to discuss, hopefully, some
of these things in the Q&A.
But for now, please take it away.
Thank you so much for joining.
Today, are you discussing indulgence
in bio-electrical networks and interface
to regenerative medicine?
And hopefully, we can tease out some of the longevity
implications and some of the AI implications
afterwards in the Q&A.
Thanks a lot for joining.
We are big fans of your work.
And please take it away.
Thank you so much.
That's a very kind introduction.
Thank you so much for having me here.
I'm very excited to share some ideas with you.
And what I'd like to talk to you about
is basically the following point.
That I'm going to make the argument
that bodies consist of a kind of multi-scale competency
architecture.
And the key element of this is that there's
problem-solving intelligence at every level,
from the molecular networks to organs and swarms and so on.
I'm going to make the argument that definitive regenerative
medicine is really going to require
us to exploit this collective intelligence.
What it amounts to is communicating
our anatomical goals in morphospace to the cells.
And the particular interface that we exploit
is the endogenous bio-electrical networks that
are present in all tissues.
This is an extremely tractable and powerful interface
for top-down control.
And I'm going to show you the tools
that we've made to read and write the pattern memories
into what is basically the protocognitive medium
of the collective intelligence of cells.
I'm going to show you some beginning applications
in areas like birth defects, regenerative repair, cancer.
And we can talk about how these are heading towards biomedicine.
So in order to heal and restore function,
we really need to understand the agential material
we're working with because it's completely
different than the kind of engineering
we've done in the past.
So for thousands of years, we worked with passive materials.
And the thing about passive materials
is that the only thing you can rely on them to do
is to stay where you put them.
And so it's on you as the engineer,
like with, let's say, Legos or wood or metal
to put them exactly where you want them.
And at best, they're going to remain there.
And you have to be the one to implement
all the different functionalities.
But engineers have increasingly started working on
with active matter and even computational materials.
And for us, bio-engineers and workers
in regenerative medicine, we work in agential material.
And you can imagine right away how different
that type of engineering is when you think about
what it takes to build a tower out of Legos
versus a tower out of dogs.
If you build a tower out of Legos, it's very straightforward.
You put everything where it goes.
But if that tower falls over, that's the end.
And you can't really expect it to do anything beyond that.
The dogs initially are absolutely not going to stay
where you put them, but they offer an amazing interface
having to do with training and memory and learning.
And if you train them to stand on top of each other,
then once you knock the tower over, they'll get back up
and they'll do the thing they're supposed to do.
And so you can see the pros and cons of this.
It requires you to really understand your material
to know which type of techniques you're going to use.
And people argue a lot about this notion
of whether bodies are actually machines,
if there's a difference between machines and organisms.
And I don't believe that these are absolute binary categories
in any way, but what we want is a plethora of approaches
at the right levels.
You definitely want an orthopedic surgeon
who believes your body is a machine
because they get to use tools like this.
They use chisels and screws and hammers and so on.
But what you don't want is a psychoanalyst
who thinks you're that kind of machine, right?
And so different types of problems
require different levels of solution.
And after the orthopedic surgeon does their thing,
they then send you home to heal.
And it is that part, the part that we don't micromanage,
that is the really interesting part
where the collective intelligence of the bodies
really takes hold.
And ultimately, we can discuss this at the end.
I won't get into it here,
but the people who work on placebo and nocebo effects
and so on, like Fabrizio Benedetti,
says words and drugs have the same mechanism of action.
And this is extremely deep
because what this is reminding us of
is that there is a multi-scale architecture
that has a language understanding at the top
and all kinds of other levels
eventually reaching the molecular level.
And our body is actually an amazing architecture
that lets your high level executive goals,
for example, social goals, scientific goals and so on,
to literally move calcium and other ions
across your membranes and your cells
so that you can walk and do voluntary motion
and go about your day to try to achieve those goals.
So our body has that kind of architecture
that literally links mental, long range mental goals
to the movement of chemicals
that allow you to enact those goals.
So across this, what I call the spectrum of persuadability
because it puts the emphasis on how we are going to use
different types of tools
to get the system to do various things.
Across that spectrum of persuadability,
we have many different waypoints.
You have simple machines, you have homeostats
and then you have learning agents
and then you have rational thinkers and planners and so on
and completely different sets of tools.
So hardware rewiring here and then cybernetics here
and maybe control theory and then behavioral science
and then maybe other interesting things
like psychiatry and so on.
So one might ask the question,
where do cellular collectives fit into this spectrum?
The assumption, and I think most people make this assumption
is that it's got to be somewhere here,
maybe a little bit here,
but I want to really emphasize the idea
that is very much an assumption.
That is a philosophical commitment.
The thing we need to do as scientists and engineers
is do experiments.
We need to find out where they fit
because my claim is that humans
are actually not very good at guessing these things.
So we need to do experiments
and that amounts to asking what tools in particular
the tools of these other disciplines
are really powerful in getting cellular collectives
to do interesting things.
Now, as we start to talk about intelligence,
it's important to work backwards.
So here we are, if we believe that we are high level
metacognitive beings with true goals and memories
and preferences and so on.
So here we are, where did all those things come from?
Working backwards, both evolutionarily and developmentally,
they came from here.
We were all once a single unfertilized OSI.
So people look at this cell
and they see a little blob of chemistry
and they say that really just obeys the laws of physics.
There is no cognition there.
But the deepest lesson of developmental biology
is that there is no magic lightning flash
during this process at which you go from being
quote unquote, just physics to having a complex mind.
So that means our goal,
and we all make this journey across
this so-called Cartesian cut.
So that means that our goal is to really understand
the scaling of minds.
We really need to understand how the primitive competencies
of molecular networks and single cells
slowly but surely become large scale competencies
in new problem spaces.
And this is something that I think Turing
actually understood quite well,
although he didn't talk about it much,
that the self assembly of the body
and the self assembly and the scale up of minds
is really the same problem.
This is why the father of computer science
who thought a lot about intelligence
and mathematics and thinking and so on
also had a paper on self-organization of chemicals
in an embryogenesis.
I think he was onto this.
This is the kind of stuff that we are made of.
This happens to be a free living organism,
but I just wanna show you, this is a lacrimaria.
I wanna show you what a single cell is capable of.
No brain, no nervous system.
Everything is handled in one cell.
So all of this animals, morphological, physiological,
anatomical, metabolic needs are handled within one cell.
And we have to ask ourselves the question
of what connection policies are there for beings
with their own agendas and their own competencies
to get together and do larger scale things.
Interestingly, intelligence does not appear first
in whole cells.
In fact, even gene regulatory networks,
and you can see the details in these papers,
even gene regulatory networks,
if you look at them correctly
or if you look at them the right way,
you can actually discover six different kinds of learning
that simple pathways can do.
So no need for cells, no need for plasma membranes
or any of that, just a small number of nodes
turning each other on and off is already sufficient
to do things like associative conditioning.
And that has massive implications for biomedicine,
which we can talk about.
So the first part of this talk,
I want to focus on the competencies of the material.
I wanna really drill down and show off
some of the amazing kinds of capabilities of the material
that we're dealing with because that bears on
what kind of technologies are possible.
Here's one example of the implications
of being made of this kind of material.
So this is a tappel of the frog,
you'll see a lot of those today.
So here are the nostrils, here's the mouth,
here's the brain, the gut.
What you'll notice is that we've prevented
the primary eyes from forming here,
but we put an eye on his tail.
And it turns out that these animals can see perfectly,
well, we test them in this machine that we built,
we built a custom machine to train
and test them on visual cues.
They can see because they can learn to perform
in these visual assays.
This ectopic eye does not connect to the brain,
it will often make us an optic nerve
that can connect and synapse on the spinal cord here.
So think about the amazing plasticity here,
without new generations of adaptation, selection,
this animal out of the gate
with a completely different sensory motor architecture,
that brain realizes that the information
being put onto its spinal cord
by this weird itchy patch of posterior tissue
is good enough to understand its world as visual data
and is able to process and behave accordingly.
That plasticity is a major theme here.
Another example of plasticity
that dissolves the distinction between memory
and body structure can be seen in planaria.
These flatworms, one of the main amazing characteristics
that they have is that they regenerate.
So you can cut them into pieces
and each piece will give rise to a complete worm.
So one thing that was known since the 60s
is that if you train them on a particular task,
for example, to look for food around these bumpy little,
these laser-etched little areas,
so place conditioning basically,
you cut off their head in their centralized brain,
the tail will sit there not doing anything
other than growing a brand new head
and a little bit more than a week later,
they've grown back in your head
and you find out that these animals remember perfectly well
where the liver was, which is what they eat.
What we see here is the amazing ability
to not only regenerate your memories,
but to imprint whatever information is present,
presumably in the rest of the body
so that we don't know yet where it is,
but to imprint that information
onto a newly growing brain.
So think about what that might mean
for future therapeutics when a patient
with six or seven decades of memories,
of personality, of history suddenly has a large chunk
of their brain replaced with the descendants of stem cells.
In terms of, are you still going to get the same,
the same individual?
Is it going to be more like a newborn baby?
What these kind of models suggest
that actually memories might persist quite well.
In fact, it's even more impressive what happens
in the caterpillar to butterfly transition.
These animals start out as a kind of two-dimensional,
it's a creature that lives in a two-dimensional world.
It crawls around and eats leaves
and it has a brain that's suitable for that.
Eventually it has to metamorphose
into a much different animal.
So this is like a soft-bodied robot.
It has no hard components.
This is completely different.
The movement types are entirely different.
This is a hard-bodied creature.
It flies in the 3D world, it drinks nectar.
And during this process, the brain is basically dissolved.
Most of the connections are broken.
Most of the cells are killed off.
A new brain is rebuilt.
But the remarkable part is not only do the butterflies
remember the training that the caterpillars received,
but actually they remap that training
with new salience onto a new body plant.
Because if you train these caterpillars to associate,
for example, a particular color stimulus with leaves,
what the butterfly doesn't care about leaves,
what the butterfly remembers is to go look for food
on those same color discs.
So that information is actually generalized,
not leaves, but food, the category food,
and remapped onto the new food,
more appropriate to the different body structure.
So this is not just a matter of where does the information
stay during brain remodeling.
That's the first question.
But the second question is,
how does that information get remapped
onto the new life of this individual?
And so you can think about what that means,
the ability to remap information onto new bodies.
Think human augmentation, new embodiments for future humans,
brain modification,
and how the information is going to persist.
So what we have, again, in biology
is this multi-scale architecture
where all the way from molecular networks,
all the way up, every layer is a problem-solving system.
They're not just structurally different size scales.
They actually have competencies to solve problems
in different spaces.
And there are multiple spaces that they operate in,
gene transcription spaces, a physiological state space.
We're going to spend most of the time talking
about this anatomical morpho space,
but just to remind us that,
to really be humble about this,
because we humans are okay
at recognizing the intelligence of medium-sized objects
moving at medium speeds in three-dimensional space.
So crows and dogs and horses and maybe an octopus,
maybe a whale.
But we're really not very good
at recognizing intelligence in these other spaces
because all of our sense organs are very much aimed
at this kind of a one-narrow range of embodiments.
And I often like to think that if we had evolved
with a primary sensor of our blood chemistry
so that you can feel the blood chemistry,
the way that we currently see and hear and so on,
I think we would have no problem recognizing
that we live in a multi-dimensional space
and that our liver and our kidneys are, in fact,
intelligent agents that navigate that space adaptively
in terms of all the different things that happen to us.
So we're going to look at anatomical morpho space,
and which is basically just a multi-dimensional space
of all the different possible shapes
that something could undertake.
And we're gonna ask a basic question.
This is a cross-section through a human torso.
So look at this amazing order.
All these different organs are almost always
in the right shape, the right size, next to the right thing.
But we start out life like this,
a collection of embryonic blastomers.
Where does this pattern come from?
Where does it encode it?
And when I give this, I've given versions of this talk
to our middle school children,
and even the nine-year-olds immediately say,
oh, it's in the DNA.
They say it's in the genome.
But the thing is, we can sequence genomes now.
It was always clear, really, that this was not in the genome.
But a lot of scientists talk as if that's the case.
And now we know when you read the genome,
you don't see any of this, which is protein structure.
You see the description of the tiniest molecular hardware
that every cell gets to have.
You don't see directly information
about size, shape, symmetry type.
And so we need to understand how do these cells,
this genomically specified hardware,
how does it know what to build?
How does it know when to stop?
If something is missing, how do we convince it to rebuild?
And as engineers, we want to go one step further
and ask, what else could you build?
If we wanted to build something completely different
out of the same parts, could you?
Or all this talk of developmental constraints,
is that really a confining paradigm?
So let's think about what the future is supposed to look like.
What's the end game for this field?
I think that what we're talking about
is something we call an anatomical compiler.
So the idea is that someday you will sit down
in front of a software system and draw the plant, animal,
organ, or biobot that you want to build.
In this case, we've drawn a three-headed flatworm.
So having drawn the anatomy, the functional anatomy
that you want, what the system should be able to do
is compile that down to a set of stimuli
that could be given to cells to build that structure.
So not a 3D printer.
This is not about micromanaging where the cells go.
This is about convincing a group of cells
to build exactly what you want them to build
and not whatever it was that they were going to build before.
So two key questions first.
Why do we even need this thing?
Because not only for the understanding of evolution
and information and so on,
but very practically most biomedical problems.
So birth defects, traumatic injury, cancer, aging,
degenerative disease, all of these things would go away
if we knew how to convince groups of cells to build
whatever organs we wanted them to build.
Now, the other question might be, why don't we have this yet?
Genetics and molecular biology
has been going gangbusters for decades.
Why do we not have this thing yet?
I just want to illustrate one simple puzzle.
This is the axolotl larvae
and baby axolotls have little forelegs.
This is a tadpole of the frog.
At this stage, these guys do not have forelegs.
In my lab, we make something called a frogolotl.
So if we make a frogolotl,
it's got a bunch of embryonic cells from here,
a bunch of embryonic cells from here,
and you get a chimeric embryo.
Now, the axolotl genome is sequenced.
The frog genome has been sequenced.
Very simple question.
You've got both sequences.
Could you tell me whether a frogolotl
is going to have legs or not?
And the answer is no.
We have no way currently of knowing
the answer to these kind of questions.
In fact, if you didn't already know
what a tadpole or an axolotl looked like,
you couldn't even give me the shape of it
from looking at the genome.
It's very important to understand
what kind of information we have
and what kind of information we do not have.
So the state of the field currently is this.
We are very good at manipulating cells and molecules.
And all of the most exciting advances today
are about the hardware.
Everybody's really into genomic editing,
pathway remodeling, protein engineering.
All of these things are hardware.
They're focused at the molecular hardware level,
like where computer science was in the 40s and 50s.
So this is what programming used to look like.
She's physically rewiring this machine.
Now, the reason nowadays, when you're on your laptop
and you want to go from, I don't know,
PowerPoint to Microsoft Word,
the reason you don't get out your soldering iron
and start rewiring is because computer science
took advantage of something remarkable,
the fact that certain kinds of hardware
are reprogrammable and in fact can support
a layered, multi-scale, modular set of software,
or in our case, it's going to be physiology,
that allows you to do interesting things
with the exactly the same piece of hardware
without rewiring.
So this is what we're missing now.
But I'm going to argue that molecular medicine
is basically here.
I spoke to a major investor once who said that
in their firm, they think of biology today,
where computer science was in the year 2000.
And I think that's, that isn't as way wrong.
I think it's where we were in the 40s and 50s.
We can go a much higher than this.
And the thing that's still missing
is to understand the biological softwares,
to understand the intelligence
that we can take advantage of.
So when I say intelligence, what do I?
William James's nice definition,
which is the ability to reach the same goal
by different means.
It's a very cybernetic definition.
It doesn't talk about what kind of brain you have,
or whether you have a cortex,
or what space you're even working in.
Same goal by different means.
The ability to reach certain states in that space
when faced with interventions, when things change.
How much competency do you have to still get your job done?
So let's look, what kind of collective intelligence
can we find in cellular swarms?
What are the capabilities of our system
that we're trying to rewire?
What's the toolkit that we have?
This is one of my all-time favorite examples.
This is a cross-section through a kidney tubule of a nut,
and eight to 10 cells normally making this thing up.
One thing you can do to early embryos
is multiply the amount of DNA in their nuclei.
So if you can make a polyploid,
nutes that have two and four and six and so on.
If you do that, the cells become larger,
and you find out that,
actually, you still get the same size nut,
and that's because fewer cells get together
and make the same anatomical structure.
So amazing thing, number one,
is that you could have multiple copies of your genome
that doesn't seem to mess anything up.
Number two, you could have abnormally large cells,
and they still figure out
how many of them there need to be to do this.
But the most amazing thing
is that if you make the cells truly gigantic,
and I think this is maybe six and nutes.
If you make the cells truly gigantic,
what they will do is wrap around themselves
to give you the same anatomical structure.
And what's remarkable about that
is that this is a different molecular mechanism.
This is cell-to-cell communication and tubular genesis.
This is cytoskeletal bending.
And so in the service of a large-scale anatomical goal,
different molecular components are being called up.
Now, just think about what this means.
If you're a nude coming into the world,
what can you rely on?
We tend to think you've had eons of evolution,
you've had all this experience with your environment.
You can't count on how much DNA you have.
You can't count on how many copies of anything you have.
You can't count on your cell size.
You can't count on how many cells you have.
You have to be able to get your job done
despite massive variation in your own parts.
We don't have even the beginnings of technology
that has that kind of problem-solving competencies
and capacity.
This is a more familiar example.
We know that embryos reliably go from a single cell
to a complex organism,
but it's not a hardwired process.
It's reliable, but it isn't hardwired.
Because if you cut these embryos into pieces,
you do not end up with half bodies.
You end up with monozygotic twins and triplets.
So what happens is that from different starting positions,
and this is again called back to James' definition,
from different starting positions,
you can navigate that morpho space
and get to that same ensemble of goal states
that basically maps to a normal variation
around the human target morphology.
In many species, this is not just an embryonic thing.
For example, axolotls can regenerate their legs,
their eyes, their jaws, portions of their brain and heart,
spinal cord ovaries.
And what happens if they lose a limb anywhere along this axis,
they will rebuild exactly as much as needed,
whether from here or from here,
from different starting positions they get here.
And here's the most amazing thing about regeneration.
And everybody's excited about cranking up regeneration
for therapeutic purposes.
But actually the most amazing thing about regeneration
is that it stops.
How does it know when to stop?
It stops when the correct salamander arm has been completed,
and that turns out to be very profound.
Now, it's not as if this is just for frogs
and salamanders and flatworms.
The human liver is highly regenerative,
even the ancient Greeks knew that.
I'm not sure how, but they did.
Human children regenerate their fingertips
below a certain age.
And deer, large adult mammals,
regenerate a centimeter and a half of new bone per day
when they're regrowing their antlers.
So massive amount of regeneration of bone,
vasculature, innervation, skin.
So the final example that I want to show you before
we go to the molecular mechanisms
is what happens to the frog face.
So this is a tadpole face, here are the eyes,
the nostrils, the mouth.
And here's what a frog looks like.
And so to go from a tadpole to a frog,
you need to rearrange the face.
These animals, the jaws will move forward,
the eyes move, everything moves around.
And it used to be thought that this was
a hardwired set of movements.
If you just somehow code for every organ
to move in that particular direction,
a particular amount,
then what will happen is you'll go from a normal tadpole
to a normal frog.
We decided to test this and to see actually
how much intelligence does this have,
and the way you test these things is with perturbations.
So what we did was we made a scrambled tadpole
called, we call them Picasso tadpoles,
where everything is in the wrong place.
The eyes on top of the head, the mouth is off to the side,
everything is just completely shuffled,
like a Mr. Potato Head doll scrambled around.
And what happens is that these animals
become quite normal frogs, actually,
because all of these different things
will move in normal paths,
in rather abnormal paths,
to get to where they need to go,
and then the movement stops.
So what the genetics gives you is not
a set of hardwired movements.
What the genetics actually specifies
is a machine that can execute an error minimization scheme.
It can continue to remodel
until certain conditions are met.
So those kind of data lead us to revise
the basic loop of developmental biology.
Normally what you have is there are genes acting
in gene regulatory networks,
they make some proteins that interact
by the laws of physics, all of this is in parallel,
and then this magical process of emergence
happens and complexity arises,
and then you have this beautiful organism.
This view, this is what is focused upon
in developmental biology textbooks,
is an open loop feed forward process
that rides along via emergence of complexity.
And it is certainly true that there are many systems
that will give you complexity
from the repeated application of simple rules.
There's plenty of that,
but that's not where the magic is here,
because what we find, which is a property
that is not shared by all the computational models
of feed forward emergence and complexity,
is that if you deviate from this target morphology,
and that can be with injury,
it can be with mutations, with teratogens.
In fact, one can propose that actually
this kind of anatomical homeostasis
and regenerative capacity was not about injury to start with.
The reason this evolution has this
is because this is how it was able to deal with mutations,
the fact that you know that in your lineage
you are going to experience changes of your internal parts.
And if you can't deal with that,
you're not going to live very long as a lineage.
So what happens when you deviate from this,
from this target morphology is that some mechanisms kick in
both at the level of physics and genetics
to try to reduce the error.
It's literally like a thermostat in your house.
It's an error minimization kind of process.
Now, this is on the one hand,
biologists know all about homeostatic loops.
And of course, we recognize them in terms of pH regulation
and temperature and hunger and all that.
But there's a couple of unique things here.
One is that, first of all,
the set point of this homeostatic process
is not a single number.
It's not a scalar like for hunger or pH.
It's a some kind of simplified version
of a complex three-dimensional shape.
How could we possibly store shape in a group of cells
so that they know what they're supposed to build?
Now, how do we store this set point?
And then the other thing is that
in developmental biology and cell biology,
really discouraged from talking about goals
and those kinds of teleological models.
You're supposed to talk about chemistry
and the way that chemistry rolls forward
to produce emergent complexity.
But it's really critical to realize now
that since the 40s,
we've had in cybernetics and control theory,
we've had a mature science of machines with goals.
It is no longer magical thinking to say
that these kinds of processes have goals.
That better be true because we also consist
of these kinds of processes.
And if they cannot support goal-directed behavior,
then it's unclear what to say about our cognition either.
This kind of weird view of looking at it
to say that the development
is actually a goal-directed process
that moves towards a kind of target morphology
makes a couple of predictions.
It means that we should be able to find that mechanism.
It means that we should be able to decode it and rewrite it.
And if we rewrite it,
something amazing becomes possible.
It means that in order to make changes here,
let's say for regenerative medicine,
we don't need to change the genes.
And that's really good
because it is almost never clear
how you would change the genes,
even if CRISPR worked perfectly, which it will.
At some point, the question is,
which genes do you change
to make the edits that you want out here?
Instead of doing that,
we could change the pattern memory
and let the cells do what they do best,
which is build to it.
So we've now, for a couple of decades,
we've been pushing this idea
and exploring the predictions of this goal-directed behavior.
So the first question we needed to ask
is where could these pattern memories be stored?
And we already have one clear example
of collections of cells
that store complex patterns
as endpoints of goal-directed behavior,
and that would be the brain.
So in the brain, we know you have
electrical networks of cells
that produce action potentials
and voltage gradients
via ion channels across their surface.
We call that ZMEM, the resting potential.
And that supports an amazing kind of software.
Here you can see in vivo physiology
of a zebrafish brain,
where people in neuroscience
try to do neural decoding.
The commitment of neuroscience
is that if you could understand this physiology,
you'd be able to decode the goals,
memories, preferences, and so on of this kind of system.
All the cognitive kinds of content
you should be able to decode
from this electrical activity.
It turns out that nature really figured out
that the electrical networks
are really good for this kind of thing
very early on.
The electrical networks are not about neurons.
They were here from the time of bacterial biofilms.
And all cells in your body have ion channels
and make resting potential gradients.
Most of these cells are connected to each other
through electrical synapses known as gap junctions.
And could we run the same kind of research program?
Could we look at, for example,
in this case an early frog embryo
and read out the electrical information
and ask what could this cellular collective
be thinking about?
We know what this cellular collective thinks about.
It largely thinks about movement
through three-dimensional space.
But embryos move through anatomical morphous space.
So could we understand how the earlier version
of this electrical system was used
to compute and to move us through morphous space?
So in our group,
we developed several different kinds of tools
first to read these patterns.
And so here is a voltage-sensitive dye in time lapse
showing you all the electrical conversations
that these cells are having with each other
to sort out where the different organs of the frog embryo
are going to be.
We do a lot of computational modeling
to tie the molecular biology together
with the voltage gradients that we observe
and ask questions about a pattern completion.
So if a part is deleted,
how does the network remember the whole and so on?
I'm going to show you two example patterns of this.
So this is what we call the electric face.
And this is a pattern of voltage.
Again, the colors indicate resting potential.
That this is one frame of the process
by which this embryo puts his face together.
And you can already see where everything is going to be.
The right eye is going to be here.
The placodes are out here.
The mouth is going to be here.
This is a subtle bioelectric pre-pattern
that tells these cells where to turn on the genes
if they have frizzles, BMPs, and so on to pattern the face.
And it's absolutely required.
If you change this pattern, the face changes.
I'm going to show you that in a minute.
Now, that's a normal pattern.
There's also pathological patterns,
such as when you inject an oncogene,
you can actually detect the defection of these cells
from the large-scale bioelectrical network
and the impending metastasis and tumor genesis.
You can see that here.
So beyond reading and recording these kind of patterns,
the key is to do functional perturbations,
do interventions.
And so for that reason, we developed some tools
to now write the content into that electrical pattern.
So just to link all of this back to the key concept
from the beginning of the talk,
we are literally treating the collective of cells
during morphogenesis as a collective intelligence,
which exerts behavior in anatomical morphospace.
It moves the configuration of the body
from that of a single cell
to some whatever the complex animal it is or plant.
And the idea is that this is literally behavior
just in a different space.
And we now want to read and write
the primitive mind of that collective intelligence.
So how do we do this?
No magnets, electromagnetic fields,
electrodes, radiations, nothing like that.
We hijack the native bioelectrical interface
that these cells are using to hack each other.
So that is the ion channels
and the gap junctions that they express.
So we basically steal all the tools from neuroscience.
So this is ion channel drugs and optogenetics
and various manipulations of these channels
that you can use to control the voltage pattern
in this tissue.
When you do that, several things happen.
Initially, this work, for example,
this eye story was published in 2010.
Initially, when we said we wanted to change
the resting potential of cells,
the background assumption was going to be
that what you'll get is uninterpretable toxicity
and death because voltage was thought
to be a housekeeping parameter.
And I want to show you actually what it really does.
So what we do here is we inject some,
in this particular case, we inject some RNA
encoding a set of potassium channels.
What they can do with the cells they end up in,
once the proteins are made, is set a voltage,
a little pattern of voltage that looks like that eye spot
that I just showed you in the electric phase.
So when you do that, whichever cells get that pattern,
they are instructed by that pattern to build an eye.
And so here you have eye made from cells
that were supposed to be gut.
If you section those eyes, you get a lens,
retina, optic nerve, all the right stuff.
So here we learned some interesting things.
First of all, that the bioelectric pattern is instructive.
It actually calls up new eyes.
It's not just that we messed it up
and then the cells died and there's toxicity.
No, it's actually instructive.
You can call up healthy new organs
by specific bioelectric patterns.
It's modular.
We didn't have to tell these cells how to build an eye.
In fact, we have no idea how to build an eye.
What we found is a high level subroutine,
a basically a high level trigger
that tells them to build an eye
and they take care of the rest.
It also, we also find that actually,
there's this prompt of this bioelectric pattern
reveals more competency in these cells
because in the developmental biology textbook,
it will tell you that only the anterior and erected room here
is competent to make eye.
And that's true if you prompt them with the Pac-6,
so-called master regulator eye gene.
But actually, these cells are perfectly competent.
It's just that nobody had prompted them
with a more convincing stimulus.
And so this again reminds us to be humble
in the sense that every assessment
of the competency of some system
is basically us taking an IQ test ourselves.
It's what are we able to discover about that system
and we need to be really cautious
in putting limits on things
when we haven't fully understood
what the system is capable of.
And finally, what I also really like about this
is this amazing property of self-scaling.
So this is a lens sitting out in the flank
of a tadpole somewhere.
The blue cells are the ones that we injected.
But look, the rest of the lens
is made of clear cells that we never touched directly.
So what's happening here is that these cells
got the message that they should build an eye,
but there's not enough of them.
And what they do is they recruit
a bunch of their completely normal neighbors,
so secondary instruction to help them in this task.
And of course, we already know
there are other collective intelligences
that do this, for example, ants.
So if a couple of ants find something
that's too heavy for them to lift,
what they'll do is recruit others to come and help.
So collective intelligences tend to have
this self-scaling property and the cells do it.
We've deployed this idea of high-level triggers
for very complex events for leg regeneration purposes.
So frogs, unlike salamanders, do not regenerate their legs.
And so if they lose a leg 45 days later, there's nothing.
We came up with a cocktail,
and this is Kelly Chang's work,
where what she did was treat them for 24 hours.
And it immediately induces a bunch of pro-regenerative genes.
And then by 45 days, you get some toes,
you get a toenail, eventually a pretty nice leg
that is touch-sensitive and motile.
Our latest paper shows one day of treatment
followed by a year and a half of leg growth
in the mature, fully adult frog.
That's, again, this notion of an early decision-making intervention.
We're not there to micromanage the stem cells
or tell any of the cells where they should go
or what the gene expression should be.
We have no idea how to do that.
And I don't think we will for a really long time,
but what we can do is discover the prompts,
the stimuli that get the system to undergo
certain complex behaviors, morphogenetic behaviors.
So here I should do a disclosure,
because David Kaplan and I have this spin-off company
called Morphosuticals.
And what we are doing now is trying this technology in mammals,
hopefully eventually towards human patients,
but we're nowhere near human patients yet.
The idea is to use a wearable bioreactor,
an aqueous environment in which we control the bioelectric
and other states of these cells
and get them to commit early on to a leg-growing behavior
versus a scarring behavior.
Okay, the next quick story I'm going to tell you is about planaria.
And so here are these flatworms.
And perhaps one of the most interesting things
about these flatworms is that they are immortal.
So these theories of aging that say that aging is inevitable,
that because it's a kind of accumulation of mistakes
and entropic loss and so on,
I think they cannot be corrected.
The asexual strains of these animals do not age.
Nobody's ever seen an old asexual planarian.
They just continuously regenerate their bodies.
And you might ask a question,
if you amputate the head and the tail
and you have this middle fragment,
how does that middle fragment know
how many heads it's supposed to have?
Like right here, this piece is going to grow ahead
and then the same, the near neighbor cells here
are actually going to grow a tail.
Why do they do different things?
How does this thing know how many heads
each fragment is supposed to have?
And so we found an electric circuit
which maintains a pattern like this
that says one head, one tail.
And if you cut this reliably, you get one headed worms.
And if we rewrite that electrical information
using ion channel drug exposure,
just for the first few hours,
what it'll do is set a voltage pattern
that's like this and it holds.
And then if you later cut this animal,
this perfectly normal anatomically correct looking animal
with normal gene expression, normal anatomy,
will then regenerate us two heads
because that is what its pattern memory says.
So I promised you early on in the talk
that we are going to find and rewrite
the literal pattern memories that the tissue has
about what it's supposed to build,
what it's supposed to look like.
This is it, you're looking at it.
These are much scans you might do of a brain.
This is the collective intelligence of these cells,
maintains a memory, we can read that memory.
And this is what this animal now thinks
a proper plenarian should look like.
It doesn't come into effect until it's injured
and the cells are called upon to read that memory
until then it's latent.
So this is actually a counterfactual memory.
The collective intelligence of cells
is able to hold counterfactual memories.
That's a pretty advanced style capacity actually.
Why do I keep calling it a memory?
Because if we take this two-headed animal
and we cut off the primary head,
we cut off this ectopic secondary head,
you might think that it should go back to normal.
After all, the genomic information is the same.
We didn't touch the genome, there's no editing here.
No trans genes.
You might think that it should go back to normal,
but in fact, it doesn't.
These animals continue to generate
two-headed animals in perpetuity.
The first two-headed worms
caused by it induced by a different mechanism
were seen around 1903 by Thomas Hunt Morgan.
Between that time and 2009,
nobody had recut them to our knowledge
because it seemed completely obvious
of what would happen.
The genetics are unchanged, of course,
it'll go back to normal.
Why would you recut them?
And only this, and so the reason I mentioned this
is because the conceptual part matters.
It defines what experiments you are going to do,
the way you think about this,
and whether you think of genetics as specifying
in a hardwired way what the outcome is
versus as a kind of reprogrammable medium
where you might say,
I wonder if the memory has been reprogrammed
and in fact, that's what happens here.
So this has all the properties of memory,
it's long-term stable, it's rewritable,
it has conditional recall, which I just showed you,
and here are these two-headed animals hanging out.
Not only can you make animals with the wrong number of heads,
but you can make this way animals with heads
from other species.
So this is a triangular-headed dugezia doradoscephala,
you cut off the head, perturb the bioelectric circuit,
and you can end up with flat heads like a Pifolina,
you can end up with round heads like an S-Mediterrania,
or of course, the normal heads.
Not just the head shape,
but the distribution of stem cells,
the shape of the brain, and so these other species
sit in these attractors in the state space,
in the anatomical space, state space naturally,
but you can convince this hardware to visit those regions.
Without any genetic reprogramming,
the exact same normal hardware can actually visit
those other regions of anatomical state space.
Now, you can go well beyond that,
and we've made these kind of crazy, spiky shape things,
these cylinders, this is not even a flat like a planarian,
it's supposed to be combination forms.
And so now we have to start thinking about
what is the space of possibilities for these?
In developmental biology,
we hear a lot about developmental constraints,
as if there were things that cells cannot build.
We actually have no idea what cells can and cannot build.
So let's just take a look at this simple fact
that we are not the only bioengineers.
So here's a cool plant example,
I'm obsessed with these gauze lately,
but this is what the acorn normally builds.
Okay, so this is the oak leaf,
and if all you look at is this,
you will get the idea that this is incredibly reliable,
and that what the oak genome does is specify this,
this is what it can do.
But along comes a parasite,
this is a wasp of a particular type,
and the wasp is an interesting bioengineer.
What it has, the lineage of the wasp,
not the individual wasps,
but the evolutionary lineage has learned
is how to prompt these cells,
perfectly normal, not genetically edited cells,
to build something completely different.
This big round, bitey, red, and yellow thing
is made of these cells,
okay, because they were prompted by this bioengineer.
Would we have any clue that these cells
are capable of building something like this?
We'd have no idea if we didn't already see
that this was here.
So we have to understand now
that the reliability of hereditary is really deceiving,
because it keeps us from realizing
what the space of possibilities are,
and that bioprompting in this way
is actually really powerful,
and can let you do things
that micromanagement cannot let you do.
So when our group were trying
for this kind of full stack approach,
where you start with a molecular biology
that tells you which ion channels are present,
and then bioelectric simulators
to understand tissue level bioelectric patterns
and where they come from,
and then dynamic properties of these patterns,
if we cut the animal, do they rescale,
do they restore, do they have memory,
do they have plasticity,
and from there to basically algorithmic models
of how large scale anatomical decisions
are going to be made.
And once you have some of those models in hand,
you can do rational interventions.
So this is a normal frog brain,
forebrain, midbrain, and hindbrain,
and under a variety of teratogens,
this can be messed up.
So for example, from nicotine,
you can see the difference here
between this brain and this.
And so we asked, okay,
is there any hope that using this bioelectrical information,
we can actually restore something as complex as this?
You might think that what you'd have to do
is tattoo every single cell
with the appropriate information
to get back into this very specific pattern.
So we made a computational model.
This is Alexis Pytaka and Baipav Pai in my group did this,
and they made this model and they asked,
okay, under a scenario like this,
when things have gone wrong,
what can we do to the bioelectrical gradient
to get back to normal?
And the model actually suggested
one particular ion channel,
which is called the HCN2,
and that channel has some really interesting properties
that I don't have time to get into here,
but one of the things it does
is restore sharp bioelectrical patterns,
it restore borders between adjacent compartments.
And what that does is able to repair even genetic defects.
So here's a normal brain.
Here's the brain of a tadpole
with a dominant notch mutant.
So you can see the forebrain is gone,
the midbrain and hindbrain are a big bubble.
And even on that background,
if you also give it either HCN2 RNA
or a couple of human-approved drugs
that are HCN2 openers,
these animals will end up with a normal brain structure,
normal brain gene expression, and normal IQs.
If you test them on learning rates,
they're indistinguishable from controls.
So I'm not arguing that we can always fix genetic errors,
but in some cases, you can fix hardware defects in software.
So an exposure of this animal
with a really powerful notch mutation
to a drug that was picked by a computational platform
restores a complex organ.
So the future, as we see, is a workflow like this
where there's a bunch of information of health and disease.
And these data, by the way, are not available.
We're just gearing up now to let this kind of physiology
catch up to the omics kind of a data sets
that exist for protein and RNA.
And then we can ask which kinds of ion flow states
would restore the correct pattern.
And then it becomes fairly straightforward
to find drugs that will do that.
And so you can play with this.
The early version of that platform is here.
Okay, so I'm just going to wrap up
by saying a couple of big picture things.
We know that both evolution and development
have scaled what they've fundamentally done
is scaled the size of goals.
So these little tiny creatures, microbes, and single cells
have little tiny goals.
They're cognitive light cones or the size of the goals
that they're able to produce and work towards
are basically right around the size of themselves.
They don't care what happens in the environment.
They just care about the internal physiological states.
But here, in this kind of system,
their tiny little goals have been inflated
towards a very grandiose construction project,
making a whole limb.
We know it's a goal because if you deviate them from that goal,
they will work very hard.
They will spend all kinds of energy to rebuild.
And when they reach that goal, they stop.
And so now, whereas here, there are tiny little goals
and physiological and transcriptional state space,
here you have much larger goals and anatomical state space.
But that amazing set of mechanisms,
which we can talk about if people have questions,
the set of mechanisms that allow the scaling of goals
has a failure mode.
That failure mode is cancer.
So this is glioblastoma.
Individual cells can disconnect from the electrical network.
And at that point, they roll back to be amoebas.
They are not more selfish.
It's just that their cells are smaller, quite literally.
The self here is very large.
This is the kind of goals that it can pursue.
These are tiny little cells here looking out for themselves.
So we have developed ways to not only detect this process early,
so this is hopefully a diagnostic modality for the future,
but also to suppress it.
Because instead of killing these cells,
so this is the same animal here.
This tapo is injected with a nasty human oncogene,
for example, a P53 mutation or a KRAS or something.
And the oncoprotein is very strongly expressed.
In fact, it's all over the place here.
It's labeled it.
But there is no tumor.
And that's because we co-injected an ion channel
that forces these cells to stay in electrical communication
with their neighbors.
That's it.
We don't regulate any of the other processes.
We just reconnect it to the large-scale network
that remembers that you should be working on the skin
and muscle and things like that and not making a tumor.
That means that we can think about next-generation biomedicine
from the perspective of the protocognitive capacity
of the material that we are trying to repair.
So not just micromanagement,
but actually all the way through the scales of the system,
perhaps guided by our computational platforms
and various AI wrappers on top of that,
we can ask, what is the most efficient interaction interface?
And I think biology and evolution work so well
precisely because they don't micromanage.
Evolution makes problem-solving machines at multiple scales
and it is hacking at every level.
Every cell is trying to hack every other cell and tissues.
And they're all trying to hack themselves, by the way,
to get them to do adaptive things
despite the various problems in the environment.
And so that means that we can take advantage of this.
All of this stuff, the ability to sense,
to amplify signals, to generalize, to discriminate,
learn, and ultimately solve problems.
Instead of building them from scratch ourselves,
as we now do with robotics,
we can take advantage of a billion years
of optimizing these kind of capacities.
And so we can think, now let's think about something else.
Not only is our target,
so the patient or the bioengineer tissue,
not only is our target somewhat up here in the spectrum,
but actually our intervention could be too.
Right now we use drugs.
Drugs, for the most part, are extremely dumb.
They are very simple machines.
They only do the one thing they do.
They bind whatever targets they're going to bind,
and that's it.
And that's very limiting.
Some kind of smart intervention.
And yes, it could be an implanted piece of engineering,
like a smart insulin pump or something like that.
But here's a different way to think about it.
So let's take a look at this thing.
So here it is running around.
If I were to ask you what that was,
you might say that this is,
we got this from a pond somewhere,
a primitive organism from the bottom of a lake.
And if you were to sequence the genome,
you would find out something pretty well.
The genome is 100% homo sapiens.
Okay, what you're looking at here
is something we call an anthrobot.
It's a new, it's the next version of arzenobots,
which are biological, self-multile biological constructs
made from frog cells.
These are made from human patient cells.
There is no genetic modification here.
There are no weird nanomaterials.
There is no trans genes, no circuits.
So far, we can add all those things and we will as needed.
But for now, we're really interested in the baseline
competencies, the plasticity.
And so there's a protocol
that causes these little guys to develop up here.
They start to, they're basically lung organoids,
and then they, we get them to turn inside out.
And then you see what they really do
when your lung epithelium gets to reboot
its multicellularity and have a new life.
And so they become these highly multi-little creatures
that have all kinds of capacities.
Here's one navigating a scratch
through a bunch of neural tissue.
So all this gray stuff out here
is IPSC-derived human neural tissue.
It's a lawn and we made this scratch through it
and you could see it moving.
Now, it's moving through this.
What might be the interactions
between the amphibot and this tissue here?
If you let a bunch of them settle down,
we call this a super bot or a bridge bot,
because there's a bunch of them together.
If you let them settle down,
what you find is that over about four days,
what they do is they knit the two sides
of the wound together.
And this is what it looks like.
Now, whoever would have thought
that your tracheal cell sitting quietly
in your lungs and in your trachea for decades,
that given a new environment,
they would be able to reboot their multi-cellularity
in a way that not only lets them move around
and do other interesting things,
but actually exert healing capacity on your other cells.
Your tracheal cells have the capacity
to fix peripheral innervation.
What else do they know how to do?
We have no idea.
This was the first thing we tried.
This was not test number 78
out of a thousand different things we tried.
This was the first thing.
So I'm going to assume
that we're not just extremely lucky
to find the one thing that they know how to do.
There's actually a ton of capabilities here.
And the other interesting thing
is that as a kind of intervention,
something that might someday be personalized,
medicine bots made from your own cells
to go into your own body,
no immune suppression needed,
to do repairs, to clean out your arteries,
drop off the pro-regenerative molecules
as a million applications.
But the cool thing is that unlike,
let's say, nanorobotics or something else
where we build it directly,
these guys are your own cells.
They share all the priors with your body
about what health and diseases,
what inflammation is, what cancer is,
and so on.
And these are not things
we have to build into them from scratch.
So the last thing I want to say
is that moving forward,
the field of biomedical interventions,
this is what's currently on the table.
So these kind of bottom-up interventions
of surgery and stem cells and all this stuff.
But there's this whole other gigantic set
of approaches coming,
which are top-down,
which has to do with not only behavior shaping.
We haven't even talked about this,
but we have some really interesting approaches
to training cells and tissues.
And these are agential implants,
and then various kinds of morphosuticals
that speak to the anatomical intelligence.
And so these are just some examples
of what's actually coming.
So my guess is,
oh, and you can see the details
in these reviews.
So my guess is that future medicine
is going to look a lot more like psychiatry
than it's going to look like chemistry.
We are really talking about exploiting
the tools and the insights of neuroscience,
very deep insights of neuroscience
beyond neurons
to understand multi-scale intelligent systems.
And I think the ability to hack this
for transformative health applications is massive.
I will just thank all of the people
that are doing the work
that I mentioned here today,
the various postdocs and students.
All the technical support
are many amazing collaborators,
our funders who support this stuff.
Again, disclosures.
There's three companies that fund
some of this work here.
And Jeremy Gay,
who did a lot of the illustrations
that I just showed you,
and most of all, the animal model systems,
because they really have the hardest job of all here.
So I will stop here and answer questions.
Thank you so much.
That was another mindblower.
Thank you so much.
I know we're over time now,
but it would be difficult
to synthesize all of the questions from the chat.
Honestly, I have no,
I'm not even going to try to do this.
But I think for this group in particular,
perhaps what's most interesting
is if you were thinking about
what people in this group could do
to either improve work
on the more elliptaceutical notion
of what you mentioned,
or on the agenda implant notion
of what you mentioned,
like where do you think
are currently open challenges
where people like maybe come from
more of a biology aging background
can like most help,
or like how could they most help draw
these applications into the field?
What's outstanding there?
What's left to do?
Yeah, what's left to do?
There's a lot left to do,
but let's just talk about
the aging thing in particular.
So the theory of aging
that we have been playing with
is this idea that
if you think about anatomical homeostasis,
the need to continuously work
towards maintaining a shape,
that doesn't stop in adulthood.
Once you've built the body,
cells are dying and being reborn all the time,
it has to,
you have to work pretty hard
to stay in the same in one place.
So that morphostasis
is happening all the time.
But that requires having information
about what the body is supposed to look like.
If you're going to resist the drift
of noise and aging
and then cancer and so on,
it requires you to have
a crisp memory of the target morphology.
And could it be that during aging
that what happens is that
there's a degradation
of the target of morphology pattern memory?
Maybe the pattern memory gets fuzzy.
And we know when in development,
if we make it fuzzy,
development goes to,
how can you get birth defects
in adulthood if it gets fuzzy?
I think what that looks like is aging.
And so our approach currently
is to think about ways
to basically to sharpen that pattern
and to refine that information.
And so this means really developing
not only the conceptual tools around
aging as a defect of geometry,
not a fundamental bio count.
And of course, it might be multiple things.
I'm not saying this is the only useful model,
but to really develop
the conceptual apparatus around this
and then to build new tools.
So we need more,
but we need better ways
to do voltage imaging in vivo.
So there's a lot of technology development there.
We need all kinds of efforts
for better ion channel drugs,
better computational models.
Physiomics is huge as a huge need.
We simply do not know
what all the correct voltage states are
for health and disease in different organs
at different ages.
So acquiring that data set
is something that we are going to do.
It's very important.
It hasn't been done
because molecular biology and biochemistry,
they can work with dead tissue.
So you fractionate your cells,
you get your protein, your RNA, whatever,
and that's fine.
You can make a list of what you have.
Bioelectricity doesn't work that way.
As soon as the cell is dead,
this is gone.
You cannot do this in non-living tissue.
So all of this has to be in vivo
and it's quite difficult.
So those are just some of the challenges
that we're facing now.
All right.
Thanks.
I don't know.
Do you have to hop off?
I have till 2.15.
So I have another 10 minutes.
Okay.
Okay.
Then let me get with,
I think Micah,
your question was highly uploaded.
If you want to unmute your thoughts
on the long term,
I can also otherwise ask it.
Sure.
So I think you answered it,
but I was wondering if you can go
into a little more detail on
how do we get to a place
where we can image a living human
and read its bioelectrical state?
Like right now people are doing this
with brains and then they plug
the output into an AI
and the AI is now learning
how to interpret what that means.
Presumably we want to do the same thing
with the bioelectric network of the whole body.
What is the path to get there
technologically or like
what research needs to be done?
Very similar to the question Ellison asked.
Yeah.
The straightforward path
is going to be to develop.
So right now we have voltage sensitive dyes
that can give us the bioelectric state of cells
you can see,
but obviously the majority of the body
ourselves you cannot see.
So some kind of improved bioelectric re-imaging technology
that can let us read the state of deep tissues
and then of course the computational models
to go from the understanding
of the patterns of health and disease
to how to turn the disease ones
into the healthy ones.
That's the straightforward way.
I happen to think there's a shortcut
and I think the shortcut
is going to be around understanding
the higher level information processing
in these networks.
In other words, I really don't think in the end
we're going to be micromanaging
the bioelectric state
any more than I want to micromanage
of the molecular state.
I think it's going to be the equivalent
of what we do in behavior science.
If you have a rat
and you want them to do a little circus trick,
one way is to try to play the body
like a puppet and control every neuron
and try to get them to walk
and do the various things,
but the much easier way is to train the rat
because the rat offers this amazing interface
called learning,
which enables you to give rewards and punishments
and you don't have to know the details
of which neurons are doing what.
I think it's going to end up like this.
I think we're going to,
once we figure out what actual
protocognitive capacities
these electrical networks have,
we're going to develop a kind of
systematic training protocols
where you can give them stimuli
and it's not going to be about
knowing which cells have which voltage
is going to be a much higher level intervention,
but stay tuned about that.
We're still working that out.
We have Ben Moskowitz next.
Hey, sorry.
Sorry about that.
I was wondering if,
I guess like what we're just saying
about like the brain dynamics of
being able to read the state
and then be more predictive from experimentation,
like for the plan area
to be able to modify their head generation
to be able to say two heads,
four heads, something like this
and the construction,
you need to be able to manipulate
the electrical networks
to guide the cells
like towards that goal that you want.
So do you have a systematic way
to approach that problem currently?
Or is it mostly through experimentation
and like once we collect the larger data set,
it'll be able to be much more
like AI driven or something like that?
Yeah, up until now,
the only path that we've had
is to observe natural patterns
and try to infer.
So if you want to know
what bioelectric pattern kicks off,
eye development,
when you look early on in the embryo
before the eye comes up and that,
oh, wow, there's an eye spot
and that's the pattern that kicks it off.
You can do the same for limb.
You can do the same for the brain.
So we've now done it in,
I don't know,
half a dozen different contexts.
It's extremely difficult
and time consuming.
And I am hoping
and we're working on some of this
to develop automated robot scientist platforms
that together with improved bioelectric
characterization machinery,
better dyes,
maybe CAT scan reagents
and so on that are voltage sensitive.
We can automate that process,
make it high throughput
and really then from there,
use AI and maybe conventional analysis tools
to extract an understanding
of the bioelectric code.
That's what we call is cracking the bioelectric code.
For now,
our number of examples is quite low
and so all we can do is look at
normal embryos,
normal regeneration,
normal tumor genesis
and try to learn from that.
But I think ultimately
we would like to scan the whole
many species,
many different ages,
many different disease conditions
and from that,
figure out what actually the encoding
is top to bottom.
That's ambitious.
Okay, Shruti, you next.
Hi, it was an amazing talk.
Thank you so much, Michael.
I was wondering what else are we missing?
Bioelectricity is of course one aspect,
but also there must be other forces,
right,
electromagnetic dissonant light waves,
sound waves,
some weak UQ forces.
I'm not able to sync all of them,
but like all of these exist in nature
and I'm sure they must exist in the body as well.
Are there any labs that are working on this
or tools that are
resistant to even stark testing these things?
Yeah, yeah, that's a great question.
And we think about this stuff all the time
and I encourage my students
and postdocs to ask,
what would we be missing?
Using the approaches
and more importantly,
the conceptual tools that we have,
what would they absolutely not see?
And so you got your known unknowns
and your unknown unknowns.
So I can't say anything about the unknown unknowns,
but for the known unknowns,
there's a few things.
So we know that we really don't understand yet
the phenomenon of mitogenic radiation,
so ultra weak photon emission.
So there are some good labs that work on this.
Cells are exchanging light
and other kinds of electromagnetic radiation
with each other.
We don't know what it does.
We don't have good tools for it,
but I'm going to guess
that it's probably quite important.
There may be sound,
vibratory kind of things that happen.
The nuclear envelope has an electrical potential across it.
We haven't even begun to scratch
what implications that might have
for gene expression.
In fact, all the organelles have,
all the membrane bound organelles have voltages.
So yeah, biophysics is,
I'm sure has tons of surprises for us.
In fact, we can go in the opposite direction
instead of looking down into these organelles,
like we found recently
that actually embryos talk to each other.
So whole embryo,
so groups of embryos make a,
what I call a hyper embryo,
where the whole large collections of embryos
can solve problems that individual embryos cannot.
And they have their own gene expression profiles
that small groups of embryos don't have and so on.
So there are many surprises here.
And yeah, some of these are being studied
and some we don't need to know about.
Okay, maybe we have time for one more for you.
Now, you had the idea in that phone on time,
if you want to go for it.
Sure, yes.
Thank you, Tricia.
Talk as usual, Mike.
Thank you.
Just, I'm trying to get my head around this.
When you reconstitute an eye,
let's say in the plant area,
you're setting up some bioelectric pattern
and you said you're changing
the ion channel states of a few cells
and then they communicate to the other
surrounding cells, right?
Something like that.
I'm probably watching this up.
So I'm just curious,
when you do that,
do you have to target specific cells
and how many cells do you actually manipulate
and then how many other cells
do they have to interact with?
Yeah, it's a great question.
It depends on the scenario.
So for example,
we have one scenario where
we can induce melanoma in these tadpoles
without any kind of genetic damage,
no oncogenes,
just by disrupting the electrical communication.
That takes about three cells.
That only takes about three cells to do that.
In the case of the eye,
it's actually quite interesting
because when you establish these cells
that want to be eye,
all of their neighbors are telling them,
you're wrong, you should be skinned.
And they have this debate back and forth
and we can see it.
We can literally see it
because if you,
I had this experience right from the beginning,
I tried to,
I wanted to make the whole embryo one giant eye.
Okay, so I just wanted to turn every cell into an eye.
So I shot it up with a ton of this potassium channel RNA
and you look at the embryos
and I was using a transgenic
that is actually glows
where the master eye gene is turned on.
So I look at this thing
and I see seven spots as I cool.
This tadpole is going to have seven eyes.
And then you look the next day
and it's, oh wait, it's only four.
And the next day, wait, it's only two.
And the next day, you're lucky if you get one.
So what's happening is that
all the other cells,
this one cell is saying,
let's build an eye
and all the others are saying,
you're crazy, we're skinned.
And depending on who wins,
they have this back and forth interaction
depending on who wins.
And it's a cancer suppression mechanism.
You don't want a lot of cells
with weird voltages around.
So in that case,
it actually, there is a threshold.
I don't have an exact number for you,
but there is a threshold where
if you're not in that threshold,
the other cells are going to wipe out
what you're trying to do.
Mike, thank you so much.
I know we've kept you one minute over.
I remind you of your time.
This was absolutely mind-boggling as usual.
I can't wait to have you back whenever you're ready.
Any time.
Thanks everyone for your great questions.
This was absolutely fantastic.
Thank you.
I see you for the next one.
Thank you, Shanky.
Thank you.
Thank you so much.
Thank you, everybody.
Yeah.
Anytime we can have an in-depth talk
about bot staging with everyone.
So thanks, everyone.
