Welcome, everyone, to Forsyth's Biotech and Health Extension
Group, sponsored by 100 Plus Capital.
I'm so filled to have Michael Levine here today.
He was recommended by someone whose recommendations
I hold very highly.
So I'm terribly excited for your talk.
I think you're tying together a variety
of different super interesting fields.
You're definitely, I think, pushing the envelope
with the research that you do.
I will say no more and let you guys
the conversation.
We'll have a little break halfway through,
in which we'll have a few announcements
from people in the community, and then
we'll go for a longer discussion.
I think Michael already said he can stay a little longer.
But this is just a reminder from me on the beginning
that I will, in a second, prompt you in the chat
to ask questions.
And usually what happens at the end of these talks
is that we have lots of questions and not the time
to cover them all.
So don't be shy.
Ask them early.
Then we can start uploading, downloading questions.
Because usually at the end of it, we always
try to keep them as short as possible.
But why not start early with asking questions?
So thank you so, so, so much for joining today.
And Michael, it's really a pleasure to finally have you on.
We scheduled this a while back already.
And you're going to tell us lots of things
about regenerative medicine that I think
many people here don't even have on the radar yet at all.
You're leading the Taft Center for Regenerative
and Developmental Biology.
I will post more on your bio in the chat.
For now, please take it away.
I'm really thrilled to have you here.
And thank you for joining.
Thank you so much.
And yeah, thank you for having me and for the opportunity
to speak to you all about this.
So let's see, can everybody see my slide?
Yeah, perfect.
OK, so you see here two websites.
Please feel free to get in touch with me afterwards
if you have any questions that we don't cover.
Everything is there, all the primary papers
and everything else is there.
And I have to do a disclosure.
I have a spin-off company called Morphosuticals Inc.
with David Kaplan.
And I'll tell you a little bit more about that.
So I want to give the main point of the talk right up front.
And here are the four things that I'm
going to try to transmit today.
I think that solving the problem of anatomical homeostasis,
which I will discuss, is the key to really transformative
regenerative medicine, which will address aging
as well as many other things.
And that the current approaches focusing
on stem cell biology, genomic editing, things like this
are limited by themselves.
And that what is really, really key
is to understand the software of life.
And I'll show you some examples of that.
A key medium by which cells compute and make decisions
in vivo is what we call non-neural bioelectricity.
And it now turns out that we have learned to read and write
various goal states into the collective intelligence
of tissues.
And I'll show you some examples of that.
And I think fundamentally that cracking
this bioelectric code, which is a sort of evolutionary precursor
to the electric code that our brains use,
will enable a really profound new class of electroseuticals
with lots of new applications in birth defects,
regenerative medicine, cancer, aging,
and synthetic bioengineering.
So those are my main points.
If we boil down the whole talk to one sentence,
what I'm here to tell you is that, like the brain,
all of your body cells and tissues make decisions.
And these are decisions about structure and function.
And that we can now, we have the techniques
to actually read the information processing that
goes into those decisions and actually modify it rationally.
And what you see here is one of our five-legged frogs.
And this is my reminder to tell you
that you're going to see all kinds of weird-looking creatures
today.
And that is not Photoshop.
These are actual real animals that we produce as a means
of testing our theories of where shape comes from
and how to control.
So let's talk first about some fundamental knowledge gaps.
I want to highlight what it is that we don't know,
despite all of our amazing advances in molecular biology.
So what we would like to have is something
we call the anatomical compiler.
The idea is that someday you should
be able to sit down at a computer
and draw the animal or plant that you would like to have.
So not try to create a bottom up from a description of pathways.
You shouldn't need to think about pathways.
You should be able to, like we do for computer-aided design,
when the field is mature, you should
be able to sit down and say, I want a three-headed flatworm
with a shape that roughly looks like this.
And what the compiler would do is convert that anatomical
description into the set of stimuli
that have to be given to those cells to produce whatever
it is that you ask for.
That's the end game for this field.
It's complete and total control of morphology.
And it might be a liver, and it might be a heart,
and it might be a whole organism,
or it might be something that's never existed on Earth before.
It shouldn't matter.
We should be able to take a description of the anatomy
that we want and to figure out what stimuli would
have to be given to cells to be able to produce it.
And the critical thing is that if we could do this,
we would immediately have all the answers to birth defects,
to regenerating lost or damaged organs,
to the defection from the body plan known as cancer,
to aging, to all of these challenges
to the normal healthy morphology of a body.
And so this is fundamentally a problem of information
processing, as I will argue.
And so the question is, why don't we have this yet?
Genomics has proceeded very rapidly.
Why do we not have this?
Because, of course, we don't have anything remotely like this.
Our control over anatomy is still extremely poor.
And so the reason is because there
are fundamental gaps in our understanding.
And I'll just give you a very simple example.
So here on the left, you see an axolotl.
And axolotl larvae have legs.
And on the right, you see a frog larva.
And frog larvae do not have legs.
The tadpoles don't have legs.
And one can do a thought experiment
and say that, well, at the early embryonic stage,
I'm going to take 50% of the axolotl embryo,
50% of the frog embryo, I'm going to mix them up,
and I'm going to make a frog allotl.
And it turns out the cells do perfectly fine.
They actually do work together.
But now I ask you a simple question.
Will the frog allotl have legs?
You have access to both genomes.
You have access to the axolotl genome.
You have access to the frog genome.
Will the frog allotl have legs?
And if so, will the legs be made entirely of axolotl cells?
Or will they recruit the frog cells?
The point is we have no idea.
And until we do the experiment, of course, right?
So even having the genomic sequence,
these basic fundamental questions
about what shape is going to result
are something that we cannot yet answer.
And that really holds back regenerative medicine.
And so let's just ask the fundamental question,
where does shape come from?
And so we all start life as this sort of ball
of embryonic blastomers.
And then here you see a cross-section
through the human torso.
So look at this incredible arrangement.
All the organs are in exactly the right place,
orientation, size, position relative to each other.
Where does all this come from?
And if you might be tempted to say the genome,
and so the genome certainly produces
the cellular hardware that you need to create this.
So the genome gives you all the protein sequences,
but the genome doesn't directly say anything
about this kind of order.
It's simply not there in that way.
And so we really need to understand
how do cell groups know what to make and when to stop, right?
It's a collective, it's a collective intelligence problem
in the sense that all of these cells are active agents
that do various things.
And the result of their activity
is to self-assemble this amazing organism.
And as part of understanding this process,
we need to ask, first of all, in regenerative medicine,
if part of this is missing,
how do we convince the cells to rebuild it again?
And as engineers, we might ask, well, what else could we build?
Could we build something completely different
out of these same cells?
And so this central question
of where anatomical order comes from
and how do we control it is the key, I think,
to really profound changes in how we do medicine.
So the important thing is that single cells
are incredibly competent.
So here you have this creature is called the lacrimaria.
And you can see what it's doing, it's hunting,
it handles all of its physiological, its anatomical,
and its behavioral needs all in one cell.
There is no brain, there's no nervous system,
there are no stem cells,
there's no cell-to-cell communication, it's one cell.
And it's doing everything it needs
on the scale of one cell.
Now, when cells get together,
they actually scale up this ability
and they work on much bigger goals.
And these goals are the production
of complex invariant anatomy, such as these here.
And we know that simply differentiating stem cells
into particular tissue types is not sufficient
because then you can get something like this down here,
which is a teratoma.
So this is a tumor that might have skin and hair
and teeth and bone and muscle.
And the reason this is not a good embryo
is because it's missing that three-dimensional organization,
that structure.
All the stem cell differentiation proceeded fine.
You've got your cell types,
you've got your mature derivatives,
but they're not arranged in the correct place.
So it's not enough to have the building blocks,
you actually need to specify how they get together.
And so there's a kind of a mainstream paradigm
which thinks about a feed-forward emergent process
where you have gene regulatory networks
and these genes turn each other on and off,
they make proteins, some of these proteins
that are sticky or they exert force or they diffuse
and so on.
And as a result, there's this process
of what they call emergence.
And at the end, something really complex from top.
And the difficulty with this paradigm
for regenerative medicine is that
if you want to make changes here,
if you want to make repairs to the anatomy,
you have to somehow invert this chain
to figure out what are you going to do back here?
Which genes are you going to edit
and how in order to make complex anatomical changes?
And that inverse problem is fundamentally intractable.
It's extremely difficult.
And so this is basically what's holding
back regenerative medicine.
You simply don't know how to figure out
what changes to make at the very lowest levels
to give you the desired effects at the system level.
And so what we're very good at in the field
is figuring out things like this,
which genes and proteins control each other
and so on these pathways.
But what we really want to understand is this,
where do these different shapes come from
and what do we do when we want to alter
the rationally, okay.
So I should point out that it's not only
about creating a complex body during embryogenesis,
it's also about the amazing ability
of the cellular collectives to repair over time.
So here what you see here is an animal called an axolotl.
So this is a Mexican salamander.
These animals throughout their lifespan
regenerate their eyes, their limbs,
their ovaries, portions of their heart and brain
and their spinal cords.
So they will sort of bite off each other's legs
all the time and if you keep them in an aquarium
and the legs grow back.
And so here's what happens no matter where you amputate
or where they lose it along this axis,
they will do exactly the correct amount of growth
and patterning and then you have an indistinguishable limb
at the end.
And so what's remarkable about this
is not only that it rapidly grows
and creates the correct tissues
that actually stops at the right time.
The fact that regeneration stops is really amazing.
Think about it, when does it stop?
It stops when a correct salamander limb has formed.
And until then it has really rapid proliferation
and cell movement and changes in gene expression.
But all of that grinds to a halt
when a correct salamander limb has formed.
How does it know what a correct salamander limb is?
How does it know when to stop?
Because this is not simply a process
that always starts at the egg,
proceeds during a set of hardwired steps and then stops.
This is a flexible process that you can interrupt,
you can make changes, you can cut at any point
and it will pick up exactly at the right spot,
do what's needed and then stop when it's done.
So there's a degree of plasticity
and adaptive problem solving here.
So of course, axolotls are not the only creatures
that regenerate, so the human liver is regenerative
and even the ancient Greeks knew that,
I don't know how they knew that, but they did.
As you see here, deer are a large adult mammal
that every year regenerates huge amounts of bone
and skin and innervation and vasculature.
These antlers grow up to a rate of a centimeter
and a half per day.
Think about that, a centimeter and a half of new bone
per day is possible in mammals.
And even human children, usually below the age
of somewhere between seven and 11,
if they amputate their fingertips,
if you don't sew it over with skin,
but just sort of keep it clean, they will regenerate.
So even human children initially have some regenerability
to regenerate their fingers and then it goes away.
So these here are, I think, the champions of regeneration
and this should be a really motivational
and sort of aspirational animal for us all
who are interested in healthy lifespans.
This is a planarian.
These animals have a couple of interesting properties.
First of all, they're a complex animal
with a true brain and bilateral symmetry.
They're not like earthworms.
These are similar to our direct ancestor, okay?
They, first of all, have the ability of regeneration.
So you can cut them into any pieces along any plane.
The record is something like 276 pieces.
Every piece will regenerate exactly what's missing,
no more, no less,
and give you a perfect tiny little worm.
Every piece, they regenerate their brain,
every other organ.
Not only that, they're smart, so they can learn.
They have the ability to learn
in a variety of behavioral assays.
And best of all, they are immortal.
There is no such thing as an old planarian.
So individual cells senesce and fall off
and they regenerate whatever's missing
and they just keep on going.
And so what these guys are telling us
is that it is possible to be an immortal,
highly regenerative creature that also has intelligence.
This is not only for CNM and these and things like this.
You can actually be a bilaterian with a true brain,
all the same neurotransmitters that we have,
and be immortal, okay?
So this is a proof of principle right here,
an existence proof.
So one of the really important concepts
to try and understand how all this works
is really the idea of problem solving
by the collective intelligence of cells.
And I wanna show you just one example,
there are many examples, I wanna show you one example.
Here is a tadpole face and here's some eyes
and the brain and the nostrils.
And tadpoles need to become frogs.
And in order to become frogs, they rearrange their face.
So the nostrils have to move, the eyes have to move forward,
the jaws have to move, all these things have to move around.
And it used to be thought that somehow
what the genetics does is it gives you
a hardwired set of movements.
After all, all tadpoles look the same
and all frogs look the same.
So as long as everything moves in the right way,
you should get from a normal tadpole to a normal frog.
So what we did was we made so-called Picasso tadpoles
where everything is in the wrong place.
So the eyes are off kilter,
the nose is not where it's supposed to be,
the jaws are on the side of the head,
everything's not where it's supposed to be.
So when this happens, what we find is that
they still make largely normal frogs.
Why?
Because all of the different components
move around in novel paths, okay?
And in fact, sometimes they go too far
and have to back up and come back,
but they all move around
until they get pretty much to a normal frog face.
And this is remarkable.
This means that what the genetics actually gives you
is a machine that is able to minimize error,
that it has some internal representation
of what a correct frog face looks like.
And when you start it off in the wrong configuration,
something that never appears during normal embryogenesis,
no problem, they can still navigate morphospace,
they can navigate a path to where they need to be
from this completely unexpected starting position.
So this, if we had a swarm robotics instance
that was able to do this, instead of cells,
we have little robots that could do this,
this would be a remarkable example
of collective intelligence.
And so it is here.
These are groups of cells that are able to solve this problem
from different starting configurations.
And this is the process that collective intelligence
and that problem solving is what we need to solve
in addition to all of the mechanistic advances
over the component pathways
in order to really control anatomy
and to really solve regenerative medicine.
So what we would like to do is to try to move
to a point where we really understand this
at an algorithmic level,
not just the mechanisms that are required for this to happen,
but the algorithms that are sufficient for this to happen.
And we really need to understand
how these cellular collectives process information
and how reprogrammable really is it.
So computer science offers us an interesting analogy.
Back in the 1940s and 50s, this is what programming looked
like.
So in order to program this computer,
you have to physically move the wires around.
You have to physically change the structure of the machine.
And since then, the journey that computer science has taken
is to realize that if your hardware is good enough,
if it's reprogrammable,
then you don't need to physically change the hardware.
What you can do is interact with it
by means of inputs or experiences
and take advantage of the software that's in the system
and the plasticity that's in the system.
So of course, what you'll notice
that all of modern biology is basically down here
at this point.
All of the exciting advances are single molecule approaches.
We're rewiring pathways, genomic editing.
Everything is about getting more and more specific
at the low level of the hardware.
And these are very important things,
but they need to be coupled with an understanding
of what the software looks like
and how much we can get done with stimuli,
not with rewiring, whether it be genetic or otherwise.
And so the framework that we work in
looks a little bit more like this,
where yes, there's this feed forward component,
but there's also a very important set of feedback loops
where any challenge to the body,
and this could be traumatic injury,
this could be aging, this could be teratogens,
pathogens, whatever triggers a set of feedback loops,
both at the level of physics and genetics
that serves to get back to the correct target morphology.
Anybody that's taken engineering
will immediately recognize this as a homeostatic cycle.
It's basically what you have
in your thermostatic home,
where this is a system that's able to regulate
back to the correct state.
Now, of course, feedback is not new,
biologists all understand about the importance of feedback,
but there are two unusual things here in this model
that I'm going to talk about.
The first is that the set point
for this homeostatic process is not a simple number
or a scalar, like a temperature or pH or hunger level
or anything like that.
It's actually a much more complex structure
that's a coarse-graining of the anatomy.
So large-scale patterning information
is what's guiding this homeostatic process.
And the second part that's kind of unusual
is that this is a process that has a goal.
And when I say goal, this is not in some mystical sense,
it's basically in the sense of cybernetics
and control theory.
There's a set point, and this is a system
that's fundamentally able to expand energy and effort
to get back to the correct region of state space
by activating all kinds of cellular behaviors
to get back as close as possible to minimize error
and minimize the difference
between whatever the current shape is
and the shape that it's supposed to have.
So if you make that hypothesis,
it has a couple of strong predictions.
One strong prediction is that you ought to be able to find
the medium in which that target morphology is encoded.
So the set point has to be recorded somewhere.
And then it means that you could alter that set point,
you could rewrite it and ask the machine
to build something different without having to rewire it.
In the same way that you can set your thermostat
to a different temperature,
and the exact same system will now maintain
a different temperature
because there's a distinction between the data
and the execution here.
So this is what we've been doing in my group
for some years now is saying,
can we find the representation of the target morphology
and exploit it for regenerative medicine?
And I think we found an important chunk of it.
And so in order to tell you
how that target morphology is encoded,
I have to introduce you to developmental bioelectricity.
And all cells in the body are sitting
in a morphogenetic field of information
that comes in all kinds of different media.
So there's chemical gradients,
extracellular matrix, tensions and stresses and so on.
And then the one that we're interested in is bioelectricity.
So bioelectricity is not the only important layer,
but it's a, I think, a uniquely powerful and interesting one.
And that's the one we'll be talking about now.
Okay, so what is bioelectricity?
Well, let's think about what happens in the brain.
In the brain, you have networks of these cells called neurons.
They all have ion channels.
They create voltage potentials
by passing ions in and out of these ion channels.
And they can pass those electrical states
to their neighbors through these little electrical synapse.
The synapse is known as gap junctions.
And networks of these cells have this really interesting
property that they can execute physiological
information processing that we associate with memory,
with behavior, with goal-directed activity,
with preferences and so on.
And so what you can see here is an example
of tracking electrical activity in the brain.
So this happens to be a zebrafish,
thinking about whatever the zebrafish think about.
And you can literally see the electrical activity
and neuroscience has the following commitment.
We think that if we understood the encoding,
if we understood the neural electric code,
we could look at this electrical activity
and extract the semantic information.
We would know what is the meaning to the animal?
What is the content of that memory
of whatever it's thinking about?
Okay, and so people are working on
and have had some success with all kinds of decoding methods
to try and pull that information
out of electrical activity in the brain.
Well, you can sort of ask yourself,
where did this all come from?
Certainly this didn't just evolve out of nowhere.
It must have had a simpler evolutionary precursor,
and it did.
The evolutionary precursor is the fact
that all cells do this, not just neurons.
So every cell has high-end channels.
Most cells have gap junctions to their neighbors.
And this kind of scheme of putting
electrically active subunits into networks
is about as old as bacterial biofilms.
It's an extremely ancient evolutionary thing.
And all cells do this.
And so what you're seeing here is an early frog embryo
in time-lapse, where the cells are having discussions
with each other electrically about who's going to be
if anterior, posterior, left, right,
dorsal ventral, and so on.
Because whereas the electrical activity in the brain
is designed to move, to activate muscles to move the body
to solve problems in three-dimensional space,
what developmental bioelectricity does
is process information to move the body through morphospace
to change and control morphogenesis.
And we can do this, the exact same thing here.
We can try to decode this to try to understand
how is it that specific patterns arise
and how can we change them?
So my lab has developed some tools to do this.
So first, here are voltage-sensitive fluorescent dyes.
And this is my colleague, Danny Adams,
who has perfected this particular technique
of using voltage reporters.
So this is not a model, this is an actual embryo,
using these voltage dyes to read in real time
all the electrical conversations
that these cells are having.
We, of course, do lots of computational modeling.
And then more importantly, we have functional techniques
where you can go in and change
the electrical information processing in the tissue.
We do not use electrodes, applied electric fields,
there's no electromagnetics going on.
This is purely molecular physiology
to target the native processes
by which these cells are communicating electrically.
So there are ways to control the topology of the network,
so which cells talk to each other cells
through these gap junctions.
We can open them, we can close them,
we can mutate them and so on.
And the same thing for the ion channels.
We can go in and literally set the electrical states
you could either optogenetics or drugs or mutations
that change the channel properties.
So basically taking all the tools of neuroscience
and using them to control morphogenetic decision-making
outside of the nervous system.
And so this is just a simple example
of what some of these endogenous patterns look like.
Here you see, again, a time lapse,
this embryo is putting its tadpole face together.
You can see all the dynamic electrical patterns.
Here's one frame from that movie.
And the amazing thing is,
and the reason I love this example so much
is that the encoding is really simple here.
The electric, we call this the electric face.
The bi-electric pattern of the face actually looks like a face.
And this shows up before the genes are turned on
to regionalize the face.
And so here you can see,
here's where the eye is going to be,
here are the placodes,
here's where the mouth is going to be.
All these bi-electrical gradients are a pre-pattern.
They're a subtle scaffold
that directs downstream gene expression and anatomy.
And if we go in and we change the distribution
of voltages here,
you will change the gene expression
and you will change the anatomy.
That is one way to make those Picasso tadpoles
that I showed you about.
So this is a native pattern that is required.
It's a normal, natural part of specifying
what the tadpole face is going to look like.
Here's a pathological pattern.
What we've done here is,
what we've done here is inject a human oncogene
into this tadpole.
They will make tumors like this.
But before they do,
you can already see using this bi-electric map,
you can already see that these cells
have a really aberrant electrical potential.
They are dissociating from the electrical network.
They're basically reverting back to their unicellular state
and they're going to treat the rest of the animal
as just external environment.
They've unplugged from the collective
and this is metastasis.
This is failure to participate in embryogenesis
because the first thing that oncogenes do
is uncouple you from the electric network
that normally tells every cell what it should be doing.
So the reason we know this is important
is that if you inject tumors
like nasty KRAS mutations and so on,
if you inject these things and cause tumors,
you can prevent the actual tumor genesis
even though the oncogene is very strongly expressed.
So here, this is the same animal.
So here's the oncogene that we've labeled it with red,
very strongly expressed and yet there's no tumor
because what we've done is co-inject an ion channel
that forces these cells into a voltage state
that keeps them coupled to the rest of the electrical network
and they simply don't progress
to tumor genesis or metastasis.
So we know this is instructive.
Now, going beyond the single cell property
of conversion to cancer,
we could look at morphogenesis
and we can say, okay, here's a tadpole.
Let's take a region of the gut.
So here, these are some cells in the embryo
that are going to become gut
and we're going to inject some ion channels
that will set a voltage state
that normally is associated with making an eye.
And guess what happens?
These cells, once you instruct them that way,
they will in fact build an eye
out of cells that were fated to be gut
and you can make these eyes anywhere,
on the tails, spinal cord, in the gut, whatever.
They have all the correct layers,
the retina, optic nerve, all of that.
And also pretty cool is that they instruct their neighbors.
So these blue cells here are the ones
whose voltage we changed
and they recruited a whole bunch of other cells
which we never touched directly, right?
These are just neighboring cells
that they recruit to make this nice lens
that's sitting out in the tail of this tadpole.
And so we can use this technique.
We can induce eyes, brains, hearts and other things.
And then there's many things that we can't,
we don't know how to make it.
So the point is that these bioelectrical gradients
are instructive for anatomy.
They control at the large scale.
And one of the most important features of this
is that we don't have to micromanage this process.
So what we basically found is an instructive hooking
to subroutines that say make an eye here
or make a heart here or make a brain here.
We don't have to go in and give all the information about,
well, how do you make an eye?
What are all the layers?
What are all the cell differentiation cascades?
What are all the genes that have to be expressed?
That would be incredibly difficult.
We're nowhere near being able to do that
as a field, but what you can do
is find the native modular control structure
in the bioelectric layer
that determines which organs get placed in what regions.
And then the cells will take it from there
once you've instructed them what to do.
They will turn on all the things they need.
So let's look at the planaria
because this is really interesting.
In a planarian, you chop off the head and the tail.
You got this middle fragment,
the middle fragment has to know to build a new head here
and a new tail here.
How does it know to do that?
Well, it has this interesting voltage gradient
that says one head here in this depolarized region,
one tail here.
And if we go in and we artificially manipulate
the voltage back here to be depolarized,
then sure enough, these cells will build what you said
and they will make a two-headed animal.
And these are perfectly viable.
So you can make a two-headed animal,
you can make a no-headed animal, okay?
So again, instructive,
and all we've done is activate the build ahead subroutine
and we've done it here at this particular region
without actually knowing too much about how you go
about building ahead in the first place.
The cells will turn on and off all the genes that they need
once they've received this high-level instruction
about what organ they're supposed to build.
Not only can you build ectopic heads of the same animal,
you can actually build heads appropriate to other species.
Okay, so if we take this planarian
with a nice triangular head here, chop off the head,
perturb the electrical network
and you can get flat heads like a Pifelina,
you can get round heads like an S-Mediterranean,
or you can get your normal triangular heads.
And not only do you get the head shape,
but actually the brain shape changes
in the distribution of stem cells
becomes just like these other species
because the space of possible outcomes
of this electrical circuit contains attractors
that correspond to other species
that evolution has found in the past, okay?
And you can dial in those without any changes
to the genomics, so both in here
and in the two-headed animals I showed you,
there's nothing wrong with the genome.
The genetics are completely wild type.
This is modifying the information
stored in the electrical network
and you can access other attractors
that belong to other species
with the exact same genetically normal cells.
And in fact, you can access regions of that state space
that evolution doesn't use because they're not viable.
You can take flat planaria and turn them
into these weird spiky forms.
You can make these three-dimensional things
that look like hats.
You can make this kind of thing,
which are sort of combinations.
The flatworms don't even need to be flat anymore.
And so the idea here is that you can really have
drastic control over large-scale anatomy
given the same genome because what the genome builds
is cellular collectives that use electricity
to store their set points, their target morphologies.
And this should sound like a very familiar story
for neuroscientists because that's exactly
how brains work.
So getting to the sort of applied regenerative medicine side
of this, unlike salamanders, frogs
do not regenerate their legs.
And what we've done is we've taken froglets
and we've designed, we've used this information
to design a cocktail of drugs
that change the electrical state of the wound.
And you can see here normally in the frog,
you amputate the leg and there's basically nothing
in 45 days.
We add the cocktail, the application's actually
just for 48 hours, sorry, 24 hours, so one day.
And after that one day exposure,
it kick starts the whole cascade.
So here pro regenerative genes become turned on.
So this is MSX1.
And then immediately you start growing this leg.
By 45 days later, you've got some toes,
you've got a toenail, eventually a very nice leg.
And you can see that the leg is
both touch sensitive and motile.
So what you can do is override the normal program
of growth, which is normally very little,
and give the whole thing of a simple signal
over 24 hours that then is picked up
by all the transcriptional cascades and everything else
that will work over months.
In fact, our latest paper, 13 months of leg growth
following one day treatment.
And so we've looked at this in,
so these are frogs and worms,
we've looked at this in human mesenchymal stem cells
and cardiomyocytes and so on.
And it's very highly conserved.
It works throughout the tree of life.
We know it's relevant to humans
because of human channelopathies.
So lots of human ion channel mutations give rise
to different kinds of birth defects,
telling us that even in humans,
these electrical properties are very important
for setting correct morphologies.
And so what we do now,
and so this is our company with David Kaplan,
we have a company that's focused on David's lab
builds these bioreactors,
which basically deliver cocktails of ion channel drugs
that are picked by us to induce pro-regenerative states.
And we are now having more or less solved it in frog.
We are now in mammals, we're doing this in mice.
And then hopefully someday hopefully humans, of course.
So just to start wrapping up here,
the point of all of this is that
we now are starting to understand the circuits
to the point where we can make multi-scale models.
So we start with knowing what genes are there
to produce various types of ion channels,
but these ion channels open and close.
So simply knowing the genes
doesn't tell you what the electrical states are going to be.
You have to simulate the physiological tissues
and those give rise to larger organ structures.
And eventually you can get down to algorithmic types
of control that show you how the electrical activity
in these tissues makes decisions
about what's going to go where.
So you go from the genomically specified hardware
to the low level and then the higher level software
that allows these cells to make the kinds of decisions
to robustly create and repair complex morphologies, okay?
And so in that process, of course,
there's a huge opportunity for application
for machine learning.
And so we've done some of this,
use machine learning to both discover the electrical circuits
and to discover the modulations
that are needed to use these therapeutically.
And just as a very simple,
I'll just close up here with a couple of slides
to show you a very simple example.
This is what a normal tadpole brain looks like.
And if you perturb it with a mutation,
let's say in a really important gene like notch,
which basically the forebrain is gone,
the midbrain is a bubble,
the hindbrain is also a bubble,
it's just they have no behavior that's laid there.
And what you can do is create a model
with the bioelectric circuit that determines brain shape
and ask it in under circumstances like this,
that either there's a mutation
or they've been hit by alcohol or nicotine
or some other kind of poison,
what would you have to change?
Which channels would you open and close
to get back to this correct bioelectric pattern
that is responsible for a normal brain?
And so the model is actually now sufficiently detailed
that it can actually tell us what channel is
and using that we can pick drugs.
So known ion channel drugs and when you do this,
you get back the correct brain shape,
the correct brain size and you get their behavior,
you get their IQs back,
so their learning rates are back to normal,
despite the fact that they've had really debilitating mutations
or exposure to teratogens like nicotine or alcohol
and so on.
Okay, so this is an example of starting off
with a basic understanding of bioelectric circuits
and how they work to a computational model
that actually helps you design therapeutics
to fix a rather complex outcome,
which is brain development.
Okay, and so what we are doing now
is we're trying to create a complete pipeline
where you start off with existing information
on what ion channels are in your tissue of interest,
what bioelectrical state do you want
and then use the model and the simulations
to tell you what channel openers and blockers do you need,
something like 20% of all drugs are ion channel drugs.
So there's this huge toolkit that we call electroseuticals,
which with the correct computational simulations,
you can actually start to deploy outside of things
like cardiac arrhythmia as an epilepsy,
as all those drugs can be repurposed now
for regenerative medicine.
And so this is an example of our software,
you can all play with it.
It's online and the idea is that you would pick
the tissues you want and it would actually help you
pick the correct drugs.
So I'll just close here and just summarize what I've told you
is that there's this incredibly powerful
physiological software layer
that sits between the genotype and the anatomy.
And it's a really trackable target
for regenerative biomedicine.
Evolution discovered very early
that electrical signaling is a really convenient medium
for computation and global decision-making.
And this is why brains exploit it,
this is why our computer technology exploits it
and this is why morphogenesis runs on the system.
Cracking this code, you can really give us the opportunity
to rewrite the pattern memories
that allow us to control large-scale shape.
And when I say pattern memories,
I mean, these are literally those two-headed worms
that I showed you, if you now cut them into pieces
with no more manipulation of any kind,
they continue to make two-headed animals,
even though their genomes are wild type, okay?
This is that memory, that electrical circuit
really keeps the memory and so you can set it back
to being one-headed, but until you do that,
the pieces will continue to make two-headed worms, okay?
And so new artificial intelligence tools
are now coming online to help us design
these kinds of strategies.
So it's now rational design to address birth defects,
cancer and regeneration.
And also our latest work has been
on making synthetic living organisms.
So with that, I'd like to thank the people
who contributed to all this work,
our funders, and I'll thank all of you for listening.
And if we could take a five-minute break
and then I'll come back and I'm happy to answer
any questions.
Wow, that was a lot.
I think we do need a break.
We will let you go for now and have you back in five minutes.
Thank you so, so much already.
And there's lots of questions in the chat,
but I will moderate them and we'll see you in a bit.
Perfect, five minutes.
Okay, sounds great.
Okay, lovely.
Well, that was quite a lot to digest.
I'll keep the questions coming and also
upvote the ones that you want to push forward.
He already agreed that he can stay on for half an hour,
up to half an hour longer.
So for those of you who want to learn more about this,
feel free to join longer.
For now, we have lots of exciting community updates,
lots of exciting projects and events
and fellowships and hackathons and so forth
in the community.
We will start with Elena.
Elena, if you're here, feel free to unmute
and tell us about your upcoming conference.
Yeah, hello everyone.
Very nice to see a lot of useful developments in the field
and hear all those awesome talks.
I'm actually a very big fan of this group,
even though not always can I attend.
Anyways, I just wanted to let you know that soon
we're going to have our fourth annual conference
and in Agile of the Diseases 2021.
It's going to take place virtually this year again
because we're not so sure that it's safe
for all of us together.
We hope that it will change in the next years, of course.
So the conference is going to take place on August 1922
and in the Eastern time zone.
So we will focus on the four traditional topics,
which will be the mechanisms of aging,
the human trials of rejuvenation by technology therapies,
the biomarkers of aging,
and of course traditionally investment matters
and regulatory matters.
As usual, we have a number of prominent researchers
giving their talks.
Some of the information is going to be pretty fresh
just from the lab.
So I hope that you will have a look
at the program of the conference
and probably get inspired and come join us this year.
For more information, please visit our website,
lifespan.io slash conference.
And as a way to support this community,
you are welcome to apply my promo code
for site 2021 to get the discount.
I will drop a link that will automatically apply a discount
in the chat of this call,
just in case you would like to proceed right away.
Thank you so much.
Lovely.
Okay.
Next on up, we have Anastasia.
Anastasia, are you here?
Oh, can you hear me?
Yes.
Wow, lovely background.
Thank you.
It's Idaho.
Yeah.
Thanks, Alison.
And great to meet you all on this regular meetings
that are really great and informative.
Some of you might know me.
And so I work with Ranjan.
Ranjan is the founder of R42 Group.
We are a fund and also investing in AI and longevity
and also an institute.
Part of our institute that we have is Fellowship.
So it's AI Fellowship.
And we're now in our cohort four.
And our demo day is actually tomorrow
between 8 a.m. to 12 p.m. noon Pacific.
Some really great projects.
Students from all over the world were working
on these projects over the 12 week period.
So they include mathematics, adventure capital,
no code, machine learning platform
for biomedical researchers, cancer biology,
just kind of a wide range of really exciting projects.
So you're all welcome to come.
And I'll send you the schedule
and also the registration link in the chat,
as well as, yeah, feel free to pop in and out
and come for all our new presentations.
So, yeah, great.
And yes.
Thank you.
Here, you might add a few words.
Let us know in case you wanna do so, Ranjan.
Otherwise, we look forward to-
Yes, that's okay.
It's free.
I'll just add it's free.
And we're gonna have the first holographic telephone call
tomorrow between England and Silicon Valley.
So that'll be around about 11 a.m. Pacific.
Exciting stuff.
You're taking the A.I. theme very meta.
Okay, lovely.
Next one up, we have Dima.
Yeah, hi, everyone.
So we're organizing a longevity hackathon.
So it's a 48 hour event
to bring the ideas to fruition in longevity
and the ideas to bring together longevity researchers,
developers, A.I. scientists, entrepreneurs,
attract people from outside the field as well,
help them build teams and tackle the kind of
like long hanging fruits that you can actually,
or you can actually produce innovation over just 48 hours.
So if there's topics from biotech, A.I., pharma,
we already have people from all continents,
except perhaps like Antarctica and Australia,
but like there's people joining from all over the world.
There's longevity tech funds.
We'll invest 100K into the winning teams.
So I'm also confident that this will continue afterwards.
And then Forsyte Institute is also supporting
with the fellowship for 2022.
So yeah, please join.
We're still looking for sponsors and mentors
filled with each other.
And I'm gonna drop it in chat as well.
The information about it.
Thank you.
Okay, I have one more to go,
which is the Aging Research and Drug Development Conference
in Copenhagen on August 31st to September 3rd.
I'll drop a link to that.
And as you can tell,
there's lots of exciting stuff happening.
Nathan, I think is on the call for the fellowship.
I reached out to you earlier,
if you wanna say something to your feet to do so now,
or in the chat.
Otherwise, I think we have Michael back.
Okay, Michael, are you back?
I'm back.
Okay, lovely.
Okay, great.
I think let's do maybe a few questions on the record.
And if anyone prefers to have theirs off the record,
then I'll turn the recording off for that.
I think some people just prefer that
for a more open discussion.
But the first one that got uploaded a bunch is Carl.
Carl asked, I think three questions
so you can make your pick now.
No pressure on you.
This is totally good.
These are good questions to be on the record
because well, I mean, first of all,
just let me say kudos.
This is very awesome sounding stuff
and kind of blows me away a little bit.
So before getting into aging and regenerative medicine
even just more basic back,
I have loads of more basic background questions
about these bioelectric networks.
So the meta question in,
I'll just give two example questions.
The meta question that the myriad of questions raises
is what's the best modern review or textbook
that introduces all those people who don't know anything
about these bioelectric networks to that.
But so the two example questions I had right away were,
what is the down, you know, what is within a cell,
what is the pathway for this bioelectrics
to actually control gene expression, right?
So what's going on in the cell that way?
How does it work epigenetically?
And then the other question I wrote was,
in non-regenerative species after development,
what do these bioelectric networks do with anything?
Yeah, yeah, great.
Okay, three questions.
Let's see, as far as reviews.
So I have lots, I've written lots.
A couple of other people have written some good ones.
Anybody who's interested, please email me.
Or if you guys have some sort of a form
that I can post this at, I will post.
If you just tell Alison later offline, she can forward it.
Sure, yeah, I will.
Yeah, we've written tons of very basic reviews
on this stuff, taking you from zero
all the way to what's known today.
Okay, the second question is a transduction to gene expression.
So on the single cell level,
we know there are about half a dozen ways
in which voltage change regulates downstream gene expression.
So this includes things that you're familiar with,
the neuroscience, for example,
voltage-gated calcium signals
followed by calcium transduction.
This includes control of neurotransmitter movement
like serotonin between cells through gap junctions
or through the serotonin transporter.
And this includes some more exotic things
like voltage-sensitive phosphatases.
It includes things like voltage-gated butyrate transporters
that then hit HDAC and those kind of
epichromatin modification pathways.
All of that is known.
I should say, though, that it's highly unsatisfying
because what that, I mean, it's good information,
it's good to have that.
The problem is all of that is single cell level data.
And if you want to know why your hand
doesn't look like your foot,
it's good to know the transduction on the single cell level,
but you still have to ask about global dynamics
that determine the size and the shape and the scaling.
It's not enough to know what the transduction
looks like on the single cell.
And what's the, oh, what's it doing in adults?
I think what it's doing in adults is morphostasis.
So it's keeping you together
against individual cell senescence and turnover.
So usually what it's, and by the way,
the interface between bioelectricity and aging
is not well understood at all.
No one has studied it, right?
We haven't even touched it.
So it's not as if we know what the answer is,
but basically I think probably what it's doing
is it's just cancer suppression and morphostasis
and keeping your tissues together.
And it's really activating those very dynamic
morphogenetic rearrangement modules
that is needed to really sort of rejuvenate
and restore after injury.
Are you satisfied?
Okay, lovely.
Glad you snuck three questions and Carl.
Okay, next one up, we have one out.
You do?
Okay.
Fascinating stuff.
So what is the, what controls the appearance
of these electrical zones?
What determines their dispersal as well?
Yeah, so there's two important pieces to this.
One important piece is what underlies the hardware itself.
And so you have to ask,
in order to have any kind of electrical states,
you have to have the correct ion channels
that are capable of producing them.
So one thing that you need to understand
is what channels are there and what are their properties?
So for example, they might themselves be voltage sensitive
or they might be pH gated or whatever,
and this controls the properties of these channels
are the excitable medium on which these electrical phenomena
propagate.
Now the specific patterns,
let's say that electric face pattern is,
it's an emergent pattern in the same way
that Turing patterns emerge from an excitable chemical medium
or the way that when we talk about this with my students,
I start off and I say visualize,
you have a collection of electric parts
that make a calculator and when you turn it on,
it has a default behavior, right?
That the parts were chosen
so that when a juice is turned on and the thing is running,
it will by default start off at a consistent baseline
emergent state, which is zero.
Now, past that, it has interesting properties
of reprogrammability and all kinds of other things it can do,
but there's this basic state that the parts
which are shaped by evolution,
there's an emergent pattern
and we can study that symmetry breaking.
So it's a process of symmetry breaking
of amplification of long range inhibition,
short range activation that sets up,
it sets up exactly two eye spots
at a particular distance apart.
All of these things can be modeled.
Okay.
Are you satisfied, Donald?
Yes, okay, great.
We'll do it.
Lovely, great.
Next up, we have Josh.
Hey, thanks again for the talk.
That was like super interesting.
My question was for the worms to put planaria,
is that how you pronounce it?
If you chop, you mentioned that they could have
like learned behaviors.
I was curious if like the worms chopped
with multiple pieces, once those pieces grow,
if all the pieces retain those learned behaviors
of like the original worm?
Yeah, that's a great question.
It was addressed first in the 60s by a guy named McConnell
and he published his observations that in fact they do.
So you can take a worm and you can train
on a particular task, chop off the tail,
raise a new worm from that tail.
So we in 2013, we reproduced all that aspect
of his work, he did other stuff,
but that's what we reproduced and it's true, they do.
So what that's telling you is that
even learned sort of behavioral information,
not just morphological information,
is stored outside the brain in some form
and is able to be imprinted on the new brain as it forms.
It's pretty remarkable
because that tail doesn't do anything
until the new brain forms, right?
So it grows a new brain
and then the information is somehow imprinted.
So what you're seeing is learned information
moving around within the body.
Super interesting, not well understood at all.
Cool.
Wow, okay, Ashish is next.
Hi, Michael, very nice talk.
Thank you.
I wanted to ask which intervention tools
are available right now for mainly
for the regenerative medicine purposes?
Is it mainly ion channel genes
or something else also available?
Yeah, the tools, I mean, as I see it,
the best tools are the ion channel drugs.
I mean, in model systems at the bench,
ion channel genes are useful
because they give you the cleanest,
the genetic technologies,
like the cleanest for getting pathway information.
But I think in medical application,
you don't want to have to do gene therapy
every time you want to target these pathways
and you don't have to
because I think we've had great success
using drugs together with the computational model.
That's the key, you need both.
You need the available toolkit of drugs
that target all of these ion channels.
And then you need the computational model
to tell you which channels to turn on and off
and when to get the correct outcome.
And so I see that as the most important tool to get right now.
It's the collection of channel drugs.
All right, thank you very much.
Lovely, we have Martin next.
Hi, is there a relationship
between endogenous peptide-based ionophores
and the ionophores you're using?
We have used, so the vast majority of our work
is not with ionophores.
We've done a little bit with ionophores.
The main ionophore we've used is monensin
and we've also used a couple other things.
But I'm sure there are others.
I mean, I don't know about the peptide-based ones.
So maybe we should have a conversation offline
so that I could learn more about them.
But we've used things like monensin basically.
Yeah, but the majority of things we use are not,
the ionophores are really kind of a sledgehammer
in many ways.
We tend to use very specific ion channel drugs
that hit classes of different kinds of channels.
Thank you.
Thanks, next one up we have Alan.
I can also ask you a question
in case you're talking about muting.
She's just asking, what is the cocktail that includes DPCA?
Is this Ellen Heberkatz, is that right?
Oh, hey, Ellen, it's been a while, I have a long time no see.
Yeah, so there's a variety of cocktails.
The earliest cocktail wasn't even a cocktail,
it was extremely simple.
It was just monensin.
We had one after that that had progesterone
and things like that.
We are playing with DPCA, stay tuned.
Among many other things,
the current cocktail has five different ingredients
and that paper should be out in a matter of weeks.
So you'll see the cocktail,
you'll see all the dosages and everything else.
Okay, lovely, next one up, Anton.
Hello, so I was really impressed by your in vivo results
with fog limber generation,
but I actually have a question regarding in vitro application,
like can your drug cocktails and similar interventions
be used for suspension culture
to grow some vascularized organoids
or some vascularized muscle tissues for clean meat application
or for in vitro we have to do something quite different?
Yeah, great question.
So I think absolutely they can.
We've not done that particular thing.
What we have done with David Kaplan's group
and some others is we've done in vitro with cell culture.
So mammalian human cell culture, it absolutely works.
So you can keep stem cells more stem-like,
you can force stem cells to differentiate.
You can do those kinds of things
exactly the same methods.
I think absolutely they would work in organoids.
We are currently using them in our synthetic bio-bots
which are sort of, it's like organoids one step further
which they have organoids with behavior.
So they move around, they do various things
and that's what we're doing.
But I would love to, if that's something you work on,
drop me an email and let's talk about it
because yeah, that's an open area of application
that just nobody's gotten to it yet.
Oh yeah, we work a bit, I will drop an email.
Sure, drop me an email, yeah.
Thank you.
Vadim is up next.
Thank you.
Yeah, the answer to my question probably is not known
but Michael, based on what, I mean,
based on your understanding of the regeneration process
in your systems, what do you think
would be a biological age of the regenerated tissues?
Would it be younger or the same age
of the rest of the animal will be older?
Great question.
I don't know the answer to that.
We have been working with,
so Steve Hoverarth is making this methylation clock
for various organisms and we're waiting
till he calibrates the frog one and then we can see.
That would be the easiest way to do it right now.
If you have some other markers,
I'd love to hear about it but we don't know.
Actually, we are doing this together
and we're waiting for this him for the frog.
Oh, well, there you go.
I said, okay, great.
So, okay, so we'll, you know, as soon as you guys are ready,
we'll, we can check it out.
And maybe, you know, once we get the mice working,
then we can check, I mean, that should be much easier.
Once we get the mice working,
we can see what the mouse tissues look like.
That stuff is still in progress.
Fantastic, okay.
Then next one up, let's take one
who hasn't asked the question, Thomas Schwirder.
Yeah, hi, fantastic talk.
So I have a question basically about an example
that you mentioned sort of in passing,
which is the fact that in like deer antlers grow at rates
on the order of centimeters per day.
Now, you mentioned in the flatworms
that you were able to sort of activate
processes that happen in certain species
in flatworms that are of other species.
And what I'm wondering is whether you think
it might be possible to use bioelectrical signaling
to trigger bone regrowth on that same sort of order.
Yeah, in kind of the same way.
Yeah, I mean, optimistically, I think so.
I, you know, it's entirely possible
that we will run into some weird aspect of deer physiology
that permits it, whereas for humans, it wouldn't work.
I can't say that that doesn't exist.
We don't know, but I don't think so.
I think that, I think these are all very fundamental things
and I can tell you some speculative stories
about why I think humans normally don't do this kind of stuff.
But I think it's there to be unlocked.
I doubt it's gonna be a deer-specific issue, yeah.
Thank you.
Oh, lots of work to be done.
Brad English.
Yeah, you mentioned me.
Sorry, you're breaking up.
I can't hear.
General pathways that you,
maybe someone else can ask about the internet issue for me.
My question's in the chat.
Okay, have you tried sitting a plate of cells
atop a conductive plate with a certain pattern
to see if you could guide its development?
Sorry, what do you mean by a conductive,
but what's a conductive plate?
Like with a voltage or current running through it to change,
what would, yeah, the underlying firmware.
Yeah, got it, got it.
You can, okay, so generally speaking,
using external electrical signals,
like using electrodes basically,
is you can do certain things that way.
So one thing you can do that way
is provide a vector for cell migration.
So that's an easy way.
If you have migratory cell types,
that is a great way to get them all moving
in one particular direction.
What's very hard using external electrodes
is to set up standing patterns of voltage across tissue,
which is what the encoding really is.
The bioelectrical code is really spatial patterns
of voltage differences across a field of cells.
That's actually very difficult to do with electrodes.
But if you want to do things like move cells around,
that you can do with external currents.
Okay, so you might have to go as small
as like magnetic nanoparticles or something,
folding around to produce something more interesting
or sit with the chemicals.
But yeah, I see your point and you're right.
It's a mesoscopic at that point.
Yeah, I mean, but the tools are already here.
So I mean, if we want to set up a pattern
that encodes the correct size and shape of the brain,
which is not a simple pattern,
we can already do that with drugs.
And if you want a more complex pattern,
I think what you would do is optogenetics.
So you would lay down a light mask
that had the exact shape that you want
and your tissue would have on our channel eruptions
or something like that.
And we've done that for kickstarting tail regeneration
and things like that.
I think right now, that's the easier path for this.
Fascinating, thank you so much, Michael.
Bleeding edge stuff.
Cool, thanks.
We have Artem and then Carl.
Hi there.
Just earlier to Ashish and the Brett's question just now,
I think more operational than a senescence question,
but yeah, is there anything you think
that could be brought from a computer science background
from adjacent fields like microscopy or NGS sequencing
to enrich the stool kit that you mentioned,
both using the drugs to alter the ion channels
and to get access to more of the morphospace, let's say.
Sure, yeah, absolutely.
I mean, on the microscopy and better dyes
and better imaging of bioelectric states
in under various conditions is really important.
So nobody's done the basic profiling.
So like physiomic profiling
I'm asking every normal organ in its normal structure,
what is the bioelectric map, right?
No one's done that.
I mean, we've done it in very specific cases
for some frogs and worms and things like this,
but in general, that data is extremely sparse.
So lots more imaging using better dyes
that need to be developed
and just getting those physiomic data sets
to complement the transcriptomic
and the genomic data sets is critical.
For NGS, yeah, NGS is good.
I feel like we already have most of the NGS that we need
because almost any tissue, what do we wanna know?
We wanna know which channels are there
because those are our control knobs.
So pretty much any tissue you can go online
and you can download somebody's profiling
and you can figure out what channels are there.
So that's probably not the rate limiting step
but the microscopy for sure, yeah.
Wow, okay, now Carl, you go again.
So outside of the sort of translational aspect here
of getting things to regenerate
or fixing problems in the process,
how many labs in the world are studying the basic,
get us more information about this?
Questions, like you mentioned
that there's not a whole lot of work
understanding the aging aspect of this.
Like, what changes about the nine to 11 year olds
or whatever that makes their fingertips
not regenerate versus before?
What's different about the bioelectronite resource
or what's involved in human liver regeneration
to those networks change over time, things like that?
And the question Allison asks at the end,
which maybe she was still saving
is what can this group do for you?
So maybe in relation to that question,
are you doing anything to encourage research labs
that focus on aging to nudge in this direction?
Yeah, so overall, definitely there are not that many labs.
It's still relatively speaking a small field.
There are people who work in bioelectricity
and don't know they work in bioelectricity.
And what I mean by that is people who, for example,
if you study Anderson-Taywell syndrome, right?
And you're a geneticist
and you don't care about bioelectricity,
but you care about Anderson-Taywell syndrome.
And then eventually you sequence
and you find out that, whoa, it's a potassium channel.
Why do my potassium channel patients
have craniofacial dysmorphias?
Well, now you're working in developmental bioelectricity,
so there are some folks that sort of get dragged
into it that way, but labs that really focus on this,
there aren't that many, there really aren't that many.
And in particular, getting money for profiling
is almost impossible, right?
If you're lucky, if you can from standard sources
and IH and so on, you're lucky
if you can get funding for functional data,
like I'm going to figure out what these ion channels do
in drosophila development or something like this,
you can do that, but getting money
for a comprehensive profiling project,
the way that they do in, when they have these,
let's figure out what every cell in the brain
is expressing, right?
And the Allen brain atlas and these kinds of things,
getting funding for that is almost impossible,
so no one's done it.
As far as your last question,
yeah, I mean, I would love to get into aging,
I'd love to collaborate with anybody in this community.
Generally speaking, what we've been doing for years now
to try and lower the barrier for other people to get in
is that we publish a lot of reviews
and a lot of how-to protocols.
So we put everything online as far as if you wanted
to get into this from whatever system,
whatever you're interested in,
here is like literally step A, B, C,
how, what do you do next, right?
And so we send out gift baskets of reagents,
we provide all the plasmids, the dye protocols,
all the data interpretation stuff,
we all have that as out there.
So anybody that's interested,
I would be more than happy to help you guys do this.
It'd be great.
Fantastic, thank you.
And well, you also mentioned there's a company, right?
And would you make clear quickly at the beginning of the talk?
And so what's happening with that next?
What are your next steps in this arena?
Yeah, it's basically the company is,
the initial focus is quite narrow, it's limb regeneration.
And so what we're doing is we're testing our various cocktails
in mice using David Kaplan's wearable bioreactor,
short-term application, our ion channel cocktail,
can we trigger limb regeneration?
That's the beginning.
Obviously my dream is to grow this to a kind of fundamental
approach to picking electroseuticals
for all sorts of indications from birth defects
to regenerative medicine to aging to cancer.
But right now it's just about limb regeneration.
Okay, and anything people in this group could do there
to help, like are you looking for collaborators
with that company or like investors
or is there anything, what are our next steps?
Sure, we're certainly happy to hear from investors.
For sure, anybody that wants to collaborate,
drop me an email and let me know what you do
and we'll see what makes sense.
Yeah, our lab is very collaborative,
we work with all kinds of people.
So for sure, I'd love to hear from this community.
Great, well, it seems like you're already collaborating,
at least with Vadim, be known around Cornus.
One final thing, which is,
we ask people to submit a longevity channel challenge,
which you've done.
And this is just another pack
that people can answer this challenge
and actually, again, up to $250 doing.
So do you want to say maybe a few words
about the challenge that you submitted?
Yeah, well, I mean, so I wasn't really familiar
with how all this works, but basically,
the big challenge in this field that I see
is just what I think, let's put it this way,
what I think would make a real breakthrough
and move the field forward, kind of a watershed effect,
would be the ability to really image
these bioelectric states
in all sorts of important conditions.
And not because imaging by itself,
I really focus on functional experiments.
I mean, seeing the beautiful patterns is nice,
but more importantly, are they instructive, right?
Can I show that when you alter the pattern,
the gene expression changes and the anatomy changes,
and we do that.
And so that's what my lab is focused on.
But it would certainly make it much easier
to develop those kind of functional approaches
if we had the baseline data from other model systems,
other conditions, various disease conditions,
various human organs, this would be a real game changer.
So that's what I plan.
