When I was in school, I wondered, like many others, what happens in between the different
forms of graphs of elementary functions. How does this become this, become this, or become this?
And what's the deal with the Pac-Man-like behavior around division by zero?
It made no sense to me that these wildly different shapes and features have nothing to do with each
other. There had to be some hidden metamorphosis between the integer powers. And there was,
extending the domain and range of these functions to complex numbers does give us a much deeper
insight, but we no longer have the luxury of graphing two values against each other in two
dimensions. We're stuck with either abstract algebraic answers, or slices of the story akin
to taking x-ray images of a cocoon caterpillar turning into a butterfly. I was never quite
satisfied with that, so today's video will be taking a somewhat unorthodox approach
to indulge the intuition of my younger self. We'll introduce complex arithmetic as it's needed,
and draw almost everything in glorious uncomplicated duty. The goal is to watch the wings of the
butterfly form and grow. I hope you enjoy. Let's first just see what happens if we start with
f of x equals x, the simplest possible linear graph, make the first power of x explicit,
and vary that power up to two in discrete steps. The negative side seems to be jumping up and down
and disappearing in between. Let's look at a few specific examples. For x to the power of one and
a half, we only get a graph in the first quadrant, where both x and f of x are positive. Both the
domain and range of this function are real numbers greater than or equal to zero. This is because
x to the power of one and a half is actually x to three halves, which is a square root of x cubed.
For negative values of x, x cubed will be negative, and when that negative ends up under a square
root, there won't be any real value dancers. So right off the bat, half of our shape is missing.
In this case, we can still recover it because it's just the other square root, there are always two.
We can get both by treating our expression as an equation instead of as a function.
We'll write y equals square root of x cubed, and then square both sides. That gives us y squared
equals x cubed, and the graph looks like this. It's just the piece we've already had reflected
about the x-axis. Let's just take that as it is and move on. What about x to 1.4? Again, we make
sense of this by turning the exponent into a fraction, in this case 14 over 10, that simplifies
to seven over five, which makes f of x the fifth root of x to the seventh power. The power under
the root is odd, so it can yield a negative, but that's okay since the degree of root is also odd,
and we just get negative results out. We also don't have to deal with multiple roots since
there is only one odd degree root of a number in the reels. This shape does look like a slightly
bent line, an intermediary step on the way to a parabola, but the left side doesn't look like it
has any intention of bending upwards. Let's keep exploring. What happens at x to 1.6? That's 16 over
10 or 8 over 5. So same story with the odd degree root, negatives are allowed, but this time it doesn't
really matter since under the root we are raising all numbers to an even power, 8, making them always
positive. That gives us a shape similar to a parabola, but it came out of the blue without
following any pattern from the shapes we've seen before. So there isn't really a smooth transition
between the first and the second power. The negative arm of the graph jumps erratically
between the three remaining quadrants. And we didn't even try to plug in an irrational power,
that's a whole other can of worms we won't be opening today.
Why is this so messy? And why is all the mess happening when x takes on negative values?
It turns out that negativeness is a part of a much bigger story where numbers can shoot off
not just away from each other relative to zero, but in all other directions too. I have a whole
video about that, a link should pop up in the top right corner, and it's also available in the
description. Raising negative numbers to non-integer powers can have the effect of breaking down
negativeness and taking numbers away from the real line altogether. Let's do a quick rundown of what
these so-called complex numbers are and how they work. All the real numbers can be arranged in an
order on a line relative to zero. We get complex numbers when we define another direction for
numbers orthogonal to the reals. This forms a two-dimensional plane and specific complex
numbers are points on this plane. All the reals are of course included, but there's also all
these other numbers above and below the real line. Numbers that lie specifically on this new vertical
line are called imaginary, and they are the same as reals in every way except for the direction
in which they are spanning. Just like negatives are equivalent to the positive except for the
direction. And just like a unit of movement for positive reals is one and for negatives minus
one, imaginary numbers also have their own version of the number one, called i, that happens to point
at a right angle away from the real line. So any number on the complex plane can be expressed as
a combination of real and imaginary, like x and y coordinates of a point on a regular coordinate
system. And we express this combination by adding them together. An example of a complex number would
be two plus three i, and you can think of it as walking away from zero, first by two in the positive
direction and then by three more in the imaginary direction. This also works as you would expect
in the other quadrants. What can we do with this? Within the regular reals we have this concept of
absolute value, which gives us the magnitude of a number independent from its direction.
The same thing exists for complex numbers, but this time we have a whole circle of infinitely
many complex numbers that are the same distance away from zero, and therefore all share the same
absolute value or magnitude. And this is what we'll need for our journey today. Instead of
considering just positive and negative numbers, we'll be plugging in the entire range of directions
for each magnitude and tracking what happens to them as we vary the power we raise x2 in our
expression. By doing that we are extending the domain and range of our functions to complex
numbers. Two coordinates go in, two coordinates come out. This is not as simple as drawing a line,
basically all the points on the plane map to some other points also on a plane,
and we can't plot them against each other because we can't draw in four dimensions.
This is where the unorthodox part comes in. We're going to compress the behavior of the
complex valued function onto a single complex plane. Let me walk you through it. We'll start by
taking the function f of x equals x squared and importing it into the complex plane. We do this by
redefining it as all complex numbers z of the form z equals x plus f of x i, so actually x
plus x squared i, and for now we'll just use real inputs for x. This keeps the shape exactly the same.
Only now we have the advantage that we can also plug a complex number in for x and see where the
value of z we get ends up. Let's first see what this looks like and then we can talk about what's
going on behind the scene. First we'll take all complex numbers of magnitude one. We'll start
taking them from the real value of minus one here, going around through the negative imaginary half of
the circle to positive one, and then back to minus one around through the positive imaginary half.
All right now we draw the z values in the same order. Watch the bigger complex plane on the right.
The curve we get starts at the regular point of the parabola for x equals minus one,
travels to the regular point for positive one, and comes back to x equals minus one another way.
Let's do the same for x of magnitude one half.
And now we zoom in a bit and fill in magnitudes between zero and one.
You'll notice that for magnitudes of one and one half, which were drawn twice,
the curves appear a bit brighter than the rest. In this visualization, curves drawn over each
other enhance brightness. Let me remove them and dim the axes so we can observe where else this is
happening. We have a bright spot right here, and it appears exactly where the curve for
magnitude one half formed the kink. This is the focus of the parabola. We'll mark it with a white
dot. Now remember, we're getting this by plugging the function into our expression for z shown on
the left and graphing the values of z on the complex plane for chosen ranges of x. The main
thicker shape that coincides with the graph of the parabola we got from real values of x,
and the colored curves from plugging in a series of complex values of the same magnitude, ranging
from zero to one. With this established, we can play around with the function. I'm going to extend
it to a general second degree polynomial. By changing the b and c terms, we can move the parabola.
So let's vary them just slightly to see what happens. Don't worry about specific values we're
using for b and c. This doesn't really matter. All right, the shape formed by the colored curves
is starting to turn, but the bright spot we found still follows the focus.
Flipping the parabola by changing the sign of the a parameter also doesn't disturb that property.
This gives us an opportunity to vary the a parameter gradually back from minus one
up to one, and watch the parabola transform between downward and upward facing. In between,
it will hit zero, making the function linear, so we'll get our first chance to observe a parabola
transforming into a line and vice versa. Let's take the whole screen for that.
Okay, the focus gets launched out, the curves reform into concentric circles,
and then the focus reappears from the other side, reassembling into a mirrored image of the whole
setup. It may appear as if the focus detaches from the bright spot phenomenon formed by the curves,
but this only happens because we've drawn the curves for a very short range.
If we increase the range, like this, they will follow along longer.
If we were to extend them to infinity, they would keep following along. The focus travels along
this straight line, aligned with this feature that looks like a ray, formed where the curves
intersect themselves. We're seeing a hidden layer of the behavior of the parabola pop out.
And now that we're a bit more familiar with this way of graphing and how it behaves,
we're ready to go back to the experiment we started at the beginning of the video,
varying the power we raise a single instance of X to. We'll start with a simple f of X equals X,
and for this regular line, the curves formed from complex values of X would just be concentric
circles like we've seen before. Let's remove them and take the power up a notch to 1.1.
Now we have two lines on the negative side. What's going on here? Let's draw in just one
curve for X of magnitude one, again starting at minus one and going all the way back around to minus
one. We started with minus one and ended with minus one, but somehow our curve didn't connect
back to itself. How is this possible? I'm sure you've heard of the famous Euler's identity,
the one that states that e to the i pi equals minus one. This is actually a special case of
representing a complex number in terms of magnitude and an angle. The full form would look like this.
So a complex number z given by this expression would be m distance away from the origin at a
theta angle in respect to the real axis, which means its real and imaginary parts could be obtained
trigonometrically like this. The famous special form of Euler's identity is just a complex number
of magnitude one and an angle of pi radians halfway around the circle. And here's a catch,
we can hit that same spot where the number minus one lies with an angle of pi, but also with an
angle of three pi or any odd number of increments of pi. And we can go the other way around too.
Remember, I've shown you that when we pick the complex values of x we put into our function,
we start at minus one and travel this way around to get back to minus one again.
The way these values are generated behind the scene is that we're ranging the angle from minus pi
to pi. The round bracket on the left just means that we're only including values strictly larger
than minus pi, because this ensures that every point is represented only once.
Why this range in particular? It follows certain conventions in complex arithmetic,
but long story short, you could say it's the range that gives us the nearest of the infinitely many
representations of a complex number we can get in this form. We reach all angles with an overall
minimum amount of travel from the angle of zero. Now let's look at raising a complex number in
this form to a power. The exponent is going to distribute, it's going to affect the magnitude
normally like it would any real number, and it's going to multiply the angle. Now we can finally
examine the case of our function. We were raising minus one to the 1.1 power. We'll do it first
as the angle of negative pi. Okay, the magnitude we can get rid of because one to the power of
anything is just one, and we'll bring the 1.1 next to pi so the angle is easier to comprehend.
Now we do the same for the angle of positive pi. These two expressions end up in different places
on the complex plane and escape our initial constrained range. One overshoots a bit into the
positive imaginary side, and one into the negative. Neither of those two numbers are real, they are
both detached from the real line. If we were drawing the graph of the function in an ordinary way,
these values and generally all the values for negative inputs of x would simply not be shown.
But we're not drawing the graph of the function. We are instead, remember,
showing numbers of the form z equals x plus f of x i on the complex plane. And these numbers
exist for any input of x we can think of at least for functions we've considered so far.
In the specific case of our function, this results in lines on the negative side slightly
deflected from each other. Alright, enough background. Let's fill in some more curves
and slowly crank the power the rest of the way up to two.
Okay, let's look at that again, rolling back to one, and again to two. We can see the results for
negative x values rejoin each other as we reach the next integer power. And in doing so, wrapping
the span between the negative and positive sides over itself to form the focal point.
Let's push this model a bit further. How does x squared become x cubed?
Looks like the focus that already existed survives, and another one forms through the
same wrapping back onto itself motion. But there's a problem. There is no such thing as a focus for
the graph of x cubed, let alone two such points. This is where the geometric definition of a focus
and the behavior of our system go their separate ways. But never mind, it looks interesting, so
why don't we crank the power up some more? Let's go to x to the fourth power,
and then to fifth. Right, it's making less and less sense to think of these points as foci.
We get them in areas where the graph of the function bends, but also elsewhere seemingly
unrelated to what the graph is doing. But if we add lower power terms to the polynomial,
so that we express all the possible extrema, the points will travel to align with them.
I increased the range and density of the curves so you can better see these features.
Pause here if you'd like to take a closer look.
This phenomenon of curves splitting between integer powers and joining at them has to do
with roots. Any non-integer power is really a combination of a root and raising to a power,
like we've seen earlier. Let's write real numbers a bit more explicitly using Euler's identity.
Positive real numbers can be represented by any angle that is an even multiple of pi,
because all of those are on the real line on the positive side of zero. Two pi is one full revolution.
Likewise, negative real numbers can have any angle that is an odd multiple of pi.
Multiplying those angles by a specific integer always yields one definitive location on the
circle, no matter what choice of k we make. If we multiply an odd number by 3, it will always be odd,
no matter which odd number we chose. And if we multiply an even number by any integer at all,
it will stay even, reflecting the fact that positive numbers stay positive under any integer power.
We have multiple representations of the same numbers, but we get the same result under
exponentiation with integers. However, if we multiply those different angle representations
by a fraction, we get different results, the most familiar which is the case of one half,
the square root. The one half will make the period cycle just one pi, which means it will
sometimes be even and positive, and sometimes odd and negative. We get the two roots of one,
and the same happens for any positive number. There's quite a lot of nuance here and we'll
explore it by driving our graphing method further down below the first power. Let's again first
just go down a notch to 0.9. Here we see a similar separation happening like before,
but this time the lines are not crossing over each other, they are instead opening up a gap
between them. Let's follow this down to 0.5. One half, the square root. That gives us half
of a parabola turned on its side. The lines for negative values of x got compressed onto the
negative side of the real axis with a bit sticking out on the positive side. And that bit is exactly
touching the focus of this half-drawn sideways parabola. The proper focus is back.
How about we add the negated version of this function in as well and complete the picture?
Right, the parabola is now fully reconstructed along with the same shape of curves we got for
x squared. And we also got this extra bit that looks like the handle of a pitchfork. Of course,
this is not the actual graph of the function you see on the screen, we're doing this z-value
shenanigans and cherry picking which parts of it to show. I'm gonna leave it up to you to ponder
on why we get the pitchfork handle here. Meanwhile, we continue our descent down the powers and things
get even more interesting at our next stop. One third, or the cube root. Just doing what we've
done before, we get to this picture. But there's something off here. This function does actually
have real outputs for negative values of x. If we drew it the regular way, it would look like this,
a perfect and complete inverse of x cubed. That's because within the reels there is only one cube
root of a number and it's always the same sign as the number itself. So why do we get this other
picture instead? We have to look at complex exponentiation again to find that out. To keep
it simple, we'll again just consider the general positive and negative cases for the number one
expressed using Euler's identity. It works the same for other magnitudes.
First, we have the positive case e to the power of 2k pi. We raise that to the one-third power,
which gives us two-thirds k pi. As we iterate k, we get the following angles and then they repeat.
Only one of them, this one, is a real number and it's positive. For the negative case,
we'll get two-thirds k plus one-third all times pi. As we iterate k, that will give us these three
angles of which again only one is real, this time negative. The way we draw our graph, the positive
side gets represented by an angle of zero that stays zero, so we get positive outputs for positive
inputs and everything just looks normal. But on the negative side, we're coming in with angles of
minus pi and pi, which give us the positive and negative one-third pi angles, the two complex ones.
That hints at there being two more versions of the graph we could draw to complete the picture,
just like we had an extra one to complete the square root sideways parabola.
We can get these missing two by multiplying the function where the unit turned one-third of the
way around the circle, like this, and then one more time, like this. So let's draw them, one by one
separately at first. This is the one we already saw, and then we get this one, which completes the
real valued graph and gives us the continuation of the two negative sides. But notice how the curves
for complex values just end up in a vacuum, not connecting to any of the thicker lines.
Their new home has been defined by the previous stage. Here's both of them together.
Finally, we get this one that for some reason just contains the funny separated lines without
any part of the real graph. These are in fact the solutions we've already seen for complex
values of f of x, they just all appear in the opposite order. And here's all three together.
I know this looks messy, there's too much going on in this picture. But there's an amazing elegance
hiding behind it. First, let's just notice that we've again fully reconstructed the shape of the
colored curves for x cubed. And now let's just focus on the thicker lines depicting results
for the real valued inputs. What we're actually looking at are three copies of the x cubed shape
pressed onto the complex plane in a manner similar to what flowers look like when they're
physically pressed onto a page of a book. To show you what I mean by that, we'll briefly change
perspective. Let me hide the graphs and we'll go back to the familiar coordinate system where
the horizontal axis represents x and the vertical f of x. Now we slightly upgrade it. We'll declare
the vertical axis to be just the real component of f of x and add another axis going directly
towards you for the imaginary component of f of x. We can get away with using three dimensions here
because we're only considering real valued inputs for x, so it's a mapping of one dimension to two.
And now we draw our three graphs again.
This is what they look like in the space we've created. We can look at the whole resulting shape
as three cubic curves.
Turning the coordinate system around to face straight down the x axis, we reveal the three
planes these curves occupy. We see that these planes are offset from each other by a third
of the way around the circle. Note that we are measuring the angles going from the positive
side of one curve to the positive side of another. Now when we look at our simplified model again,
we have a better idea what the shapes we're seeing actually represent.
We've just compressed these rotations into a visual deformation, a sort of fake perspective
in two dimensions. We're not seeing the true picture but there's an amazing amount of symmetry
preserved. These three curves, when inverted, represent graphs of three regular cubic functions
and all three of these functions, when run through the same z expression we've used this whole time,
yield the exact same shape with the quasi focus points appearing in the same places.
So we've made a long pit stop at the third route but it's time to move on.
We're going to put multi-valuedness behind us again to have a simpler image to look at
and make our way towards the next interesting power, zero.
Of course, that's just a straight line through one. Let's look at the journey between the power of
one and zero again. Two simple straight lines separated by the thick woods of multi-valued
routes in between them. And as we approach the power of zero, we can see a discontinuity form,
the dreaded zero to the power of zero. Going even just the tiniest bit under zero of power
results in values approaching the vertical axis exploding to infinity.
So we have this situation right over the power of zero and this right under it.
There is something remarkable happening at the singularity when both values are exactly zero
and to understand it we'll consider the limits as we approach it from different directions.
The most commonly considered ones are x to the power of zero, our function itself,
as x goes to zero from the positive and negative sides, which both work out unsurprisingly to one.
The same happens if we simultaneously approach zero in both base and exponent.
The negative side limit only exists if we allow approaching from complex numbers, but it's there.
If we fix the base to zero and approach the zero power from the positive side,
we also unsurprisingly get zero. But if we plug any negative number in the exponent,
forget the limit, we get this peculiar mathematical object called complex infinity.
Its formally used symbol is just the regular infinity we're used to,
but I find this confusing because it can easily be mistaken for positive infinity.
Wolfram Alpha uses a notation with a tilde over it to make it more distinct and I will adopt that.
So what is this beast? To understand it we need to consider how zero works in the complex world.
In the reals, zero is the only number that isn't either positive or negative,
and in the complex world, since there are infinitely many directions,
this ambiguity encompasses all of them.
Zero is basically a circle of radius zero in the complex plane, its direction is undetermined,
which in some sense means we need to consider them all when operating on it.
Raising this number to any negative power turns it into division by zero,
which is commonly left undefined, but within a special set called the extended complex numbers,
that is complex numbers with this omnidirectional infinity added to it.
This operation is actually allowed since it yields a single definitive answer.
That means that our singularity goes through a kind of big bang.
The infinitely small circle of zero instantly becomes an infinitely large circle,
a place where all complex numbers, regardless of the direction they were headed out in,
will meet. Keep that in mind as we travel down to the negative one power.
At the end of this journey we get a familiar function x to the negative one power,
better known as one over x, which has this property of looping back from infinity around the x value of zero.
Well, now you know where Pac-Man went and where he's coming back from.
Along the way we're passing multi-valued routes, just like we did on the positive side,
and finally we form the two foci of the hyperbola,
in a similar way like the single focus showed up for the parabola.
There's a lot more to say about these phenomena, but I'm going to leave that for another time.
This inverted version of the behavior we've seen on the positive side
continues on down to the lower powers, like this.
I suspect all this stopping and restarting we've done might have felt a bit frustrating,
so what I want to do now is to just let the animation run from minus four,
where we currently stand, back up to five, so you can see the whole story come together.
And since we're done explaining, we'll crank up the range and resolution to make it more pretty.
Here we go.
I hope you liked this journey. If you'd like to play around with this model,
I've included links to Desmos graphs where you can fiddle around with the parameters
to get a feeling for how this model behaves. Links in the description.
As a bonus, let me show you some other notable examples visualized this way.
The exponential function.
X to its own power.
And back over a constant one to my favorite Gaussian function, the normal distribution.
And let's enhance it a bit.
And then we go back over the exponential function and we draw e to the ix,
which we remember to be cosine x plus i sine x. So if we just stake out the i sine,
we get the cosine on its own.
Thank you so much for watching. I hope you enjoyed and learned something new.
I'm curious to know what you think of the approach taken here, what questions it inspires,
so please leave a comment and let me know. Here are some other videos of mine,
and consider subscribing if you haven't already. Have a lovely day. Bye!
