In this episode, I'm joined by Mark Andreessen to discuss accelerationism, AI, technology,
the future, energy and more.
I'd like to say a big thank you to all my paying patrons and subscribers for making
all of this work possible.
And if you'd like to support the podcast as it runs off patronage alone, then please
find links in the description below.
Otherwise, please enjoy.
So, Mark Andreessen, thanks very much for joining us on Hermitix podcast.
Hey James, thanks for having me.
We are going to be discussing accelerationism, AI, technology, the future, technology is
probably the key one here, I think.
But I want to basically begin with probably something that on the usual podcast you go
on, you probably aren't asked, like a lot of people will know who you are, but in the
sphere that I'm working, people might not.
So just tell us a little bit about yourself and what it is you do before we get started
here.
Yeah.
So I'm probably the polar opposite from your usual guest.
Exactly.
So I'm bringing diversity to your production.
So my background, I'm an engineer.
So I'm a computer programmer, computer science, computer engineer by background.
I was training kind of the old school computer science where they kind of teach you every
layer of the system, including hardware and software.
And then I was a programmer and then an entrepreneur in the 90s.
And probably my main kind of claim to fame is I was sort of president of the creation
of what today you'd consider the internet, sort of the modern consumer internet that
people use.
And so my work first at the University of Illinois and then later at a company I co-founded
called Netscape, sort of popularized the idea of ordinary people being online.
And then helped to build what today you experience as the modern web browser and kind of the
modern internet experience.
And then I was involved kind of through a broad range of Silicon Valley waves over the
course of the next 20 years in the 90s and 2000s, including cloud computing where I started
a company in and social networking I started a company in.
And then in 2009, I started with my long-time business partner, I started a venture capital
firm and our firm, which is called Injuries and Horowitz is now kind of one of the firms
at the center of funding, all of the new generations of technology startups.
And maybe the main thing I kind of underlined there is just technology, quote unquote technology,
high tech, computer technology in particular, kind of used to be, it's always been kind
of interesting and important in the economy for the last 50 years or something.
In the last 15 years, I think a lot of people kind of feel that like technology has really
spread out and it has become integral to many more aspects of life.
And so my firm today finds itself very involved in the application of technology to everything
from education, housing, energy, national defense, national security, as well as kind
of every possible artificial intelligence robotics, kind of every different dimension
of how you might touch technology in your life.
And you picked up on something that will come into the conversation in a couple of questions
time, but this notion of you is basically completely opposite to the majority of guests,
not in a bad way, but often it's a lot of philosophy and which theory and not practice.
And also this notion of technology in relation to either pessimism or optimism.
And this is super, super key, I think, for the ongoing atmosphere of really the West,
of where we're going to end up.
But before we get to these questions, I mean, this is a question I'm slowly phasing out,
but I think it will work for the sake of our conversation, because we're talking more
broadly around themes.
I know you've listened to the podcast before, so it is the Hermitix question.
You can place three thinkers living or dead into a room and listen in on the conversation.
Who do you pick?
Yeah, I think that maybe I'll give you two versions of the answer and then maybe I can combine them.
So there's kind of a timeless answer.
And the timeless answer would be something like Plato or Socrates, Socrates and then Nietzsche.
And then maybe I'd throw in one of your favorite people, Nick Land, I think would be interesting.
The somewhat more applied version of that would be something a lot, and this is sort of maybe
a little bit more topical these days with this movie Oppenheimer that just came out.
But it's like John von Neumann, who was one of the co-inventors of both the atomic bomb
and the computer, Alan Turing, who became famous a few years ago with another movie,
The Imitation Game, and then let's throw in Oppenheimer there also, because those three
guys were sort of present at the creation of what we would consider to be the modern
technological world, including literally those guys were at the center, especially
von Neumann and Turing were at the center of both World War II, the atomic bomb,
the sort of information warfare, the whole kind of decryption kind of phenomenon,
which really a lot of people think one, World War II, along ultimately with the A-bomb,
and then also right precisely at that time with those people, the birth of the computer
and everything that followed. So is that more of a practical room for you or
in terms of like a vision going forward into the future? Or is there something else going
on there between those sort of six figures? Those guys were very, it's almost impossible to
overstate how smart and visionary and far seeing they were like, there's actually the
von Neumann biography came out recently called The Man from the Future, and in anything like
von Neumann is a more interesting character than Oppenheimer in a lot of ways, because he
touched a lot more of these fields. And of the people who knew them that von Neumann was always
considered that he was the smartest of what were called the Martians at that time, right,
which were the sort of group of super geniuses that originated in Hungary in that era.
And so, you know, they were very, very conceptual thinkers. I'll just give you one
example of how conceptual they were, how profoundly smart they were. So they basically
birthed the idea of artificial intelligence right in the middle of the heat of World War II.
Like the minute they created the computer, like they created the computer, right? They created
like the electronic computer, as we know it today, in the heat of World War II. And then
they immediately said, aha, this means we can build electronic brains. And then they immediately
began theorizing and developing designs for artificial intelligence. And in fact, the core
algorithm of artificial intelligence is this idea of neural networks, right, which is this idea of
a computer architecture that sort of is mirrors in some ways the sort of mechanical operation of
the human brain. You know, that was literally an idea from that era in the early 1940s. There was a
paper, two other guys who were in this world wrote a paper in 1943, outlining the theory of
neural networks. And that literally is the same technology. That is the core idea behind
like what you see when you use JGPT today, 80 years later. And so there was a very, very deep
level of intellectual and philosophical, you know, I don't know what it is, like they tapped
into or discovered or developed a very deep well that we're still drawing out of today.
I was gonna, yeah, I was gonna ask that immediately, but you covered it. I mean,
is there any significant changes between AI then and AI now? Or is it really just a matter of
practicality? Like we've got the, we've got more resources and more ability to create it.
Yeah, we're at this fairly shocking moment. So for people who haven't been following this,
basically, it's this, it's one of these amazing things where it's like, there's like this 80
year overnight success that all of a sudden is paying off. And so that it's, you know, it's,
there were, you know, there were 80 years of scholars and researchers and projects
and attempts to build electronic brains. And like every step of the way people thought that
they were super close, you know, there was this famous seminar on the campus of I think it was
Dartmouth University in like 1956, where they got this grant to spend 10 weeks together, they'd
get all the AI scientists together in 1956, because they thought that after that they'd have,
they'd have AI, you know, and turn out they didn't. And so, so it's what, but like it's
starting to work, right? And so when you use ChatGPT today, or you use on the artistic side,
you simply admit journey or stable diffusion, like you're seeing the payoff from that.
I think the way to think about it is it's the deep thinking that took place up front.
It's, and then, you know, just obviously tremendous amount of scientific and technological
thinking and development, you know, and elaboration that took place since then.
But then there's two other kind of key things that are making AI work today that are kind of,
and there's sort of, again, there's sort of a combination of sort of incremental, but also
step function breakthroughs along the way. So one is data. And so just like it turns out a big part
of getting a neural network to work is feeding in enough data. And so, you know, and the analogy
is irresistible, right? It's like, you know, if you want to, if you're trying to educate a student,
right, you want to feed them, you know, and feed them a lot of material in the human world also.
And so it just turns out there's this thing with neural networks and data where, as they say,
you know, quantity has a quality all its own. And you really needed actually the internet to
get to the scale of data. You needed internet scale data, you know, you needed the web to
generate enough text data, you needed like, you know, Google images and YouTube to generate enough
video and imagery to be able to train. So we're kind of getting a payoff from the internet itself,
you know, combined with neural networks. And then the third is the advances in semiconductors.
And, you know, and this is, you know, sort of the famous Moore's Law. But, you know,
this phenomenon that, you know, that kind of we refer to as, you know, quote unquote teaching
sand to think. And so kind of this idea, right, that you can literally convert, you know,
silicon, you know, sand, rocks into, you know, into chips, and then ultimately into brains
is kind of this amazing thing. And actually, as I don't know if you follow this stuff, but as
we're recording right now, there's this like amazing phenomenon happening in the world of
semiconductors and physics right now, which is there's this, we may be, we may be, we may be
right now, we may have just discovered the first room temperature superconductor.
I've been seeing this, but I'm not smart enough. Can you give me a brief overview of why this is
so important? I mean, I'm guessing is this a resource input issue?
So basically, every time you build a circuit today, right, every time you build any kind of
circuit, a wire, a chip, you know, anything like that, an engine, a motor, you know, you have
basically this process. And by the way, this actually relates to the philosophy of acceleration,
as we'll talk about, but you have this sort of thermodynamic process where you're taking in
energy on the one side, right, and then you have a system, right, like a, you know, an electrical
transmission line or a computer chip or something, you have a system that's basically using that
energy to accomplish something. And then that system is inefficient and that system is dumping heat
out the other end. And, you know, and this is why when you use your computer, you know, if you
got, you know, an older laptop computer, you know, the fan turns on at a certain point,
if you have a newer laptop computer, it just starts to get hot, you know, you probably notice
your phone starts to get hot, you know, let, you know, batteries every once in a while do what
they call the cook off, they, you know, they lithium ion batteries will explode, right, like
they're, you're dumping, there's always some, there's, there's always a byproduct of heat,
and therefore, you know, sort of increased entropy kind of coming out the other side of any sort of
electrical or mechanical system. And that's just because with, you know, kind of running energy
through wires of any kind, you just have a level of inefficiency. By the way, the human body does
the same thing, right, like, you know, we take in, you know, energy, and then we, you know, we're
sitting here, you know, we don't feel it, but we're sitting here humming along at, you know,
whatever 98.6 degrees Fahrenheit, you know, significantly higher than room temperature,
because, you know, we're generating our actual biochemical process of life, right,
bioelectrical is generating heat and dumping it out. Anyway, so the idea of the superconductor is
basically think about it in the abstract as a wire that basically transmits information without,
you know, with basically perfect fidelity, you know, perfect conservation of energy
without dumping any heat into the environment. And it turns out that if you could do that,
if you do that at room temperature, then all of a sudden you can have like, you know, basically,
like, you know, incredibly more efficient, you know, kinds of batteries, electrical transmission,
motors, you know, computer chips. And so you can start to think about, for example,
just, you know, an example people talk about is if you, if you, if you cover the Sahara Desert
and solar panels, you know, you could power, you know, basically the entire planet's, you know,
power, you know, energy needs today. The problem is there's no way to transmit that,
you know, transfer that power from the Sahara to the rest of the world
with existing transmission line technology with superconducting transmission lines,
all of a sudden you could, you know, quantum computers, you know, today they exist,
but they're sharply limited because they have to be operated at these, you know, super cool
temperatures, you know, in these very carefully constructed labs, you know, with superconductors
in theory, you have desktop quantum computers, you know, you have levitating trains, you've got,
you know, you just, you have a very broad cross section, you know, you have handheld MRIs,
right, like every doctor, every nurse, you know, has an MRI and they can just, you know,
take a scan wherever they need to, you know, on the fly, you know, and like, like, like the Star Trek,
you know, the, the tricorder, you know, kind of thing. And so anyway, it's fascinating. So,
so, so sitting here today, there's, there's, there's the reports of this, of this breakthrough.
And there are the sort of almost, these almost UFO style videos of, of, of this material levitating,
where it's not supposed to be levitating as a consequence of this breakthrough. And there are
betting markets on scientific progress, and the betting markets, as of this morning, have the odds
of this being a real breakthrough at exactly 50-50. And so, we...
Not the worst odds.
No, but it's, it's funny. If you think about it, it's funny because it's, it's, it's the,
our entire world right now, from a physics standpoint, it's like Schrodinger's cat,
like we live in a, we live, we live sitting here today in a superposition of two worlds,
one in which we now have room temperatures, some conductors, and one of which we don't.
People are, you know, these are radically different potential futures for, for humanity,
right? And so, if it turns out it's true, you know, it's an amazing stuff, function,
breakthrough. If not, it'll, you know, it'll, it'll set us back and we'll, you know, people
will go back to trying to work on it, figure it out. But, you know, but, but between the time
we're recording, between the time we release, we may even find out whether the cat, the, the
superconducting cat, the box is alive or dead. That alive or dead state, I mean, these, these
two separate futures is really something that I, I see, you know, when I was reading your blog,
when I was looking at, uh, effective, effective acceler, accelerationism and accelerationism
we'll get to, but these two futures, I think is the big question that I want to ask you, which is,
because, because you've lived through this time, which is going through the, the optimism of the
90s, especially, you know, you mentioned Nick Lander, the star, I mean, you see that in philosophy,
you see that in technology, see that in the history, this huge, um, so let's call it a cyberpunk
optimism regarding our technological future. And I would say now, I don't know, you know,
whether or not you agree with me, please let me know. We have entered into what land himself
called a slump from the 2000s, like late 2000s, you know, early 2000s onwards. And there seems to be
within the, within the air, a sort of cynicism, a sort of pessimism that we've just ended up in this,
like, place of stagnance. And do you see, I mean, if you agree with me in terms of those two,
two possibilities, do you, I mean, I think I would be right in saying you're an optimist.
Do you see us now re-entering into that, a new phase of optimism regarding technology and regarding
the future? Well, so there's, there's, there's several layers to this question. I would be happy
to kind of go through them. Then we can spend as much time in this as you want. But the, the, the,
the core layer we're talking about, and I totally, by the way, totally acknowledge and, and I think
this is a great topic. And, you know, the, your observations are very real. The core thing that
I would go to, to start with is not kind of the social, political, you know, kind of, you know,
philosophical dimension. The core thing I would go to, to start with is the technological dimension.
In other words, at the substantive level, like, what is the actual rate of technological change
in our world? And, and you'll know, you'll note, I don't know, you'll note that on the, on the social
dimension, we seem to whip back and forth between, oh my God, there's too much change,
and is he stabilizing everything? And then we whip right around to, oh my God, there's not enough
change. And we're stagnant, right? And that's horrible. So, so there's kind of dystopian versions,
you know, there's kind of dystopian mindsets in the air, kind of in, in, in both directions.
So, so anyway, so I would start with kind of the technological kind of substantive layer to it.
And there, you know, the observation, and this is not an original observation on my part,
you know, Peter Thiel and Tyler Cohen, in particular, have gone through this in a lot
of detail in their work. But, you know, basically, like, if you look at the long arc of technological
development over the course of, you know, basic, you know, which, which effectively started with
the Enlightenment, right? So you sort of, practically speaking, you're sort of starting
around 1700 and projecting forward to today. It's about 300 years worth of what we would
consider kind of systematic technological development. You know, it's basically, if you
look at kind of that long arc, and then if you basically measure the pace of technological
development and applause by saying you actually can measure the pace of technological development
in the economy with a metric that economists call productivity growth. And so, and basically,
the way that that works is, you know, economic productivity is defined basically as output
per unit of input, right? And you can, you know, whatever your inputs are, could be energy, right?
It could be, you know, raw materials, you know, whatever you want. And then, you know, output is
in, you know, actual, you know, actual output, you know, more cars, more chips, more this,
more that, more clothes, more food, more houses. And so, basically, what economists will tell you
is the rate of productivity growth in the economy, which they measure annually, basically, is the
rate of technological change in the system, right? And so, if technology is paying off, right, if the
advances are real, then your economy is able to generate more output with the same inputs.
If your technological development is stagnant, then that's not the case. And it's an aggregate
measure, but it's a good measure overall. If you look at those statistics, basically, what you find
is we had very, we think more recently in the last century, we had very rapid productivity growth in
the West, basically, for the first half of the 20th century. So, from the basically, you know,
what was called the Second Industrial Revolution, which started around 1880, 1890, through to basically
the mid-60s, we had actually a very rapid rate of technological development. And by the way,
in that era, right, we got, you know, the car, the interstate highway system, the power grid,
telegraph, telephone, radio, television, you know, we got computers, we got, you know,
we got like all, you know, all we got, you know, atomic, we got, you know, both atomic weapons
and also nuclear power technology, right? And so, there was this tremendous kind of technological
surge that took place, you know, in that sort of scholar 1880 to 1960, 1965 kind of period.
The productivity growth ran, you know, through that era, two to 4% a year,
which, which, and the aggregate is very fast, you know, for the economy overall, like that's,
that's a very fast pace of change. Basically, since the mid-60s, early 70s, the rate of productivity
growth basically took a sharp deceleration. And so, in the, in the, basically, the 50 years, 52
years now that I've been alive, you know, it's, it's been a step lower, it's been 1 or 2% a year,
it's been kind of persistently too low relative to what it should be. And, and, you know, I think
there's a bunch of possible explanations for that. But I think the most obvious one is that
basically the, the world of technology bifurcated in the 70s and 80s into two domains, one domain is
the domain of bits, you know, the domain of computers and the internet, where there has been,
you know, obviously very rapid technological development, you know, you know, potentially,
you know, now culminating in AI. But then there's also the world of atoms. And, you know, the,
the diagnosis at least that I would apply is we, we, we essentially outlawed technological
development and innovation in the, in the realm of atoms, you know, basically since the 1970s.
There are many examples of how we've done this. And, you know, you can look at things like housing
policy, and you can kind of see it quite clearly, but also very specifically, you can see it in
energy, which is, you know, we discovered nuclear power, right? We discovered a source of, you know,
a limited, you know, zero emissions energy that, you know, compared to every other form of energy
is like ultra safe, you know, nuclear energy is like, by far the safest form of energy that we
know of. And, you know, in the 1970s, we essentially made it illegal, you know, just like totally
banned it. And we talked more about that, but like that, that was like a draconian thing that,
that, you know, has consequences through to, to the world we live in today. And so, so we live in
this, or any, you mentioned cyberpunk, and this is, this is actually kind of the cyberpunk ethos
that I think actually reflects something real, which is, you know, if you're in the virtual world,
it's like, wow, right? It's like, you know, it's amazing. Like everything is like spectacular.
And, and yeah, look, even like a podcast like yours, like, right, would have been, you know,
inconceivable 30 years ago, right? And so like information, transmission, communication, coordination,
you know, all these things are have taken huge leaps forward. But then the minute we, you know,
the minute you get into a car, or the minute you plug something into the wall, right, or the minute
you eat food, right, you're still living in the 1950s. And so I think we live in a schizophrenic
world with respect to that question. Why then, so you write about this in your blog post on AI,
which we'll get to, but you draw in Prometheus, right, this, this consistent historical cycle of
when there is a new technology, it's going to destroy us, everything's going to end,
it's the worst thing ever, we need to be careful of it, you know, the TV is going to burn your
eyeballs out of your sockets, the vacuum cleaner is going to, I don't know, like explode or whatever,
but every time there is a, like a cyclic change of a new technological innovation, it's this
Promethean thing of where we're pretty terrified of it and we want it to go away. And then eventually
we're like, Oh, actually, no, that's pretty helpful. But there seems to be, as you said,
there's something that happened in the 1970s, where we just pushed away the atomic world in
favor of the bits, you know, which makes sense. But why, I mean, there's probably a lot of
governmental reasons for this as well. But why were we so, it seems like a fear, really,
the way you talk about it, like why were we so in a way scared to then develop the atomic world
in the way we had the bit world? Yeah, so I go start even deeper, I think, which is there's
a deep fear in the human psyche, and I think probably in the human animal of new knowledge,
like it's even a level like technology is an expression of knowledge, right, like the Greeks
right have this term, Techni, which is sort of this, you know, which is where the word technology
comes from. But I think the underlying meaning is more like general knowledge.
You know, the Christian, you know, the key to the Christian, you know, kind of theology,
right, is the, you know, what is, you know, what was the original sin, right, it was eating the
apple from the Tree of Knowledge, right, it was, it was mankind, right, mankind learning that,
which he was not supposed to learn. And so, you know, the Greeks had the Prometheus myth,
the Christians have the snake in the Garden of Eden and the Tree of Knowledge, like there's
something very, very deep, like there's, there's an asymmetry, I think, wire deeply in the human
brain, right, which is, you know, sort of, you know, fear versus hope, which, which from an
evolutionary standpoint, like would make a lot of sense, right, which is like, okay, if you're
living in, let's say prehistoric times, you know, in the sort of long evolutionary landscape that
we lived in, you know, is new information likely to be good or bad, probably over the sweep of,
you know, the billions of years of evolution that we went through, most new information was bad,
right, most new information was the predators coming over the hill to kill you. And so, I think
there's something like deeply resonant about the idea that new is bad, that, you know, and by the
way, look, in the, in the West, like, we probably, you know, we actually, I think, from a historical
and maybe comparative standpoint, like we're actually quite enamored by new things as compared
to a lot of traditional societies. And so, if anything, we've overcome some of our national
instincts on this, but that, that, that impulse is still deep. And then if you go up one level to
kind of the social level, you know, I'm quite bought into an explanation on this that was provided,
there's a, there was a philosopher of science, historian of science named Elting Morrison
at MIT in the, in the first half of the 20th century, who talked about this. And he said,
look, you need to think about basically technology intersects with social systems.
When a new technology intersects with a social system, basically what it does is it threatens
to upend the social order, right. And so, at any given moment in time, you have a social order,
right, with status hierarchies, right, and people who are in charge of things. And basically what
he says is the social order of any time is basically, you know, in sort of Western sort of
modern sort of enlightenment, Western civilization, the social order is a function of the technologies
that led up to it, right. And so you have a certain way of organizing the military, you have a certain
way of organizing, you know, industrial society, you have a certain way of organizing, you know,
political affairs. And they are the consequence of the technologies up to that point. And then
you introduce a new technology, and the new technology basically threatens to upend that
status hierarchy. And the people who are in power all of a sudden aren't, and there are new people
in power. And of course, you know, what is the thing that people will fight the hardest to maintain,
you know, as, you know, as their status in the hierarchy. And then he goes through example
after example of this throughout history, including this incredible example of the development of the
first naval gun that adjusted for the role of a battleship and battle, which increased the firing
accuracy of naval guns by like 10x. It was one of the great decisive breakthroughs in modern weaponry.
And it still took both the US and the UK British navies 25 years to adopt it.
Because the entire command status hierarchy of how naval combat vessels were run and how
gunnery systems worked and how tactics and strategy worked for naval battles, like had to be upended
with the invention of this new gun. Anyway, and so like he would basically say, you know,
essentially, duh, you know, you roll out this new technology, it, you know, it causes people who
used to have power and no longer have power, puts new people in power, you know, in modern terms,
you know, the language that we would use to describe this as gatekeepers, right? Like so,
you know, why is the traditional journalism press so, you know, it just absolutely furious about
the internet, right? And it's because like the internet gives right regular people the opportunity
to basically be on a, on at least a peer relationship, if not, you know, in the case of
somebody like Joe Rogan, a superior relationship, right? And then it's an upending of the status
hierarchy. And kind of, you know, the same thing, you know, through, basically, like one of the
ways to interpret the story of our time from a social standpoint is all of the gatekeepers who
were strong in the 60s and 70s are basically being torn down. Another obvious example, political
parties, right? Why are so many Western political parties in a state of some combination of freak
out and meltdown right now, right? Well, it's because in an era of radio and television,
they were able to broadcast a top down message, and they were able to tell voters basically
what to think in the, in the new model voters are deciding what they think based on what they
read online. And then they're reflecting that back up and finding their politicians wanting,
right? And so therefore, like the re-rise of populism and, you know, sort of the blowing out of,
you know, sort of both left-wing and right-wing ideologies, right? The sort of, you know,
the center is not holding. And so anyway, that would be another example in Morris's framework.
And then I'll just close on this. Morrison has this fast. He says there's this as a consequence
to the fact that technology changes social hierarchies. He says there's a predictable
three stage process to the reaction to any new technology by the status quo, but basically
the people in power at that time. He says, step one is ignore. And so just like pretend it doesn't
exist. Which by the way, is actually a pretty good strategy because like most technologies don't
upend social orders, like most new technologies don't work at the time that they're first
presented. So maybe ignore is actually a rational strategy. Step two is what he calls rational
counter argument. And so that's where you get like the laundry list of all the things that are
wrong with the new technology, right? And then he says step three is when the name calling begins.
This, I mean, I watched a couple of your other interviews recently. And this relates to,
I know you've been talking about Nietzsche's master in slavery morality recently. And this
seems to tie to that in this notion of Nietzsche and, you know, he does a typical
philosophical thing of taking a French word and drawing it out. But Rosentum on, right? Instead
of, you know, just having a look at nuclear power and seeing where it would go and allowing that
power to unfold within society, you try invert the morals. So you say, well, actually, the good thing
to do is because these people don't have the will to power, because they don't have the ability
or the engineering skills, I guess in your own case, to like, you know, to utilize the thing,
they invert the morals and say, well, actually, the good thing is to do the inverse is to not have
it like this is bad. And now that then immediately puts them in the in the good camp. But it seems
like, to be honest, it really feels especially with AI and also now with nuclear power, now that,
you know, especially in Germany, certain things have been tried. And now it's like, okay, this was
a really bad mistake in terms of energy, like the cat's out of the bag. And we like, there's now
this force of having to move, you were then talking about the second to second and third stages there.
It's almost like, look, with AI, especially the cat's out of the bag, like, we have to move, there's
no, there's no choice of like, ignoring or reacting against it. Now you have to deal with it or you
don't. Yeah, so let's let's spend a little one more moment on nuclear power and then and then go
to AI. So nuclear power is so interesting, because nuclear power is the tell. Like, I always look for
like the little signals that people don't really mean what they say, or that they don't, they're
not really like they're, you know, they're, they're, they're, they're sort of, you know, moral system
doesn't quite line up properly. And so nuclear power is this like amazing, it's this amazing thing,
it's like, literally, it's like, okay, you build this thing, it generates power, it basically,
it generates a small amount of nuclear waste, it generates steam, but it generates zero emissions,
right, zero carbon, right. And so you have this basically, it's amazing phenomenon where you have
this, and let's just take them completely as space value, I'm not gonna, this is not me questioning,
I'm not going to question carbon emissions or global war, I'm just gonna, I'm gonna assume
that everything the environmentalists say about carbon emissions, climate, you know, change all
our stuff. Let's assume that that's all totally real. Like, let's just, let's just grant them all
that. It's like, okay, well, like, okay, so how could, how can you solve the sort of climate
crisis, the carbon emissions crisis, it's like, well, you have the silver bullet technology,
you could roll out in the form of nuclear fission today. You could generate a limited power. Richard
Nixon, by the way, the, you know, the heavily, heavily condemned Richard Nixon in 1972,
you know, proposed something at the time he called project independence.
Project independence was going to be the United States building 1000 new civilian nuclear power
plants by the year 1980, and cutting the entire US energy grid, including the transportation system,
cars, everything, home heating, everything over to nuclear power by 1980, going zero emission
in the US economy. And by the way, right, geopolitically removing us from the Middle East,
right, right. So no, right, no, Iraq, FK, all that stuff, like just completely unnecessary,
right. And, you know, you'll note that like project independence did not, did not happen,
right, like we don't, we don't live in that world today. And so it's like, okay, you've got this
like crisis, you've got this like silver bowl solution to for it, and you very deliberately
have chosen to not adopt that solution. And it's like, and there's this actually very interesting
split in the environmental movement today. And it's really kind of, you know, I think kind of
bizarre. And it's like a 99 to one split, you asked like 99% of environmental activists about
nuclear power, they just just sort of categorically dismiss it was, of course, that's not an option.
You do have this kind of radical fringe with people like Stuart Brand, who are like, basically
now pointing out that it is, it is a silver bullet answer, but most of them are saying, no,
it's not an answer. And it's like, okay, well, why are they doing that? It's like, well, like,
what is it that they're saying that they want to do? And what they're saying they want to do
is what they call, you know, degrowth, right. And so they want to decarbonize the economy,
they want to deenergize the economy, they want to degrow the economy. And then, you know, when
you get down to it, and you ask them a very, you know, specific question about the implications of
this, you know, basically what you find is the general model is they want to reduce the human
population on the planet to about 500 million people. You know, it's kind of the answer that
they ultimately come down to. And so ultimately, the, you know, the big agenda is to is to reduce
the human, you know, basically the human herd, you know, quite sharply. And, you know, they kind
of dance around this a little bit, but when they when they really get down to it, this is what they
talk about. And of course, you know, Paul Ehrlich, you know, is kind of one of the kind of famous
icons of this, he's been talking about this for decades. I think it was Jane Goodall, who used
the 500, you know, million, you know, number recently in public. And so, and so, and so then
you got this kind of very interesting, you know, technological philosophical moral question, which
is like, well, what, what is the goal here, right, is the goal to like solve climate change, or is
the goal to like depopulate the planet, right. And to the extent that like free unlimited power,
right, would interfere with, you know, to the extent that that's a problem, the problem it
would be as if the actual agenda is to depopulate the planet. And like, I would like this to not
be the case. Like, I think, you know, again, take taking everything else that they say at face value,
you'd like to solve carbon emissions and climate change and everything else. But like,
you know, like, I think you, you know, you might also say you want a planet in which there are
not only 8 billion people, but maybe, you know, maybe people are good, right. Maybe you're actually
should have 20 billion or 50 billion people. And we have the technology to do that. And we're
choosing not to do it. So, so, so, so this is the thing, like this gets into these very deep
questions, right, to your point of like, okay, very deep questions about morality. And like,
how did we maneuver or, you know, like per nature, like how did we reverse ourselves into a situation
where we're actually arguing against human life. And of course, and this is we'll get to it, but
this, this of course is then, you know, a big part of the origin of the idea of effective
accelerationism, which is basically new, like let's go sharply in the other direction. Oh, and
then yeah, so AI, yeah, AI is playing out much the same way as already playing out the same way.
And here you've got this like just incredible phenomenon happening where we, we, you know,
it looks like we have a key breakthrough to basically increase the level of intelligence,
you know, basically all throughout society and around the world, you know, through, you know,
basically for the first time, you know, directly applying your general intelligence to the world.
And, you know, there is this like incredibly basically aggressive movement that is actually
having tangible impact today in the halls of power in Washington DC and in the EU and other places,
you know, that is seeking to stop and reverse it, you know, as aggressively as they possibly can.
And so we're kind of, we're going through, we're going through, I would say, a suddenly accelerated
and very sharp and aggressive version of exactly what happened with nuclear power happening with
AI right now. I mean, this is the thing that can, can, well, there's two questions because
on your blog, you, it's really refreshing to see you, you're pretty to the point when you say,
look, AI is code, it's code written by people, by human beings on computers developed by human
beings, you know, like we're in control, you're not of this, I think there was, you know, Musk
signed a big thing where like, you know, 1000 people signed this thing to say like, we need to hold
this the whole Rocco's Basilisk AI is going to be terminated to come in and blowing us up with
robots, etc. So it's going to kill us all. You're very much like, no, this is code, this is just
an intelligence for us to use. Now that's one question, you know, I guess, why isn't AI going
to kill us all? And I know you've spoken about that a lot. So that answer can be brief. But
secondly, this whole idea of trying to reverse it, to me, it seems inherent within AI as a thing
that it wants, you know, it's the cats out the back, you can't like once it's here, you, you,
outside of really draconian measures, you can't because how do you how do you hold an
intelligence which is growing, right? Well, except, you know, they did stall at nuclear power,
right? So, right, like so they did, like it worked. So why did project independence not happen?
Why do we not have like, you know, unlimited nuclear power today? You know, the reason is
because it was it was blocked by the by the political system, right? And so, so, you know,
Richard Nixon, who I mentioned, you know, proposed this, he also created the Environmental
Protection Agency and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. You know, the nuclear, it's actually
that this actually been a big week. The first new nuclear power plant design, the first newly
designed nuclear power plant, in the last 50 years, just went online in Georgia, you know,
$20 billion over budget and you know, it's got it's a story of its own, but at least we got one
online. It's the first new nuclear power plant design ever authorized by the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission, says Nixon created that commission, right? And so, so, so we put in place a regulatory
regime around nuclear power in the 1970s that, you know, all but made it impossible. By the way,
you alluded to the Germany thing earlier, I'll just touch on that for a second. So,
you know, that, you know, you've, I'm sure you've heard of the idea of the precautionary principle,
right? Right, which is this, this idea that basically scientists and technologists have a
moral obligation to think through all the possible negative consequences of a new technology before
it's rolled out. The precautionary principle, right, the precautionary principle, and we could
talk about that, including whether scientists and technologists are actually qualified to do that.
But, you know, this was also a central theme of Oppenheimer, but the precautionary principle
was invented by the German Greens in the 1970s, and it was prevented specifically to stop nuclear
power. And, you know, it is just amazing, we're sitting here in 2023, and there's this, you know,
where we effectively, we in the West are effectively at this, you know, at war with Russia,
right? And, you know, it's a proxy war right now that, you know, hopefully doesn't turn into a real
war, but who knows, you know, the proxy wars have a, you know, have a disconcerting, you know,
pattern of spilling over into becoming real wars. And, you know, a lot of this is, it's a tale of
energy. And, you know, basically the Russian economy, you know, is like 70% energy exports,
right, oil and gas exports. The major buyer of that energy historically has been Europe and
specifically Germany. You know, Europe and Germany specifically essentially have funded the Russian
state, the Putin state, you know, and that funding is what basically built and sustains
their military engine, which is what they've used to invade Ukraine, right? And so it's this like,
like, there's this counterfactual, right, where the German Greens did not do what they did in
the 1970s, nuclear power was not blocked, you know, Germany and France and the rest of Europe
today is like fully energy independent running on nuclear power, you know, the Russia state,
it would be greatly weakened because the value of their exports would be, you know, enormously
diminished. And they would not have the wherewithal to invade other countries or to threaten
Europe. And so like, these decisions have like real consequences. And, you know, these people,
use the pejorative sense, like they are so confident that they can step into these, you know,
debates, you know, kind of questions around, you know, new technologies and how they should be
applied and what the consequences are, they can step in and they can use the political
machine to basically throw sand in the gears and stop these things from happening. So, so like,
AI, this is what's happening right now. So like, you know, in the, in the sort of, you know,
theoretical position where AI is kind of this, you know, potentially runaway thing, then, right,
maybe it can be constrained, like, in the real world, it very much can be constrained. And
the reason it can be constrained in the real world is because it uses physical resources,
right? It has a physical, it has a physical layer to it. And that layer is energy usage.
And that layer is chips. And that layer is, you know, telecom bandwidth. And that layer is data
centers, physical data centers, right? And so, and that layer is like, you know, by the way,
that layer also includes the actual technologists, like working in the field, and their ability to
actually do what they do. And there are, you know, a very large number of sort of control points and
pressure points that, you know, the state can put on those layers to prevent them from being used
for whatever it wants to prevent. And, you know, and look, the EU is on the verge, the EU has this
like anti AI bill that it looks like is going to pass that is like extremely draconian and may
result in Europe not even having an AI industry and may result in, you know, American AI companies
not even operating in Europe. And then in the US, we have a very kind of similar push happening is,
you know, the sort of ant, what I would describe as the anti AI zealots are, you know, they are,
they are in the White House today, right, arguing that, you know, this is bad, it should be stopped.
And it's like, you know, it's, it's, it's amazing because it's like, how many times are we going
to like run through this loop? How many times are we going to like repeat history here? How,
how many times are we going to be kind of self defeating like this? And like apparently the,
the impulse to be self defeating, we have not worked it out of our system.
You don't want to be self defeating them. I mean, let's move into this peculiar four letters,
which is found at the moment at the end of your Twitter name and the end floating around Twitter,
mostly e slash act or effective accelerationism. And this like, this is just beautiful to me.
It's like the, the acceleration is Renaissance. I've been set talking about it in that way. I
don't want to gatekeep it too much, but you know, I wrote my master's thesis on accelerationism,
like I love it. I love talking about it. You don't want any of this holding back. You don't
want to hold anything back. You want to accelerate. So firstly, I mean, there's two questions there.
What is it for you to accelerate and what is effective accelerationism?
Yeah. So let me, let me just say where that, where it came from, I'll reverse the second one
first and then go to the broader topic. So, so, so it's a, it's a combination. There's, there's,
there's, you know, kind of two, two words there, effective and accelerationism. So the, you know,
the acceleration, accelerationism part of it is obviously building on what you've talked about
and what Nick Landon and others have talked about for a long time. And of course, as you,
as you've talked about, there's, there's all these different versions of accelerationism. And so this
is, this is, you know, proposing one that, you know, it's this, this one is like the closest to
what you would call right, right accelerationism, although, you know, maybe without some of the
political overtones. And so there is that component. There's also the effective part of it. And the
effective part of it, it's sort of a half humorous reference, obviously, to effective altruism.
And it's a little bit tongue in cheek, because it's like, of course, if you're going to have a
philosophy, of course, you would like it to be effective. But, you know, but, but also look
like EAC is like very much like EAC's enemy, right, the oppositional force that the thing that EAC was
sort of formed to fight is actually, you know, specifically effective altruism. Right. And so
it's also like, you also sort of, you know, use that term to the term effective to kind of kind
of make that point, like this is in that world. And this is opposed to that. And, and, and the
reason why like this is happening now, like the reason why the concept of effective accelerationism,
you know, has kind of come into being. And by the way, that, you know, the people, this is not
originally my formulation, this is, this is, there's, you know, kind of ultra smart Twitter
characters, who I think are still mostly operating under assumed names. But there's Beth Jesus,
and Bayes Lord are the two, the two, two of them that I know. And they're, you know, these are
like top and Silicon Valley, you know, engineers, scientists, technologists. But, you know, at least
for now, they're operating kind of under undercover pseudonym. So the reason this is happening now
is because of what I, what I was describing earlier with AI, which is you have this, you have this
other movement, you have this movement of what's sort of called sometimes it's used different
terms AI risk, AI safety, AI alignment. Sometimes you'll hear the term X risk. You know, sometimes,
and then this is sort of directly attached. This is all part of the, you know, EA world,
the effective altruism world. And then, you know, the central characters of this other world are,
you know, Nick Bostrom, Elisir Yadkowski, you know, the open philanthropy organization.
And, you know, a bunch of these, a bunch of these kind of, you know, the sort of the AI,
what we call the AI doomers running around, like the AI doomer movement is basically a
part and parcel with the effective altruism movement. And, you know, AI existential risk has
always been kind of the boogeyman of effective altruism, kind of going back, you know, over the
20 year development of EA. And so anyway, that that EA movement is the movement, by the way,
with lavish funding by like EA billionaires, which is which is part of the problem, by the way,
who made all their money in tech, which is also amazing. But, you know, so you've got this funding
complex, you've got this EA movement, you've got this attached AI risk safety movement,
and now you've got like active lobbying, you know, sort of anti AI PR campaign. And so anyway,
so effective effective acceleration is intended to be the polar opposite of that, it's intended to
be the, you know, to head boldly and firmly and strongly and confidently into the into the future.
You know, it's like, why, you know, why, why this form of positive accelerationism, you know,
it's, there's a couple different layers of it. The founders of the, of the concept of the act
have a thermodynamic, you know, kind of thing, which, which we could talk about, but it's kind
of one layer down from our operate. The layer operate is more at the level of engineering. And
when I think about it, I think in terms of essentially fundamentally of material conditions.
So human flourishing, quality of life, standard of living of human beings on earth. And back to
that concept of productivity growth, you know, the application of technology, to be able to
cause the economy to be more productive and therefore cause more material wealth, higher
levels of material welfare, you know, for people all over the world, by the way, also with reduced
inputs, right. And so not just greater levels of development and greater levels of advance,
but also greater levels of efficiency. And the nature of technology as a lever on the physical
world is you can have your cake and eat it too, you can get higher levels of output with lower
levels of input. And the result of that is a much higher standard of living. So,
so I kind of adopt my, my philosophical grounding is sort of, you know, I don't know if I call it
like a positive materialism or something, you know, which is like, I think the thing that we,
the thing that the technology industry does best is improve material quality of life.
I think that we should accelerate as hard into that as we possibly can. I think the quote,
unquote risks around that are greatly exaggerated, if not, if not false. And, and, you know, I think
the forces against basically technological progress, you know, they're like the environmental
movement I described, you know, they're fundamentally sort of at some deep level,
they're sort of anti-human, you know, they want fewer people and they want a lower quality
living on earth. And like, I just, I very much disagree with both of those.
And what is this at the thermodynamic level? Is this, is this the, you know, we are ultimate
enemy is entropy? So there's, there's a thermodynamic part gets complicated. And this is
not my, my field. So there's, there's other people that you should probably have on to talk
about this, but the effect of accelerationism version of the thermodynamic thing is, is based
on the work of this physicist named Jeremy England, who is this very interesting character
actually, he's actually trained by one of my partners. And is now basically, he's an MIT,
you know, physicist, you know, biologist, and by the way, and also by the way, interesting guy,
I don't know him, but a very interesting guy from the distance, he's also a trained rabbi.
And so he's an interesting cat. And so he basically has this theory that basically,
basically it's, it's sort of life is the direct result life, life, like the phenomenon of life
itself is a direct consequence of thermodynamics. And, you know, the way he describes it is
basically, basically, if you take, you know, basically the universe with a level of energy
that's washing around and raw materials, and you sort of apply kind of natural selection at a very
deep level, you know, you know, even at the level of just like the formation of materials,
like on a planet or something, you basically have this thing where basically a matter wants
to organize itself into states where it's able to absorb energy and achieve higher levels of
structure. And so you have absorption of energy, you have achievement of higher levels of structure,
in the case of organic life, that's, you know, starts with our basic RNA, and then kind of works
this way up to, you know, full living systems. And then on the other side of that, as we talked
about before, on the other side of that is your, the result of that is your sort of your dumping
heat, which is to say entropy, you know, kind of out into the broader system. And so it's almost
like saying the second law of thermodynamics has an upside, right, which is basically, yes, entropy
in the universe is increasing over time, but a lot of that increases the result of structures
forming that are basically absorbing energy and then exporting entropy. And one form of that
structure is actually life. And this, and this is actually a thermodynamic, you know,
biomechanical, bioelectrical kind of explanation of actually how organic life works. Like this is
what we are, we are machines for gathering energy, you know, forming increasingly, you know, complicated
biological machines, replicating those machines, right. And of course, you know, he talks about
like, you know, natural selection, like it's not surprising that natural selection is so oriented
around replication, right, because replication is the easiest way to generate more structure.
Right. Like replication is the way that a system that is basically in business to
generate structure, it's the way that it can most efficiently generate more structure.
And so anyway, basically, the universe wants us to basically be alive. The universe wants us to
become more sophisticated. You know, the universe wants us to replicate. You know, the universe
feeds us and, you know, an essentially a limited amount of energy and raw materials with which to
do that. You know, yes, we dump entropy out the other side, but we get structure and life,
you know, to basically, to basically compensate for that.
The universe is a, the universe is pronatalist and kind of Nietzsche in there as well.
Yeah, exactly. 100%. Yeah. So anyway, so that's, that's the, that's the thermodynamic,
that's the thermodynamic underpins of effective accelerationism. The people who have encountered
effective acceleration, effective accelerationism, some of that get very, some of them get very
deeply into that. And there's a very deep kind of well there to, to draw from this guy, Jeremy
England has a book out. Actually, you'll appreciate this. This guy, Jeremy England has a book out
and the title of the book is something like every life is on fire. And it's actually funny,
because it's like, if you read Heraclitus, you're like, Oh my God, you know, he saw it.
Right. Like, it's like, there's something very, very deep going on here with this sort of
intersection of energy life. But so he's got this book out, which apparently is quite good.
And so some people in effective acceleration kind of, kind of go deep. There's a tongue-in-cheek
reference to the so-called thermodynamic God, right, which is not, you know, which is not a
literal, you know, religious, in the literal religious sense, like a, you know, sort of
a conscious God or a sentient God, but more of this, this idea that the universe is, is, is,
is sort of designed to express itself in the forms, you know, basically in higher and higher
forms of life. Yeah, to your point, like there's an obviously direct niche in connection.
And, you know, so maybe, maybe he saw a lot of this too. You know, and obviously he, you know,
he was obviously writing and thinking at the same time Darwin was figuring a lot of this out on the,
on the natural selection evolution side. Yeah, so there's that. But, but having said that,
like, like I said, my take on it is more, you know, I find that stuff fascinating. I'm more
naturally inclined as an engineer, more naturally inclined towards the material side.
And so I just more naturally think in terms of the, the social systems and the technological
development and the impact on, on, on, on material quality of life. And so I think you
can also just take it at that level and not, not, not have to get all the way down into thermodynamics
if you don't want to. I mean, there's an odd, I mean, yeah, drawing it down to this level of
engineering, well, not down to, but just to this level of engineering, there's this odd
learned helplessness. And I mean, just to take the two examples we've given so far. So, and,
you know, they work quite well actually nuclear energy on the atomic side and AI on the bit side
of things, virtual, I guess, virtual reality and reality. You posted this really interesting
essay on your, on your blog about availability cascades, which is about basically, in short,
if I'm getting this right, this idea of why are so many people interested in this thing or this
view of whatever the, the opinion or the idea is that's floating around. And it seems on both of
those, both nuclear energy and AI, we have that same opinion, which is like, mimetically infected
culture of a sort of learned helplessness, like, oh, no, you know, we've already spoken about this
a bit, but like, oh, no, we need to get rid of this, we can't deal with this. But it seems,
do you think on the engineering side of things, and I guess it overlaps also into the social in
terms of how you engineer and how you promote these ideas socially as, as tools, as things that
people use is an attempt to like, invert that availability cascade and like, try to like,
begin some mimesis on the side of like, it's okay to want a better quality of living, it's okay to
want to grow, it's okay to want energy, like, you don't have to be almost like submissive to,
to whatever this strange, self-defeating learned helplessness is that we have in terms of
technology and our like, our like weird allegiance to just this, this stagnant comfort that we've
had for too long. Yeah, that's, that's, that's right. That's exactly right. And like I said,
like we said, like we talked about earlier, like, there's, there's this, I think there's a natural
human impulse deeply wired into like the limbic system or something, which is basically, right,
fear over hope, right? You know, like, what's most likely to come over the ridge, right,
a sabre to tiger to eat you or like something warm and cuddly that wants to be your friend,
right? I guess a quack or something like that, right? So, right, it's, it's probably the tiger,
right? And you know, there's, there's a sort of, you know, false positive, false negative,
right, two ways of making mistakes. And you definitely, from an evolutionary standpoint,
want to err in the direction of being, you know, more, you know, more, you want to overestimate
the rate of Cybertooth Tigers, right, to, to, to survive. So, so, so that, that impulses deep.
Yeah. But then, you know, what we have is, you know, we have, we have sentience, we have the,
you know, the, we're not just limbic systems anymore, we have a, we have the ability to control
environment, the ability to build tools, we're not afraid to save the two tigers anymore.
And so, yeah, we have the ability to shape our world. You know, we develop rationality and
the enlightenment and science and technology and markets and everything else to be able to control
the world, you know, to our benefit. And so, we, you know, we don't, we don't have to live
cowering in fear anymore, you know, as much as, or as much as that might be like grimly satisfying,
like we don't actually have to do that. And there's actually a, you know, very, there are many,
many good reasons over the last 300 years to believe that, you know, there's, there's a much
better way to live. Yeah, but look, somebody has to say, you know, somebody has to actually say that.
And then look, I think the other part is, I think there's a big divide. I think there's a big divide
between, I'll pull up my, my Burnham on this a little bit is, is a big divide on this stuff
between what you describe as the elites and the masses that has turned out to be pretty interesting.
So the, the, I would say this problem, this problem of fear of technology,
or hatred of technology or desire to stop technology, I think it's primarily a phenomenon of the
elites. I actually don't think it's particularly shared by the masses. And it just seems like
I just take AI as an obvious example. One of the amazing things about AI is it's like freely
available for use by everybody in the world right now today, fully state of the art, like the best
AI in the world is on, you know, websites from open AI and Google and Microsoft. And you can go
on there and you can use it for free today. And people, you know, hundreds, hundred, already
a hundred, 200 million people, something like that around the world are already doing this,
right? And if you talk to anybody who's, you know, if you talk to any teacher, right, you know,
you know, they'll already tell you they've got students using chat GPD to write essays and so
forth. Right. And so you've got this amazing thing where, you know, like the internet before it
and like the personal computer before it and like the smartphone before it, AI is, it's like
immediately democratized, right? Like it's immediately available in its full state of the art
version. Like there's no more advanced version of like GPT that I can buy for a million dollars than
you can get for free or by paying 20 bucks for the upgraded version on the open AI website.
Like the state of the art stuff is fully available for free. And so you have people all over the
world. And this is one of my, this would be a source of optimism that the AI doomers are going
to lose almost by definition, right? Is you have people all over the world who are just already
using this and they're getting, you know, great value out of it in their daily lives. They love
it. They're having a huge amount of fun with it. You know, it's great. They're good, you know,
making new art and they're, you know, doing all kinds of, you know, asking all kinds of things
and it's helping them in their jobs and in school and everything else and they love it. So,
so I think there's this thing where like, I actually think that what we, what we're actually
talking about from a social standpoint is basically essentially a corrupt elite,
a corrupt oligarchic elite that basically has been in a position of gatekeeping power,
you know, for, you know, basically in its modern form for 60 years. And every new technology
development comes along as a threat to that. And back to the Morrison thing like that,
that's why they hate and fear new technology. You know, they would very much like to control it.
You know, it's like social media, like they're all just like completely furious about social
media, but like, you know, 3 billion people use social media every day and they love it.
And so it's only the elites that are constantly kind of raging against it. The problem is,
the elites are actually in charge of right from a, from a formal, you know, government,
like they actually have the ability to write laws. By the way, you also see this in polls.
If you pull on, like there's two, two, two very interesting kind of phenomena,
phenomena kind of unfolding if you do these broad based polls on trust in institutions.
And there's organizations Gallup in particular, and then there's another organization called Edelman
that does these polls every year of basically essentially, they pull regular people and the
question is like, which institutions do you trust? And that the institutions here includes
everything from the military to, you know, religion to schools to government to, you know,
journalism to, you know, big companies, big tech, and so forth, small business. And basically,
the two big themes you see in those polls is one is ordinary people trust in institutions,
trust in any sort of centralized gatekeeping function is been in basically secular decline
basically since the 1970s, corresponding to the period we've been, we've been talking about.
And so generally, people as a whole have kind of had it with the gatekeepers,
which is very interesting. And by the way, that phenomenon, actually, the beginning of that
predates the internet and social media. And so that traces back to the early 70s. And so I think
that which I think is not an accident. It was just like, it's where the current regime basically
essentially took control. And then the other thing that's so striking is that, you know, although
you can you can sit and read the news all day long, and where they just like hate on tech
companies all day long, if you do the poll of, you know, basically businesses by category,
tech polls by far at the top. And so again, ordinary people are just like, wow, my iPhone's
pretty cool. I kind of like it. And the strategy PT thing seems really nifty. And so I do think
there's this weird, like I do think there is this this aspect of this where like, it's a cliche to
say the elites are out of touch, of course, the elites are out of touch, the elites are always
out of touch. But like, it seems like the elites are particularly out of touch right now, including
on this issue. And another way kind of through this not whole is, you know, they may just simply
discredit themselves. Like the EU is a great example, the EU may pass this anti AI law, and the
population of Europe might just be like, what's the hell? Right. And so that that's that would be
another white pill against what otherwise looks like a deep kind of drive in our society for
stagnation. It would also be really strange to try and find a way to like define AI in that sense,
because it's not like we haven't been, we haven't been using it in a minor form before all this
for a while, right? So I don't know how they'd go about defining that in that way.
Yes. So, yes. So do you ban linear algebra? Right? Do you ban linear algebra? And it's
actually really funny, because I don't know if you know this, there actually is a push under
way to quote unquote ban algebra. And it's literally in California, there's a big push
underway to drive it out of the schools in California. So there's a big push first to
start with a push to drive calculus out of the schools in California, and now it's extended
to drive algebra out. And of course, this is being done under the so called rubric of equity,
right? Because it turns out, you know, test scores for advanced math, you know, vary by,
you know, vary by group. And so, you know, there's this weird thing where like in California,
we're trying to push algebra out of the school. In Washington, we're trying to push algebra like
out of tech. Like the whole thing is, and this is where I get like really, you know, this is
where I start to get emotional, because it's like really like we spent, you know, 500 years
climbing our way out of, you know, primitivism and getting to the point where we have like
advanced science and math, and we're literally going to try to ban it. I was involved, I was
involved, if you remember this, there was actually a similar push like this, there was a push in
the 1990s to ban cryptography, right, to ban the idea of codes, right, ciphers, right. And as you
probably know, like codes and ciphers are just math, like all they are is math, right. And there was
a move in the 1990s where people who thought that cryptography, obviously, you know, there's all
these anti-cryptography arguments, because like bad guys can use it to hide and so forth. And so,
there was this like concerted effort by the US government and other Western governments to
ban cryptography in the 90s. And it took us years to fight and defeat that. And I was like, okay,
that was so stupid, that will certainly never happen again. And like we're literally back at
trying to ban math again. Well, that does lead me just to the final question here,
which is to do with the future. I mean, whether or not it's your optimistic,
pessimistic in relation to, you know, I guess it would draw in on what we've just been talking
about there. How do you envision the short term future, which I've put down here like 10 to 50
years, and then how do you, what do you foresee for the year 3000 AD? Oh boy. So, I should start
by saying I'm not a utopian. So, you know, we talked a little bit early about kind of these
impulses, the kind of dry people to these kind of extreme points of view. Like the way I think
about it is like there's a natural drive. A lot of people have what Thomas Soll called the unconstrained
vision, so that they've got these kind of very broad based kind of visions. And you know, those
visions kind of then split into like a utopian vision. And that might be, you know, in for AI,
that might be something like the singularity, right? Or in the 1990s, these were called the
Extropians, right, which is sort of this idea of kind of a material utopia as a consequence of like
AI and let's say nanotechnology on the one hand. And that's where that, by the way, the idea of
the singularity came from, right, which is Ray Kurzweil and Bernard Vinge, they were like at some
point you get this kind of, you know, point of no return, which is like a utopian point of no return.
But then of course, the flip side of every utopia is, you know, apocalypse. And so then that's where
the sort of AI, you know, sort of the Singulitarians 20 years ago have become that, you know,
a lot of them have become the AI doomers of today. And they, you know, they have sort of this sort
of, you know, they have the same utopian impulse, they've just flipped the bit and made it negative.
So I should say like, I'm not one of those. I'm probably more of a materialist and a little bit
more of a, like I said, an engineer where, you know, things, for example, have constraints in
the real world. So I don't think we tend to get the extreme, quite the extreme outcomes, but I do
think we get, you know, we get change, like we get, we get change, we get change in the margin,
and then, you know, change in the margin that compounds over time can become, you know, quite,
quite striking. So look over 10 to 50 years, you know, look sitting here today, like, if we want it,
you know, you can imagine the next 50 years to be characterized by, you know, the rise of AI,
looks like we kind of figured that out now. You know, this superconductor thing, if it's real,
that's a, you know, turning point moment. And by the way, if it's not real, it may be, you know,
that this result points us in the direction of something that becomes real in the next few years.
And so you can imagine some combination of AI, superconductors, you know, biotech,
you know, you know, all these new techniques for, you know, biooptimization, gene editing,
you know, and then, you know, nuclear, you know, if we get our act together on nuclear fission,
by the way, there's a lot of really smart people working on nuclear fusion right now.
You know, fusion is, you know, would be an even bigger, you know, kind of opportunity
for unlimited clean energy. You know, now, you know, my cynical, the cynic in me would say
if fission is illegal, then they're certainly going to make fusion illegal. But, you know, that,
you know, that's a choice. We all get to decide whether we want to live in a world where fusion
is illegal. So, you know, we get nuclear fusion. And so sitting here 50 years from now, you know,
we basically are like, wow, you know, we are like, we have, you know, we are all much smarter
than we were because we have these smart machines working with us and everything.
You know, we have solved whatever environmental problems we thought we had, you know, with,
we have abundant energy in an increasingly clean environment.
You know, we're curing diseases at a rapid pace. And, you know, new babies are born that are immune
to disease. And so, you know, you know, not quite a material utopia, but like, you know,
a significant, you know, meaningful step function upgrades in human quality of life.
Like, I think that's all very, over a 50-year period, for sure, like that. And that's all very
possible. Over a 3,000, over whatever the year 3,000, over a 1,000-year period. I mean, look,
you do get into these questions, you know, you do, if you're going to talk about 1,000 years,
like you do get into these questions of like, you know, for example, a merger of man and machine,
right? So you do have to, over that time frame, you have to start thinking about things like,
you know, the neural link, you know, like where neural link takes you. And, you know, you know,
over that period of time, you know, you'll definitely have like, you know, neural augmentation.
So, you know, do you have shifting definitions of humanity? You know, where is the transhumanist
movement actually taking us? You know, becomes a very interesting question over that time frame.
Obviously, you have lots of questions over that time frame of space, you know, exploration,
getting to other planets, you know, other life, you know, either other life in the universe or
not other life in the universe. So kind of the spread of the, you know, the spread of our civilization
more broadly. You know, so there you truly get into science fiction scenarios. You know, then,
yeah, that's it. I'm always fun to talk about. I will admit, I am much more focused on the next
50 years. Yeah, I mean, is there anything you'd like to add into the conversation
that you feel, you know, is key that we haven't touched on?
Yeah, no, I think that's a good, I think that was a good, covered a lot of ground.
Yeah. So for effective accelerationism, just if you Google, there's a number of good already
websites and substacks talking about that. A lot of the conversations happening on Twitter.
So, and I already dropped the names of the of the EAT guys. So Beth Jesus and Bayes-Laurie,
definitely follow those guys. You know, I've not met Nick Land, but I would definitely give a
shout out and say, for anybody who hasn't encountered his work, they should definitely read
up on it. He is, I think pretty clearly like the philosopher of our time and not even because,
you know, whether I agree or disagree with him on everything he said. And of course,
he's changed his views on a lot of things over time, but just the framework that he operates,
like his willingness to actually go deep and actually think through the consequences of the
kinds of technologies that I deal with every day, you know, are just, I think, way beyond most other
people in his field. And so it's, it's, and I know he took kind of a long road to get here,
so it's fun to see, you know, it's fascinating to read that. Oh, I'll point to one other thing.
So I already mentioned the Jeremy England book, and I'll point to one other book that people
might find interesting. So, so a lot of Lance work and a lot of accelerationism, right, is based on
these, these, the ideas mob this field called cybernetics, which is kind of this, this, it's
cybernetics is interesting because it's kind of this lost field of engineering.
It was super hot in the, as an engineering field from the 1940s to the 1960s. And it basically was
sort of the original computer science. And then it was sort of, it was also sort of the original
artificial intelligence. A lot of the AI people of that era kind of call themselves cybernetics
or cybernetics. But it really is an engineering field that kind of went away or got a lot more
sedate after the 60s. And, but, but, but as I mentioned, like a lot of the ideas around AI and,
you know, machine world of machines and thermodynamics, a lot of those ideas were being
explored as far back as the 30s and 40s. So the cybernetics people of that era thought a lot
about a lot of these questions. Anyway, there's this great book is a lot of original source
material on this. And the, you know, the key character of that movement was Norbert Wiener,
and there's a bunch of books by him and about him. But there's also a great book came out recently
called Rise of the Machines by an author named Thomas Red. And it sort of reconstructs the
archaeology of cybernetics and sort of makes clear how relevant those ideas are today.
And so if you read that in conjunction with, with, with, with Nick Land's work, I think you'll find
it pretty interesting. I'll be sure to put the link for your Twitter and your blog in the description
below as well. But yeah, I think that's a good place to finish up. Mark Andreessen, thanks very
much. Good, James, a pleasure. Thank you.
