So welcome everyone, my name is Davide DeBiasio
and I'm a member of the ISQG Outreach Activity Team.
Today, I will have the pleasure of interviewing
Professor Loren Freiburg.
I hope I pronounced that correctly or appropriately.
First of all, thank you very much
for having accepted our invitation.
It's a real honor for me to be here today.
If I understand correctly, you started in a remark disk
because most of our audience would
be comprised of PhD master bachelor students.
You started your career as a PhD student
at the Col Normal in Lyon.
Is that correct?
That's correct, yes.
You're currently a research fellow at a faculty member
at Perimeter Institute in Canada, right?
Yes, that's correct.
Mostly the faculty chair at Perimeter currently.
Perfect.
So physics-wise, going to the topic,
you have worked on a remarkable lot of issues
related to quantum gravity.
As a young PhD student, I'm personally
amazed by your Google Scholar page
and it's something I want to stress.
But concerning this, would you like
to say something more about your research interests,
present yourself and your audience, who you are,
what you work on?
OK, yeah, no, I can try.
On the one hand, my research interest is very simple.
It's quantum gravity.
And by that, I mean, this is my entire focus.
And I want to do whatever I can to make that concept,
that thing that we call quantum gravity, happen.
And now, as you mentioned, if I go through the history
of what I've been through, I did my PhD.
If I didn't do my PhD, it was more
mathematical physics and then integrable systems
and then topological quantum theory.
And then I slowly evolved to a more quantum gravity interest.
But as you mentioned, I think to master quantum gravity,
and maybe I'm part of a generation
that when I did my PhD, all the fields of physics
were still in the same room.
I think today, if your PhD physics might be hot,
so when I, the first school I went to, Le Zoo School,
well, I could talk to, I could have a lecture of quantum
matter, or I could have a lecture by a non-commutative geometry,
by Alan Cole, or one string, by Pauliakoff,
Rand Toft on black hole and information.
So I'm still part of this maybe old generation,
old enough to be in a generation where I was trained
and it was all of the same.
And then, of course, it kind of grew out.
There's a lot of information out of there.
But so with that focus in quantum gravity,
I've tried to bring in many different fields.
So I worked in quantum field theory, CFT, topological quantum
field theory, so more like deeper aspect of quantum field
theory.
I worked on strong gravity, gravity wave,
understanding that because I think if you want to understand
the quantum nature, part of my research
is also a lesson on the humidity.
Going back to the basics, what do we understand
or we do not understand before we jump ahead?
And then I worked on loop gravity, spin forms,
or really kind of trying to go deep
hardcore on the other side of the world where you just focus
and try to picture what quantum geometry is.
And more generally, foundations of quantum mechanics
I think is important.
And I have interest in some papers on philosophy
and history of science because if you
want to be part of a new discovery,
it's kind of interesting to understand
how this previous discovery were made.
And ultimately, I think at some point,
any discovery should be linked with phenomenology.
So I've been trying to think about through maybe this
infrared UV mixing or what we call relative locality, what
could be the weirdest or the most radical aspects
of a field of conoverity even without having one.
So it's very simple.
I'm very focused.
There's only one thing I want to do.
I don't want to be.
And I'm not dogmatic.
I've learned a lot of subjects for that focus.
I hope that answers.
Thank you very much.
What you said really resonates with the aim of the society.
I am glad to be part of.
Because the ISQG aims at bringing people working
on quantum gravity from different approaches
with different methods, bringing in different stuff
in the same room, as you said, because it is clear.
People now do not fit into the same room,
but at least people working on quantum gravity
should try to talk to each other.
So we perfectly agree on this point
and we perfectly agree on the importance of philosophy
and foundations.
But we are here to discuss quantum gravity.
So I will start, being this the first interview of our series,
the responsibility of setting the stage for the others
bears on our shoulders.
So I will ask you, what is quantum gravity?
Why do we need it?
Should gravity be quantized in the first place?
What does this whole thing mean?
OK, well, that's another question.
I like it.
Yeah, let me try the simple.
So what is quantum gravity?
The simplest answer is that we don't know.
And that's why I have a job.
Now you could say it is, historically, it is a project.
It's a quest which has been going on
since almost right after the invention of quantum mechanics
and general relativity.
That question was asked.
So it's a quest that has been lasted for 100 years.
It's a beautiful quest, very frustrating quest.
It's a quest that many people have claim over the years
that they have found the answer to it and then not.
So it is, for me, it's one of the most ambitious and fascinating
quests that the human mind can try.
Maybe we can talk about understanding the brain
or understanding what consciousness is, which maybe is after.
But this is these kind of quest, which is absolutely out there.
And there's any quest, which is really extremely challenging,
trying to make sense of what are the questions you want
to understand, right?
Because in any research project, more than half
of the understanding is really what are really the questions
that we want to settle down?
And then what are the techniques?
What are the new objects that we have to invent
to master these techniques?
So often these objects have applications all over physics.
And quantum gravity or the history of quantum
gravity is filled with such example,
like the descriptions of the Hamiltonian system
or the constraint system that is used for gauge theory,
the concept of ghost or recently the concept of the development
in entanglement entropy.
It's endless.
Or as we are going to talk, maybe the concept of memory
effects and stuff like that.
So sometimes I think trying to rub yourself
against a very, very hard problem brings a discipline,
a simplicity, a humility, and brings new discovery.
But I don't know yet what quantum gravity is.
So let me briefly end now, because I
want to be sure that everyone is on the same pace.
So I will forget all I know, which
is not much about quantum gravity
and though I'm doing my PhD in the topic,
I'll be the treatment asking questions.
So we have a non-quantum theory of gravity,
general relativity.
It's a relativistic theory.
It works well in the solar system as its problems.
We all know that.
Black hole stuff, cosmology, and all of that.
We used to have non-quantum theories,
for instance, of electrodynamics.
And we managed to quantize those,
to make them into quantum theories.
Why is it so hard to quantize gravity,
to turn gravity into a quantum theory?
Because that's the point, right?
Construct a theory of gravity that
works roughly on the very small scales or high energies.
Let me state it like that.
I know it's a bit imprecise.
Yeah, yeah, sorry, sorry, sorry.
I should have explained it.
So what do we expect one on gravity to be?
As you were saying, we have a profound understanding
of the physics of what we call the ultraviolet.
I'm going to say maybe the UV, which
is what are the small scale physics.
And we have a profound understanding
of the large scale physics, which is gravity.
And for some reason, physics has this property
that when you go to extremely small scale,
or when you go to extremely large scale cosmology,
it becomes extremely simple, right?
All the complexity in nature appears at our scale.
Us, we are like the mean square root between these two
scale, and then we have brains, we have complexity,
we have chaos, we have all that.
But when we go into these two extremes,
we are very simple.
I mean, OK, it's mathematically complex.
But in some sense, when I say simple,
it means that with a computer, with a pen and pencil,
with study, I can really kind of understand
the nature of these subjects, even without experiencing them.
Like one of the most radical examples for the biggest one
was Einstein predicted that black hole would exist,
and then they would eventually emerge,
and they would emit gravity wave.
And then, OK, it took after 100 years.
A few years ago, we saw that.
And we saw an event that is 5 billion years away.
We will never be there in an environment where we cannot
survive.
But we could predict exactly what would happen,
which is kind of amazing, right?
That's the amazing property of.
So OK, so we have an understanding of quantum mechanics,
and quantum gravity.
So gravity, what it tells you is that somehow it brings something
new to the game.
Both of them bring something new to the game,
but gravity brings new to the game
is the fact that the main notion of geometry,
the main notion of space and time,
which is really the place where we put objects
and we do physics within space and time,
is itself dynamical.
And that, to some extent, we know how to manage.
But the goal of the prospect of quantum gravity, in some sense,
is to understand what is the quantum nature of space time.
So think about the discovery of quantum mechanics
in the beginning of the century.
One of the discovery was Einstein's, for instance,
Bronyon motion discovery.
You look at the liquid, and then you
had the evidence that, no, it's made of constituent molecules.
But that's what quantum mechanics does.
It has this tendency to create quanta, which
means discrete objects that are constituents.
And then we realize that nature is made of constituent.
The sky is blue because it's made of constituents.
And the water boils because it's made of constituents.
So in fact, we were witnessing quantum mechanics
for thousands of years.
We didn't know that it was quantum mechanics.
So quantum gravity, you could say,
is really the prospect of trying to understand what
are the atoms of space and the atoms of time?
What are the fundamental constituents of nature?
And why is it hard?
Because the way we understand physics
is that first we set up the theater.
And the theater is space and time.
Space and time is given.
It's got given.
It is kind of fixed.
Or maybe it's a little bit moving.
And then on it, we can define fields and objects
that move on it.
So it would be as like you have a play and you have a theater.
The theater is fixed and the play is fluid.
But now imagine trying to understand
the play where the theater itself is part of the play
and the floor and the ceiling.
So where do you start?
And what do you keep?
And what do you?
And that explains.
And in fact, these questions, where do you start?
There's different perspective.
And that explains maybe like there's
two or three big, big, big entrance
perspective onto the program.
Does that?
I think that sums it up pretty well.
If I may make a synthesis, then tell me if you agree.
On one hand, we have general relativity
that tells us how space time behaves,
at least on large scales.
So we have black holes, as I said, cosmology.
As you said, gravitational waves and so on and so forth.
On the other hand, we have quantum mechanics.
Or quantum theory, as you like,
which is more or less the framework
in which all other portions of physics are written.
It's in a sense the language in which we write theories.
Dynamical space time, non-quantum.
Quantum theory, no dynamical space time.
We have to find a way to write down
quantum mechanical systems in which the space time itself
is part of the system.
It is dynamical.
It is a physical degree of freedom.
It interacts with other objects and so on and so forth.
Would you agree with that description?
Just a little bit.
Yes, I would agree with that.
Perfect.
So maybe we are putting under silence
how weird quantum mechanics is, or are beautiful in here.
Yes.
How beautiful it is.
But yeah.
Are the old topic and it's super complicated.
I would be more than glad to discuss that together,
but I would now try to bring our conversation
to topics which are more close to your research.
This is supposed to be the core of our...
Maybe you were asking why gravity should be quantized.
Did we address that?
Yeah.
I mean, if you want to get into that,
I would be more than happy to listen to your opinion.
Yes, sure.
Sure.
I mean, it's always a fair question, right?
Is it, if you're a student, is it a valid endeavor
to go through?
And I think it's a very difficult question.
And a lot of people would answer,
and you just have to accept that,
that they would say maybe not.
That is, we have a framework which is quantum theory.
We have a belief system,
which is a decoupling between UV and infrared.
So we talked about the UV,
the Gravaillet, the small and the big.
And if you believe that,
and that's the current,
if you think about the current state of mind
of 99% of physicists,
they believe in this concept of effective theory,
which assume this decoupling.
And if this decoupling is true,
so under this, it's very important to appreciate
that when you answer a question like that,
it always comes with a theoretical bias.
Okay.
And often in call of gravity,
people have very strong opinion,
but don't tell you on what these opinions are.
What hypothesis they use to be so decisive.
So here I'm just framing.
If you have this belief that effective theory
is really all there is,
and there's a decoupling between UV and infrared,
then in some sense, as we just said,
the quantum nature of gravity is going to be,
one of the most is going to be smaller
than the smaller scan of particles, right?
So it's something very,
it has to be something very much in the UV.
Yeah, you want it?
So if I may, this, as we might call it,
this naive effective theory perspective,
because what is more or less, more or less the following.
Physics changes when we go towards smaller scales.
And as long as we stay at a given scale of length
or of energy, as you said in the beginning,
higher energies mean smaller scales,
it can in a sense neglect what happens
at higher energies or at smaller scales.
This is the traditional perspective
offered by effective theories, right?
This is the decoupling between UV and IR
you were referring to, right?
Exactly.
And to some extent, it works.
Like, if you study biological system,
you don't need to know how cosmology function.
Yes.
So that's kind of...
Yes.
So it's a very robust and solid picture.
And of course, it's supported by this
technical developments of the renormalization group.
So in physics, we call it the Wilsonian picture
of decoupling.
Now, if you believe this picture,
and you think this is the fundamental picture of theory,
then I would say, then you would say,
well, no, we don't need to quantize gravity.
Or in some sense, we really have a framework
to quantize it, which is effective in theory
that is given a certain level of precision.
Quantum gravity is only going to be
something extremely ultraviolet,
something that appears only at very, very, very small scale.
And for all practical purpose,
I will never be able to maybe witness it.
Yes, sure.
Right?
Sure.
Yeah, so that's why a lot of people would say
that we should not go there.
I mean, at least when I grew up,
maybe now the picture has changed,
but I was the first person doing quantum gravity.
I want to say my continent or something like that.
Now it's much more common.
If I may, just to give some kind of reference
to people listening to us.
When you mention small scales at which quantum gravity should
become relevant or significant or witnessable or whatever,
you are really referring to scales
which are much, much smaller.
People might not be, and not in the field,
might not picture this much, much smaller
than atomic or nuclei scales.
Actually smaller, well, if you,
it's a matter of proportions, right?
We are more or less meter scales than to the zero scales.
And nuclei, I think are, I'm really bad with this,
but 10 to the minus 18 meters scales, right?
Well, quantum gravity is expected to become relevant
in this picture at 10 to the minus 35 meters, right?
Is that correct?
That's supposed to be Planck's length.
So that's much, much, much, much, much, much smaller
than billions of, than billions and billions of times smaller
than nuclei scales.
So that's a very small scale.
So you should, in principle, not expect that to be relevant
for our everyday physics life, at least at the scales
which we can explore nature.
But I guess you're saying that's not the case, right?
Well, I mean, yeah, no, I won't, yeah, for me,
no gravity should be quantized, just, but yeah, yeah.
Exactly, I mean, let's say it's still a possibility
that this is true, that if you work on quantum gravity,
you have to have the rigor to assume
that you're making a very strong hypothesis.
And this is why, I mean, I personally believe
quantum gravity is an absolute breakthrough
because the only, the reason is gonna be important
because it kind of failed this strong hypothesis
of the coupling of scale.
And if I think like that, I mean, I start,
so I started by saying, oh, it's about quantizing
the atom of space-time.
You see one of the strong implications it needs to have
is also this connection which is completely mysterious
whether philosophically or technically between UV and IR.
And personally, I think the source
of tremendous new observable.
I'm not saying I'm right, but I think this is what
a breakthrough kind of look likes.
And we say we have evidence that somehow
the picture is not as simple
because we know that gravity is also about black hole.
So we know that this picture of the coupling
that the higher you put the energy to a system,
the smaller you go.
At some point, it doesn't work with gravity
because if you try to put so much energy somehow,
what's going to happen is exactly the inverse.
You're going to get a bigger and a bigger
and a bigger and a bigger object, which is a black hole.
And big black hole will behave quantum mechanically.
So there's already some very interesting tension
between a sets of belief that people hold very, very dear
and another sets of evidence.
And I think we just have to be as intellectual.
We have to be honest.
Like when there's fundamental paradox
in the game and physicists often hold these two beliefs
together, but being a quantum gravity means, okay,
if you're all two beliefs together
or two conceptual system
and you don't acknowledge that they're in deep conflict,
I think you're dissident.
So this is why we have to do gravity.
It's just at some point you have to,
we have to resolve this fundamental tension.
This is more an intellectual reason, I would say.
I think what you're saying is crucial.
So let me make it a bit concrete with an example, right?
We use for people listening to us.
We typically use particle accelerators, right?
To investigate small scales.
And at our stage, putting more energy into particles,
as you said, means resolving,
that's the word physicists typically use,
smaller and smaller and smaller scales.
But if we take, and this is quantum field theory,
quantum mechanics taken at face value.
But if we also take general relativity at face value,
at some point by keeping, you know,
putting energy into a particle in an accelerator,
we should start producing black holes
because we have a dense enough energy distribution
so that black holes are produced and stuff like that.
So, but when you keep pouring energy into black holes,
they grow, right?
They grow.
So this means that you decrease your scale,
decrease, decrease, decrease, decrease.
And then you start increasing it again.
You have this kind of rebound in one that hints,
perhaps at the existence of a minimal scale
and stuff like that.
And this is really crucial
because it defies all our intuitions, right?
Yes, yes, exactly.
I know that you said it well.
And then it points towards something.
So this, what we call the seismometer microscope,
which is the fundamental discovery of quantum mechanics,
right, that energy is connected to wavelength.
And this is where this constant H bar appear, right?
And it's inversely, and wavelength is the resolution.
And that's a law of nature.
And at some point, this law of nature get inverted.
And that's, for instance, that explains one type of ways
where there are people who are thinking in depth.
You can think, I would put them in, you know,
non-computative geometry.
For me, this is relative locality.
Even before, you know, how is there,
what kind of conceptual framework could make sense of that?
And I think it's one of the very important questions
of quantum gravity.
There has to be, there's a few, two or three like that,
that, you know, if you give me a theory of quantum gravity,
then we'd have two results.
So that's one that has to be addressed.
There was a small technical problem, but we are back.
It came at the right time,
because I was just about to bring back
the question I tried to pose previously.
Namely, I wanted to ask you something
about one of your big research interests,
if I can call it that way, namely symmetries
and their interplay with boundary charges,
boundary degrees of freedoms, freedom,
locality, edge modes, which are, you know,
and there's a lot of terminology involved.
So I think it's important, first of all,
to make it clear for people listening to the topic.
So if you wanna take the stage,
I will be more than glad to learn something
about this from you.
Okay, thank you.
So yeah, it's true that in the past,
whatever, seven years, I came across this idea.
Let's call it, so it's the central concept,
and I'm going to explain a little bit,
is the concept of corner symmetry and local holography.
And I think it provides kind of a form of new paradigm
that unifies certain key ideas.
So let me try, before I explain what it is,
let me just try in what way,
what I'm doing is kind of completely different
from the strategies that were done before.
So I would say, up to this program,
most of the approach of quantum gravity,
where what we call a top down, right?
Top down, people mean, you know,
physicists means that you have an idea
what is the fundamental constituent of nature.
For instance, it's a string theory,
you need to quantify the string.
And then you need to work very hard
to connect to the real world, that is us, right?
So if I may, using your terminology
or the terminology we used before,
you start from the deep ultraviolet
for the super small scales,
and then move towards a word.
Exactly, exactly.
And that approach had been very successful.
You could say for Einstein, he postulated, you know,
the Einstein's equation independent,
almost of any phenomenology.
I mean, going way beyond the phenomenology,
or particle physics, when the problem was,
we wanted to classify nuclear,
people postulated, you know,
it has to be the Young Mill's model, you know,
like a fundamental QFT, et cetera,
that explains all the spectrum of addrons, okay?
Instead of, through you trying to go through the complexity.
So, you know, I would say since the 60s and 70s,
or even, yeah, yeah, this is really the approach, right?
And then, of course, as we're saying, you know,
this means really, and you can say,
there's maybe three main perspective there
that have kind of survived,
and you can clump yourself into one of them
on some broadside.
So, string theory is one idea where you postulate,
string theory is interesting.
The fundamental postulate of string theory
is that you want to look at the symmetry property
of the smallest probes,
which is called conformal invariance,
and then you deduce Einstein's equation from that.
It's kind of radical.
You say, I deduce Einstein's equation from,
which is the biggest equation that covered the universe
from the property of the smallest object.
And it's, you know, that's one perspective.
Another perspective is, you know,
which group is, I would say the one implemented
around loop kind of gravity is, as we were just saying,
you know, if you try to do gravity,
there's something that, at some point, tells you
there's a special scale,
the scale where your Eisenberg microscope rebounds.
Instead of, you put more energy,
instead of zooming in, you zoom out, okay?
It means like there's a fundamental land scale,
we call it the Planck length.
There's a fundamental energy,
there's a fundamental temperature
that you cannot break through.
And if you think in terms of Planck length,
then you might think, well,
maybe it means that the world is atomic, right?
There's some fundamentally discrete structure
that explains this subject.
So there's, you know, when I say loop gravity,
there's also causal sets or a lot of people there,
you know, there's a myriad of different modes
where people have postulated.
Here, I postulate that the fundamental geometry
is discrete.
Loop gravity is kind of, in some sense,
more interesting because it postulates
some amount of discreteness,
but it also gets some amount of discreteness
through quantization, like the area quantization.
So, which is interesting.
In some sense, this is where you would like to go.
You would say, like to go,
it's not that the space time is discrete,
it's somehow the quantum mechanic
that make it look like...
It should be some kind of result of the theory, right?
It should be a result of the theory.
And I would say LQG, loop quantum gravity,
as we say, as part of that, and not fully,
but I think it has one key element there,
which is that the notion of geometrical objects
that we use, like computation of the area of an element,
is now an operator, okay?
Instead of being something God-given, classical,
it's an operator.
If I may, but just as one...
You connect to what we said before.
In a sense, string theory postulates
some kind of new degrees of freedom in the deep UV,
like the string and its excitations,
while loop quantum gravity tries to adapt
the way we quantize things to a dynamical space time, right?
That's what you said before.
We typically postulate space time,
while here we try to quantize in a way
which is consistent with having dynamical space time.
Is this correct?
So it's quantized geometry versus string theory says
maybe geometry, philosophical is very different.
Maybe geometry only exists through the probes I sent in.
Yes, yes.
The particle, right?
Is geometry something that exists on its own?
So then you're a gravitational person,
or if you're a particle physicist,
no, are the only thing that exists are particles.
So you can, and both are true, okay?
But this creates big camps if you want to choose.
In some sense, this is one of the tension of GR,
which is very important.
And then they branch, right?
So things get even.
Yeah, and then they branch, but I would say, okay,
there's this kind of, let's say, at the core of it.
And then of course, what happens for every theory,
and there's a third one, is that there's a core idea
which is profoundly true.
And then people build up, you know,
a long, long, long, long release that deviate,
and then you have this very rigid edifice
that prevents people to create silos,
I would say, of the mines, right?
So this is, so when I'm talking about my approach,
it's one where I'm going to bring down
the walls of these silos, going back to,
so this approach I'm describing is not a top-down approach.
It's a bottom-up approach.
It's like trying to understand really precisely
what is the nature of quantum and gravity
in a regime that I really control and learn from that
and create a framework where any theory of color gravity
will have to submit to the discoveries
that I'm going to discuss about, okay?
So then we can agree on that.
And then we can find a common ground.
I would say there's a third element
which is very important in my program,
which is holography, okay?
So it is this idea, and this is the one
that I'm going to maybe expand more on.
In fact, it's an idea that, you know,
it's presented as a new idea,
but it's already something that goes back,
was discovered in 1915.
It goes back to the theorem of Nutter,
which is, you know, wrote a remarkable paper in the 1910s
at the instigation of Hilbert and Klein
to try to understand the nature of gravity.
And there she kind of showed something kind of remarkable
is that if you have a gravitational system
and that system has a boundary.
So for anything non-gravitational,
we know that the energy is additive in the bulk, right?
So the number of quantized bulk,
the bigger the object, the more energy you have.
But Nutter proved that the energy,
which is the fundamental concept in gravity
that generates time evolution, that organizes everything.
This is, is in fact a boundary observable.
Yes.
And that was discovered a hundred years ago,
but somehow it's so against the way we understand
quantum theory that it was kind of never acted upon.
And this entire program called the coronary symmetry program
is just engaging with, you know, front end with that result,
which is this holography result,
which is in fact true for any finite region, right?
So this is what I'm doing.
There is a top-down approach of holography,
which is called ADS CFT,
where people postulate that the only thing that exists
is ADS space.
And the only thing that ADS space exists
at the boundary is a CFT and it's super young males
and et cetera, it comes attached.
And this is it.
This is a top-down approach.
And then it's, you know,
you need to take it as a definition of quantum gravity.
So these are like I would say the three top-down approach.
And me, I'm, okay.
If I may, because I'm trying to set up the framework here.
Yes.
And that's really important.
So I thank you.
You mentioned the ADS CFT.
I hear this idea of holography
just to make it a bit clear for people listening to us
is the idea, an idea about the existence
of some kind of correspondence between our gravity theory
living inside some volume.
That's what we mean when we say bulk, you said it before.
And another theory without gravity living on the surface,
the boundary of such volume, right?
And top-down approach, as you said,
you just take the theory on the boundary
and use it as a definition
of your corresponding gravity theory in the bulk
inside the volume.
What you're saying here is that you are using holography
in a way which is not this, right?
Exactly.
So maybe, yeah, this is why maybe the,
I'm trying to find the proper term
because holography has been used a lot.
So I call it either local holography
or I mean, it turns out that the term
that's becoming popular now is the term of corner symmetry.
And I'm going to explain.
Because the key concept is the concept
of symmetry of nature.
And yeah.
So maybe.
Yeah, now to go back with holography,
I didn't say philosophically, it's a third.
Often people misrepresented as being part of string theory,
but it's very conceptually different.
With string theory, we say what it was.
Holography, it's a very different conceptual starting point,
as you're saying, that somehow the theory on the boundary
determines the theory on the bulk.
And it focuses on one key aspect of quantum gravity.
As we say, every one of these programs
has to address as one of the central questions
of quantum gravity.
And of course, the full quantum gravity
needs to address all of three, in some sense.
And if you just put, what is the word for?
You know, you refuse to look at the other one,
then you're good in your work.
But the one of holography which is very important is,
is this property that we understand now
that somehow it seems that black holes,
and in fact, maybe more generally,
it seems like space-time region can
be a sign or notion of entropy.
Entropy is a thermodynamical concept related to eat,
but it's also related to counting
the number of degrees of freedom.
And as I was saying, we use the fact
that the number of degrees of freedom in a box
is proportional to the volume of the box, right?
But in gravity, it seems, and we have many, you know,
when you say evidence, like indirect evidence,
semi-classical, that somehow a theoretical gravity
need to explain why it's not proportional
to the volume of the box, but to the area of that box.
Yes.
Like, let me stress this and jump in.
Like, when you study black hole physics,
like in very simple terms, when you study black hole physics
and you try to, you discover they seem
to be thermodynamical objects like gases
or other weird systems, we study with many, many, many,
many components, which is something absolutely novel
with respect to what we knew in general relativity.
When you put a little bit of quantum mechanics in there,
you, when you try to count the number of degrees,
smaller degree, microscopic degrees of freedom,
composing this big object, thermodynamical object,
as you would count the number of water molecules,
you know, water glass or air molecules in this room,
you discover they are proportional to the area,
not to the volume of the black hole.
And this is weird, right?
Yes, yes, this is good.
So let's say, if you're interested in quantum gravity,
you want to solve quantum gravity,
we mentioned three fundamental problems
that you have to put together.
This fundamental inversion of the microscope,
the fact that matters, excite geometry.
So quantum matter is somehow dual to quantum geometry,
which is the kind of the string.
And then, you know, the fact that geometrical objects
are quantum, that's the fourth element.
And then now, the fact that entropy is holographic
or that gravity is holographic, in some sense.
OK, and then, OK, and it begs, there was a, you know,
it begs the question, like, if you think about
putting these things together, you start to get a feel,
even before doing quantum gravity,
how radical and completely conceptually mind-boggling,
you know, this discovery is going to be.
OK, now, OK, so let's go towards this program.
So for me, it all started, and I have to grant early collaborators
like Alessandro Perez or William Donnelly,
but it's especially where it was William that changed.
So we started to ask a very simple question.
I've been obsessed with this idea that counting degrees
of freedom, I mean, and, you know,
and why is it proportional to the area?
But clearly, if it's proportional to the area,
it means that it's important to understand what happened
when you have a field theory or a quantum system,
and you cut it, and you decompose it into a system
which is inside and a system which is outside.
So when you introduce a surface, for example,
in this room, right?
Yeah, the surface, exactly.
And now, OK, so the surface is the two-dimensional,
and so it's a boundary of a space, right?
But it's also, we call it a corner,
because if you draw it in space-time,
it's, there's two dimensions, it's co-dimension two,
which means that it's the boundary in time and in space.
Yes.
OK, so it's very important to distinguish,
I'm not talking about boundary condition,
I'm talking about corner, and tangling surface,
separation surface between the inside and the outside
of a system, and I wish I could draw a little prosal diamond,
you know, that somehow, anyway.
So that theory is very simple,
and it comes from a very simple idea.
You know, what is a project of quantum gravity?
So understand, I go back, understand
what are the atoms of space-time, OK?
Maybe it's not atomic, maybe it's a fluid,
maybe what are the constituents?
Whatever is your, I don't want to, I mean, you know, prickle,
but you know, what we would do in,
if I want to understand it, what is this chalk made of?
Well, we do something very simple.
We break it open and look inside.
Sure.
And so this is what we started to do.
We just started to do, OK, why don't we take, you know,
gravitational system and then decompose it into subsystem
and see what you have to do, right?
And for some reason, that was never really done fully
or properly, it's a very simple question.
And it's because in the language of quantum theory,
there's often this belief, or at least maybe it's technical,
like the theory we know how to define or quantize,
they're defined on the entirety of the space-time.
It's all of A, D, S, or it's all of flat space,
and all the observable are at infinity.
So there was something preventing people
from just asking this simple question.
So we just look at that and we try to understand
what it means to decompose a gravitational system
into subsystems.
And what it would take to first cut the subsystem out,
separate it, and then glue it back, right?
Because if you can glue it back, it means you have not
you can cut a system and destroy everything,
like put a mirror, but then you have a different system.
So we all look to, OK, that was the idea.
The other thing we realized is that when you do that,
this process is controlled by the notion of symmetry.
And that kind of changed the picture.
So maybe this is a bit technical.
So the fundamental theory of nature,
and I would say there's like the two most
fascinating theory of nature, first, gravity.
The second one is QCD.
And I would say in order of the theoretical physicists,
there's two ground of physics.
One is to contact gravity, and maybe just nearby
is to prove confinement, OK?
And these two theories, what they have in common.
Podomy, just for people that do not know QCD,
is quantum chromodynamics.
This is the theory we use to explain nuclei, atomic nuclei.
And together with a lot of other stuff,
but in general, how nucleons like protons and neutrons
are made and confinement.
Like you have this fundamental degrees of freedom,
fundamental objects, we call quarks.
And they seem to be bound into protons, neutrons,
stuff like that.
Confinement is the process that supposedly, I mean,
we have a lot of evidence for confinement.
For instance, the fact that we are made of protons,
and we do not decay into quark glue and plasma stuff.
But these objects are confined into protons.
You cannot take them out.
And we do not really have a full-fledged proof
of this processing side or theory.
So that's one of the holy grails of theoretical physics.
Mathematically proving in a rigorous way,
not only with computer simulations or evidence
or like this computation and stuff like that,
that there should be confinement in the first place, right?
Yeah, yeah.
And so these two theories, they are what we call gauge theories.
What does that mean?
It means that in order to describe them as local object,
we need to seemingly add degrees of freedom or objects
that seems to be relevant.
And then we need to take them away into every other observable.
It looks like we have a redundancy of this description.
And I don't want to enter too much
into this philosophical debate, but it's a profound debate.
So for 100 years, people thought that gauge symmetry
is just redundancy.
It doesn't mean anything, right?
And there's another camp.
Let's say this would be like more particle physics camp
versus the loop gravity camp that says no.
It's something fundamental.
It's something that is about background independence.
And so it kind of frames.
If you think about quantum gravity,
you have to kind of position yourself.
Is it really fundamental or is it just some fluke
and some redundancy, right?
And so in this paper, we have proved that, in fact, it is,
in some sense, it's a little bit of both,
but in a very precise sense.
It means that if you have a closed system,
yeah, it's gauge symmetry is pure redundancy.
But when you start to cut it open,
you find and you discover that now these gauge symmetries,
which are redundancy, becomes true symmetry of nature.
That is, they carry charges.
They carry representation.
They carry degree of freedom.
And this is where the lingo comes.
So we, the symmetry, we call it this corner symmetry.
The represent, okay, when you have a group of symmetry,
you know, group of symmetries,
you transform your system and it looks the same,
but it's different.
Like a particle moving in that direction
is clearly different than a particle moving in that direction.
But, you know, there's a rotation.
There's a similarity between these two motions.
When I understand that motion and I rotate,
I understand that motion, but they are different, right?
They are mapped onto another, but they are different.
They are not the same object.
So this is a symmetry at the quantum.
Why do I care about symmetry?
Because in theoretical physics,
any physical system that we know how to quantize,
because it has enough symmetry.
So as somebody that has the prospect to quantize gravity,
you know, if I'm honest, my only,
and quantize gravity non-perturbatively,
the only option is that that system has enough symmetry
for me to control its quantization finely enough.
Okay.
If I can jump in here just to make things a bit more,
you know, more clear,
you use two different words, symmetry and redundancy.
And in very rough terms, when you use the word symmetry,
you mean transformations that leave nature
or laws of physics invariant, in a sense,
like rotations and, you know,
a ball is symmetric under rotations.
You cannot tell if someone rotated it or not.
Redundancies are, in a sense, transformations
you can apply to your mathematical models
without changing anything.
But they seem to be different,
at least on a philosophical, regardless of the mathematical.
Yeah, they are very different.
And I think part of the work that I've been doing is clarify,
and they were confused for many years.
So part of the reason why we had some difficulty
with quantum gravity is to confuse one with the other.
Redundancy, as you're saying, is extra bells and whistles
you put in your mathematical description
that you put because you like them,
but you can do as well without them, right?
And it's a more personal, aesthetical,
whatever convenience.
But symmetries are, remember,
one of the problem is to count the number of degrees
of freedom, count how many atoms there is
in a portion of space.
So, you know, when I say a particle here
is different than a particle here.
So if I have two particles there,
they're related by symmetry,
but I really have two states, not one, right?
If I have a particle plus a redundant description,
I still have only one particle, right?
So at the end of the day,
it really matters for how do I count,
what are the fundamental constituent, if you want, okay?
So first, okay, so first we discover
this corner symmetry group that appears,
you know, when you decompose subsystems.
And then this is where come the study
of this corner symmetry group here.
Now, when you have a notion of symmetry at the quantum level,
well, you need to, what we call in physics,
you need to represent that symmetry.
Now, this is a very abstract notion,
but it means, you know, I can have the notion
of the rotation, but I can rotate a vector,
or I can rotate a plane,
or I can rotate different objects,
where they have, it's kind of the same action
in the background,
but they can be represented in different manner.
Okay, for instance, let's take a simple symmetry,
like a reflection symmetry, right?
Objects which are symmetric with respect to an axis.
You can have a snowflake, or an apple,
or many, many different objects
which are symmetric with myself, approximately.
And these are different representations
of the same symmetry.
I mean, I can act with reflections of myself
on a snowflake, on a piece of paper, on an apple,
and all of them will be symmetric,
all of us will be symmetric,
but those would be different representations, right?
In a sense.
Very good, exactly, exactly.
And then, if you're a mathematical physicist,
we have tools, if I give you a symmetry group,
I can go, I can try to classify,
I give you a complete list
of all the possible representations, okay?
And then I know if I have a symmetry for physical system
that my physical system is a particular representation.
And then from that perspective,
all I have to tell you is what representation,
and somehow, if there's enough symmetry,
the system is, I mean, I can do that at the classical level,
but it's almost then easy to go quantum, okay?
So that's the power of symmetry.
And as I say, I did my PhD,
it's interesting, maybe for God's sake,
a little lesson, you see,
is that whatever you learn in physics is never lost.
Like I said, one reason I was able to do that,
I could grab this idea,
which says because I worked several years
in integrable systems,
we're there, you want to quantize a system,
and you don't quantize the system,
you quantize the symmetry,
and then find the quantum system
by representation of the symmetry is extremely powerful,
extremely, extremely powerful.
And if you were trying to quantize a system without that,
you would get completely lost, right?
So, you know, and then, so all this work I did,
maybe 30 years after it came back to me
as a very useful teaching.
And then it's always-
Never throw away anything,
never throw away anything.
No, it will come back.
You have to be here long enough.
Keep an open mind, it's going to come back.
Anyway, so we have this symmetry,
we have this opposition.
So for me, and we're still talking
about something very elementary, you know?
I'm talking about the nature of classical GR,
understanding what we call the phase space.
So there's a way to understand this object
where you don't need to jump to a top-down approach.
Okay, there's a way.
And then, okay, so then when we discover that,
we have to develop all the mathematical framework around
because it's so tall,
and that's what you're saying,
there's a lot of paper technical,
but, you know, in some sense,
it's more okay to make sure
that we have all the right technical tool.
But what's important is we went from a point of view
where gravity has no symmetry,
to the point of view where gravity
has now infinite dimensional group of symmetries.
A little bit like when people discovered
that the theory of continuum of phase transition in 2D
was governed by an infinite dimensional group
called the conformal symmetry group.
Here we're saying, well, it's like that for gravity.
So for sure, as soon as you realize that,
you know, I mean, that's what I'm devoting, you know,
my, I want to understand the nature
of this symmetry, the quantization.
And what, as I'm saying,
any theory of kind of gravity need to submit to that.
If not to tell me, like, for instance,
there was a proposal called Ojava gravity
that say I could quantize gravity
if I break all the symmetries.
I mean, Lorentz symmetry.
That's another option.
You can say, even if you tell me, look,
I break all the symmetry.
That's not going to be my choice,
but you know, you do have to, anyway, submit to that.
So I hope that explains some of the ideas.
And now what are the kind of results you can get there?
And I emphasize it's a bottom-up approach, right?
We are not, the first beautiful result I find for me
is very satisfactory.
Is that it gives me a complete conceptual framework
where I can bring the core idea of loop quantum gravity
and the core idea of holography
and emerge seamlessly, okay?
And by core idea, I mean, maybe you have to throw away
some aspects of loop gravity that don't belong.
And I have to throw away some aspect of holography
that, yeah, don't really belong to the theory of quantum gravity.
But that's the first sign for me that you're on the right way.
Because as you're saying,
there's different approach of quantum gravity,
but breakthrough or discovery
is not just concatenation of different perspective.
It's when this perspective diffuses.
They merge, yes, yes.
Right, they merge, okay.
Can I ask you to expand a bit on this?
Like, when you say you bring in, just restate that,
something from loop quantum gravity,
so this idea of discreteness, right?
Introducing all your surfaces and cuts in space time
and this idea of holography of boundaries being important.
Is that the thing, like,
what will you bring from loop quantum gravity?
Okay, so I'm not saying that I bring some things
from holography and think that by looking at this system
and just following what the system tells me,
I can now recognize both elements, which is very different.
I'm not trying to prove that one is correct or the other.
I'm just looking at the system and finding it.
So what you have is that now you have this corner sphere
and then you look at representation of this corner sphere.
And okay, when you have symmetry,
something which are very nice is to classify
what we call the casiniers,
which are the objects which are invariants, okay?
I mean, it's a technical,
but there's the techniques where you recognize the objects
which when you make the rotation, nothing changes
and these objects are central.
They organize the system.
I mean, I can give you an example.
This is, yeah, the notion of symmetry references
is why we can predict the weather system, right?
So, and in fact, we discovered the symmetry group
of quantum gravity at the corner is extremely similar
to the symmetry group that governs the meteorology
called weather system on the planet Earth.
Wow, okay.
Okay.
I mean, it's a mathematical equivalence and anyway,
it's a sidetrack.
So we know that, you know, the weather system is chaotic
and it's very complicated,
but it's governed by a fundamental symmetry
and the fundamental symmetry has invariance,
casiniers, which are called the,
which are the number and the location of the vortices.
And so if you have ever done some sailings
and back in the day where there was no computer,
you could predict the weather for a few days
because what you would do is look at a map,
locate the vortices, understand the speed
and know that for the next three days,
before the vortex merge,
nothing will happen in your track, okay?
And the vortices, why don't they move very fast?
Because they are casiniers.
That is, they are protected by that symmetry, okay?
And that's, okay.
So it's just to tell you how, okay?
And the same, okay.
The same kind of objects appear in this representation.
So I'm trying to be, okay, I got carried away
but because it opens up new, that's the one thing, you know,
we're studying this quantum gravity system
and at some point we had to study the representation theory
that meteorologists or mathematical physicists
developed because it's useful.
Racism is this beauty of theoretical physics.
At some point there's-
That's the importance of cross-contamination
between different-
Yeah, cross-contamination, right?
Yeah.
So, you know, where does the quantum gravity idea comes in?
Is that you look at these casiniers
and one of these casiniers is somehow the area element here
and then, you know, you look at representation
and it's possible for this area element to be atomic.
So then you can find, imagine,
if you really think about this fluid on the corner
as a free for a moment, a gravitational free,
it could be made of atoms.
And if it's made of atoms,
then the spectral area is quantized
and it comes purely from representation theory.
Okay, okay.
Now, so that's where I say, you look at the system,
there's no discretization whatsoever, okay?
You just look at representation theory and boom,
you find one option is this one.
Something which really resembles
what happens in loop quantum gravity,
in a sense, you have this idea.
Yes, yes, yes.
Something that resemble exactly one of the key results
of loop quantum gravity,
but so now with a little bit more symmetry,
like loop quantum gravity had to assume
some pre-established edge,
whereas here you have more flexibility somehow.
Like you don't need to break some different variants
if you want.
Okay.
And to conclude,
how does it relate to a holography?
One of the central aspect of holography
has been the emphasis.
It's a link between let's say,
holography and quantum information.
It's been the focus that somehow
what we need to understand in quantum theory
is the entanglement entropy.
That is the idea that maybe geometry,
at the quantum level is by definition,
the number of information shared
across that entangling surface, right?
And that's the way you should understand quantum geometry.
You should not necessarily understand it as quantum geometry,
as I just described,
but you should understand it as purely informationally.
Yes, some kind of object that emerged
from quantum entanglement,
or which is made in some sense at the fundamental.
Exactly, exactly.
That geometry is the expression of quantum entanglement.
And here, that's one aspect of what we have,
because this symmetry group,
it appears exactly when you have a link of entanglement
between the two and you cut it in half,
and you realize that the half that you have on the left,
in fact, carrier representation of symmetry.
So you find that the symmetry controls completely
the nature of quantum entanglement, okay?
So, okay, so that's where we are.
And anyway, so this is why I find it beautiful.
And yeah, that's the, and it's just the beginning.
And you see, you can bring different approach.
One that I didn't mention,
and I find fascinating in the past few years,
I connected a lot with what's called celestial holography.
Yes, yes.
Which is also some kind of bottom-up approach
for scattering process,
and it's very naturally linked.
Yeah, I don't have time to explain,
but if you take a sphere,
I was talking about a small sphere,
but if you take a big sphere and you move it along,
you're now at infinity, then anyway,
you can see that we're talking about the same thing there.
I mean, this is another aspect where I would say
we have blue gravity, holography, and celestial holography,
now in the same ground,
and it's a much bigger playground than it was five years ago.
Well, this is absolutely remarkable,
the way in which area quantization,
but also this interplay between geometry
and entanglement entropy comes in naturally.
It's really fascinating.
I mean, I'm excited, you see it on my face, so.
But so I will, at this point,
I was expecting to ask you
what you think is the right approach to quantum gravity
to solve the problem,
but I guess you already answered the question.
You put us in front of a nice bottom-up approach
to the problem, which starts from symmetries
and then tries to exploit them,
read them off and exploit them to quantize the theory,
and this is super interesting,
and I thank you very much for your explanation.
If I may, I would like to move towards the end
of our conversation with just a brief personal question,
because we are approaching one hour, right?
We are about the hour,
so I guess it's time for us to move towards the last question.
Why did you choose quantum gravity in the first place?
I mean, you partially answered,
but is there one single-line answer to this question?
And this can be really helpful
for students listening to us.
Yeah, I think there's a single-line answer,
and I remember exactly the moment it happened.
I mean, the single-line is just because it's the most,
it's the most fascinating,
and it's the hardest problem in physics, in my view.
And I remember the moment is that I started my PhD
doing things in the Galois system,
and at some point, they were interesting,
but at some point, the world is a big space.
I could become a doctor, I could become a banker,
I could become an explorer, I love mountains,
and I wanted to become a writer.
I mean, there's so many things that were in musicians,
so many things, and then I'm like, why am I doing physics?
I'm doing physics because I realized at one point in my PhD,
oh, I'm doing physics because I wanted to do these things,
which are fascinating,
but I was really, I think that I was afraid to,
they were not worthy of me in some sense, right?
Like I said, no, I have to do realistic physics, right?
Physics that pay, I don't know, the rent or whatever.
And then I decided, well, if I want to pay the rent,
I go in this world and I can find any job I want
because that's true for any theoretical physicist.
And I said, well, if I stay in this world,
it's to do the thing that I'm really passionate about.
It's to understand what is the atom of quantum geometry,
and I realized that only if it's just to decide
I'm going to fail, but yeah, that's the...
Well, and with this, I think that I can thank you.
This is really important, that will keep it with me.
Thank you very much for your time.
This was really valuable,
and I'm sure it will be for the people
that will listen to us in the near future,
because this will be uploaded.
Then I want to, I don't know,
advert everyone that many other conversations will come,
and thank you again for your...
Thank you for organizing everything.
It's a great initiative.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
See you, David.
