It's recording. Okay. Hello, everybody. Welcome back. So today we have the fourth and the final lecture by Professor Horatsu Nastasi, right? So last time we learned many things. We learned
lip-sheet scaling. We learned some QCD-like theories. What else? Okay, I forgot a few other things.
And the PPUA correspondence.
The PPUA correspondence, that's what, okay, how can I forget that? That's what Horatsu is famous for, right?
So, yeah, we did the PPUA in Penrose Limit and other things, right? So fantastic. So today, I think that covers the first three lectures, covered all the things in Horatsu's first book on ADS-CFT.
And today's lecture is about application of string theory to cosmology. He has a book on this alone, right? So I strongly advise you all to go check that out. Okay, so with that said, Horatsu, please go ahead.
Thank you. Let me go. Where is it?
Yeah.
All right.
So thank you for the introduction. And as was said, this is actually the last lecture. And after all, after the previous three lectures, I described the basics and the formalism of ADS-CFT and gauge gravity dualities.
Today, I will consider an application that is actually more in line with the lecture series, mainly holographic cosmology, which intends to apply the ideas of gauge gravity duality to obtain a cosmology in the regime of strong gravity.
And that otherwise would not be possible to obtain. But now we will do this through the gauge gravity duality.
So, first of all, as I said, this is an example of gauge gravity duality. And it's a non-conformal type.
So, obviously, cosmology is not conformal.
So, let's first understand an example, a top-down example of such non-conformal gauge gravity duality. This is an example that was done shortly after the paper of Maldesena by these people.
I'm going to talk about Maldesena as an example.
So, one considers Md2 brains in a decoupling limit.
And that will give a two plus one dimensional super ammios with gauge group SUM.
And the metric now is not ADS because this is not conformal. As I said, ADS corresponds to conformal field theory boundary.
But we have, on the boundary, we have this three dimensional flat space.
The decoupling limit as before corresponds to taking low-energy limit, meaning alpha prime to zero, and also taking a near-horizon limit, which means r going to zero, while keeping the ratio r over alpha prime fixed.
The one difference now is that the relation between g-angles and g-string, since we are in three and not in four dimensions, involves also a dimensional quantity alpha prime.
And g-squared-angles is g-string over square root alpha prime.
Accordingly, g-squared-angles has mass dimension one.
So, in the decoupling limit, we look at this function H, and we see that the second term is much bigger than the first, so we drop the one.
So, then we get a so-called gravity dual, as we said, the general gravitation background is called a gravity dual, that has three plus one dimensions, not ADS four, but rather something like a warped ADS four in some sense.
And then a six-dimensional sphere.
So, in this case, duality is holographic as well in the sense that the gravity part, once we reduce on omega-six, is three plus one dimensional.
And then the field theory part is two plus one dimensional.
So, this is an example of a top-down duality, but as we said last lecture, in particular in ADS CMT, but not only we would use this also here, one considers also phenomenological type of gauge-dryity duality, bottom up.
And, in particular, the application I'm interested in now is to cosmology.
So, the example that we've considered last time to ADS CMT was, we considered some gravity theory in ADS space, and we considered, we assumed there is holography.
And therefore, by the holographic map, we obtain a dual non-perturbative field theory that we actually don't know in general, but we know its desired property through the holographic map.
So, for this, the phenomenology was going from ADS towards field theory.
But now we want to go the opposite way. We want to go from field theory to an unknown gravity theory.
So, we define a perturbative field theory phenomenologically, and then by the duality map, the holographic map, the perturbative field theory will correspond to a non-perturbative that is highly quantum gravity, and it will be defined implicitly by the holographic map.
So, even though we don't know what it is, the holographic map defines it implicitly, giving us some desired phenomenology.
So, just to fix things, because this is rather unusual respect what we usually do, let's understand the cosmology has three spatial directions that we'll call perhaps x, y, and z, and time t.
And then, on top of the cosmological background, FLRW, one considers fluctuations for the, let's say for the spatial metric, HIJ, and for some scalar.
So, those are functions of these three spatial coordinates and time.
However, in order to apply ADS CFT or rather gauge gravity duality to it, we have to do a double V rotation, such that instead of x, y, z, we have now t, x, y, so the time is now part of the boundary field theory.
And instead of time, we have radius, so that this extra coordinate, now the coordinate away from the field theory, corresponding cosmology to time.
So, once we do this, we understand the RG flow in momentum or in energy, U in the field theory was mapped, as we said last lecture, to evolution in the radial coordinate R away from the boundary field theory.
Now, through the double V rotation, this is mapped to time evolution. So, in conclusion, we have RG flow in the field theory mapped to time evolution, more precisely, inverse time evolution or inverse RG flow to time evolution.
Okay, so let's understand a little bit about the picture we want to obtain.
So, first of all, what's the current model? The current model is inflation, and inflation would correspond to an exponential expansion, so a proportional to e to the h of t or some high power law with power greater than one.
So, a of t proportional to t to the n and greater than one. This is almost a standard model of cosmology, because among other things, so the most important things are that it agrees with the data with the CMDR fluctuations.
And so the set of classic puzzles with usual hot big bang cosmology pre-inflationary.
But, now, we want to consider, in some sense, an extension of this inflationary paradigm into the strong gravity domain.
And being strong gravity, we can deal with it holographically via gauge gravity duality and calculate things in perturbative field theory. And this will be called holographic cosmology.
And I should emphasize that when people say holographic cosmology, many times they mean different things. So, the specific holographic cosmology I'm talking about is this setup here.
And moreover, the set the phenological setup defined by McFadden and Scanderis in 2001, which uses specific side types of two plus one dimensional quantum field theories, once with so called generalized conformal structure that I will define.
So, not conformal invariance because it doesn't correspond to ADS, but generalized performance structure.
And we will fix the parameters in this field theory phenomenologically by fitting through the to the CMDR data.
And when one does that one obtains so a different parametrical fitting that rather than the usual fitting of lambdas called that matter plus inflation, but the, but nevertheless the fit to the CMDR of this holographic cosmology is, we'll find this as good as for inflation.
So, chi squared is, is a difference of point five so one says when chi squared is less than one this theories are the fits are indistinguishable.
So, one case we have chi squared of 824.0 and the other side one 823.4.
Now, and the other point is that this will be possible to be improved by lattice calculation at some intermediate coupling so instead of using just small coupling perturbative.
One can do things on the lattice for field theory, and this is in progress by a lattice group that includes cost of Scanderis.
And so, this is with respect to the fit to the CMDR.
And then we said, another reason why considering inflation, besides the fits to CMDR are the classic puzzles of cosmology of the pre big bang, the pre inflationary, not big bang cosmology.
And we'll find that these puzzles are also sold by holographic cosmology.
All right.
So, what is holographic cosmology.
And it, when one has to be crotate the cosmology.
And instead of the time direction. So we, we think rotate the time direction to a radial direction. I'll call it said here before.
I mean, it's basically one of our from before.
So, we write the big rotated cosmology as this gravity dual.
And then we'll also has have some scalar field, as we said in cosmology we usually have a scalar field, which has some background, plus a fluctuation fluctuation that is modified by the same is multiplied by the same.
And so, this week rotation comes with also a big rotation of the momenta q bar is minus IQ, and off also, which is slightly more bizarre of the gravitational the square of the gravitational coupling so kappa bars Newton squared is minus kappa Newton squared.
And, and then this cosmology would correspond to some phenomenological gravity dual that gravity, which means a gravity dual in which we write the most, the most general, sorry,
not great, you do a field theory dual, I should have said, so the, we write the most general field theory consistent with what we want.
And then we fix its parameters.
And the field theory, the big rotation corresponds to, well, the same for momentum but this condition on kappa Newton corresponds to n bar is minus I am.
It's not bizarre since n is the end of SUM. But the point is, remember, I insisted on the fact that when we consider gauge gravity duality the gauge group disappears so the only thing that is left is and as a parameter.
And that's what we're doing here we can do calculations and at the end of the calculations, we big rotate the parameter and so this does not need to be thought of as big rotating the gauge group.
Then we have, we have to think about these fluctuation that's that's really what we're interested in.
We know that in inflation we want to fix to fit the quantum fluctuations of the inflaton to CMBR observations. And that's what we will like to do here as well.
So, one must obtain power spectra for the perturbations, the gauge invariant perturbations tensor perturbations, including the metric and the scalar so gauge invariant combinations of h i j and delta phi.
These are delta scalar squared and delta tensor squared, the two point functions of zeta and gamma i j.
These are the things that are fit against CMBR observations, but now we have to calculate these things in our holographic cosmology.
So how does one do that. Well, this was started by an idea of Maldesena in 2002.
So, if one considers inflation, like Maldesena did, Maldesena only considered inflation, exponential inflation, I should say, a of t proportional to e to the h of t.
Then, by this big rotation, we would have a of z proportional to e to the h that so exponential scale factor.
This would correspond to an approximately decider gravity.
And then the sitter itself was considered by Maldesena to be, in some sense, a type of big rotation, not really big rotation, but the type of big rotation from anti the sitter, going from anti the sitter to the sitter.
One is able to do a big rotation like transformation on parameters.
So it does that Maldesena found the following prescription. So one starts with a bit with a written prescription in ideas which was that the partition function in the CFT as a function of some sources five zero is the partition function of ideas,
where these five zero now correspond to boundary sources for the fields.
And this partition function in the supergravity limit is just E minus the supergravity action that depends on these fields.
When one does this big rotation Maldesena finds a prescription or map, where now this CFT in the partition function in the CFT, depending on, well, these files but also now fluctuations of the metric.
Hij is equal to the wave function of the universe, psi, as a function of the same Hij and phi.
The wave function of the universe. I mean, if you're following quantum gravity, you probably know, but the wave function of the universe is the path integral up to a surface with a certain where I define the values that the wave function depends on so the three metric and the
pi at some time t.
So one does a path integral over everything with these boundary conditions.
Okay, so that is the prescription of Maldesena.
And then further this was extended to non-conformal theories by works of Scanderis et al.
Similar to things like the D2 brain example that I gave to you, in which case one finds power laws instead of exponential A of t, one has power law.
So, in the gravity dual one finds a proportional ZFM, which means a proportional to t to the end in cosmology.
And therefore, as for the usual ADACFT, we assume it is valid at any coupling, including the strong or non-perturbative quantum gravity.
Right, so inflation is weakly coupled. But now we apply this also to the strongly coupled regime.
As I emphasize, this is really a variation of inflation, a strongly coupled form of inflation. So the holographic cosmology that we're describing here is nothing but inflation in this strongly coupled regime.
And there we can say something about it through filtering.
So, the new model then says that the CMBR perturbations that we observe in the sky are perturbations that were created during this strong gravity or non-geometrical cosmological phase.
And after that, eventually we have to reach the geometrical or weak gravity regime. But the things that we see now in the CMBR are perturbations that were generated during this strong gravity regime.
And then a certain holographic, that is to say, strong gravity or perturbative corresponding to perturbative field theory, calculation, which is either a direct one based on a formulation, a Hamiltonian formulation,
like Giannis Papadimitriou and Costas Candaris, or based on directly on this extension of the Maldesena map, the partition function versus wave function of the universe, extended to this case, gives the following formula.
In the scalar spectrum, we have cubed divided by 16 pi squared times the imaginary part of a B defined at this V-rotating momentum.
The tensor perturbation, the same thing where I have switched with an A instead of the B.
And B are just scalar functions appearing in the two-point function of stress energy tensors. The two-point function of stress energy tensor can be decomposed in these two scalar structures multiplied by some tensor structures that involve the momentum,
both delta ij and qi.
So, okay, so we found what the scalar and tensor structures in the CMBR, seen in the CMBR, should be as a function of these A's and B's in the two-point function of energy momentum tensors.
So, what, how do you calculate that? More precisely, what's the theory in which we calculate that?
Well, we will calculate in a Euclidean field theory.
Euclidean, because as we said, it's a double V-rotation, so if we do just one V-rotation, the x, y, and z of cosmology correspond to the coordinates of field theory.
And the theory must be super-enormalizable and have generalized conformal structure.
So, generalized conformal structure means the following. It means that dimensions in this theory, the only dimensions are contained in the dependence on q, and specifically through this effective coupling, g-squared n over q.
Remember, in three dimensions, g-squared has dimension one, so g-squared n over q is dimension less.
If we write the action, the action will be a phenomenological one, so I write the most general theory that has these two properties of being super-enormalizable and having generalized conformal structure.
So, for the QFT, I write then what? Well, I have to write, as usual, up spins up to one, which means scalars, fermions, and gauge fields.
And the generalized conformal structure means the only dimension comes in with a coupling. There's no, with a Young Mills coupling. There's no other dimension.
So, I write specifically the Young Mills in here, and then everything else, these mu M L1 L2 and these lambda M1 M4, are dimensionless. So these are couplings for yukavas and pi-4 interactions.
What I'm saying is that if I now rescale, if I write the action in the form with one over g-squared Young Mills in front, and then no other g Young Mills in the action, the thing that multiplies it doesn't have any dimensionful parameters.
So, if I write it like this, then I have the kinetic terms and these yukava and pi-4 terms with dimensionless coefficients.
The only way of thinking about it that is consistent with this is that if I would imagine this action as being derived from four dimensions by dimensional reduction, the four-dimensional action would be conformal, right?
Because if I have a four-dimensional conformal action, right, the only thing that happens when I mention reduce, I multiply the coupling, one over g-squared Young Mills, with an integral over the circle, so with a 2 pi r.
And in here, things would be four-dimensional conformal.
All right, so this is the field theory that I'm considering.
And in this field theory, as we said, the A and B are the coefficients of the sensor structures in the two-point function of energy momentum tensors.
And because of the notion of generalized conformal structure, so because generalized conformal structure is a symmetry or property of the action, these A and Bs can only be functions.
Well, we have this cube cube for dimensional reasons, and then squared, again, because we have n squared.
And this is the action's proportion plan squared.
But otherwise, the functions that appear in here, f t and f, are scalar functions of this dimensionless, effective coupling, g-squared Young Mills, and divided by q.
And so then one calculates this two-point function of energy momentum tensors in field theory at two loops.
And at two loops, one obtains the following form, and higher loops are contained in these terms that were dropped.
So one obtains, well, a constant in front, multiplying one, and then the corrections are of two types that are corrections of g-squared effective and of g-squared effective, log g-squared effective.
This is standard in quantum field theory, standard in three-dimensional quantum field theory.
And then remember that the scalar and tensor, like two-point functions, were equal to something proportional to one of the imaginary parts of A and B.
So we take one of our imaginary parts of these A and B, and it's easy to see then that we obtain, for the scalar and tensor power spectra, something like a constant divided by one plus an effective coupling.
So therefore I have something like gq star divided by q, where q is the momentum, log q divided by some other beta gq star, and for the tensor something similar with different g and beta.
Yeah, so I have, in other words, I have something of the type one over one plus log q, where the coefficient is also one over q.
So, and so this is a phenomological parameterization, but all of these phenomological parameters gq star beta gt beta t depend on the parameters of the phenomological action on g-squared angles on n, number of scalars, number of fermions, and the couplings lambda and mu.
So now let's understand a little bit, since this is the part that confuses most people, I think. Let's insist on the issue that why do we get a spectrum that is almost exactly the spectrum obtained from inflation fluctuations for the CNBR?
So in particular, why is the spectrum almost flat? Well, the answer is this generalized conformal structure. The only corrections I'm allowed to have are corrections in this g-squared effective, g-squared and over q, and we're doing perturbation theory, so this g-squared effective is small.
So then the only possible perturbations are g-squared effective or g-squared effective, log g-squared effective.
There's no other perturbations allowed, but there's no other parameters allowed at the two loop.
One loop is the zero third.
And then we get really this form. This is just, this form is really nothing but generalized conformal structure in perturbation theory.
So then why do we get something that is similar to lambda called armada plus inflation?
In lambda called armada plus inflation, the scalar perturbation, for instance, the tensor is the same.
This parameter as follows is the constant, and then q over q star, so the scale, to the power ns minus one, plus perhaps if ns actually varies, then we write,
if ns varies with q, then we write another parameter alphas over two log q over q star.
And as you know, this ns minus one is much smaller than one in inflation, right? Experimentally, it's about what? It's about 0.025, right?
So then if this parameter is small and this is even smaller, so it doesn't matter. I can just consider this first term.
Then I expand q to the ns minus one as approximately one minus ns minus one log q.
But then delta s squared for holographic cosmology is something of the type one over one plus something times log q, which is also expanded when this something is small as one minus log, this something log.
So these two parametrical forms are approximately equal anyway for the parameters that we're having.
But the point is that the data is sufficiently complex that they can distinguish them. I mean the CMDR fluctuations are now calculated, you know, very, very precise numbers and we can have to fit all this acoustic curve.
With that, so one can have a fit that is very complex.
And yet the fit, so it could in principle distinguish them. That's, that was the standard thing you would think that the two should be distinguishable.
And yet, in terms of the fit, I should have brought the two fits. Sorry, I forgot. I should have taken the two fits out of some papers, but the point is, so the two fits don't fit perfectly in the same regions.
So, don't fit perfectly the data in the same regions.
And yet, nevertheless, chi squared is less than is within less than one. So, the difference between the two is point five, which is less than one, therefore then indistinguishable.
And of course the fit fixes parameters. And another thing I should have said is that one uses the same number of parameters as for the fit to inflation otherwise, you know, with his efficiently many parameters you can fit anything.
And so one thing that one finds as is that in the CNBR, if you look at at
angular L, which is less than 30 right so L is like momentum is one is picking.
And these are very large angles for small else is very large angles on the sky.
So one finds that this region. So on the fit.
The region is non preservative. It goes away from the perturbative limit in which we calculate it.
So, so it has to be excluded so in the fit. In the end, the region for L less than 30 was excluded because it did not correspond to the, to the perturbative regime.
To put it back, one needs to do lattice calculation in order to be in the non perturbative region that is needed. And this is work in progress.
And this is lattice working process and hopefully this should be done very soon. I mean, you know, I don't know, really, two or three years maybe we should be able to distinguish which of the two fits is better.
Is it holographic cosmology or inflation.
Okay.
Another quantity that is needed for for the next idea that I'm going to present the solution of the classic puzzles of big bank cosmology is the global this global symmetry current correlators.
The global symmetry current JIA, the two point function of the current, like the two point function of the energy momentum tensor is written as a function of the effective coupling times a tensor structure.
And the structure now it's much simpler is just this pi j delta pi k delta i k minus q i q k over q squared.
And again, as before we have this function of the dimensionless coupling has to contain has to be of the type constant times one, and then G squared effective and G squared effective log G squared effective terms and higher order terms come at three loops and higher.
But I said global symmetry currents, and the action I took was phenological so it means it had all possible terms.
And so it didn't have any particular symmetry, global symmetry.
It's some global symmetry I have to restrict the phenological model I have to invent some global symmetry.
And related to monopole perturbations that we will describe shortly.
So, so now, let me come to the puzzles of hot big bang cosmology.
And first, let's see their solution in inflation.
And then before you, before you go further, could I ask some questions.
I will go back to the slide 82.
I had a couple of them there so your your partition function for the CFD as this spatial metric.
And, but I didn't see well, I guess this this metric is a classical background space time.
No, no. So, okay, so, so remember, remember what I see what you want to ask but so it gets confusing because you have to think of, you have to think of the generalization of this written prescription for ideas so what's the, what happens here and ideas by zero is a source for a current, right, an operator,
but let's think of it as a current.
Right. And then, on the other side by zero is just a boundary source.
Right. So, what happens here then.
HIV is the thing that defines the way function at the universe, which is a boundary source for the metric, but the spatial metric only because you're looking in time at the fixed time.
So, HIV on the cosmologist side is a boundary source.
But the boundary source on the field theory side corresponds to a source for an operator.
Right. Oops, sorry.
So the so HIV here is a source.
Right, it's just some some numbers.
Okay.
So this is part of the theory, it's a source for what, what couples HIV, Tij, right, the energy momentum 10.
So this is just the source for the energy momentum tensor. And so when I vary with respect to it, I get functions, two point functions in particular for Tij.
Right. Okay.
Yeah, that's why it doesn't appear anymore in all the actions you're showing us. Okay.
So so when I calculate things I very respect it and I put it to zero at the end in order to calculate the two point functions. So that's okay.
How we arrived at this formula. I mean, it's a bit more complicated but it's rough.
So I vary with respect to HIV and then I put it to zero and I get this two point function. And then it's related to the power spectrum in the, in the cosmology.
And also, here you said, well, I think in the next slide or when where you get the, the ratio of the, the scalar perturbations for this generalized conformal something structure.
Yes. Yes. And in the next one, when you're comparing it to, to land a CDM. Yeah, so you said that.
Well, okay, so this, this, this expression in red, that's the one that you get in usual in inflation, right? And you say that you get something similar and that for this.
Well, nearly conformal field theory. And that, well, it doesn't have a lot of freedom because that's kind of the only way that it can depend on the parameters because it has this, this symmetry.
Yeah.
Okay, so it is, it is like, well, I mean, that's a very big coincidence, right.
No, it's not the question, right? That's my point. So it's, it's really saying, you're saying why, so people will say, oh, inflation, you don't need to calculate anything because it's scale invariance.
So that's why you see the scale invariance spectrum.
Yeah, fine.
But this is the same explanation here, generalized conformal structure is, is a symmetry which implies the same thing as for.
Okay.
And I'm saying, and I'm saying the corrections to it are small on both sides. So that's why, you know, the fits both are expected to work at least you have, you have large errors.
But the interesting thing is that you have small error bars for CMBR. And nevertheless, the fit is indistinguishable. It could have been distinguishable. And in fact, as I said, with the new calculations of on the lattice, they will be distinguishable.
So now which is better.
Okay, thank you.
Alright, so what is, what is the, what are the big, the puzzles of hot Big Bang, and we'll first see how they are resolved in inflation and then how what happens in holographic cosmology.
So the first is the smoothness and the horizon problem.
This is the fact that the universe.
Tiny perturbations, and moreover their correlations that are bigger than the observed horizon.
We see things that like one in one direction in the sky is correlated with something in the opposite direction on the sky, even though the horizon so the, the, the, how much the, the light has been able to propagate is smaller than the sky.
So, one concrete measure so this is Jerry slightly confusing so you might think that maybe this is just the error of calculation but it's not if you do things properly.
What you, what you must consider is the observed correlation size which is two times the horizon radius.
Divided by the horizon distance at last scattering, which is when CMDR is formed, and you, you translate that to today.
So the formula is this, it's to our age at T zero today divide by the age and the same. And this is approximately two times square root one plus Z last scattering, which is about 72.
We see correlations over 72 times the horizon that should have been true.
And inflation saw that by saying that there's an expansion which is either exponential or with a power greater than one, which means that scales expand exponentially, and they get outside the horizon.
During inflation, and then during usual radiation dominated cosmology, usual cosmology with and less than one, they get back inside the horizon.
So that's really the explanation and the
age at the last scattering is proportional to this exponential, this blow factor this e to the number of defaults.
Then there's the flatness problem, which is the following. If you calculate, use just FLRW cosmology and you calculate the Friedman equation, and you'll find that omega, which is row over or critical minus one is
A, which is plus minus one or zero divided by a squared H squared. And that's, that is proportional to T over a of T squared.
So, yeah, I kept use different the number is the NP is the same man as here. So, so then this is proportional to T to the two times one minus P or this M.
This means that the universe.
So if if P or N is less than one, that means that omega minus one increases with time.
Right. So that means even if omega minus one was kind of small at some point, then it kept in kept increasing. So now, reversely, if we see that omega is really, really close to one nowadays, we go back in time, it should have been absurdly close to one.
Now, of course, you could say it is equal to one, but we, you know, that's a, then that's a theoretical statement, it doesn't have anything to do with what we actually see experimentally.
So experimentally, we just know omega is very close to one.
So, so then why is it, why was it so fine tuned in the past.
And the explanation of inflation is rather simple, because it has either P greater than one or exponential, which means that omega minus one decreases during inflation.
So, omega one minus one decreases a lot during inflation and then starts to increase again during normal cosmology.
Then we have the relic and monopole problems.
Well, so what is the problems. The problem is we don't see neither monopoles nor relics.
So direct searches for monopoles found that there are less than 10 minus 30 monopoles per nucleon, which means that there's at the very least a 10 minus 30 monopoles per volume dilution of the monopoles.
Why is that because if we consider the cable mechanism that generates by definition monopoles at a phase transition, the cable man mechanism generates one monopole per horizon, one monopole per nucleon per horizon.
And so we should have seen a lot of monopoles right of the order of one monopole per nucleon.
And that means that we need a dilution factor of at least log 10 to the 10, which is about 23 e-folds of inflation. So we need that many e-folds of inflation for a potential phase transition before inflation ends.
Relics is even, we even have another thing, we have, if we had had too many relics, they would over close the universe, meaning the universe would be closed instead of being open as it is now, I mean parabolic.
So we would get 10, so we would need at least 10 to minus 11 reduction in volume since the phase transition. So that's a smaller bound, bigger bound is from monopoles.
We have the entropy problem, which is the entropy today is, is huge, it's about 10 to the 88, the entropy in the observed horizon today.
But even at Big Bang nuclear synthesis, which is the last time that we can say for sure what happened in cosmology.
It was over the first time. You know what I mean.
So the, so then it's still 10 to the 63.
However, again by the cable mechanism at the phase transition you generate one entropy unit per horizon.
So that's kind of puzzling how do you generate them so much entropy.
So inflation is a large growth of entropy during the reheating, and then exponential expansion also increases the entropy. So we generate a lot of entropy.
There's the perturbation problem, which is that CMDR perturbations that we see in the sky are classical, and we're outside the horizon in the past.
Right. So, why do we have this perturbations that are greater than horizon and classical.
Well, in inflation, as I said, we generate quantum perturbations, and then they're exponentially blown up outside the horizon.
And they just come back in now. So that's the solution in inflation we generate quantum perturbations, and they're just blown up outside the horizon.
And also the Baron asymmetry problem but that is that inflation doesn't help too much with it.
The Baron asymmetry is that the number of relative difference between Baron anti Baron is 10 minus nine in the universe.
And in order to create Baron asymmetry, you need interactions out of equilibrium.
And well inflation helps in the sense that in its extremely fast expansion.
And so it's much out of equilibrium, but doesn't tell you much more than that.
So now let's see how we solve this in holographic cosmology.
Well, so how about the first one the smoothness and horizon problem.
You might first say, well, it's a non geometrical phase. It doesn't matter you can explain you can use geometry.
Yeah, but at the end it should be geometrical so it's not you should still explain things.
One thing you might think of is the holographic map is non local.
And all the field theory itself is causal and local the map to gravity is non local so it will generate some apparent non locality.
And that's certainly part of it.
However, it turns out that the most important thing, most important solution is that the field theory it's actually finite in the infrared.
So in November, we had said that our RG, inverse RG flow corresponds to evolution in time.
And so, in the infrared corresponds to small cosmological times.
So scan there is at all proved in. Well, I forget it was maybe last year, I think.
So the finiteness of these three dimensional quantum field theories that we're talking about.
So the absence of infrared diversities infrared finiteness right.
And that translates now to act that correlators are non zero over land large distances.
And that means that there is no cosmological singularity.
So cosmological singularity would correspond in the field theory to a singularity in correlators, but there's no singularity in correlators.
So, that means that there is an absence of cosmological singularity, which is much more than the solution to the smoothness and horizon problem that we wanted.
And this gives also the fact that the light cones coming from different regions are correlate.
But fine. So, so this is the actual solution but let's suppose it's not that let me just take just so that we understand a little bit better what's going on.
Let's suppose the theory would not be infrared finite.
So let's define as the beginning.
The universe corresponding to G squared effective of the order of one.
Then this.
The fact that there is a constraint on the number. Remember, a horizon problem generates a constraint of the number of defaults for inflation.
So it would turn out would correspond now to a constraint on the amount of RG flow in field theory.
So,
let me be a little bit more precise about why this inverse RG flow is, or RG flow corresponds to inverse time evolution.
Consider a geodesic in ante the sitter joining two spatially separated points.
Then this would go through a minimum distance. It will go through ADS and then would would have some minimum distance inside ADS that I call R zero.
But through the, through the big rotation, this corresponds. So this are corresponds to E minus T over R.
That means that the scale L at which the minimum distance ADS is related to this separation L for this separation L would be related to E minus T over R.
And T over R means really in this case, T times H.
So inverting this one of L is K, the scale corresponds to H e to the H T.
So, as you see, the evolution in K corresponds to evolution cosmological time.
So, RG flow corresponds to inverse time evolution, as we said, and we said that the horizon problem is solved because there's no cosmological singularity and we have we have
correlations of a large distances.
But even if it weren't, we would be able to say that there was an amount of RG flow that is needed.
That corresponds to the amount of defaults that was needed in inflation in order to fix the horizon problem.
Now, now this last form is also the solution of the flatness problem.
Why is that so how do I understand the flatness problem from the point of view of holographic cosmology.
The point of view of holographic cosmology the flatness problem meant that there were some perturbations in gravity. Well, we said omega minus one but we can think of omega minus one as some sort of perturbation from omega equal one.
The fact that we have this particular gravitational perturbation.
It should decrease along time evolution.
And as we said time evolution is inverse RG flow.
So the perturbations should decrease along the inverse RG flow, inverse RG flow is from IR to UV.
So that amounts to just seeing what happens to to this functions function F that appears in the two point function of energy momentum tensors.
So this function F was had this generic form.
But then we look at the coefficients now.
So this leading coefficient F one.
So the best fit to the CMDR and also for most of the theoretical parameter space is negative.
So, and this dominates over everything else. So, this F one, then, if I take it, it's negative and I take it to be the leading be behavior of F, then we get that.
We get the following. If I would write this as q to some power, then expanding.
When the power is small, I'll get this one plus two delta log q, but just quite effective is proportion one of a q. So this would be one minus two delta log G square effective.
So comparing the two, we see that F one negative corresponds to delta negative.
And delta negative means what means that the energy momentum tensor is marginally relevant, meaning that the two point function of the energy momentum tensor.
The two point function of energy momentum tensor decreases with q.
So,
we get exactly the thing that we wanted. So when q increases from IR to UV, then the two point function decreases so perturbation decrease along this inverse RG flow.
Now, we used CFP terminology when saying here things like marginally relevant.
And yet we only have this generalized conformance structure, but the results are the same results are the same so we have this coefficient F one is negative implies that the this anomalous power delta is negative which means dilution along this inverse RG flow.
And the amount needed to
satisfy the observed flatness problem is still the same amount calculated, calculated in here.
All right, the entropy problem.
Well, the entropy problem is
is solved in inflation by reheating we saw.
Well, so now this holographic cosmology we said it's kind of a strong coupling version of inflation.
So, it should be solved by a period that corresponds to reheating.
But in field theory.
Kind of obvious, the, the dual field theory to the cosmology has what I would call gravitational modes, the things that give rise to gravity in the gravity dual.
And the things that I would call standard model modes, which are the things that correspond to standard model particles in cosmology.
And then what one has to the thing in the thing that corresponds to reheating is really a transfer of energy from one to the other from these gravitational modes to these standard model modes.
But in any case the issue was, why do you see an increase of very large increase in entropy.
We remember that cosmological time evolution corresponds to inverse RG flow.
Right. So, late times correspond to the UV and initial times correspond to the IR.
But what happens in a field theory, along this inverse RG flow, number of degrees of freedom decreases.
Along the RG flow, right, because of Tadanov blocking.
Right, when we do the RG flow, we, we consider an averaging of an over blocks, which amounts amounts a decrease of, of the number of degrees of freedom, which means that along the inverse RG flow, the degrees of freedom increase.
Right. So from, from IR to UV, the number of degrees of freedom increase, therefore the entropy increases.
So, then again, in order to get the right amount of, right amount of increase, it will be again a constraint on the amount of RG flow.
But so now this is perfectly natural and, you know, model independent really.
Because, so in inflation we had reheating and, well, okay, that was also in some sense model independent but the point is that now the solution is much more elegant with is just this generic fact that we have
the number of degrees of freedom decreasing along the RG flow, therefore increasing along the inverse RG flow.
That's corresponds to the entropy increasing.
And as a bonus, this gives us the arrow of time, right.
So, in, well, we could say also that reheating gives the arrow of time in inflation, but now it's more than during reheating, right, this is the arrow of time at all times is defined by this quantum filtering notion of, of increase the
of the number of degrees of freedom along the inverse RG flow.
Okay, the perturbation problem, it's also easier to understand in holographic cosmology, because the quantum.
The classical, the classical perturbations that one sees in the CNBR are due to these quantum perturbations of the energy momentum tensor, which are just usual quantum theory perturbations.
And, moreover, now there are no more assumptions.
But because, although, you know, in field, in inflation, people say, well, there's no assumptions about perturbations, but they are actually two assumptions to important assumptions.
One is that we can use quantum theory in her space to calculate things, which, you know, you might say it's reasonable but it's still an assumption.
Further, one uses the bunch Davis vacuum initial conditions in order to, you know, a specific initial condition in order to calculate the perturbations.
That is not true in, in the holographic cosmology in quantum field theory, the vacuum is the unique perturbative quantum theory vacuum. There's no more choice of initial conditions or anything.
There's no extra assumption corresponding to quantum theory in her space. There's nothing like that now.
For the better, and I see magic problem, there's the same solution, but
yeah, we could say also that there's no thermal equilibrium along the RG flow.
Finally, the one, the one problem that gives us some work to do is the relic and monopro problem.
So, so this is the problem of the problem that we have.
We need to have a dilution of the number of monopoles, because
yeah, we find less than less than one monopole per 10 to the 30 new clones and so on, and we should see of the order of one.
Now, how do we solve that in holographic cosmology?
Well, first thing you might also say the same thing that well there's no geometry in the gravity so why do you care about monopoles in that and how do I can explain something like monopole when there's no geometry.
The point is the monopole is defined by topology so you can define it abstractly even in the absence of a geometry and further as we said also the previous one.
In the end, at the end of this phase you still have to transition to usual geometrical phase.
Again, let's consider a monopole in the bulk.
And let's think what that corresponds to on the boundary on the three dimensional boundary.
That would correspond to a vortex, right.
Something that is topological and has magnetic charge into plus one dimensions is a vortex.
Now, the true case that we would be interested in would be something like a top monopole, which is a monopole in a non abelian theory that has no singularity at the core.
And that would correspond on the boundary to a true vortex, which is also in the same spirit is non abelian and has a no singularity at the core.
But that is extremely hard to consider.
So the only thing we can do is to consider an approximate case where instead of the top monopole in the bulk I consider a direct monopole, which is, you know this point like abelian monopole with a singularity and direct stream.
And correspondingly on the boundary, there would be some corresponding singular object that I decided to call a direct vortex.
So this is the, the, you know, the only thing that we can work with.
So we have to dilute these direct monopoles in the bulk.
And therefore, we would need some sort of dilution mechanism for the direct vortices.
So, what does that correspond to.
Well, first of all, there's a constraint.
The constraint would be described in terms of the monopole currents in the bulk.
So, like for the perturbations problem.
We would say that we would dilute perturbations of the monopole current, which means the 2.5 monopole current should be diluted.
In the cosmological time that means inverse RG flow, we need to be diluted, which turns out that that this means that the anomalous dimension delta of this monopole current should be negative as we saw in this previous case.
So the flatness problem we saw the same thing, we needed delta to be negative to have dilution.
Yeah, for relics, which coupled to Tij, we need dilution of Tij, which already saw and so it's also less stringent constraints so we'll not consider this we just consider monopoles.
A gauge field in the bulk corresponds to a global current in the QFT.
And also, you note that we don't know at this point how to deal with magnetic currents so we have to consider electric currents.
So, not their currents.
So, but since I emphasize that the quantum field theory is phenomenological. So, I don't know how to define a symmetry current in a phenomenological theory.
Because, you know, it doesn't have a symmetry. If it's arbitrary.
So that means that I need to consider a toy model. I need to focus on the model with some symmetry.
So let's consider a toy model, but a posterior you found, we found in this paper that the calculation is valid for all relevant models with a global symmetry.
So, let's consider a model with an SO three three global symmetry that allows both vortex solutions.
And we've considered this model with the gauge field and six complex scalars with one index, which is one and two and one is just so three index.
And then the potential is this one.
Then we can write down the global, the net recurrence.
And, and then we do exactly the same kind of two loop calculation for the two point function as was done for the energy momentum tensor so now we do it for for the global synergy currents.
And, well, this thing has divergences but they are removed since the momentum that dependence that we're after it's only in the finite piece.
And we find some result like that. And again, we have to, again, we have to match this with the expectation. What do we believe it should look like.
So, from generalized conformal structure as I said, this should be should have a given tensor structure, this be finding new which is delta menu minus q mu q new over q squared, and then a function of G squared effective and more over the leading
term is G squared effective log G squared effective.
G squared effective is proportion to one of a piece. So, then, when I take replace this log with log P, I get instead of plus here I get the minus.
And then, if this would be generically as before proportional to P to one plus two times the anomalous dimension delta, then we would get plus two delta log P.
So, this two times anomalous dimension is minus coefficient times G squared effective.
And we obtain that this delta the anomalous dimension is positive, which means the another current is irrelevant. It grows in the UV not in the IR.
But now we remember that we don't need another current we need the vortex current, the do magnetically dual current.
So, then we find, well, okay so we can, there's a transformation in an abelian model we can write the transformation between the not our current and the vortex current.
But there's a precise
relation.
That was calculated by
within in the billion case and herds of cotton such that and so on in the non abelian case.
They said that if we have a conform of your theory, the two point function.
Goes over from the electric two point function.
So, the electric two point function is written in terms of a coefficient T and the coefficient and parity breaking coefficient w.
And then the magnetic current two point function is written in terms of
these new structure T over T square plus w squared and w over T square plus w squared.
If I don't have this, this parity breaking term w then the going from electric to point function to magnetic to point function amounts basically just to inverting this coefficient T
and inverting it so this was in the abelian case, and in the non abelian case.
One basically just replaces this scalar coefficient with a group.
A group valued coefficient K and AB, and then growing from electric to vortex corresponds to just matrix inversion of this coefficient.
Okay, so now we can, we can consider our calculation.
And so we obtained for the for this non abelian, not our current two point function.
We saw that we obtained.
Oh, actually, I forgot to write there's actually delta AB in here. That was the.
Oh, sorry, it's in here. Yeah.
So, so as far as the symmetry as far as the group indices concern it's like abelian it's delta AB.
So, so the matrix inverse is just delta AB times the regular inverse of the coefficient. Oops, sorry.
And so basically I have to just invert this thing.
Which means invert the delta, right.
So,
that means going from one plus two delta log P to one minus two delta log P.
Oh, delta tilde, right. Sorry.
So, delta tilde is minus delta.
So that means that
that means that
and I should note that this isn't the effect of an S duality, which is nothing but the usual Maxwell duality exchanging electric and magnetic in the bulk.
So, so this the effect of this electric magnetic duality exchanging not occurrence for vortex currents is just changing the sign of the anomalous dimension.
And since we obtained that the anomalous dimension was positive, meaning the not recurrent was irrelevant.
It means that the magnetic current has negative anomalous dimension, which means it is relevant as we wanted relevant means that it grows from UV to IR.
And along the inverse RG flow from IR to UV, it decreases. Therefore, the monopole perturbations decrease in this cosmological time as we wanted.
The only
the only extra thing that one needs to check is that the theory actually has a vortex solution.
Here's some toy model.
Oops, written here with this potential. So we have to check that it this has this.
Well, the rock vortex, not normal vortex, but the rock vortex solution.
And
and indeed it has
checked an ansatz that keeps the potential zero.
And this on this ansatz we obtain a direct vortex solution, which means a point like vortex with a singularity.
And
so, because we have this vortex, we do have a vortex number and an actual vortex current, because otherwise, it would be meaningless to say that we did a duality transformation between other current and vortex current, if we didn't have a vortex.
But we do have a vortex so things are okay.
And finally, that means that we've solved the monopole problem as well. We have found that monopole perturbations decrease along this inverse RG flow, which is cosmological time.
So the monopole solution was also solved.
That means that all problems with the original hot big bang cosmology are also solved, just like inflation solves them.
So that the CNBR fit was as well for as for inflation for the holographic cosmology.
So what, what does it mean, what does it, it's missing them to be at the same level as inflation.
Well, one thing that is missing is really a well defined reheating model, or rather for the equivalent of reheating in holographic cosmology.
The reheating, it means the transition from this phase, in this case a non geometrical phase to the usual radiation dominated cosmology, inflation was the transition between inflation and radiation dominated cosmology.
But so we did.
There is a sketch of one available in a paper I wrote in 2020, but a more precise one is needed.
And one. So the problem with that is that one needs to reverse the direction of the flow of the coupling of the RG flow if you want.
Because during this non geometrical phase.
The, the coupling is, is the young nails coupling is getting weaker. So it's very strong at the beginning and very weak at the end, which means reversely in gravity is the opposite gravity is becoming stronger.
During this cosmological time.
So, but of course gravity must become eventually start to becoming weaker in radiation, radiation domination, gravity is becoming weaker, right.
The universe is expanding and gravity is becoming weaker, weaker.
So that means that we must reverse this.
This flow, and I've shown I sketched how one can do things in this paper but there are many things that are not complete there.
And finally, I told you that there is the lattice field theory calculation that is ongoing for some time now but you know these things they plan.
The lattice group that contains costus can there is.
And this will eventually do a test for matching the CMDR at low, low L, low.
The momentum L, less than 30, which, which corresponds to the large distances in the sky, large angles in the sky.
And one should see whether it's actually inflation or holographic cosmology which is better because in this region the two are really different and none of them fits perfectly with the data.
And at this point, so it would be interesting to see whether the fit becomes better or worse when that is done.
So, yeah, we'll, we'll wait for the solution of these two things, but I hope that holographic cosmology will actually will actually be a new contender parallel to inflation.
So that's the end of my talk and my series. Thanks a lot.
Thank you so much for this lectures, brilliant lectures.
Any questions.
This is your last chance to talk to Professor Nassasi. Okay, so.
I have another question.
So, I don't know if I got lost at some point or what happened because I thought you were, you started with this model that was constructed by Maldacena where, where you do these big rotations and then you can work in the center right.
But then when you were arguing, especially in your first point in this list of problems that you are solving.
You at some point argue with that in ABS there's a minimum distance between, well, of minimum length of a geodesic joining two points.
And so then I got confused about, are you working in the center or are you only not in the center.
Okay, that was just in order to motivate the, I mean, to not motivate to give a stronger explanation on why inverse RG flow corresponds to time evolution and cosmology.
So, the point was that in, in, in anti the sitter, I can make that that extremely precise by the argument I just gave.
Now, after you do the big rotation to the sitter and further you go away from the sitter to some other gravity dual then it becomes less clear but that this is not, you know, this is not about the actual functional form.
It's only about the fact that the arrow points in that direction, right. That's all I wanted to argue for so.
Okay, we have a question.
Yes, can you hear me.
First of all, Professor, I would like to thank you for your interesting lecture. I need to review again and more and more. My question is about the essence of information in the case of holography.
Is it true that the holography information can be put on a surface of space in a lower, lower dimensional. For example, in an interior surface of black holes.
Is it true or not. Thank you.
Well, so, yeah, in terms of the actual.
I'm not the best person to reply in a precise way on how that is done but just as a generic issue so one believes nowadays that all gravity is holography.
So there's then to two ways in which that can happen. Right, so that you can.
That means that you can take the physics in the bulk and project it on to a surface, but which surface. Now here, the things become a little bit dependent on your background.
Okay, so if you have anti the sitter, then it's clear, and then they see that you can always project the bulk physics on to the boundary so until they sit there is thought of as a cylinder, and you can basically project on the surface of the cylinder, everything.
Now, if you have a black hole in anti the sitter, then, then you could you have a choice, actually.
That's one of the, one of the things that was that is interesting is that you can project also to the surface of of the black hole. This goes under the name of membrane paradigm.
So that is the possibility. Now if you have more complicated spaces, and you have black holes in them. Then the issue is more complicated and I don't think.
I don't think there's a.
Well, general story and I might be wrong so one can project on to some light like surface.
There's a proposal to project holographically and to a light like surface into a generic, let's say, asymptotically Minkowski even face, but to the surface of a black hole.
You can certainly project the physics nearby but I'm not sure how long, how far away does that extend right. So, so if you have a physics enclosed in a certain surface around the black hole you can certainly project that on to the surface of the black hole making it locally holographic but
yeah for for asymptotically Minkowski I don't know if that is possible in any meaningful way.
And thank you. It means and professor it means that the information is permanent or temporarily.
For example, no, it's not that. No, it's not.
It's, how should I say, so the.
You're thinking of something like a real hologram right. So, when you take a real hologram you you imprint on the hologram, you imprint the image of a three dimensional object but it's the image right.
So, it's not the object that's imprinted right so it's.
So, if you.
So that's, that's why I mean when you when you think of this as a physical process of imprinting.
You're not transferring the object on to the surface, you're just making an image for it but once the image is made.
You are is equivalent the image and the holographic image or three dimensional object and the hologram the two dimensional thing. That's the analogy that one has for for holography in gravity right so the physics is completely equivalent it's not.
So, you can extract any information.
Either from the boundary or from the book.
It's equivalent. It's not deleted from somewhere and goes somewhere else.
Thank you very much a final my final question in a higher dimensions also this in this information.
It's a constant or will be changed for example the image that you said about.
About this information, I want to know that in just in a lower dimension and this information will register for example on a surface as a shadow or anything, or in a higher dimension will be changed for example the formation of information.
No, this is this is valid in any dimension right, it doesn't matter so in particular, as I was saying the original ADS CFP is is for ADS five process five so five dimensional space.
You have to reduce on as five projected onto four dimensions. Right. And, and then in, in higher in higher dimensions you have, for instance, the ADS seven projected into six dimensions.
Right, so that's, that's really, really the picture. So when you're talking about surfaces we're always talking about generically about hyper surfaces.
Thank you very much and I really appreciate this.
Sure.
So it's just one dimension less than the bulk, right that that's what I mean.
So, any other questions.
Yes, in this model that you showed us.
There is no super symmetry hidden.
No, right, so that's, it's okay. So it's not, you can restrict to a super symmetric model and I, I have tried to do that.
But then it becomes very difficult to fit the data CMDR data with it.
So, it, it seems to be so at least naive super symmetric models, those are like an equal force family of, for instance, do not fit the CMDR data.
Okay, we are data has more scalars and for me.
So this is really like a four dimensional universe and a three dimensional boundary theory.
Reduced reduced.
Okay, okay.
And what maybe in the spirit of this, the name of the lectures basics of quantum gravity.
I mean, this is so I am asking your personal opinion on it.
How much do you think we can realistically learn of quantum gravity in our universe from holography or ADSEFD or even string theory.
Well, so, as I said, perturbative quantum gravity.
I think, but people might disagree but I don't think there's any other way in which to obtain a finite perturbative quantum gravity, other than string theory.
The interesting issue is non perturbative, you know, how do you get.
How do you learn about a non perturbative quantum gravity because we don't have a non perturbative definition of string theory.
Any other completely satisfactory theory of quantum gravity that is valid in both perturbative and non perturbative regimes.
So, so, for that, the question is, well, so we have this tool ADSEFD right so we think we know quantum field theory.
And then, assuming, as I've said, there are a bunch of tests that say that ADSEFD should be valid at all couplings therefore also for the case that corresponds to non perturbative quantum gravity.
That's why we applied it here for holographic cosmology.
The interesting thing would be to learn what non perturbative quantum gravity means to define it, right, because the way we do so now is just, you know, calculating its effects without knowing what it is.
Right.
So, in particular, I've calculated.
I'll calculate, I've calculated two point functions of perturbations h i j without knowing how those are defined in a non perturbative quantum gravity.
I just assume this map, and I've calculated in field theory.
Right.
So, for that, it's harder to say.
I mean, hopefully, I mean, I, I, I, I tried a few things but it's it's very.
Yeah, it's very difficult to find the ADSEFD offers you some ideas but it's.
It's, it's unclear how to at this point how to make it better.
We can hope that somebody will come and we'll define this holographic map non perturbatively.
So then then then we'll know.
Yeah.
Otherwise, we can still, we can still in principle, you know, if all you're interested in our formulas, you might not even need to define it right if you.
Yeah, I will.
What the question that you want to answer.
That's what I mean. That's what I mean. So, so like,
if you solve the complete problem here, you know, how do you define perturbations quantum perturbations, two point functions of perturbations in non perturbative quantum gravity.
We've calculated it. Right.
So, what else do you want to know right.
Now, you can ask, well, other relevant questions would be, you know, what happens near a black hole, perhaps, I don't know.
So all of these questions are studied by.
By string theorist made it using ADSEFD so.
Yeah, if that's all you want, then.
We've made great progress, but to define really.
You know, just put it on a computer and, and, and you're done.
Yeah, we're not there.
So,
thank you for your questions, Alicia.
These these inflationary models, basically we are dealing with these two space time without super symmetry because they don't go together right so I was reminded and reminded of a joke by Eva Silverstein.
That's why people say string theories are anti DC to.
So, how I'd say today you taught us lots of things about the holographic cosmology. My question is, how different is it from DS CFD correspondence, this is your CFD correspondence, are the two different things.
Yeah, that's where it was started from but yes, yes.
What I'm saying is the, the city CFD is means different things to meet different people so various people have their own impressions what I'm saying is the application to cosmology was this is a really, really huge, really important paper of Malta Sena from
three.
So you know this is a paper that cosmologists use a lot.
Okay, right.
And, but he did it for just for perturbative the sitter so in perturbative inflation. And the issue is that.
So in fact, one is still not convinced that this works for for the cases we applied it to.
But so it is, it is an extrapolation, but I think, I think it's well defined so in particular, as I was saying the holographic calculation was done in two ways one was using his map which is just takes just taken from the sitter.
And then the original one that McFadden and Scandinavians actually did was using a Hamiltonian formulation for ADS CFD developed by Scandinavians and Papadimitriou, and, and so they match and, and so I think.
Yeah, to my mind this is, you know, very well defined the extension from, from the sitter's CFD to, to this case but unfortunately not everybody's convinced so.
But it's impressive that you take problem by problem, saying okay what does inflation do what holographic cosmology do that that's that's really impressive.
Regarding that I have a question.
What about the prediction of be modes in holographic cosmology.
For example, a prior to the universe, they say, no, it doesn't exist, whereas inflation. Yes, some models have more than the other.
It exists there being calculated yes. I mean, so the other point is, as I was saying, the.
So, so this is being calculated but I haven't shown because you know it's not.
This is in the future so I just want to show the things that we know now, but.
So the other thing is, as I said, you have to think of holographic cosmology as an extension of inflation into the strongly coupled regime that's really the way to think about.
Okay, okay.
So that's, that's unlike a periodic or cyclic or so which are different paradigms.
Right, this is an extension of the paradigm into the strongly coupled regime, which means that at some level it was expected to work at the.
It was just, just because it's just that you are now in different parametrical regime that you expect.
Maybe you could find deviations, but, but, but yeah the deviations are actually not big so anything that you solve with with inflation you can solve with holographic cosmology.
See the last point on the on the slide you have is about the low multiple fitting right so yes, people say this is because of the cosmic variance so we will never be able to fit it perfectly because we are we have only one one data set.
So, you know that that's true that's true but you know, so I, I didn't.
I didn't show you here the grass I should have perhaps the matching but so the matching is is at small L is at the moment is is really different between inflation and.
Okay, and the point is not that you're matching just there. The point is that you take a matching that works everywhere.
And you use it to match also at low L. Okay, so this guy squared of a hundred and something is, you know, it's over the whole region of else, which, which will be modified so.
The results will be different really.
I mean, yeah, it will be.
You know, a huge surprise if the magic state the same.
Okay, there's no reason for it.
Yeah, I was very impressed by seeing those guys square numbers any numbers is good we are getting more realistic.
That's fantastic. Any other questions.
Just like this paper by Maldesena that you have been mentioning is the one non Gaussian feature features of primordial partitions. Okay, good.
And there is another paper 2017, I don't know recently in physical letters by lots of fathers I think Horatio mentioned that they also talk about the plank data and holographic cosmology right.
I guess this guy square values come from that paper. Yeah, yeah, yeah, so so the I've this paper.
That's great. Yeah, 2017 exactly. Yes, that's great. Yes. Okay, so if there are no more questions.
We can all thank Horatio Natsasi parts of such nice set of lectures. Thank you so much for everything and I strongly advise everybody to go check out his books, including the ones related to what we have.
Okay, so, okay then. Thank you.
Thank you.
