Hello everyone, and this is a status report on the ADS CFD correspondence as requested
by the organizers of this very interesting meeting of the ISQG, since the purpose of
the ISQG meeting is to generate conversations across the topics for researchers in quantum
gravity. This status report is not really aimed at anyone working in the field, and I
should also warn you that it is not even remotely a comprehensive review, which is in any case
impossible to do in 25 minutes. What I will try to do is to give a sort of a zero-ether
order, very high-level concept map and a set of pointers for some of the important ideas
and developments in the subject. But at the same time, I didn't want to clutter the slides
with references, and so in the accompanying slides at the end, I have put a few references
to review articles, which can be entry points into the vast literature. Also, the terms
ADS CFD correspondence, gauge gravity duality, gauge string duality, the Mulder Center duality,
all these are often used interchangeably, but though there are important distinctions,
but at the coarse grain level that we are going to speak, this will not be so important.
So what is ADS CFD? At the very broadest and most ambitious level, it is an equivalence
of two categories. And the one is the category of non-abelian gauge theories in d spacetime
dimensions, which we'll think of as living on the boundary of the conformal boundary of d plus
one dimensional anti-disseter space. And the other category is quantum gravity, a consistent theory
of quantum gravity on asymptotically anti-disseter spaces in d plus one dimension. And this is
often called the bulk, and this is the boundary. So these are very big categories in some sense.
And the claim is that these are equivalent. It's a strong equivalence that is being claimed
in the strongest form of the ADS CFD conjecture. And the strong equivalence identifies the Hamiltonians
on both sides, so the eigenspaces, eigenvectors, and the eigenvalues more specifically on both sides,
together with correlation functions, and in both the Euclidean, Lorentzian signature,
and I'll say more about these and several other elements in the dictionary between the two sides,
but this is, in some sense, at the very broadest level, what it is really about.
And it is a realization in very concrete terms of two seminal ideas going back ultimately to a
toast. And the remarkable thing is that these have, these are combined in a way that was completely
unforeseen. One is the idea that any theory of quantum gravity, not necessarily in ADS
D plus one, at least in the way it was originally phrased, any theory of quantum gravity in D plus
one dimensional space time must in some sense be holographic. That is the microscopic degrees of
freedom are in some ways one on one lower dimension, one lower dimensional D dimensional
in this case. And this was elaborated on by Lenny Suskind as well. So this was one
very, very remarkable idea, which in some sense had remained a very attractive picture
until the advent of the ADS CFT correspondence. The second, also due to Toft almost 50 years ago,
is that large N gauge theories, gauge theories in the so-called large N limit have an alternate
description as weakly interacting string theories. Once again, it was a very compelling picture,
but there weren't too many concrete realizations of it. And people didn't have a very clear idea
how you would try to get these dual string theory pictures to large N gauge theories.
So in some sense, prior to 1997, these two ideas in fact seem to be living in two different
universes of interesting tantalizing ideas. And the only thing in common between the two seem to be
the fact that both ultimately originated from a Toft. So this, it is these categories now that
are being identified and come giving that for a realization in a remarkable way of both these ideas.
So let me say a little bit about the landscape of the ADS CFT correspondence. So I mentioned
these two categories. What we really do know is we know a large number of varied and varied
number of examples in these categories and strong evidence for their equivalence in
many different dimensions in the middle without supersymmetry and so on. So here's a list,
which is not necessarily exhaustive, of what the boundary theory is, the category on the left
in my picture, the quantum field theory is. And these are all well defined quantum systems.
They include super Yang-Mills theories in four dimensions, both conformal theories as well as
non-conformal theories or massive theories. In three dimensions, there are super Yang-Mills plus
John Simon's terms with matter. And there are these exotics higher dimensional theories,
like in six dimensions, these so-called 0,2 super conformal field theories and tracking
super conformal field theories. In two dimensions, there's a class of, so to say, gauge theories,
which in that context are orbital CFTs and their deformations in the so-called symmetric product
orbital theories. There's a large number of examples, which are so-called vectorial
examples in which involve large and vector models, which are gauged with something like a
John Simon's term. And in three dimensions, this includes the famous Owen vector models as well.
There's an analogous case in two dimensions for what are called coset CFTs, like the WN
minimal models. These are, again, both non-super symmetric field theories, which have a lot of
direct connections to statistical mechanics. And in one dimension, there's been the developments
of very interesting quantum mechanics in the SYK system of interacting fermions.
And there are topological quantum field theories, like the pure John Simon's theory itself. And
as you see, so many of these are non-super symmetric examples.
Correspondingly, on the other side of this correspondence on this equivalence,
there are a variety of different bulk descriptions, many of them appropriate to particular regimes,
and therefore not all of them are UB complete. But I again wanted to give you a sense for the kind
of different systems that are there, like there is, of course, Einstein gravity, plus,
very importantly, higher derivative corrections to them. There are the higher spin theories of
Veselyev in three dimensions and four dimensions, and they're dual to some of the vector-like models,
the coset CFTs that I mentioned. The topological string theories, for instance,
dual to some of the topological quantum field theories, like the John Simon's theory.
There's the two dimensions. There's a very different theory of gravity, JT gravity,
or Louisville gravity, and non-critical string theories, which are dual to the kind of quantum
mechanical systems I mentioned. And of course, in some ways, the biggest overarching systems
which contain most of the examples are really the full-fledged type two string theories,
and in some cases, their M theory or lift, which in some limits reduces to 11-dimensional
supergravity, but more generally, it's an interacting somewhat mysterious theory in 11
dimensions. And I wanted to mention these different bulk descriptions, because many of them are,
in some sense, independent of string theory. Some of these bulk descriptions were developed,
of course, independent of string theory. So this is a very important slide that I want
you to take away if you wish. If you look at the parameter space of these dualities, in a sense,
you can distill it down to two dimensions. And what are these two dimensions of this parameter
space? One measures the so-called, if you are looking at it from the point of view of the bulk,
one measures the quantumness in the bulk, which essentially, because it's a theory of quantum
gravities and is measured by the Newton's constant, the Planck scale. And so this vertical axis here
is a measure of the quantum behavior in the bulk. And in the context of the string theory
backgrounds, this is encoded in the so-called string coupling, which is proportional to the
square root of the Newton's constant. The horizontal axis corresponds to the curvedness
or the stringiness in a particular context. But in some sense, how there's typically
an additional scale in many of these dualities, which is in the simplest case,
ratio between the radius of the ADS and the so-called string length. But there could be
other such parameters, for example, in the Wesselier theory. In any case, this is a measure
of the stringiness or the deviation from Einstein's theory. And this deviation
is parameterized in string theories by this parameter, the ratio. And that's what the horizontal
axis corresponds to. This is the limit where the stringiness is very small or things are almost
flat. So this bottom right corner is this case where you're really considering classical gravity,
Einstein gravity. So the quantum effects are very small. The stringy effects are very small.
And this is one corner. And this is the corner many of you might have heard of. But I want to
stress that this is just one corner in this big parameter space. But coming back to what
these are, what this parameter space looks like from the point of view of the dual gauge theory.
And the quantumness translates into the so-called non-planarity of the gauge theory,
the 1 over n corrections in a large N expansion of a gauge theory. And so that's sort of when
N is very large, this is a small parameter. But you could consider things like finite N,
in which case you're in the highly quantum regime, as far as the bulk goes or in the non-planar
regime as far as the boundary goes. And this other horizontal parameter, which measured the
stringiness from the point of view of the bulk, is really the so-called tuft coupling constant
proportional to the N-ness coupling of the non-Abelian gauge theory or equivalent couplings,
gauge couplings. And this parameter is what captures the strength of the interactions
from the point of view of the dual gauge theory. So while the strength of the interactions in
the quantum gravity is captured by this parameter, the vertical one, that in the gauge theory is
captured by this horizontal one. So this is an important distinction. And this is why I stress
this figure. But there's another, from the point of view of the gauge theory, there's another
interesting corner, which is where this parameter is very small. And that's also something we
understand very well, perturbative quantum field theory. And you can go along this axis
from weak coupling to strong coupling, keeping N very large. And you would want to interpolate
between perturbative quantum field theory and classical gravity. But more generally,
you can also go along the vertical axis into the more quantum regime. So this is essentially the
kind of space where you will be sort of playing around with. And yeah. So I want to sort of
lay out some sort of misconceptions that are often there about ADS-CFT and try to say why they're
not true. And one is that ADS-CFT only holds for a subset of supersymmetric or VPS observables.
And that's not true. There are a large number of the whole spectrum, the correlations, and we'll
give examples why this is not true. But then there's another complaint that, oh yeah, maybe it's not
just for supersymmetric observables, but we are looking at only observables in a supersymmetric
theory. The theory has an underlying supersymmetry, which is what explains a lot of the magic. But
as I tried to give next to mention in the list, there are by now several non-supersymmetric examples
where we see such a duality. If not for supersymmetries, sometimes people raise the issue that
maybe it's not supersymmetries, but all the isometries of ADS space are equivalently the
conformal symmetries that are really what constrain the theory. And correspondence is
essentially kinematic. The fact that the ADS-D plus one and the conformal field theory share
the same symmetries that essentially determines things. That's, again, far from being true.
And there are many theories. The kinematics constrains things to a very mild extent. There are
many quantities that are not at all constrained by the kinematics, which by now have been matched
beautifully. And the related thing is that it holds only for exactly conformal theories or
exactly anti-deceptive spacetimes. But this is also not true. There are massive theories, like I
mentioned, and asymptotically ADS geometries. So this is also not necessarily the case.
And as I tried to emphasize in the previous slide, the bulk theory is not always Einstein
gravity or supergravity. And that's just a small corner. And that's often the corner a lot of people
have been focusing on. But to really understand this correspondence, you need to look at the very
least the two-parameter, the two-dimensional space that I had in the previous slide.
And you need to move away ultimately from this corner, both in the vertical as well as in the
horizontal directions. And finally, sometimes people say it's just a conjecture. But once again,
I think the sheer weight of the evidence that has been there in the last 25 plus years and in
the wide variety of examples that I mentioned indicate that this is just not true. This has
been there now by now as compelling evidence that this is not a seriously doubted thing by anyone
who has worked in the subject. And the question is to understand the scope of this duality.
So ADS CFD in some sense is here to stay. And this is regardless of what one might believe
about string theory as a framework for quantum gravity and so on. In this limited context of
asymptotically and to visit space times, string theories give a consistent quantum gravitational
description of large and gauge theories. It's a very non-trivial statement about large and
gauge theories. And it is in a proof of concept that there are holographic quantum gravitational
descriptions, at least for this class of space times. So let me say a few things about the spectrum,
the dictionary between these two categories. So at the most basic level, you need to make
sure that the spectrum of the Hamiltonian matches and I'll say a little bit about the
perturbative part and more non-perturbative micro black hole microstates. There are going
beyond the spectrum, you go to correlation functions and here at zero temperature or finite
temperature corresponding to black holes. You can talk of Lorentzian correlators, which capture
very important physics as well, such as those of transport and hydrodynamics. And more recently,
the very novel OTOC correlators, which are diagnostics of chaos. And there are non-local
observables beyond correlation functions like Wilson loops and many other defects, which have been
by now also, for which there's a dictionary and there is non-trivial matching. And something in
the last decade or so that has really come to the forefront is how various quantum information,
theoretic quantities like entanglement entropy and related measures are how they are related
between the two and may in fact hold the key to our understanding at a fundamental level
in the ADSCFT correspondence. So a few words about the spectrum. The spectrum is that the
eigenvalues of the Hamiltonian, where you understand the Hamiltonian in the boundary
theory as in some sense the spectrum of operator dimensions of the theory, which corresponds
to the eigenvalues of the time asymptotic, time translation generator in ADS,
asymptotically ADS spacetime. The spectrum in the large and limited least can be sort of separated
into two quality, into at least into several regimes actually, but the simplest set of low
lying states are what are, which have eigenvalues which scale like n to the zero. And these form
a fox space of single, they're essentially dual to the single particle perturbative states in the
bulk and the single particle states correspond to the so-called single trace gate invariant operators
which just built out of a single trace. And the multi-trace operators are to be thought of as
multi-particle states at least in the large n limit. And this is the case where at least in
the canonical example of the maximally supersymmetric n-mills theory that the spectrum has by now
matched beautifully due to the fact that a novel integrity in this theory which was suggested by
the ADS CFD was uncovered in the last 15 years or so. And this led to a solution through a set of
system of equations that gives you the spectrum of operators and these are non-supersymmetric
operators whose spectrum is not protected, they are not in any sense constrained by any of the
normal symmetries of the theory. And this, the spectrum has an expansion at weak coupling like
this and this has an expansion at strong coupling like this. As I said, these were the two corners
of my diagram and you can find a delta of lambda which interpolates beautifully between them and
reproduces the perturbative results and expansion with the higher derivative corrections
to Einstein's equations. This I think is one of the very strong proofs, convincing proofs of the
fact that this correspondence really is something non-trivial. There are by now some other examples
where we can actually match the entire perturbative spectrum on both sides in something like in the
limit in the left hand corner in the lambda equals to zero limit. So, this is also very
non-trivial because now you get a full Haggadon spectrum of states. And there are black hole
microstates also in the spectrum whose dimensions grow like order n square which is like one over
the Newton's constant. And these black hole states actually compute, you can compute the
Beckenstein Hawking entropy of class of supersymmetric black holes in these dimensions. And
these are non-trivial supersymmetric black holes which have functions which have multiple charges
and the area is a function of these charges in some very non-trivial way. And there is beautiful
agreement by now of these microstates and moreover also subleading corrections matching to the
walled entropy as well as logarithmic terms and so both stringy corrections and quantum corrections
to the Beckenstein Hawking entropy coming from an accounting of the states from the gauge theory.
Of course, one would like to go beyond supersymmetric black holes but this is already very strong
non-trivial indication. Going beyond the spectrum to correlators, the correlators correspond to
scattering amplitudes of single particles in the asymptotically anti-visitor space time.
So these are the correlators of the gauge theory. You can make a genus expansion and pick out the
genus G term in the 1 over n expansion and you can go beyond the supergravity limit and there's
actually in the cases where there's a string dual, one has a S matrix of the string theory which
have schematically written over here which is supposed to agree with this. And recently,
there have been many cases where this matching has been done, there have been recently very
powerful constraints from the conformal bootstrap for the correlators like the four-point function,
for instance, on this side expressed in terms of melin variables. Melin variables are a good way
to go over to the flat space, take a flat space limit of these S matrix elements actually.
And these amplitudes are constrained by the conformal bootstrap requirements for the dual
field theory and they reproduce scattering amplitudes which agree where you can match them
with the dual string theory side. And this involves a non-trivial matching, not just of
coupling but now in terms of functions of these Mandelstrom variables, S and T. And more generally,
the conformal bootstrap is something that has proven to be powerful in constraining spectra
and correlators of holographic CFTs. Similarly, the Lorentzian correlators capture hydrodynamic
behavior in the quasi-normal modes and determine transport coefficients and the famous example
is the viscosity to entropy density which was computed in n equals to four elements. It takes
on a very beautiful universal sort of a value and that resulting developments known as the fluid
gravity correspondence have been very influential. I mentioned that a lot of quantum information
theoretic ideas seem to be coming in and this was triggered by the Riu Takanagi formula which
and its generalizations which is a remarkable connection between the entanglement entropy of
a region in the boundary field theory with purely geometric quantity in the bulk, an area of what
is called a quantum extremal surface and plus an additional bulk entanglement entropy term.
And in many cases these are being used to create a dictionary between operators in the bulk,
local bulk operators and how you can reconstruct them in the boundary within so-called entanglement
wedge. There have been also very interesting developments about how the Riu Takanagi formula
seems to even know about the non-linear corrections to, I mean both the linearized as well as the
first non-linear corrections to the Einstein's equations as well. So there have been several
applications of ADS CFD in this last decade since I don't have the time, running out of time I'll
just skip over this slide but this is something many of you have probably heard of. It's a remarkable
number of disciplines where it has had an effect. So in this very short little presentation I've
only scratched the surface but I think even collectively as theorists we have only scratched
the surface of a very rich connection and in particular we haven't delineated the scope of
that equivalence of categories beyond by now a very large and rich set of examples but we haven't
understood structurally in some sense this equivalence and this is where I think it is
very critical to understand the inner mechanism of the duality. And there have been very interesting
attempts and in the panel discussion maybe we'll hear also about from Suvarath about attempts to
understand from starting from this right hand corner of my picture from semi-classical gravity
how maybe holography is already captured perhaps over there. Another starting point is from the
left hand corner where we understand perturbative large and quantum field theories and could this
be a way in which we could try to structurally derive ADS CFD and understand what makes this
connection. So I think it's very useful to approach this from both these corners that we understand
well. But then the underlying reason which I think is also spurring a lot of developments,
the underlying reason for the ADS CFD, what is it really trying to tell us? I think this is something
maybe Jan will speak to some of this about how maybe ADS CFD is capturing the geometry of quantum
information perhaps and sort of geometrizing the flow of quantum information. And I think
we have a lot of lessons that we can take away for quantum geometry from this,
from the ADS CFD and I think insights from different other approaches to quantum gravity
will be very valuable. Thank you very much. I'll just leave you with a slide from Mulder
Sinan's recent spring stock which sort of captures this information theoretic picture of ADS CFD.
