I'm Tim Ventura, and we're joined today by Amel Grafstra, book author, TEDx speaker,
and CEO of the biohacking company's Dangerous Things and Vivo Key Technologies.
Amel has various RFID and NFC implants in his body that open doors, start vehicles,
unlocks his smart gun, and log into computers for him.
Prior to his current roles, Amel's experience include numerous executive IT-related roles
at firms including Wallopmore, EverFind, the medical biotech company Morpheus,
Tom McMobile, Silicon Energy, and more. He joins us today to discuss the intersection
of information technology and medicine with the focus on the intersection of biology and technology,
the evolution of our relationship with machines. So Amel, welcome back. It is truly a pleasure.
I am so excited to have you with me today. Cool. Yeah, let's get into it.
Well, let's start with Neuralink. Okay, they just implanted their first patient with a brain
implant containing 64 flexible polymer threads providing 1024 sites for recording brain activity,
which allows the patient to control a computer mouse simply by thinking. So I wanted to start
with your thoughts on this. Yeah, so it is quite a milestone. They're not the first, of course,
they've spent brain implants for a very long time using like arrays and things, but the idea
that this could be a permanent device. So not a lot of people realize that back in the old days
or whatever when they would do nerve interfaces, they're just like spiked arrays and you jam that
into the tissue and it works, but it only works for a time because your tissue is gelatinous,
right? And it moves and it grows. And so you would set up your arrays to try to figure out what
kind of brain cell activity am I able to record here? Can I induce activity in those cells? But
very quickly, in the matter of a few weeks, the cells will move around, scar tissue will form.
You have signals that you have then, don't work now. And so it's very difficult. But
yeah, the two kind of front runners in the space Neuralink and Synchron, they're doing
amazing job because the way that they're approaching this, you can expect that those devices are
permanently implanted. So that gives rise to applications that wouldn't be really possible
with previous technology. So moving a mouse, being able to communicate at all is fascinating,
and it's a huge leap from where we were. But it's also quite crude, right? It's
it's the first thing that we can that we can point out and say, look, we've gotten the first
rung of the ladder here. Well, and I appreciate you mentioning Synchron. I'll come back to them
in a moment. But from what I've read, the implant was done by a surgical robot, which is hope to
pave the way for mass adoption of this technology for the treatment of conditions like Dave mentioned,
obesity, autism, depression, schizophrenia, at least to begin with. And this comes on the heels
of a story about a man with Lou Gehrig's disease who was the 10th person to receive
a Synchron Blank Brain implant that allows him to send health notifications and pain reports
to medical providers using his mind. So again, this this goes to what you were saying about
they're not the first, right? But apparently this surgical robot, I guess, is something that
could mass produce implants. Yeah, so well, it doesn't produce them. But what it does do is
when you're placing threads right into the brain, your biggest issue, and again, the issue with
like the arrays and things is that when you it's just spikes, and you ram this into the tissue,
and it creates tears, bleeds, you know, your body has to react. The whole point of the surgical robot
is that it can identify places in brain tissue to be able to thread that thread, you know,
into the brain matter without causing a bleed without hitting a blood vessel,
basically working it in between the capillaries and things that are supplying your your brain
with oxygen. And by doing that, there is no reaction, the body doesn't realize they're there.
There's no scar tissue formed. And it's really the only way to make this approach that Neuralink
is taking, make it a permanent implant or something that doesn't reject or change or become useless
over time. You know, Synchron is taking a different approach. They're they're not going
through the brain at all. They're going up through blood vessels, and they have a stent,
right? So it goes into the blood vessel that's in the brain, it blows up like a stent, and it has
all the sensors arrays around that perimeter. And so by being very close to the wall of the blood
vessel, and the brain cell, the neuron is right there, they can pick up the activity through
the thin wall of the blood vessel without any actual interaction with brain matter,
brain material. So the two approaches are really great. The surgical robot feels a little scarier
because it's like a robot that's poking in your brain. But, you know, we do all kinds of surgeries
now with robots, eye surgeries, things like that, lasers that use robots, basically a computer
that's going to evaluate where to shoot that laser into your eyeball to, you know, change the shape
of it. So we're trusting, you know, this this kind of thing, this medical or surgical robots
in many other areas. So it's, it's not really crazy. But, you know, I think when it comes
to the claims, when we're talking about treating like autism, schizophrenia, things like that,
that that's a possibility. Yeah, but it's a big, that's kind of a hyperbolic claim, because
we don't even really know how those things work yet today. Like we're saying we're going to solve
X, but we don't really know how X works. But we're going to solve it, right? It just seems a bit,
yeah, wrote a bit of a too, too. Maybe a little bit premature. Yeah, it's premature. And, but,
you know, at the same time, you got to, you know, there's all this discussion going on, because I
had a chance to talk to Tom, CEO of Synchron a while back at an event. And, you know, it's not
just him, but, but all these companies that are bringing these kind of devices that have medical
uses, but they also have augmentative uses. They're really, really don't want to talk about the
augmentative uses. They want to focus on the medical use, because who's going to argue with
that? Who's going to say, well, we shouldn't help these people, right? But at the same time,
the exciting cusp of this is that while, yes, we could improve the lives of people with these
conditions, we could also improve the lives of people without any conditions. And that's where
I'm very, very interested in the human augmentation aspect of these technologies.
Well, and that brings me to your implants. Again, you are on the leading edge of this. And it just,
I mean, in terms of mind blowing stuff, you actually have RFID and NFC implants in your
body right now. And you've tailored those so that they do specialize things in your life.
Can you tell me a little bit about your implants? Yeah. And I guess I should ask you
to tell us a little bit about your companies too, so that you can learn more about those.
Well, let's start with the, we'll kind of go through the chronology and that'll cover it. So
in 2005, I was working at Morpheus and my company Morpheus doing consulting and
basically managed services for medical clinics and things. And so
I was going in and out of this door and quite frequently, and it was an automatic locking,
you know, emergency door really. And I just got really, really frustrated with it. And I'm like,
I need this door to just know that it's me and let me in and not have to fiddle with the keys and
stuff. And so I just, I looked at biometrics and stuff, but it's, you know, it was terrible back
then. It's kind of still terrible now. And high cost, high management, all that. And, but, you know,
cards, RFID badges, beep, beep, you know, those were great and robust and cheap. And so I was like,
I want that, but I don't, the card, it's not going to solve my problem. I want, I want something
that works like that, but it's going to, going to just know that it's me. So I looked at pets,
like pets are getting these chip identifiers, you know, put in, that's just normal. And I was like,
well, why not? Why couldn't I just use that? So I called around, found a company that made them
for pets. And for technical reasons, I didn't want a pet chip specifically. I got the same kind of
material and construction, but with a different chip inside to, to interact with cheaper readers
that were available. And so I just made my own access control system that read the chip and,
you know, just beep my way into the door was great. I just walk up and kind of, you know,
tap my hand and grab the handle and go and went in. And then, you know, people saw that. And then
one of my friends took a picture and some videos and stuff. And that got on a blog. And then I kind
of, you know, got some media coverage and, and then wrote a book, RFID Toys for Wiley Publishing
in 2007, because RFID was just becoming accessible to hobbyists, right? And, you know, so just kind
of kept rolling. And I kept waiting for that momentum to die down, doing other things, other
companies, you know, exploring new things. But by 2013, it was just very obvious that there was
interest, enough interest that just began to overwhelm my inbox. And so I started a company
Dangerous Things, a little tongue in cheek, you know, just, I figured I could call it safe
things, but that wouldn't convince anybody anyway. So it's called Dangerous Things. And then,
you know, only people who really kind of understand that they're, they're literally
taking on the bleeding edge here would, would even consider it. So started the company and then
very quickly did a, you know, a crowdfunding campaign for the world's first NFC-compatible
implant. And so, you know, did that and then got a huge forex response over, over the ask. And
so I was like, okay, well, this is a thing, I guess. And so then we just kept going. But by 2018,
you know, it was clear that we needed applications that were beyond the basic, you know, tap the
badge on the door, kind of what I call personal scope application. So my door, my car, my computer,
I want to talk about like logging into websites, getting bank accounts, identifying myself,
it's for travel, like those kind of bigger applications, broader scope. And so I launched
a company Vivo Key Technologies to do that, to bring secure features, security features to
the implantables. And so, and, and also to kind of rebrand that approach for the broader scope,
because, you know, banks are not going to be like, yeah, get a dangerous things implant,
it's not going to fly. So Vivo Key, you know, we focused on, on doing that. And during that time,
you know, over that period of time, technologies like FIDO security keys, you know, we're calling
them pass keys now, but it's FIDO compliant security keys became a thing. So now all my
accounts are that are possible to secure with FIDO security keys, I secure them with an implant.
So I've wanted each risk here, ding, ding. And so I just, you know, log into your account. Yep,
I just tap my wrist on the, on the reader here, my desk or on my phone, and I'm in. And there's
that's a cryptographically secure login, no more passwords. So doing things like that is what Vivo
Key is focused on. And then, you know, we want to talk to governments and get into EHR medical
records, portable medical records, patient identity, things that are silently a problem.
And I mean, like, it's silent because patient identity, just simply identifying yourself properly,
particularly an emergency situation, but even just walking in the front door of the clinic,
seven to 10% of patients have multiple records, even at a single clinic. And that's a problem
because record one might have this medication that you're taking, and record two might have this
other medication. And it's why every single time you will go to the clinic, they confirm
are these all your medications you're taking, because those dual records, duplicate records do
exist. And there might be contraindications. And if you have one medication that's bad to
take with another, but they're on two different records, you, they won't know that. And then
you'll, you'll get prescribed something that could be lethal. So that's one big problem.
Another big problem is just patient identity in general for surgeries, things like that. Is
this the right guy? Are we cutting the right leg off or the left leg? So just kind of reducing
all those possibilities down to something that's more than just, you know, your name and your birthday
when you go into the clinic is, is kind of one of those goals. So a lot, a lot of applications.
Well, and one of the things that we've talked about in past interviews is the fact that this is the
most secure way to protect your identity, right? I mean, phones can be stolen, smart rings can be
stolen, watches, things like that. Fingerprints are just lost copied. Yeah, lost or forgotten. So
there's a, there is the, the hacker, the active, like trying to compromise your account, but more,
more likely is just the loss. Like you forgot that, that incredibly important token. And it's,
you see this increasingly in work environments. So you forget your badge, you forget your, your
security key for your laptop or your work station at work. That's a whole day of productivity gone.
There's, have, have a full time employee at the company to handle that situation, get your temporary
login, whatever they need to do, or you just need to go home. Like there's some environments that are
just require security so they don't, they don't offer a workaround. So just loss of tokens, managing
the tokens, all these identifiers of you to these different systems, you know, we, we really want
to try to collapse those down into just you. And I really want to make you the bastion of your own
identity, both physical, biological, but also digital to, to, you know, kind of abdicate that
authority to your phone or to your laptop or to a thing that's on your key chain. It just doesn't,
it doesn't feel right to me. So, you know, I want me to be the most important thing. And
if I, my phone breaks or I lose it or get stolen, I want to be able to pick up any phone and continue
to interact digitally online or even physically getting to my house, that kind of thing without
any need for, for another device that we need to manage. Well, I want to get into the psychology
of this briefly. And part of that is based on past audience feedback. You know, I've had a wide
variety of responses. Some folks are like, yes, this is amazing. Let's go for it. You know, I
want to see this go mainstream. Other people are saying, you know what, I feel really uncomfortable
about putting anything foreign into my body like that. And for me, I look at that and I'm like,
you know what, there's a psychological barrier here. It's something that I've thought about.
And so I have a short list of artificial augmentations and body modifications,
including braces, glasses, artificial hips, pacemakers, IUDs, tattoos, makeup and lipstick,
circumcision, vaccinations, tonsil or appendix removals, hormone replacement therapy and plastic
surgery. These are just, again, this is just what came to mind as examples of body modification
or augmentation that we already do in society. But we don't consider these to be artificial
because we've normalized to them, right? Yes. And the other thing that's important,
there's two other aspects here. The first aspect is application, right? Is it compelling? Is the
application compelling? Replacing a faulty hip, that's compelling. You want to walk, right? Getting
a tooth filling, very compelling. You wouldn't get a drill put in your face for any other reason,
but you want to be able to chew food, right? Like get rid of the pain. Like there are
compelling applications. And so for a lot of people, they may not feel that the applications
are compelling. They may not have had a security incident in the past. They might not care about
securing an account that they really could throw away if it got compromised. So there's a lot of
potential reasons that they just won't care enough to bother, right? Some people don't care enough
to get a near piercing even. Like they're just like, I never really cared about it, right? So they
just don't, or they don't get a tattoo because it's not compelling. But the other thing, the other
side of that is just an awareness of how the technology works because there has been a flood
of kind of misinformation that has just been pushed at the general public. And really, that's
the only education that they get about this technology is every movie you see that has a
microchip implant involved, every television show, every joke that's made on a radio show, or even
in television, they might offhand like, haha, you're tracking it with a chip or all of those things
are always negative for the person with the implant. They're being tracked. They're remotely being
killed, right? They're got a missile fired at them because it's tracking the implant. All these
things are all about how to get rid of that chip or it's a bad thing. And so when you don't have any
other real world, you know, real examples of the benefits, there's a real lack of trust that's
created. So not knowing how the technology works, you know, not really, not really thinking that
companies or governments have your best interests, that's very American, you know, on the other side
of the pond, there's not as much mistrust of the government anyway, like agencies that are trying
to help society, you know, here we have problems with trust, you know. And so, yeah, all that stuff
together, that raises the bar significantly for the compelling application. People still will do
terrible things that they're aware that there are terrible things to their body for the application
if it's compelling enough. A breast augmentation is one of those things. It is horrific on the body.
It's, you know, any kind of facial surgeries, horrific nose jobs, all that kind of whatever,
very, very impactful and stressful to the body with risk, real risk, like lethal risk.
But the application is compelling enough, they're like, eh, you know, I'm going to do it. So, you
know, that's really the two things, the unawareness of the technology, mistrust of technology,
companies, governments, and then the lack of a compelling application. But the thing that I
really want to point out is that our entire approach here is to decouple you from those companies,
and effectively from the government as well. But when you get an implant, there's no like,
the way that it works is just like the implant in your pet. It doesn't have a battery, there's no
charging it, it doesn't broadcast, it's not online, it's just there dormant. And when you need to use
it, you bring it up to a reader to do that application. And very much so, that implant,
vivo key implants, dangerous things implants, they are your property, they're part of you,
if you put them in your body, in my opinion. You control what they do, what goes on them,
how they work, you know, that kind of thing. So, it's not like a phone, right? So, if you get an
Android or iPhone, you are tied in to those companies. There's no real way to use that
phone without those companies in existence. Not at all, like so, and then you're tied in the
phone company, they have the SIM card or whatever, like there's so many ropes and threads that tie you
and your digital identity that that phone wants to own, you know, it wants you to put your wallet,
your keys, your driver's license, your everything about you, your digital keys, your pass keys,
everything, they want in that phone, they want you entirely to be owned by that phone and in
proxy by those companies. And so, you know, I really don't like that, I really don't like that
idea, I like the idea that I have my identity here inside of me all the time and I can use the phone,
it's I can use the phone as an interface, I can use the phone to log into things and to,
you know, have connectivity and, you know, all that stuff. But that phone and that account on the phone
is not my critical identity. I can throw that phone away, pick up any other phone,
even if I borrow a phone from somebody else. And now I can interact with my website because all
that stuff here is not in my phone. I don't have to log into that phone that I've borrowed
to get access to all my identity, it's here. And so that is compelling.
Well, and phones, I think are a great example, where, you know, 20 years ago, smartphones were
kind of a luxury novelty, right? And it was for people who needed to be ultra connected.
And today, it's considered, I think, a necessity by most, you know.
Yeah, you can get a smartphone from any kind of social services, like,
even if you're homeless, you literally can get a phone, a smartphone, right, with these features
and connectivity, minimal data and minimal messaging and everything. But it is something
you can get literally for free, because it is seen as almost a utility, right? It's power, water,
these are utilities because we see them as like critical. And phones, smartphones in particular,
and connectivity has been put into that arena, if not officially by law, at least by practice,
right? Well, so do you think today's neural implants, I mean, again, right now we're talking
about moving a computer mouse, right, which is not tremendous, but for, you know, for the right
person with the right disability, then it is very important, as this technology matures,
do you see it enabling immersive virtual experiences, like we see in movies like The Matrix?
I mean, that is a possibility, I don't know that it would be a good use of it. But yes,
for sure, because let's say you are having a visual issue, right? You have blindness or
there's some kind of problem with your optic nerve and, you know, the optic part of the brain
processing is back here. And, you know, if you plug into that nerve center, where you can submit
some visual information to the brain for processing, then, yeah, you could virtualize that completely
if you wanted. You could augment it. You could say, I want to be able to see in the UV spectrum,
I want to be able to see the infrared spectrum. I want to be able to see other things, right?
Like, there's a lot that could be done. And I think rather than full virtualization, I mean,
which would be possible, I guess, but particularly with people that still have input from their
real eyes, right? For full virtual, I'm sure that you would have to somehow put a blinders on,
right? So the only input your brain is getting is from the augmentation. But,
yeah, I think augmented visual aids are coming. We're trying to collapse that down already.
There's contact lenses that are trying to be created and things. But I think, really,
that augmented experience where you're able to, if you'd like, you know, be able to overlay
information, things like that. But more so, just kind of augment your capabilities. I'm much more,
I'm less interested in, or I can see floating information about what's going on. I don't care.
I want to see, like, infrared. I want to see ultraviolet. I want to see electromagnetic
spectrums. Like, how strong is the Wi-Fi in here? Oh, it's really strong over there, right? Like,
you know, being able to perceive things that we just can't perceive now,
that is really interesting to me.
Well, the reason I mentioned the matrix is I want to take people beyond that. And again,
you are one of the few people who can just absolutely blow minds with where these things
are going. So, you know, again, in the matrix, humans connect to a network, to a brain implant,
for essentially a VR experience. But one of the things that you suggested is that in the future,
due to natural neuroplasticity, the human mind may actually spread consciousness out
over the network as it begins to offload tasks for processing. And for me, that was incredibly
intriguing. Yeah, yeah. So, I mean, we know this can happen. So, in brain injury cases,
you have an entire area of the brain that's been compromised or damaged or destroyed or removed.
And the brain compensates. It says, oh, shoot, I need to do that. So, let's move a little bit
out over here and make this part do that part now. And it doesn't really do it as well as the
area of the brain that was designed to do that. But it does work. And it's compensating and,
and, you know, building itself anew, basically, to do that. So, you know, the mind of the brain,
the physical process that the brain runs on, like, you know, what we'll call it the mind,
the mind runs on the brain, right? The brain is the hardware, the mind is the emergent
property. And so, you know, and we'll talk about emergent properties, I'm sure. But anyway, so
when you give that that hardware more space, because you've now linked it to digital neurons,
let's call them. So, you have a bridge like Neuralink, Synchron, and you have a higher density
of that. You know, right now, it's mouse curses and things. But you got to think of it like
telephone lines. You know, even the old school, run them on the telephone pole, pick up the phone,
beep, beep, beep, telephone lines. Like, those telephone lines, it's the same copper and everything.
You know, you had, right now, we're having phone conversations. Hello, Mr. Bell, right? Like,
very rudimentary, right? But those same copper telephone lines bring, you know, eventually,
we're bringing data and high speed data, DSL and, you know, broadband over those same copper lines.
And so, that's what we're talking about here is the evolution of what it is we can do and the
bandwidth we can do it with over those connections to neurons in the brain. And with the idea that
there is some permanence, right? So, these things aren't nebulous or ethereal. They are kind of rooted
once we map things out and connections out. The mind will realize that there's more hardware
out there to utilize, right? And so, even the neurons will reconfigure themselves and you'll
see, I believe, what you will end up seeing is as we move more information over those bridges,
the neurons themselves, the, you know, the synapses and the dendrites and all the things that
change over time, you know, I don't know if your audience is aware, but when you have thoughts in
your brain that recur, right? If a signal goes from neuron A to B many times and repeatedly,
that dendrite, that connection gets stronger. It gets bigger and that neuron starts prioritizing
that because it's saying we're learning, right? This is why having recurring bad thoughts is not
great because you're reinforcing that physically. Your brain is reconfiguring itself to reinforce
that behavior. So, have good thoughts and reinforce that and you'll be good. But my point is you're
starting to see these kind of super highways in the physical, biological brain bringing information
to and from those bridges to these, this digital space and that digital space could be, you know,
could be crazy. Who knows, right? It could be anything. You could get, you know, the Amazon
brain expandable service, right? Or whatever. So, yeah, I think that there is, depending on how
things are communicated within the brain and how those kind of action potential, action potentials
are how neurons communicate and how those are explored and mapped and provided digitally.
Yeah, I think the brain will totally reconfigure itself and then parts of your mind will have
the opportunity to run on the cloud, basically. How that feels or how that works when there's
connectivity issues is a little scary. I'm not sure how that would work. You might suddenly
become, like, lobotomized if your connection drops. So, you know, if you migrate too many of those
functions and features out, that might be scary. But it doesn't necessarily need to be on the cloud
either. You could have a device with you. I mean, we already have our phones with us at all times
and we kind of prioritize those devices over even our wallets. So, you ask somebody if they'd rather
lose their wallet or their phone, they're like, I don't care, take my wallet. Don't take my phone,
right? So, you could imagine that there could be something similar where you have your kind of
digital neural space. But it is, in my opinion, would be better if it was something that you
had and controlled and contained and had with you at all times to help augment your cognition.
Well, so I want to jump from the matrix to the Borg, right? It's just one science fiction trope
to another. In the matrix, right, the brain is either here or here, but, you know, it's discreetly
in one place. But then this idea with spreading your consciousness out is you start to form, like,
a hive mind, right? And when I thought about that, I was like, what's the best example for that? I
thought the Borg, right? Where they are potentially individuals, but that consciousness is spread out
and it's shared among groups. Maybe that's working groups, maybe it's larger groups. And so, you get
into this hive mind, that's the only word to describe it, I guess. Do you think that's possible
in the future? Yes, but I do want to point out, so in the matrix, the brain was always in the jelly,
right? It was always in the person. You had experiences that were generated
and shared, like you're in a game with other people, but the mind was always in the body.
And with the Borg, you didn't, they described it as saying the hive mind, but what they really
described technically was not that. It was more of an information superhighway. I equate how the
Borg behaved. I mean, I don't want to get too nerdy, but there's episodes where one of the Borgs
was, like, disconnected from the group and how they felt and all that, and they tried to describe
what that was like. But that what they were describing was the same feeling of a person who
is maybe addicted to their phone and then loses their phone. They don't really lose part of their
mind. Their mind is fully capable. The idea of an individual is still there. But when they're
connected, they lose that because they're just used to that ambient intimacy that always being
connected with other people can bring. And so that idea that a Borg was a hive mind isn't really
true. It's just more like an ultra-connected, I mean, you could kind of equate them to a teenager
today that's just like always on the phone because that is their connection. And so they do kind of
lose their individualism, although we try to tout the idea that you can be yourself online
or whatever, but you're tied into that whole environment and you cut that off. And there's
like a real sense of loss, social loss, personal loss, but it's not a loss of mind, right?
And so the idea that your actual brain function can be shared or intermixed with other people
rather than a communication, because a communication is a clear barrier. Here is me, down here,
here is everything else. And I communicate what I want, even if it's thoughts and high bandwidth
communications and feelings, like we could be able to communicate feelings, which would be crazy,
or like images that we hold in our heads without words. So there is a huge potential for changing
fundamentally just how we communicate. But that still means that there's a barrier between me
and my thoughts and my memories and what I want to communicate and how I'm communicating it with
others. The big leap would be if we started to share neural spaces so that there is no idea of
communication, there is just the idea of us, right? And again, the Borg tropes, they try to
promote that idea that that's a hive mind, it's us, it's, you know, whatever. But in every example
of where they describe the technology about how the Borg network works, how they interacted with
the Borg network cut off from their group, it just shows that they were doing really high-end
communication and not actually sharing neural space. The idea that, you know, Borg is an altered
biological being, their mind is still in here, but they're just really connected. They never
really broach the idea that when you argue that connected and you're dealing with neural signals
like action potentials of neurons itself, that part of the mind could actually migrate away
from the biological framework that it's running on. And the level or the amount of
that migration is, you know, it's not deterministic. It could be anything. But in those cases,
like, it could be very, very serious. I mean, the Borg had the ultimate setup. They should have
explored that because they had some kind of subspace, you know, communication that was always on and
never had a glitch. And, you know, like, that's what you would really need and want. Because if
you did start to explore this idea that a lot of your mind was actually, you know, being processed
outside of your brain matter, if you did have a miscommunication or disconnect, right, you could
you could really and quite literally lose cognitive function, right, not just psychologically,
but like actual cognitive function could be lost and just like a brain injury, right, where you
have brain damage. And it's like, okay, now, now your mind is collapsed into this biological thing.
And it has to learn how to deal with that and recuperate and reassign functions to other parts.
And then maybe you get reconnected and you're like, oh my gosh, you know, but there is a bizarre
possibility. And that and this is far future. But but if you were operating in that mode where you
had some of your mind and in here and some of your mind out there, whether that's on a device you
have or in the cloud or both, you know, if you had a disconnect, and there was enough of
plasticity that your mind has grown equally in both spaces, is there now two of you? Is there a
mind that's digital, right? And what happens when you reconnect? Are you now getting to know yourself
again? And, and, you know, that just touches on, I mean, I haven't really circled around yet, but
but the idea that you have this digital neural space, or even just connections to the biological
brain through a digital bridge, if we wanted to then like do the Vulcan mind meld, we could really
do it for real, because we could share neural spaces, even if there was no, I mean, probably the
first thing that some crazy people out there are going to try to do is connect brains together
without a digital mind, but just bridge two brains together. So, you know, Dr. Warwick, who did the
first, I think in the 90s, he did the first, he was the idea, say, Hey, microchip implant, let's put
it in here. He did that for a week. And that was a cyborg 1.0 project. But a cyborg 2.0 project was
to take the terrible metal spiky arrays and jam them into a major, I think it was a radial nerve
in his arm, and then his wife also got one, and then they linked them together and they could feel
the pulse, the impulses and the neural activity from each other. Their brains didn't have enough
time to plasticize and change and reinterpret that input as anything meaningful, but they could
definitely feel it. And so that was kind of the first neurological mind meld, so to speak.
But having these really high quality permanent bridges like Neuralink and Synchron,
why there's no reason we couldn't experiment with the idea of linking brains together in that way,
it'd be really, really interesting.
Well, so again, just to kind of recap where we're at so far, we started with the matrix,
you've got VR experiences, we've gone to the Borg where you're starting to move functions
outside of the brain. I want to get into additive functions as well, which is something that I
touched on in an interview about super organisms the other day with author Byron Reese. Now,
his focus was entirely on biological organisms. He's a beekeeper. And so I think that was his
original inspiration. But he made an amazing point. For me, it was very paradigm shifting. He said,
look, you know, human beings are made of cells. And somehow we have this emergent consciousness
that comes from that. He said, Well, you know, cities, countries, societies are made of people.
What if something similar happens there? Now, what interested me, though, was his focus. And
again, this goes back to beekeeping. I guess his inspiration was he was looking at this
entirely biologically. But the thing that immediately came to my mind was, we're not
entirely biological, right? Like the internet is machines plus people. And so even without
neural implants, you know, I'm wondering if that might be going on, you know, if if what we think
of as the singularity or the network waking up, maybe that's already happening. But I thought
I would put that out there and see what your thoughts were. Yeah, I don't think that in the
same way, an emergent consciousness will happen from from the connectivity that we have or
or anything. But I but there are definitely emergent behaviors. There are emergent features. So
if you go on Wikipedia, you could search just emergence. And it has these different contexts
under that entry. And so, you know, emergent consciousness is seemingly unique. So far,
there might be emergent consciousness coming in the digital space with different AIs and whatnot.
But I think the idea that multiple conscious beings emerging into kind of a super consciousness,
that depends on how you really want to define it, right? Because yeah, if you're just observing,
which everybody is doing, right? Right now, we're not we don't have linked brains, we don't share
a neural space. And so really, I just have to trust all the inputs that I'm observing and
make a determination about that. So it's, you know, the Turing test, right? Can a computer
pass as a human in a conversation? Well, we have that now. But does it make it a human? No.
It's just that that observation, you know, is tricked, right? We're saying, okay, well,
with the things that I'm seeing and the things I'm observing, this is a person. And
and that's just not true. So this in the same way, I think we're going to be tricked
a lot by by AI that's that's coming down the down the pipe. But at some point, I think there
there may be an emergent consciousness that that arises. But it's it won't be like ours.
It'll look very similar and I'll probably know how to pretend to be. But it will be its own thing.
But as far as like the idea of merging humans together, just in a communicative way. So just
because of the internet or just because even in the 1700s, because you had a very close knit society
where everybody knew every of its business. And, you know, you all lived in this one little area
for forever. That that had an emergent thing. And we call that culture, right? So we have
definitely emergent cultures from our proximity and our ability to communicate and the methods
we use to communicate the internet connecting us all together in ways that we never could before.
So we definitely have emergent properties, which, which are culture. But, you know, when it comes to
actually binding, you know, neurological activity together, overlapping it intermixing it.
I think it's going to bring a whole new world of, you know, understanding on one hand, like
you really, we really can't do a good job today of truly communicating what it feels like to be
yourself to another person. You you're relying on that person having similar experiences that
they can relate to you're relying on your ability to collapse that down into something I can tell
you about that you then reimagine in your head as a story that makes sense to you. But it's not
my story. It's my story reimagined by you because you've imported it as input and now you've created
it reconstructed it. But for me to be able to say here's my story, and then literally put that
in your mind because we're connected in that way, or we're sharing the space and we're thinking
together. I don't even know how that would feel or work or whatever. That just is bizarre. And then
you add multiple people to that groups of thinking together minds where it's not communication.
It's shared thought and influence, you know, just like the brain, you know, every neuron in the brain
is based on influence. This neuron is very important because it we've had this thought before. And so
all the connections this one is are very robust and carry the signal farther. And so, you know,
and then it reconfigures, you can reconfigure your mind. It's dynamic. It's always changing.
It's plastic. And so in the digital space, you know, you'd have individuals with shared space,
and that would probably have a similar approach, I would think, where there's like influence that
is always changing and depending. But but you're thinking together, which is different from anything
that's ever happened before. It's not communication. You're not saying, here's my idea. What do you
think of it? Oh, and then you take it, take their feedback back. And you that's not what I'm talking
about. I'm you literally would have a shared mind, which is, I mean, it might be terrible. It might
cause psychosis, but you know, ever might be great while it's happening. But then if you get dropped
from that, you're like, you know, a zombie, who knows, right? It's just exciting to think about.
But but the reason that it's exciting to me is that it's totally plausible.
Yeah, well, there is so much coming down the pipe. And it seems like these things are almost
required for the future. I mean, I work with a lot of scientists. And one of the things that I'm
seeing is the amount of work that has been done in the past, right? And this has been written
about in terms of data, you know, human data just keeps increasing and increasing and increasing.
And when you get into the sciences, it's the same thing with papers and observations and theories
and hypothesis, you know, it's becoming too much for any one person. And, you know, in some disciplines,
like physics, it's probably been that way for many, many years. But even in, in, you know,
I would say less rigorous disciplines, you know, it's becoming that way. And it will
continue to increase. And so one of the problems becomes, you know, when the amount of information
is required to make good decisions outpaces what anyone is capable of doing, you know,
we're almost going to have to use like, for instance, chat GPT is something that people
are using for research a lot now. And I would assume that as things like that, you know,
continue to progress, that we'll go to implants and things like that as well.
Yeah, I think we're touching on, you know, what Elon Musk has talked about, which is the only way
for humans to compete is to integrate, right? And even if we're talking about, we're not, let's,
let's just omit the idea that like, we're going to share minds, right? Let's just go back to the
basic idea that we can expand our cognitive capabilities as individuals with some technology
like this. So there's one side, which is like, I need to be able to think harder, right? I need to
be able to do things in the digital space in a digital mind that my biological mind isn't good at,
like math or mass information consumption and processing, you know, and I'm just enacting
it as an individual doing that. So that's one approach that we could get to with, which is
like, I'm a super brain when I'm connected, and I can parse all these papers, and I could do all
this stuff myself. Then there's the other side, which is much more likely, which is that I still
do that. I still have like expansion of mind, but the focus is on directing AI agents that are acting
on my behalf. And then I task out things. So I'm like, Hey, look at all these papers, and figure
out this thing. But the difference between doing that now with like a chat GBT and doing it in a
mind space, right, is that, you know, when you're on a roll, like you're in the zone, you got flow,
right? And things just seem to come super natural. And you're just like, boom, but that could be the
reality with independent agents that are doing these tasks, but doing it on a subconscious, almost
level, you don't have to command them to do it. You're just thinking like, Oh, and then you just
like, Okay, get those things. Yeah, okay. And it's kind of all coming together for you in a shared
mental, you know, digital mind space, that that is just it feels like magic, right, compared to
how difficult it is to arrange all those things with your jelly brain, right? So I think that's
probably a much more likely scenario. Before we get into that, I mean, I could see like, maybe
even regulation, we're like, no mind sharing, right? Like, that's a bad thing. Because I really don't
see how that kind of concept could be maintained. It's like, I would say there's probably a hard time
making it such that doing that, sharing a mind space of other people, one or more people over a
long period of time could be good for you. Particularly because the technology is not to
the point where you can rely on it, like if you had a failure of the network, right? Like AT&T
went down, you know, and thousands, thousands of people were out of cell service, couldn't call
911 or whatever. So that just happened last week. So, you know, if we get to this point,
and then I can imagine being they're being serious, you know, impacts to society and individuals,
if these types of experiments start getting into the public space, just like social media was an
experiment, and there's all kinds of bad fallout from that, because people are too engaged in it,
and they start to make their lives about that. And then there's problems. So on the other hand,
you know, I think humans are still going to try it. I think humans are still going to bumble
down that road, and we'll see what the outcomes are. And maybe, you know, there might be some
capabilities that are new emergent cultures that come from that, that can handle it and can deal
with it. And like the people that are of our generation, even the kids that are being born
today might look at and go, ooh, that's creepy. There's kids today, you know, like, you know,
that's just how it works. So, yeah, it's definitely going to be interesting, though.
Yeah, yeah, things continue to change. And it seems like we're continuing to blur the
line between the natural and the artificial. And when I thought about this, when I was writing
questions, I realized, you know, we really haven't been natural for something like 2.6 million years
since we started using tools. So it's not that we're leaving natural behind. It's just that
we're continuing to change what it means to be natural, I guess. Yeah. I mean, there's no,
it's the height of arrogance to think that you're outside of the natural order, right? Like, this
is the natural order because we're creating it as we go. Like, there is no other order. This is
natural. It's just, you know, the decisions that are made or the paths that different species go
down could lead to extinction. That's something that we are not, I wouldn't say unique. Other
animals make decisions, and other animals do have cultures and things. But we are taking
things to the nth degree, right? We're just like blasting off the surface of the planet
into the unknown. And we're doing it very, very, almost light speed at this point.
Well, Amel, thank you so much for your time today. We have given people a lot to think about. No
pun intended. But, you know, I mean, this is, we've gone through some mind blowing concepts,
you know, and so this is, it's starting out with very rudimentary work in implants. And
we're just saying this is where it could go. And there are going to be lots and lots of
challenges along the way. Let me ask, what is coming up for you in 2024, as well as dangerous
things in vivo key? And do you have any predictions or prognostications for what we might see with
Neuralink in the implant sector as well? Oh, man. So yeah, I mean, for me, where our focus is on
bringing more secure applications. We just started experimenting with legitimizing payment features
and implants, although, you know, the networks like MasterCard Avisa and whatnot, they're still
very, very skeptical and don't don't really want to explore it. But, but we're doing, we're making
strides there. And, you know, we're, we're talking to different companies now that want to bring
different features to different government ID and patient ID and medical records
solutions. So that's, that's exciting. We're launching an IDP, which is an identity provider.
So like a third party, I'm getting very technical, but a third party like SAML based SSO provider,
so that you can use your chip implant to log into enterprise applications,
like octa one login, that kind of stuff, being able to provide like Google workspace accounts
that you can log in with your chip implant. So if you go to a website says login with Google,
you do that and then scan your chip and, and be able to log in that way, no password. So fun
stuff like that, things that I want to use my daily life. People, people have been asking about
the payment thing, we're working on that. As far as like prognostications, I wouldn't, I wouldn't
dare. Like, there's a, yeah, I just never, I never step into that space because you're always
going to be wrong, right? Like it's just going to, there is this gap. I think if you try to go,
if you go very far, like what we did today, then you, you probably have some, some level of accuracy
because you're very broad in general. But, but to say, oh, the next five years, I think these
things will happen. No idea. No idea. Always surprised every morning. Thank you again so
much for your time today, sir. Sure.
