In 1997, Computer Deep Blue beat the highest-rated player at chess.
2011, Computer Watson beat champion players of Jeopardy.
2016, the game Go fell to the computer AlphaGo.
But these are just games. What about a demonstration of practical problem-solving?
Enter AlphaGeometry, an AI developed by DeepMind that can solve Olympiad-level geometry problems,
outperforming the average human participant.
This has been heralded as a massive leap in AI reasoning and a step towards artificial
general intelligence. But is it? I'll give my thoughts in this video.
Firstly, how does it work? No coverage I've seen actually goes into any detail of AlphaGeometry's
solutions. I went through them and it was so painful I feel it's only right that I inflict
that experience on others, but trust me, that pain is worth it as it will help us in the second half
of this video where we discuss whether this is actually a step forward in reasoning
and its potential impact on mathematics as a whole.
First, a brief look at how AlphaGeometry works and then a deep dive into one of the
Olympiad problems it solved. It is made up of two systems and I'll demonstrate what it might
look like if it tries to prove this well-known result. The first system is a language model
akin to a refined and specific use chat GPT. I suggest ideas like plot the midpoint of this line
or draw this diameter. The second is a symbolic deduction engine. I know a bunch of geometrical
theorems like M is the midpoint of AC, therefore AM equals CM. OA is a radius, this is a tangent,
therefore this is a right angle, therefore this is 90 subtract x. These two systems work in tandem
with the first making a suggestion. Let's draw these lines and the second making deductions
because M and O are midpoints, these lines are parallel and they repeat until the problem is
solved. Now let's draw this line. By Thales's theorem, this is 90. Angles in a triangle sum
to 180, so this must be x and by angles in the same segment, this is also x. Well done guys,
I don't always have the best ideas but we usually get there. I'm always right but my options are
limited by this absolute moron. Some commentators have likened this to a right brain generating
ideas and a left brain analyzing the facts. Let's see it in action with a more challenging problem.
The International Mathematical Olympiad is one of the world's toughest mathematics papers for
high school students with each paper containing six problems selected from four mathematical
domains. Let's focus on problem one of the 2008 paper since alpha geometry solved this in 40 steps
which is fairly close to its average of around 55 steps. Before we state the problem there might be
some language with which you're unfamiliar. So here's a quick rundown of some triangle properties.
Start with a triangle ABC and first it turns out that it can be embedded in a unique circle
called the circum circle and its center is called the circum center. The center is the intersection
of the perpendicular bisectors of the three edges and I'll leave it as an exercise to justify why.
Second a line from a vertex meeting the opposite edge at a right angle is called an altitude.
Every triangle has three and third it turns out that all three altitudes meet at a common point
called the orthocenter. Ortho meaning orthogonal meaning perpendicular meaning at right angles
you get the idea. Paul's here if you need to just digest this I'll summarize them here as
I'll be using them for the rest of the video. The extended cut of this video goes into a bit
more detail on these like why the circum circle and orthocenter even exist and if you want to
check that out as well as extended cuts of other videos please consider supporting me on Patreon.
So let's now look at this Olympiad problem. We'll start with some triangle ABC and plot its
orthocenter H. Take the midpoints of the three edges and label them A0, B0, C0 so that A0 is
opposite A, B0 is opposite B, C0 is opposite C. Now draw a circle centered at A0 which goes through
H. Now this circle will cross BC twice called these points A1 and A2. Note these needn't
actually be on the triangle. In an obtuse triangle they might drift outside but we plot them anyway.
Now draw circles centered at B0 and C0 each crossing H and plot B1 and B2, C1 and C2 in the
same fashion as A1 and A2. These problems really tend to front load a lot of information so pause
and digest this if you need to because now here's the question. We want to prove that A1, A2, B1,
B2, C1 and C2 all lie on a circle. In Geogebra we can see that this seems to be true but our task
is to prove it. Pause now if you want to have a crack at it then we'll look at Alpha Geometry's
solution. So how did Alpha Geometry solve this problem? Well first it's worth noting that in the
paper on Alpha Geometry the problem is stated differently just wanting to prove that B1, B2,
C1 and C2 are cyclic. This is insufficient. By symmetry a proof of this kind will generalize
to the other pairs of sides but it could be the case that the A's and B's, the A's and C's and
the B's and C's share different circles but anyway maybe they'll justify why this is sufficient
later. Just a few things to mention up front. There are often a few redundant steps along the
way. It often restates things already deduced. This is due to how it presents solutions but I'll
mostly just gloss over them and sometimes compress steps together but I will show all steps on screen
if you care about the minutiae. I'll assume a high school knowledge of geometry throughout,
the results we'll need will be summarized here. One to draw your attention to is cyclic quadrilaterals.
Most of us learn that opposite angles in a cyclic quadrilateral sum to 180 but the
converse is also true. If you have a quadrilateral where opposite angles sum to 180 then it is
cyclic. That's less obvious and it's going to be very important. I will be going through the steps
fairly quickly. Now each step is fairly simple but the length of the proof is quite overwhelming.
My advice is not to worry about every little detail and just get a feel for Alpha geometry's
approach but feel free to pause after every step if you want to fully grasp every detail.
I'll use lowercase Greek letters for angles and I'll use a star to denote a supplementary angle,
i.e. Alpha star is 180 subtract Alpha. Let's get into it. We actually don't need these altitudes
so I'll hide them and it starts by defining point O such that EH equals EO. So clearly O must lie on
this left circle but also such that HO is perpendicular to EF. I think we can infer that
O is actually where these circles intersect but Alpha geometry doesn't realize this yet.
Step one is realizing that O must lie on the left hand circle so that's good. And step two,
it uses angles in the same segment to prove that these are the same. I'll call them Alpha. Also
this is a cyclic quadrilateral so these angles are supplementary. They sum to 180. I'll call them
Beta and Beta star. Step three, this triangle is isosceles as EB2 and EH are both radii of this
circle so these angles are the same and I'll call them Gamma. Steps four and five, here it infers
that this angle is also Gamma. Again this is by angles in the same segment. Steps six to eight,
it deduces that EF is parallel to BC by acknowledging that E and F are midpoints
of those lines of the triangle. Steps nine and 10 are some of the redundant steps I mentioned
earlier. And step 11, we have that this is a right angle and that's by Thales's theorem.
Angles in a semicircle are 90 degrees. Step 12, AH is perpendicular to EF. That's because AH and
BC are perpendicular by the definition of an altitude. BC and EF are parallel so that angle
must also be 90. Step 13, now this one is interesting. We extend the line B2O to EF. I
guess that's the right brain talking. We've run out of angles to chase so let's just stick another
line in. Now what's this angle here? Well we have a right angle triangle so this is 90 subtract
Gamma but here is another right angle triangle so this angle must be 90 subtract 90 subtract Gamma.
In other words, it's Gamma. Steps 14 to 16 use this common right angle here to establish that
AH is parallel to OH. The diagram is awkward here because it looks like this is necessarily the case
and it is but alpha geometry didn't know that yet. Steps 17 and 18, this is a right angle and again
that's by Thales's theorem. Steps 19 to 22 are more redundant restatements and step 23,
this is an isosceles triangle as EB2 and EO are radii so these base angles are the same and I'll
call them Delta. Steps 24 and 25, now this is a brilliant inference and that's that this angle
is also Delta. All it says is justification is that these are Delta and these are Gamma so why
must this be Delta? Well here's a triangle with Gamma and Delta so its third angle supplements
them but now here's a triangle with Gamma and this angle so its third angle must be Delta as
required. Step 26, again another fantastic inference and that's that EF bisects this angle here. Now
why is that? Well call the top one Epsilon, yes that's how many of us Brits pronounce it and
note this triangle up here whose top angle is Delta star so Epsilon supplements Gamma and Delta star
and now note this triangle also with Gamma and Delta star so this angle must be Epsilon as well.
It's great stuff, I mean we can infer this so much more easily but it is kind of cute how
Alpha Geometry picks the most difficult ways to get there. Step 27, because F lies on the angle
bisector of EO and EH and because EO and EH are the same length we have that FO and FH are also
the same length and step 28 therefore O lies on this right hand circle. Remember when we said
as much at the very beginning? I told you we'd get there eventually. Okay so it's putting a
lot of pieces together and step 29 what does it do with this newfound power? Well what do you think?
It's straight back to chasing the angles so plot C2O and HC1. Now these are the same via angles
in the same segment and I'll call them zeta. Steps 30 and 31 these are clearly the same as
they're both zeta star and as a result these angles are the same I'll call them eta and why is that?
Well consider this triangle and call its top angle theta then eta supplements theta and zeta star.
Now consider this triangle and we see that this angle also supplements theta and zeta star so it
must also be eta but I need the whole Greek alphabet at this rate. Steps 32 because these
triangles have the same angles they are similar and that's expressed as this ratio AH over AC1
equals AC2 over AO. Steps 33 and 34 this is quite fiddly but we're doing a similar thing on the left
as we did on the right with the zetas so call this top angle kappa and fill in this angle which we
know is beta we'll need it in just a second. This angle is 90 plus alpha and we see that it is in a
triangle with beta and kappa but this angle is also in a triangle with beta and kappa so it must
also be 90 plus alpha. Steps 35 similar to before no pun intended these two triangles have the same
angles so they are similar and that's expressed as AH over AB1 equals AB2 over AO. Steps 36 now
a bit of algebra we see that AH times AO is equal to AB1 times AB2 and AC1 times AC2
therefore AB1 over AC2 is equal to AC1 over AB2. Steps 37 and 38 we will use this ratio so construct
B2C1 and B1C2 and this ratio tells us that these triangles are similar thus their angles are the
same in particular these ones which I'll call lambda. Steps 39 so close this angle supplements
lambda so I'll call it lambda star and step 40 finally we have a quadrilateral B1B2C1C2 with
opposite supplementary angles thus it is cyclic thus these four points lie on a circle. Finally
so what do we think about this proof well for a start it doesn't really answer the question
there is no demonstration that A1 and A2 must lie on this circle now this is easy to argue because
consider any circle containing A1 and A2 then A1 A2 is a chord of the circle and its perpendicular
bisector must contain the center but A1 A2 is a diameter of this circle centered at A0 therefore
A0 lies on this perpendicular bisector but recall that A0 is the midpoint of BC thus this is actually
the perpendicular bisector of BC we conclude that any circle containing A1 and A2 must be
centered on the perpendicular bisector of BC repeating the argument for the other sides any
circle containing all six points must be centered where all three of these perpendicular bisectors
meet which is the circum center so all three circles must coincide so alpha geometry successfully
solves this problem which isn't exactly the same as stated in the olympiad paper and i don't like
how the writers have simplified the problem yes it turns out that it is a solution in this case
but that requires justification and they haven't given any the next thing to say about alpha
geometry's proof is that it's quite meandering to say the least it isn't so much a solution
but more like watching someone else solve the problem in real time when we're solving problems
we don't always have the best idea first so we tinker and meddle and hope that our ideas go
somewhere what i'd love to see is that if later versions of alpha geometry can refine the solutions
into something more palatable for example consider this step one define o as the second
intersection of these circles and step two e h f o is a kite so its diagonals o h and e f are
perpendicular this is well known or provable in just a few steps and if we can assume things like
thales's theorem i think we can assume this step three e and f are midpoints so e f is parallel to
bc and step four altitude a h is perpendicular to bc by definition which means it's perpendicular
to e f since o h and a h are both perpendicular to e f they are parallel and both pass through
h so in fact a o and h are collinear steps five and six establish the beaters as before
so these triangles with beta and kappa are similar expressed as follows and steps seven and eight
establish the zetas as before so these triangles with zeta star and theta are similar express as
follows steps nine and ten chase these ratios to establish similarity of these triangles as before
step 11 establish the lambdas as before and step 12 establish this quadrilateral as cyclic
and we're done i'm sure we could shorten this further but without much thought i took this
from 40 steps to 12 with the benefit of hindsight but my main issue with this proof is that the
reason why the result is true doesn't leap out at me a good proof should show why the result holds
the logic should enlighten us and i don't find this particularly illuminating however this does
veer close to my favorite solution to the problem consider the intersecting second theorem this
says that if you have two non-parallel second lines one meeting the circle at a and b and the other
at x and y and crossing at p then the following holds ap times bp is equal to xp times yp the
converse is also true if five points have this property then those four points are necessarily
cyclic with that in mind once we establish that a o and h are collinear we have by the intersecting
second theorem that ab one times ab two is equal to a o times a h and ac one times ac two is equal
to a o times a h thus ab one times ab two equals ac one times ac two and by the converse of the
intersecting second theorem these points are cyclic this proof was written by a human and there is a
wealth of other succinct and creative proofs out there but most importantly this is a proof that to
me finally does the job of telling me why the result is true i can see it right in front of me
these seconds always combining at a vertex and therefore giving rise to this specific circle
in the middle all who love mathematics love the spark of insight that proofs like this give us
we don't want to just learn the results we want to experience the unique joy of resonating with
this kind of logical poetry it's beautiful this isn't but is that a problem after all it got the
answer and it did so in this unique way of combining creativity with deduction so let's now take a
broader look at what i think alpha geometry means for ai and what it means for mathematics let me
just remind you that i am not a computer scientist i am a mathematician first and foremost everything
that follows in this video is just like my opinion man let me loop back to something i said at the
start of the video the previous ai's learned to play games while this one can solve problems
well is alpha geometry really solving problems because it looks like what it's doing is brute
forcing its way around the angles and eventually landing on the result but isn't that what problem
solving is alpha geometry solutions are pretty haphazard and lacking in any general direction
look at this solution for problem three of 2015's imo horrendous but if you try these problems
what do your initial attempts look like i think for most of us we just get our hands dirty and
work out a bunch of lengths and angles before we have a good idea we might have slightly more
direction and intent behind our choices but is our approach radically different to alpha
geometries i don't think so and i find this aspect of alpha geometry impressive and fascinating
a less impressive aspect of alpha geometry is that plain geometry is easy to codify in terms
of strict rules and results i mean it's kind of telling that the oldest recorded axiomatic
approach to mathematics is euclid's elements and that begins with plain geometry olympiad problems
are kind of like games we know they have an answer we know they are solvable with high school level
results because that's how they are designed for the language model right brain there are only
certain things you can try and certain things that you need to try compare this to analytic
number theory or algebraic geometry where problems demand ideas that are way out there this is to say
that i don't think alpha geometries achievements can be immediately generalized to other fields of
study no more than chess computed deep blue could attempt to play go for this reason that
i respectfully disagree with some other commentators on this topic subina hossenfelder for example had
this to say about alpha geometry it generally highlights ai's growing ability to reason logically
discover new knowledge and verify solutions and not only this it can also explain how it arrived
as a conclusion such a type of ai system has users that extends beyond geometry not only can this
achievement be generalized across various mathematical domains but it will without doubt also come in
handy in other areas where rational thinking and logical deduction is of use like everything high
school level plain geometry questions which remember are written to be solvable are comparatively easy
and there is currently no evidence to suggest that this technique can be generalized at this present
time now i'm not so naive to think that things will be different in the near future especially
given the rate of ai progress so maybe soon an ai can tackle something like algebraic geometry
but not right now a computer brute-forced chess but it still took 20 years before a computer
one at go here alpha geometry is answering geometry questions by well not quite brute force but it's
similar and i think that we're still a while away from seeing ai have a go at some of the
unsolved problems across mathematics i come to think of it given all the operations alpha geometry
can do every second it's still surprising to me that it still can't outperform the best humans
how weird would it have been if ibm announced that its computer deep blue attempted to beat
gary kasparov but came second no the victory over the champion was the milestone i'm not
taken away from the achievements in this paper i just think our excitement should be tempered
a little in my mind this is a small step beyond beating games like go not a radical leap forward
it's natural then to ask about the future and whether ai will tackle unsolved problems
those of you who have read the paper will know that alpha geometry developed many synthetic
theorems results proved from its foundation that help it make inferences it even discovered
a new result in this question because its solution doesn't require one of the premises
i'd be gubsmacked if the question setters didn't already know about this and just added this
constraint to tune the difficulty of the question but is this a sign of ai eventually being used
to solve open questions and is that a good thing well the first thing i foresee is ai assisted
proofs these fall into a similar region of computer assisted proofs but there might be a difference
computer assists are basically time savers the four color theorem for example required a lot of
pen and paper research to break down the number of cases each of which could then be checked by hand
but a computer can do it much faster so it's more practical even simulations and data analyses
essentially boil down to just doing a lot of calculations which could be done by hand if we
had infinite mathematicians writing on infinite blackboards but we do it by computer to save time
a computer is just part of the equipment of the modern 21st century mathematician along
with chalk and blackboard along with traditional computer assists ai assists might be considered
part of our tool set as well but ai might replace some of the creativity involved and so would a
purely generated ai proof it feels like cheating but is that a bad thing well we need to ask why
do we bother solving hard problems other than to satiate our curiosity i think there are three
reasons the first is that they have immediate practical value these are things like optimization
problems that could revolutionize aspects of computing or cracking the enigma code it shortened
the war direct impact a non-mathematical example would be curing a disease it's just good the
benefits are immediate and tangible the second reason is that the theory or techniques we develop
in order to solve them could be used elsewhere this is the spin-off effect proving firmars last
year and for example required several leaps that connected many areas of mathematics and improved
our overall understanding a non-mathematical example might be that we didn't really gain
any practical value from armstrong setting foot on the moon but many innovations were required
to get in there which have everyday use thirdly most importantly for me as a pure mathematician
and a reason i think is overlooked it's just good to solve problems you know it's the old
why climb Everest because it's there even without the innovations required for the
Apollo missions i still find the moon landing endlessly inspiring maybe the proof of the
collet's conjecture won't directly impact my life in the slightest but i'll still find the event
enormously inspiring nonetheless basically the reason we solve problems and really the reason
we do anything is either because it's useful or because it's beautiful or it's neither like my
phd thesis but still both reasons are valuable so here's my take on ai in mathematics if a solution
to a problem has immediate practical value we should use ai and cheat and get the answer
who cares if we look up the answer to a disease cure it'll save lives the second case gets a
bit weird though i worry that ai assisted proofs might not develop interesting spin-off theory
and instead force the solution out of pre-existing knowledge when humans puzzle for a long time
they force themselves to be creative and that's where the new theory lies ai might get the answer
with a messy and haphazard application of more basic stuff so we miss out on potential new techniques
this isn't exactly the same but by analogy it's like this geometry problem did you know the
intersecting second theorem before you saw this proof you might have done but alpha geometry on
the other hand applied the same few results over and over admittedly that's just my opinion i don't
really have any direct evidence of this but we are already starting to see stagnation in other areas
of ai generated content but my main reservation with ai generated proofs is this third point
the beauty i know alpha geometry wasn't designed to create beautiful proofs and again this is just
my opinion but i want to convince you why beauty really matters imagine if an artist composed the
greatest painting ever there is likely no practical value to be found in the painting or in any of
the techniques developed to compose it but we wouldn't say that it's pointless as an enormous
cultural contribution it would still enrich our lives in ways beyond what is practical well
mathematics is part of our culture has your life tangibly and practically improved because
wiles proved firmars last theorem probably not but the story likely inspired you the result was
as much an enriching cultural contribution as a great piece of art would the story have inspired
you if an ai had proved firmars last theorem and this is again where i disagree with sabina i know
this last comment was a bit of a joke but rational thinking and logical deduction aren't useful for
everything i can't rationally convince you why this proof is beautiful to me it just is and nor
can i convince you why alpha geometries proofs are ugly and does this matter yes because we're in the
land of plain geometry which isn't some untapped wilderness of mathematical usefulness it's a
playground squarely in the domain of beauty and what makes something beautiful i don't know it
isn't the length of the proof as shorter isn't always better and it isn't simplicity as too
simple often hides or disguises the inner workings we just know it when we see it and i don't think
ai has come close to capturing beauty yet there's a line about aesthetics in the alpha geometry paper
how alpha geometry might discover some plain geometry results overlooked by us humans because
it isn't biased towards symmetry or that which is aesthetically pleasing and great you do you
alpha geometry but if it isn't aesthetically pleasing why do we care mathematics is often seen
as something that's purely logical it's black and white and we love it for that but we also love
it for the aesthetics like be honest if i made a video saying here's an ugly geometrical result
and here are the 100 difficult steps it takes to get there would you care about that no i
curate topics that expose mathematical beauty even when the solution is kind of ugly i try to make
every step intuitive so we can appreciate the symmetry the hidden magic and the beauty within
three blue one browns video on collisions printing pie it's a jaw dropping result but we all watched
the whole video because the real or comes not from seeing the answer but from seeing why
that's what we love that's what inspires us not this i want to be super clear here i am not
criticizing alpha geometry or the authors of this paper alpha geometry wasn't designed to
create beautiful mathematics it was designed to solve olympiad problems and it does that pretty
all i'm saying is that while ai might be close to solving problems i think it's far from solving
problems beautifully this is where my concerns lie and why i'm not yet excited about ai generated
proofs to me mathematics is the most creative and beautiful thing there is my qualms echo those
who love visual art music and film and fear that artists musicians writers and actors will be replaced
by ai this replacement will be a cultural net negative if ai also solves our mathematical problems
we might sacrifice their cultural impact as well thank you so much for watching a bit of a different
video this time because i wanted to respond to the news i think alpha geometry is a fascinating new
approach but the more i thought about it the more i felt i needed to say so i hope you enjoyed and
if you disagree with my take that's absolutely fine let me know down in the comments and keep the
discussion respectful a massive thank you to all my patrons who keep the channel alive if you'd
like to support me you'll get your name in the credits access to extended cuts of select videos
we get to hang out on our dedicated discord community and more if not don't worry subscribe
and share the video that will help me out as well this has been a human made proof under
another roof until next time
