There's always this sort of gray area.
We haven't had a sense where we feel like
we have the definition nailed
and everything in this box is life
and everything outside this box is not life.
Which suggests that maybe that categorization
that we have is not right
and there's something else going on.
And from my perspective, I think life is the only thing
that we've observed in the universe
that builds up complexity
and builds structures like you and I.
We obviously understand that evolution
plays a prominent role in that,
but we don't have like a fundamental physics
that really unifies this idea
of complexity being built up over time.
What could go right?
I'm Zachary Carabell, the founder of The Progress Network
and I'm joined as always on this podcast
by Emma Varva-Lucas,
the executive director of The Progress Network.
And what could go right is our weekly podcast,
looking at the world through a lens
of creative yet edgy optimism,
a word that we've debated a lot at The Progress Network,
given that people seem to have a negative connotation
with the word optimism,
probably because it suggests a Pollyannish rose
to the view of the future
that we neither subscribe to nor share,
but we do think it is vital to look at the world
through a lens of what are we doing?
What problems are we solving?
What's the world that we're living in
and what's the future we want to create?
One of the things we don't focus on as much
as we probably should is hard science.
We focus a lot on public debates,
on different parts of the world,
on geopolitics, on social issues,
but we don't focus on hard science as much.
So we decided to have a conversation today
with someone who is a brilliant articulator
of extremely vast complicated concepts
in astrophysics and other things,
but is also herself a serious practitioner
of the very hard science that we're talking about.
So bridging the gap a little,
or at least we hope to be bridging the gap.
Emma, why don't you tell us about
who we're gonna talk to?
All right, so we're gonna be speaking
with Professor Sarah Walker,
who's an astrobiologist and a theoretical physicist.
If you don't know what an astrobiologist is,
not to worry, we're gonna talk about it
in the conversation.
She's based at Arizona State University
where she does research into the origins of life,
artificial life, and whether there is life
to be found on other worlds.
So Sarah Walker, or Professor Walker, to your friends,
thank you so much for joining us today.
I remember when I was at Oxford once,
I just wanted to get that in there that I was at Oxford.
And we were at a meal,
and I think it was a bunch of physicists
were like having a meal next to us.
And I mean, we knew there were physicists,
I think, because they were referring
to some work they were doing.
And then they quickly launched into a very animated,
passionate discussion about one of Shakespeare's plays.
Like, what did it mean, and what did they think about it?
And I remember thinking about the time,
like, this is really unfair,
because I can't go, I can't toggle at dinner
from a meaningful discussion about Shakespeare's plays
to some debate about, like, astrophysics.
It's a one-way street, it's not a two-way street.
I actually disagree.
I just think it's a matter of, like,
what way you wanna jump in.
So one of the things I've been really interested in
is actually the history of physics
and where the ideas come from.
And I think a lot of physicists actually don't understand
how much of our understanding of reality
is historically dependent.
So one example I like to give
is just the history of timekeeping devices.
And when we invented certain laws of physics
was in step with kind of our understanding culturally
of time at the time.
So, you know, in ancient civilizations,
we kept time with the elements like sand clocks
and using, you know, like the position of the sun.
And then we invented mechanistic clocks.
And by inventing, like, a mechanical device
that could track seconds,
then we could track planetary motion.
And then Newton was able to come up with, like,
you know, the laws of physics as we know them now,
like the laws of gravitation
based on these really accurate maps of planetary motion.
And then the mathematics that Kepler came to describe it.
So there's all this history embedded in it.
And so it would just be, you know, like a good,
a good stumbling block to ask a physicist
what cultural conceptions are informing
the way that they think about, you know,
like the historical contingency.
There's like a million examples like that, though.
I love this way to talk about science
because it's a concept of science is dependent on us, right?
Although we think that science kind of existed
its own thing outside of us.
That's the point, right?
Yeah, that's the point.
It doesn't exist outside of us.
So I think like there's this,
there's this sort of dogma and part of the ego of physics
is this idea that it's completely independent of us.
And it's actually like objective.
But I think all of the ideas in physics
have emerged in certain cultural contexts.
And they're very historically dependent
on what society was thinking about at a given point in time.
So I think this is one place where the humanities
and science can intersect in a rather deep way
is to really understand how our biases
and how we think and our cultural norms
and everything else inform the sort of constructions
that we have about what we think is fundamental.
I mean, look, I, first of all,
it's great to hear you talk that way.
I do think there is an exclusionary kind of,
well, one, there is just a legitimate amount
of pure intensive math and knowledge
that kind of goes into some of these things
that does create a kind of barrier to the quote unquote layman.
And, but there's also this, you know,
within universities and within culture,
there's like the expertise of science
and then there's everything else.
And it is definitely true.
Like we've now been doing this podcast for a while
and we've had remark, I mean, I don't know,
maybe we had two or three people
who kind of really fit the science bill.
And even in the progress network itself, you know,
it's not, it is way overrepresented
either by kind of journalists who are generalists,
even if they're science journalists
and there are no science journalists,
I think in our roster.
And yet we, during the pandemic, right,
everything was about follow the science, follow the science,
except for the fact that most lay people
and most people who aren't scientists
don't even know what the science is
or wouldn't know how to read it.
Right.
Well, I also, I actually don't like the follow the science
because it suggests that science is a monolith
and rather than a dialogue.
So in some sense, in that situation,
science could offer a set of best practices
from certain perspectives.
So like a social scientist might make recommendations
based on, you know, like social constraints
and the way people behave in societies.
And then, you know, somebody that studies disease
might offer different advice.
And then the question is like as a society,
how do we actually come together
and merge the science with these other facets?
And I think this is where discussion of scientific ideas
become really muddled when they become public discourse
because people usually want somebody
to be a representative of an idea,
like an archetype of that idea.
And then the way society debates itself
is to have archetypes that are fighting with each other.
And then people think person has to be right or the other,
rather than thinking that actually the way
that societies achieve consensus understanding
or like societies as sort of a higher level construct
actually, you know, discuss things
is by having those kind of...
So I guess what I'm saying is I think we confuse
what science is with these sort of archetypes
of what science needs to be to have public discourse.
And you're totally right, by the way, about this.
The need for someone representing,
particularly when it becomes a public debate, right?
Whether it's about nuclear power
or climate science or COVID,
you get overrepresented by scientists
who are more comfortable in that public sphere
saying things in a black and white fashion.
Look, I know there's a lot of pre-interviews,
you've probably had them too.
And I would venture to say that some of those pre-interviews
probably didn't go so well.
Cause like if you're the person saying,
well, you know, it's a little more than,
it's a little more than that,
often a producer at CNN or one of the,
I mean, I'm just picking on them or picking them out.
That's not what they want, right?
They don't want the...
That sound bite.
Well, yeah.
This is also super interesting
in like the current discussion of AI
and like what's happening with large language models
and have we achieved artificial general intelligence?
Cause the loudest voices in the room are like
the doomsayers that like AGI is eminent
and it's going to destroy us all
because that's a really simple package message
for people to understand of something
that they don't understand.
And there's all these really fascinating nuances
about how these systems are interacting
with human culture and society
and even, you know, how we should perceive
our own intelligence in light of them
that are just not like,
it's just too nuanced for that kind of level of discussion
at like, you know, like global civilization.
Having a discussion is very different
than you and I sitting here
and getting to unpack these concepts.
So, so I think it's important to make those distinctions,
but, and I think it's important for people to understand
that none of these things are really like,
there's no such thing as like a non-nuanced opinion.
There are no simple answers,
but I think people ask for simple answers a lot, right?
Like going back to the pandemic for a second,
I remember I was in a group chat with people
and they were complaining about the journalism
at the time being like, well, they said one thing last week
and they are saying something else now.
And I'm like, well, yeah, the journals is updated
because the science is updating.
That's natural.
That's what should be happening.
It should be changing as we go,
but weren't changing as we go.
It would be a little bit suspicious.
But I feel like that for some reason,
the understanding doesn't kind of reach people en masse.
I'm not sure why.
Yeah.
And, you know, so, so this is actually really interesting
because I wonder if this is a problem to fix
because everyone thinks that this is a huge problem
and we need to fix it.
And I, and I agree to an extent,
but I can also think, you know, from the counterpoint
that what we're like, if you think in evolutionary biology,
we talk about these sort of hierarchies
of different living systems.
So like cells in your body have to cooperate
to make you as a living, you know,
like as a multicellular organism.
And individuals have to cooperate
to make a functioning society.
And I think processes that happen at the societal level
don't have to, they don't have to make sense
necessarily to individuals in a rational way.
And there's, there's even all kinds of, you know,
like I think arrows impossibility theorem
about like the impossibility of like having ranked choice
voters actually come to a consensus decision
or something is like, or not ranked choice,
but, but sorry for the details of that.
But anyway, there's like examples of this
where you can explicitly demonstrate
that societies might have different kinds of ways
of thinking than individuals do.
And I think the problem is when we're talking
about these things, we're always trying to contextualize
what we see in group discussion
in the way we think individually.
And I think that's just the wrong framing.
Oh, that's fascinating.
I've never heard that before and I really liked that
because I feel like I'm constantly trying to conflate the tube
because I feel like if I can understand the way this is,
I don't know, it just feels like the way to fix problems.
So what would be the better way to go about?
Well, it's very funny because people think that like conflict
like social conflict, like all these people
that are like archetypes on Twitter
and battling each other is a bad thing.
And I'm just like, oh, this is good.
Society is trying to solve this problem
and figure out what we think about it.
So it's almost like you have mental debates
inside your own head, but like imagine that just in terms
of like now people are the individual things
of this like larger structure
that's trying to actually figure itself out.
And I don't think any of us as individuals
can really have a perception of what human societies
are doing as collectives.
So let's talk for a minute a little more
about some of the work you're doing
just because even though we're sort of talking about
the way we talk about science,
you also do a lot of really interesting kind of work.
First of all, astrobiologist, does that mean,
see, this is where like the utter layman in me comes out.
Meaning, is there a radically different biology
of astrobiology?
Is it non-carbon biology?
Is it just biology?
There may be no biology anywhere else.
But yeah, it's supposed to be like the study of life
as a universal phenomenon is the way I would think about it.
But it's a relatively new field.
So even when I was a graduate student,
I never heard of astrobiology before.
And I only heard about it because my PhD advisor was like,
do you want to work on the original life?
There's this thing called astrobiology.
And I was like, what is that?
So,
I think public discourse is still in the, what is that?
I mean, so along this though,
I have been waiting my whole life to ask someone
actually with expertise, like what is life?
But I saw Lex Freeman ask you the question.
You were like, that's the wrong question.
So I'm not going to make Lex Freeman's mistake.
I'm going to reframe the question as,
how do you understand the problem of life,
just taking it from your mortgage?
That's a great question.
I took it from you.
So I cannot take credit for that.
Yeah, I think from my perspective,
there's a variety of phenomena that we want to,
quote unquote, call life.
And the question of explaining those phenomena
and why they exist to me is the question of answering
what is life and also the origin of life.
So this is very much,
I'm super biased by my training in physics
to think a certain way,
but I'm very interested in deep abstract properties
that give broad explanatory power.
So what that means is basically can explain a lot of stuff.
But in the process, those kind of ideas usually don't look
like the things that we feel like we interact with.
So example is gravity is currently best explained
by the curvature of space and time.
And obviously, I'm sitting in a gravitational potential
well, supposedly,
but what does that mean to my everyday experience?
So when I'm thinking about the problem of life
and actually thinking about that,
from this perspective of a physics
that would allow us to understand
how this thing we call life emerges in the universe
and where else we might find it,
I'm thinking at that kind of very deep abstract level
that would give us some kind of mathematical laws
that explain the entire swath of things
we might wanna call life.
Which I would assume there's nothing
that exists right now that explains that.
I mean, what do we know?
What do we not know?
How close are we to establish these theories?
So the problem is that most people have been asking this,
what is life question?
And the reason that I said that's not the question to ask
is because we already kind of know
when you go down the road of asking what is life
and you do it based on some kind of description
or definition, like it's an evolving system
or it's self-replicating or it metabolizes,
there's always this sort of gray area
and nothing fits, like we haven't had a sense
where we feel like we have the definition nailed
and everything in this box is life
and everything outside this box is not life.
Which suggests that maybe that categorization
that we have is not right
and there's something else going on.
And so the sort of what I sometimes will call
the art of theoretical physics
is trying to actually just look at a set of phenomena
and try to figure out like what is the thing
to describe about this set that like actually
is the sort of deep property
that I would think is the feature.
And from my perspective, I think life is the only thing
that we've observed in the universe
that builds up complexity and builds structures like you and I.
We obviously understand that evolution plays
a prominent role in that,
but we don't have like a fundamental physics
that really unifies this idea of complexity
being built up over time with how we think in physics,
which is very sort of much about like elementary particles
and simple objects and gravitational fields
and not this sort of combinatorial universe
of all possible objects.
And why is it that you and I are sitting here right now
having this conversation instead of like a potentially
astronomically large set of other possible things
that could have been happening on this planet.
On the theoretical physics side of the equation.
So here's one thing to pause it.
I'm sure you get this all the time,
probably from students who are curious
and that's probably about what my level is
about some of these things, which is.
Beginner's mind, Zachary.
Beginner's mind, keep an open mind.
So a lot of what we write about prehistory,
so pre-recorded history is based on a remarkably few bits
of material data points and a massive amount
of trying to connect the dots and find patterns
and telecoherent story.
A story which may be largely directionally correct,
but is also possibly just completely
and utterly fictitious and wrong.
Just because there's so little we actually can know
in any kind of concrete way.
I mean, I joke about this, we built a house in Connecticut
and because of the way one small part of it
was classified by code, it had to have like massive amounts
of rebar and structural stuff.
So there's like this one wall in the house
or like right outside the house
that can withstand a category five hurricane.
So the entire thing could just be completely knocked down
in 150 or 500 years later, somebody could be looking
through it and there'll be this like perfectly contained wall.
And I just imagined someone going through it going,
I wonder what the wall was for?
What do you think the wall,
what do you think the wall right in the middle was?
And coming up with a story that bore nothing,
no relationship, right?
Because the codes are gone, everything else.
So I kind of wonder about origins of the universe,
big bang theories, trying to extrapolate from
even whatever the Hubble is telling us about,
distant universes whose light is reaching us
what 2000 years late.
I mean, how much of this do you feel you know
or how much of it is a fascinating puzzle
to try to make coherence about?
Like where are you on that spectrum?
Yeah, so my personal like take on this
is we predict the past as much as we do the future.
It's just the evidence is a little bit different.
So the past is distributed differentially
in the present than the future is, right?
But even in cosmology actually,
you have this concept of prehistory.
We have a concept in cosmology of the past hypothesis,
which is kind of consistent
with all current observational evidence,
but it's about the initial state of the universe,
which we don't know and we never will know.
But the hypothesis is it was a,
what's called a low entropy state.
So it had, it was like very ordered.
And part of the reason for that is we expect systems
to become more disordered over time.
So we need an ordered initial state
as an explanation for the way the universe is now
in current physics.
But it's a hypothesis based on our theories of the world
and observational data that we have.
So I think about it as we have,
so a theory for me is sort of,
it's a broad set of explanations
that are consistent with the observations,
but give you the expanded ability to like see a horizon
beyond what you observe now.
And that's what theoretical physics does really well
because it does it in such a way
that you can predict a really,
like a really a very deep feature of that structure.
But I think that's like pretty much what we do in any field
where we're trying to extrapolate beyond like,
what's immediately apparent to us is we try to look
for patterns and then we try to say,
well, this would be consistent with these patterns
that we see.
And I think the past is constructed
in exactly the same way.
And we do lose information about the past
because things disappear over time.
And so sometimes I actually even question
if there's a unique history
because people think the future is undetermined
and there's not like maybe a specific future.
Standard physics doesn't say that,
but I actually think that's probably accurate.
And I think that's one of the things
that a physics of life would have to re-envision
is that the future is open in some sense
and determined by what exists now,
not necessarily going all the way back
to the initial conditions of the universe
because we also have to predict that.
And then if you think that then to be sort of symmetric,
the past might also be undetermined in some sense.
Yeah.
Oh, man.
This is the type of thing where you're waiting for someone
really high to wander by
and you realize like, no, we're super, super, super high.
This is super serious science.
I get mistaken for that all the time.
It's like, like some people are talking about stuff
they talk about when they're high
and I'm like, this is just what I think about all the time.
No drugs are required.
No, it's amazing.
I mean, obviously there's a lot of,
when it comes to science being developed
by the things that are observable now,
there's got to be a lot of humility there
because there are so many things that we haven't observed
that we know that we haven't observed.
So how many things are there
that we don't even know that we haven't observed, right?
And that's kind of mind boggling.
Yeah.
I think we can't see most of reality.
It's professional.
It's that question like,
do we even know what we don't know?
Right?
Yeah.
And the answer is often no.
We think we have some idea of what we don't know.
Like we have an advent horizon that we're kind of aware,
at least we think we're aware of.
Right.
Yeah, so I think it's super interesting
because some people, like human imagination is pretty big.
We can imagine a lot of possible things existing
and sometimes we confuse the space of that imagination
with everything that could exist.
So we feel like we can imagine this space
of all possible things that could exist
and I can even make that statement.
But I think everything we can imagine
is still just a local feature of where we are
because we're already, like our imagination itself
is a physical feature of what we are.
So it's telling us something about that locality,
but we can't, yeah, you can't imagine
beyond what you can imagine
because it's actually not part of your local physics
and like where you exist in the universe.
Which is kind of crazy.
I think, because I was gonna ask you to play a phone game
where I asked you to explain some of your tweets.
I think one of them is what you just said,
which is we don't model anything
in the external world with quotes, external.
When you build a simulation in your mind,
you're already looking at a piece of the world stored in you,
which reminded me so much.
There's this one school of thought
in Tibetan Buddhism called the mind-only school,
which, okay, they're saying something a little bit different.
They're saying that the world only exists within your mind,
but embedded in there is that like,
the relationship between you and the world
and your existence of the two
and your creation of the two are constantly together, right?
Yeah, I think we have a tendency to make a distinction
between the subjective and the objective.
And I think part of the challenge,
in particular with understanding life generally
as like a physics is that you have to blur the boundary
between those two.
So like the outside world is the inside world
and what does that actually look like?
And what I mean by that is like,
so physics so far has mostly described the universe
from the outside in some sense,
because we write down like laws of physics
and we write down our initial conditions.
So we might know something or we can hypothesize
about the initial state of the universe
and we know the laws of gravitation,
we can explain like the behavior of the universe
over all time.
But when you're a system inside the universe,
trying to describe it,
I think the physics actually looks quite different
in the sense that you can also think of that law of physics
not actually being outside the universe.
And I think like I kind of alluded this to at the beginning
of thinking about the history of physics
when we were having this conversation about like,
what could somebody that's not a physicist say to a physicist?
Well, you're looking at a physicist from the outside
and a physicist from the outside is the physical systems
that invented laws of physics, right?
So laws of physics themselves are a product of something
that's happened on our planet over billions of years.
Life first emerged, it evolved to multicellularity,
multicellularity eventually emerged animals,
the animals evolved into humans, humans invented culture,
and human culture invented something called science
and science invented laws of physics.
And now we use those to describe the properties
of where we happen to be sitting
and whatever reality we're existing in.
And I think trying to understand it
from that more intrinsic perspective
of understanding ourselves in the universe
and like looking at it that way
is much more productive for these kinds of questions,
but it gets really hard
because you start blurring these boundaries.
Right, I mean, that then leads
to these philosophical speculations of,
are there any laws of physics distinct
from human observation, right?
That's the whole, you know,
philosophers have been dealing with that question,
obviously Einstein did too in terms of quantum, right?
Is the perspective of the observer
a distorting factor into the phenomenon
or a separate factor?
Yes.
Parallel to the phenomenon,
obviously not a question that we know the answer to,
but at least we've begun to posit the fact
that our observational eye may be
a much more substantial factor
than whatever it is we're observing,
which does segue a little bit with your question
about life, right?
If there was forms of life that are not within our spectrum
of understandable possibilities,
would we even be able to register to such, right?
Right, okay.
Yeah, aliens could be weirder than we could imagine.
Right, and therefore could indeed be among us
without us recognizing that.
You know, these are the philosophical questions.
I wondered if you had a thought,
because you just mentioned this, you know,
one thing that's separate from the AI mania,
which seems to have seized Silicon Valley in particular,
but culture in general.
One thing that's been a kind of prevalent
in the past decade or so, I guess,
has been this whole simulation theory idea,
you know, that we're living in a simulation.
Yeah.
And there's been some really cool writing about this,
some philosophers have talked about this,
because just as a thought experiment of like,
how do we know what we know?
Right.
It's an interesting one.
Right.
I just, you know, because you've talked about this,
I wonder what your thoughts are.
Is this just like a kind of a weird, you know,
subset of overly wealthy people
speculating about the nature of reality,
or is there something there?
I think there's something there in everything
that becomes sort of culturally relevant,
because it's kind of like,
what's on our collective psyche?
But I don't think what's there
is what people say is there.
So I think, you know, we had a really important revolution
in our understanding of how the world works
and how we can control it in the last century
with the invention of modern computation.
And I think, you know,
we don't really understand fundamentally
what it is to simulate things.
We don't understand what information is
as a fundamental category of nature.
And I think people are just kind of confused
about what that is.
And so it's easy to say all of reality could be a simulation,
but it doesn't actually give you any explanatory power
beyond saying all of reality is governed by laws of physics,
because the laws of physics actually have the same problem
as a simulation argument does,
which is reality is governed by a mathematical description
that requires something external to it
to basically program the universe
by setting a law and setting an initial condition.
So I think it's just kind of a,
it's interesting because people reinvent
the same sorts of concepts with new language,
but by doing that,
they actually point at some of the holes in the old concepts.
So I don't think like the simulation argument itself
is interesting because it points to the fact
that our current conception of the universe
in some sense could have an external designer.
And we've replaced that external designer now,
which used to be called God with a computer programmer,
which is a very Silicon Valley kind of thing to wanna do.
So I think there's some ego there.
But then that kind of cast some light
on this whole question that we've had for centuries
about where do the laws of physics come from?
And in Newton's conception of theoretical physics,
he didn't have a problem with inventing a field of inquiry,
which we call now modern theoretical physics,
that relies on external agents to set the thing in motion
because he believed in a Christian God.
So I think this sort of reinvention
of some of these ideas in new spaces actually points out
where this kind of like where the science
is actually not that different
from like having a theological belief.
And then the question is,
is it possible to move beyond that
and get a deeper explanation that allows us
to open new windows?
And I think where this becomes interesting to me
is not to say the universe is a simulation,
which means the universe doesn't exist,
but to ask that question in a more constructive way,
which is to say, what is it for a simulation to be physical?
Like to have physical reality.
What is it for words to be objects, like physical objects?
Or what is it for things that are abstract
to actually have causal power in the world?
And this for me is actually the same question
that's fundamentally about what life is
because all life has been doing
over the last few billion years
is building up more information processing systems
and layers of what we might call quote unquote software
and a computer system,
but like just layers of abstraction
that seem to be allowing new possibility space to open.
And we can do that very like,
and computers evolved out of that process, right?
Again, it goes to the fact
that like computers were invented by humans.
So then that, I think it raises new interesting questions
for asking about what physical reality is,
but it's trivializing that question
to just say reality is a simulation
because I think it supposes
that we understand what a simulation is
and I don't think we do.
You're constantly taking the step back,
like going back, you know,
but what's the original question as it were here?
I like inverting things.
It's just the way my brain works.
So if somebody wants to make an argument,
I like to take the same exact structure
and try to invert it
and think about it from the other side.
And it's so funny how often this happens
that you can find logically consistent things
that have a completely different spin and explanation on them
for the same sets of arguments.
I said something really briefly about aliens.
That was, again, both fun and useful
that they might be weirder than we think,
meaning like they might live among us,
meaning you like here on earth or like way out there
and maybe we've already seen them, but we didn't realize it.
I mean, well, it depends on what level.
So I could mean in either of those ways,
but in some ways, if you think, you know, like in some sense,
the exercise of understanding alien life for me
has become deconstructing everything we know
about physical reality in terms of like the laws of physics
we know and trying to build up a physics
that would describe the phenomena that we call life.
And that sounds like kind of an odd exercise,
but every time we've had a major revolution
in our understanding of fundamental physics,
it's never been because somebody carried an old theory
over into a new area of understanding.
So we didn't take, you know, Newton's laws of motion
and apply them to quantum physics.
Exactly why we invented quantum physics
is because our old paradigms didn't work.
And I think we see that with trying to understand life
in mind, like the reason these problems are hard
is because our old paradigms don't work.
And so in some sense, you have to reconstruct it from scratch.
And so the reason I'm bringing that up
is depending on what that reconstruction looks like,
like the alien could be beyond weird
that like there's a different chemistry
on a different planet.
It could be like, you know, to the extent that like
in an entire universe, there's only one form of life
because they're so non-interacting
in terms of like their possibility space,
that alien is really like,
it exists in a different possibility space.
That's wildly philosophical and conjectural,
but I think like opening the possibility that like,
even when we say the word alien,
we can't even imagine what an alien is,
is a useful framing to really put us in the right space
of like where we are and how creative we have to be
to think about this problem.
And I think it's too great,
because like I was just having a conversation
with someone this week about,
well, I had a workshop on plant intelligence last week
and like our plants smart.
And that seems like kind of a rare question to ask,
but you know, plants evolve,
they do all kinds of really interesting things,
but they're very alien to us,
because I mean, what would be the experience of a plant?
Like impossible to imagine.
So in some sense, like when we think about alienness,
we can't even imagine what it's like to be a plant.
Like all of our alien concepts
are very anthropocentric and very like animal focused.
So this is just like another example.
I think that one's getting a little like hard
and speculative to think concretely about,
but I think just it's a good illustration
of this kind of issue of the space
and the use of the word and how we think about it.
You know, there was that great,
I don't exactly know when it was written,
it's sort of mid 20th century book called Flatland.
Yes.
And I mean, for those who don't know,
it tried to conceive of entities existing
in different dimensionality.
So one dimensionality, two dimensionality,
three dimensional, four dimensional.
And that basically there were multiple aspects
of each of those experiences
that were just totally incomprehensible
to each of the other dimensionalities.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And I mean, if I wanted to get really nerdy in like physicsy,
I could say that like,
because I think life is fundamentally related
to the physics of time.
There are some like theories in cosmology
and things where space emerges from time.
And so, but if you think life is,
time is more fundamental and life is related to that,
like this issue of the dimensionality
and like where aliens could exist,
becomes very Flatland-ish
because like the space is actually built
out of like how they exist in time.
And so it gets totally weird.
The weirdness too, also segues with,
I mean, there's a reason why there's been an odd,
not necessarily culturally prominent,
but odd convergence between
some kind of Eastern mystical esoterica,
some of the Buddhist Hindu and physicists, right?
And the end views of the world
and the circularity of the world,
the non-linearity of time,
the degree to which things may be expanding endlessly
and therefore where we exist
within that expansive universe
may just be a small part of it.
And completely different languages, right?
In the sense of, you know,
the, you know, dharmic text or a, you know,
a sutra in Buddhism is a completely different language
than the mathematical languages of physicists.
But they end up describing
kind of oddly parallel realities.
Yeah, I always love that.
But also like you kind of think like they should
because presumably we live in the same reality,
we're just using different languages to describe it.
So I think a deep insight is a deep insight.
And I don't think it's unique to theoretical physicists
to have these kinds of insights into how reality works.
I just think we have a way of formalizing it
that allows using that information in new ways.
And I give the example of like,
this is like a widely speculative comment,
but like what's the difference between magic and science,
right? Like magic is something like an individual person
can do, science is something that you can teach it
and everyone can use that information to do something.
And this is why science actually is more powerful
than like colloquial knowledge.
Because it becomes knowledge of societies.
And I think this is actually a really important function
of science that people,
it's not just about making predictions
and understanding the world,
it's actually about the transferability of that information
in a way that allows you to do things
that you wouldn't be able to do otherwise.
And my go-to example is like the fact
that we're launching satellites into space
is a direct consequence of the fact
that Newton Law wrote down the laws of gravitation
300 years ago.
And so, you know, like you might imagine it was possible
and you might have one person building a rocket or something,
but like, unless they have the fundamental principles
of how that works and they can share it with other people
in a mathematical language,
which is, you know, a precisely shareable kind of language,
then it doesn't become, you know, useful to societies
at that level of long-term evolution.
Yeah, which is interesting, right?
And the discussion in the, you know,
religion versus science conversation
because religion or spiritual insight,
whatever you want to call it, would fall
under that same exact definition, right?
With less...
Yeah, because of your personal thing, right?
And then I think what science,
why I like science so much is I feel
like it's shareable deep insights.
We are approaching our temporal time limit.
Excellent.
For the podcast.
And it's talking about time.
Clearly the conversation is gonna continue endlessly.
I say that our conversations always end
and we should continue.
This one, we could just say it's gonna continue,
just no one will be able to hear it.
There's a possibility space in which it did continue,
but it's not the reality we live in.
So it's not gonna continue, fine.
So that may be an anticlimactic note,
but I love the way you think.
I think you are immensely creative
and always provocative in the best sense of the word.
And I encourage everyone to, you know,
follow your work and you and everything you do.
So we're gonna leave it at that note, but thanks, Sarah.
Thank you.
It was really fun.
Thanks, Sarah.
So I kind of feel like I just had a conversation
where like the level of the conversation
was like a step above where I was able to go.
I don't know if the listeners felt that way as well,
but I wasn't kidding when I said I felt
like I was waiting for like that guy
who's not gonna join to walk by being like,
yeah, man, you know, universe in time.
So it's a fun exercise for those of us
that aren't really used to thinking about that
on a daily basis to meet people that do
and to hear how their minds work
and where the theories are going.
I mean, it certainly is true
that particularly in the theoretical physics realm,
there's an awful lot of kind of philosophical conjecture.
And yes, the architecture of it is intensely mathematical.
And so it's not like you and I could sort of
create the same architecture of argument
that a theoretical physicist does,
but once you get beyond that,
a lot of what they're talking about
is these kind of huge questions of like,
what's the origin of life and what's the nature of life
and what's the nature of the universe and why are we here
and when's it gonna begin and when's it gonna end
and how did it begin?
And those are essentially the eternal questions
that human beings have been asking about.
It's important to remember that there's a lot of scientists
who are asking those big questions.
They're not just grappling with very specific problems.
Yeah, and I also really loved her answer.
And the point that you made about how a lot of the stuff
with physics ends up sounding very resonant with me
coming from the Buddhist world,
I think about Buddhist texts and Buddhist thought,
because if you talk to Buddhists,
there's lots of like, yes, like, you know,
that shows that that Buddhism is correct
or you get the second response of, no, Buddhism,
you know, we can't have Buddhism be relying on science,
but I've never quite heard a scientist
kind of put them on the same level like that, you know,
the way that you said like a deep insight is a deep insight.
I find that pretty rare to hear
from the scientific community, so that was neat.
Yes, and once again, very cool person,
very cool conversation.
We probably should focus a little more on science.
We did this a little bit with public health,
but clearly we could be doing it more
with some of the sciences as well.
So what's some of the news of the week
that we ought to be paying attention to that we haven't?
So let's talk about Indonesia.
Indonesia is on the cusp of moving
into low middle income territory,
which sounds really dry.
The exciting part about that is that part of that success
means that they've eradicated nearly all extreme poverty,
which is defined as living on less than $1.90 per day
in 2011 dollars to be very precise.
Indonesia is the world's largest Muslim majority country
with a population of almost 274 million people.
Despite being the world's fourth most populated country
and spanning one eighth of the planet,
Indonesia maintains a modest profile
on the international economic stage.
However, this is now changing
as the country's rapid expansion in infrastructure,
industries, education, and other aspects
is taking it to new highs in the world economic rankings.
In 2022, they got the percent of Indonesians
living in extreme poverty down to 1.5%.
And it was 19% in 2002.
They've also had pretty good progress
when it comes to poverty.
So this is a step up from extreme poverty
is defined as living on $3.20 per day.
And that is now 16%,
which was an astonishing 61% in 2002.
So Indonesia is coming up
despite the fact that Jakarta is sinking.
And they built a whole new capital,
care of an initiative by the president, Jokowi.
Or they're trying to, I think, they're trying their best.
Oh, they haven't, it has not, it is an incomplete city.
It's not the current status.
It is incomplete.
And I think that there's some concerns
about rushing construction,
but they are attempting to move the capital
since Jakarta is sinking at a rate of one foot per year.
That's a fact courtesy of the New York Times.
Wow, I'm impressed.
I mean, I'm impressed that you knew that.
I'm not impressed that Jakarta is sinking
by one foot a year.
And Indonesia is clearly a place
that we don't talk about enough.
There's no sarcasm in that comment, by the way.
It's got 280 million people.
It's the largest Muslim country in the world,
or Muslim majority country in the world.
And it's vast, I mean, 17,000 islands,
I think from one island to the other
is farther than New York to San Francisco by far.
And it's a country that we basically overlook, right?
And we just, it barely comes up in global conversations.
And yet it remains one of the more interesting
kind of under-examined places in the world.
We have a news item that does have to do with the US.
Job satisfaction hit a 36-year high in 2022.
So 62.3% of US workers said that they were satisfied
with their jobs.
This is data from an organization
called the Conference Board.
And the Conference Board is a pretty reputable organization.
And it's brilliant. According to them and others.
According to them, I don't know about others.
The workers that were among the happiest
are the ones who are hybrid
and the ones who took part in the Great Resignation,
so people who switched jobs during the pandemic.
Workers are now the most content
since the Conference Board started tracking job contentment
in 1987.
Now, fueling the increase,
the tight labor market and flexible work arrangements.
The measures that saw the greatest uptick,
work-life balance and improvements in workload
and the performance review process, perks and pay,
improved with people reporting being happier
with health plans, wages and bonuses
and the potential for future growth.
Across the more than two dozen metrics,
measured hybrid workers were the most satisfied
compared to fully remote or fully on-site workers.
In fact, all sectors saw an increase in satisfaction.
And people who have the optionality
of doing some of their work at home
and not commuting as much.
So take that Elon Musk.
Exactly. It'll be interesting to see
if that satisfaction goes down
as people are either required or told.
Well, that's the same thing, required and told.
As they are required to go back to the office,
whether or not that worker satisfaction will go down.
But another kind of counterintuitive story in that,
I think most people think or feel
that satisfaction would be very low,
particularly given how negative most Americans
by most surveys are about the quote unquote economy overall.
I think it might be tied into one of those things too,
where people just generally, right,
not even having to do the job satisfaction
are negative about outside circumstances
and positive about their own personal circumstances.
So in that way, it's not surprising,
but I think that most people probably do assume
that people are just toiling away miserable.
So it's nice to hear that it's in fact the opposite.
So to follow up from that very science-based convo,
our next story is a science one.
Zachary, you've mentioned that sometimes TPN
doesn't do as much science as we could.
Have an update about mapping the human genome.
20 years ago, we mapped the entire human genome
for the first time,
but it was primarily based on the DNA
of one mixed-race man from Buffalo, New York.
Very random, I'm not sure.
I wasn't sure how that happened.
Buffalo's claim to fame, no offense to Buffalo.
With some inputs from a few other individuals,
but it's mostly of European descent,
which means that we're just missing
a lot of the information that we should have.
So now there is something called the PAN genome,
which incorporates near-complete genetic sequences
from 47 men and women of diverse origins.
The reason why this is important has less to do
with sort of like DEI stuff
and more to do with the part of the human genome
that is associated with diseases.
It's a very small part, it's like 0.4%,
but that changes based on people's origins.
So if we wanna make advances for personalized medicine
for discovering the links between certain things
in our genes and then a disease
that will crop up later in life,
it's really imperative that we have samples
from a wide base of people.
So now we have it.
And the cost of mapping, 20 years ago,
incredibly arduous, hundreds of millions
that always raised for these companies,
the human genome project required massive funding
and with computing power now,
and particularly now with AI tools looming,
the speed and ease and cost of mapping genomes
has changed things, maybe not as dramatically
as the initial mapping, but in many ways, yes.
Like the ability to do this 47 now,
it'll be 4,000 tomorrow, it'll be 4 million soon enough.
Whether that's personalized medicine
or just increasingly greater insight into what it is
we're even talking about
when we talk about our genetic makeup,
our ability to do that dwarfs what was done 20 years ago.
Yeah, it's incredibly fast progress.
And it's something that because it doesn't have
like that tangible now effect,
it's really hard to feel excited about sometimes,
like you just want like the product right now, right?
But eventually it will come
and then we can point to all these times
that we pointed out the steps along the way.
Absolutely.
Well, thank you again, Emma,
for another great conversation.
We look at these news items
and we also highlight many, many, many more each week
in our newsletter, What Could Go Right,
which Emma writes with support of others
and encourage all of you to get that newsletter.
You can sign up for it.
It's free at the Progress Network site
or click on on Twitter at all.
Also gets distributed through LinkedIn.
So many ways to get it, many more stories
than the ones that we cherry pick for our episode.
And thank you all for listening.
Thank you, Emma, for hosting.
And we will be back with you next week.
Thank you, Zachary.
