In this lecture, we're going to spend time mostly talking about mathematics, but perhaps
not in a way you've seen before.
At the end of lecture one, I tried to establish that of all the languages that humanity uses,
only mathematics has shown the capability for us to describe nature's most fundamental
laws and structures.
Why is this so important in a series of lectures about string theory?
Because string theory, as theoretical physics concerns something we have never seen.
Particle physics, which we will begin discussing in the next lecture concerns things that we
have never seen also, but we have lots and lots of evidence for these beliefs and experiments.
People hear me and other physicists say we've seen particles, but what we mean is that we've
seen the data produced by our instrumentation.
String theory is purely mathematics.
The evidence for strings for the belief that at the fundamental level our world is defined
by pasta-like structures can only be found in mathematical equations presently.
Before I talk about mathematics, which as we will proceed through these lecture series
and use on many occasions and return to time and time again, let me take a few minutes
to discuss my vision for this course.
I've been called on more than one occasion a heretic in the Church of String Theory.
Perhaps one of the reasons is because I believe that the ideas associated with this can be
understood by anyone, not necessarily a string physicist or string theorist.
However, let me explain what I mean by understand.
This understanding will not permit you to become a string theorist any more than listening
to a concert would make you a great composer.
However, the understanding I am referring to is to allow access to the pictures and models
that sit behind string theory.
This understanding must necessarily be less precise.
It is only with the mathematics that we get the level of precision needed for a researcher.
So for me, the driving force behind teaching this course is to give you this level of understanding.
Yes, string theory is completely in the mathematics and I will be showing you mathematics at a
level that you might not even encounter during an undergraduate degree program.
I've envisioned this course as allowing you, the student, to have an unprecedented chance
to look over the shoulders of a theoretical physicist at work.
Certainly, I won't sugarcoat this as an incredibly difficult and complex subject, but I have
faith in your ability to gain a general understanding of the overall concept of string theory.
I want you to become part of a really elite group of people, those who not only have some
passing familiarity with string theory, but have more than they passing insight.
This is a little bit like becoming one of the small number of people who have completed
a marathon.
I hear the statistics are about one half of one percent and I must acknowledge I'm not
one of those.
If you have to watch one or more of these lectures more than once, don't worry about
it.
If there's one portion you feel you understand well, but not another, don't worry about
that.
It's going to be a little bit like some physicists feel about string theory, that it's not quite
easy to get into.
I also want to take a moment to talk about how this course unfolds.
It's a little bit like a mystery novel.
As you're reading through it, you won't quite be able to figure out who committed the murder,
but by the end, I hope it all makes sense.
As opposed to the impression that you may bring to this course, science is not linear
in its progress.
We often have to reflect this in the way that science works, so it will appear that we will
bounce around a bit.
There will be a few lectures to get string theory straight.
This is the way that the course of science follows as it makes progress.
We will need time to talk about Newton, Maxwell, Einstein, and their theories.
We will need to talk about dark matter, dark energy, antimatter, black holes, and we even
take up concepts like particle physics and return to them over and over again.
You see science, and especially physics, is not about truths.
It's about forming beliefs that are less false, and so the notion of falsification that is
showing through experiments that a concept, an idea, or a proposal is wrong is the essence
of science.
Even when we string theories may seem to have thrown out all vestiges of reality, and you
may find yourself agreeing with that statement, we are still very much committed to the notion
that this work can ultimately be tested and that all our efforts are built on the edifice
of physics as it has developed over the course of the last 100s, if not thousands of years.
You will find us asking in later lectures, are strings the ultimate mathematical description
of the laws of nature?
We will be looking at the various theories developed by Newton, Maxwell, Einstein, and
others and enhanced, added onto, and falsified sometimes by additional work of physicists,
all in an overriding quest to unify all theories, those that apply to light, to sound, to gravity,
to mass, to motion, into one grand theory that satisfies every equation and condition
and ultimately describes our universe.
We will see, for example, that particle physics, which we will discuss exclusively in the next
two lectures, does not resolve the world of the quantum with the world of gravity, and
by the quantum we mean the world of very small.
We'll find out that Einstein's search for theory that would unify all existence theories
and failed.
Throughout these lectures, we will be presenting evidence, mathematical evidence, that string
theory is the one that leads successfully to this unification.
We'll be examining closely string theory through the mathematics of its equations and find
that will lead us to the conclusion that string theory provides us with the only presently
viable description achieving this unification and describing the essential of our existence.
That's why I sometimes refer to this as the DNA of reality.
Pretty heady stuff, sounds pretty overwhelming, but I'm getting ahead of my story.
I've given you a sort of preview on the end of the story, the end of this puzzling and
mysterious journey we're about to take together, but even before we embark I need to give you
proper tools, and mathematics is our essential tool.
So mathematics is a language.
It's a language like other languages, but different also.
In fact, the astronomer Arthur Eddington once said that the problem with using words
to describe scientific concepts is there are simply not enough tenses.
So mathematics really is this very strange and interesting tool that scientists apparently
are forced to use.
I sometimes describe mathematics as an organ of perception.
By this I mean that those of us who work as theoretical physicists use mathematics to
gain insight into physical reality and to have a way of knowing things for which there
is no other means of access.
This is often first achieved by mathematics.
An example of this is the atom.
Atoms are something that's pretty commonly discussed in our world, a topic that we see
in the news with respect to nuclear energy, and yet the very notion of the atom was at
one point in time controversial.
In 1905, Einstein had a year of miracles.
He wrote five papers, and three of these papers totally remade the way we look at nature.
One of these papers is called On the Movement of Small Particles, Suspended in Stationery
Liquids, Required by the Molecular Kinetic Theory of Heat.
Boy, what a mouthful.
But the important thing about this paper is that Einstein was able to use its mathematics
and some observation of the world around us to predict the size of atoms.
No one had ever predicted the size of atoms prior to this, and so it turns out, as Charles
Darwin once said, mathematics seems to endow one with something like a new sense.
Those of us who are scientists, and certainly theoretical physicists, use mathematics as
a way of sensing the world, as a way of seeing the world.
But all languages have the power to convey ideas.
That's what languages are good for.
And to this extent, the notion that languages are actually telepathic is kind of ubiquitous.
However, the precision of the transmittal of ideas and concepts using mathematics is
striking when compared to other forms of human communication.
Let me kind of illustrate this with a story.
Let's imagine that true exorcentric perception existed.
Did individuals using these abilities study the microscopic world?
Well, let's see.
The remote viewer might use their ability to find something among the world of atoms
that no one had ever thought about before.
And having found it, they come back and they try to tell someone else what they've seen.
Since no one has ever thought about this idea before, how do they do this?
Words will not suffice.
Pictures likely won't be sufficient.
And in fact, it's extremely difficult to think of any way that such a genuinely new
concept using what we normally think of as language can be used to communicate to other
minds.
It turns out, however, that if the remote viewer describes whatever it is with mathematics,
then another person trained sufficiently well in mathematics.
We might call this concept numeracy the analog of literacy with words, but any other person
trained at a sufficiently high level will be able to understand this totally new idea.
And so mathematics has a kind of telepathy that's very strange.
We can almost look into another person's mind with mathematics and see more clearly what's
there than we can do with most other languages.
Mathematics has other weird properties.
There's something called unreasonable effectiveness.
And even theoretical physicists find this surprising.
The physicist Eugene Wigner once wrote an essay, the title of which was The Unreasonable
Effectiveness of Mathematics in the Natural Sciences.
He noted in this article that if you actually look at what scientists are able to do over
the course of the last few hundred years, you'll find that mathematics has somehow given
far more in return than one might have guessed at the beginning.
In fact, even Einstein found mathematics strange in this way.
He once said, here arises a puzzle that has disturbed scientists in all periods.
How is it possible that mathematics, a product of human thought that is independent of experience
fits so excellently the objects of physical reality?
Can human reason without experience discover by pure thinking properties of real things?
So when even a great physicist like Albert Einstein thinks math is somehow spooky, we
know there's something very interesting going on.
Let me give you other examples of this spookiness.
Well, there's a famous story of Sir Isaac Newton sitting under a tree.
One day supposedly an apple falls on his head, and at least according to this apocryphal
story, he gets some insight and understand why the moon is in orbit around the earth.
So here we have a connection between an apple dropping on someone's head and the moon orbiting
earth.
Why are these things connected at all?
Well through mathematics, the description of gravity for the first is exactly the same
as the description of gravity for the second, and so you have a unification between the
celestial and with the everyday world.
It's kind of a spooky story when we say that something serendipitous has happened here.
I can tell you in other such stories that the 1930s, a physicist by the name of Paul
Dirac, tried to write an equation to describe the electron or any electrons.
There was one problem, however, he knew that electrons existed and he wanted them to be
consistent with Albert Einstein's theory of special relativity.
Well, at the time when he was undertaking this, no one knew how to describe electrons
in such a way.
And there is the added complication of the world of the small where quantum theory, a
topic we will return to again and again in these lectures, holds sway.
So now a very strange thing happens.
Dirac takes these two things, quantum theory on the one hand and Einstein's relativity
on the other, and he tries to combine them.
He finds that in order to do this, he has to invent some new ideas.
So he writes an equation which we now call the relativistic equation for the electron
and he succeeds in finding a solution to this equation that precisely describes all the
properties of the electron.
One can imagine that he was very happy, but that's not the end of the story.
The goal he set for himself was succeeded, but there was a second solution.
Now the second solution was kind of interesting because it has exactly the same mass as the
electron.
It has many other properties in common with the electron, but it has the opposite charge.
Now remember, this is only in the mathematical equations that he found this thing.
He also found that if you take the second solution and combine it with the first, both
of them destroy each other, leaving behind them an amount of energy that precisely matches
Einstein's famous equation, E equals mc squared.
Now Dirac didn't at first know what to make of this other solution.
And at first he, in fact, confused it, thought maybe it's a proton, but a proton turns out
to be 1800 times as heavier as an electron.
So it couldn't be describing a proton.
What Dirac had actually found was what we now call antimatter.
Antimatter is kind of a mirror image of the matter that we see in the everyday world around
us.
So we work with electronics, we need electrons for that, that's how computers work, but in
nature there's a complete copy of the electron, but it has the opposite charge.
When Dirac wrote the mathematics for the electron, this other thing automatically came into existence.
And antimatter, of course, has gone on into a life of its own in science fiction.
For example, Captain Kirk has matter, antimatter engines to drive the great starship enterprise
across the galaxies.
But this piece of science fiction, which perhaps one day we will use for such technology, starts
off as real science and it starts off only in the world of mathematics.
So again, without the mathematics, who knew such a thing was possible?
Mathematics promotes this kind of serendipity in trying to understand nature.
It's a very, very strange circumstance and indeed, of course, one of which we are the
fortunate beneficiaries.
If I start each lecture with pages and pages of equations, most of you would quickly decide
this is not a course you want to take.
So let me show you something that I think is pretty complicated, but nevertheless I
bet your reaction to it is very different.
Let's look at this.
It's a piece of music.
And if you try to describe music in terms of symbols, you get things that look like this
score.
Now this particular piece of music was written by Handel and in fact, let me play it for
you.
Now I think that was a fairly pleasant experience, at least for people who like classical music.
There was nothing daunting about it, nothing frightening, and by the way, the only reason
I picked this particular piece of music is because if you look in the title, you'll see
there's a word there with which I have some affection and familiarity.
The name of the song, of course, is Lift Up to Your Head, O ye gates.
So this is a piece of music, a typical piece of music, dots on lines, nothing frightening.
And yet, when I do this for many, many people in our society, they see things that look
sort of like mathematics.
If I showed you the mathematics, the reaction is completely negative.
Now the thing that I as a scientist and someone who uses mathematics constantly in my everyday
life and living and pursuing my profession, the thing that I find very interesting is
that at least from my viewing, a musical score is not that different from a complicated
piece of mathematics.
Here let me show you one.
And yet the reaction people get to music versus mathematics is so very different, so diametrically
opposed to each other.
So most people don't wind up using mathematics.
Mathematics is a real challenge in our society, and yet there's a challenge that we have
to face.
For people who are musicians, however, when they look at a score, they access an experience
that even I, as someone who cannot read music, cannot experience.
So those of us who are theoretical physicists and scientists, those of us who use a lot
of mathematics, are kind of a little bit like musicians because in our part of reality and
our professional activities, we have these scores that we're constantly reading, but
our scores are mathematical scores.
So when we talk to each other, we get excited because in some sense we can hear the music
that's behind these symbols, behind these scores.
So when we talk about something like string theory as being elegant, when Einstein talks
about the beauty of mathematics, it's all because we have access to these scores.
In fact, many quotes from many scientists talk about the beauty of mathematics.
And the whole point of the discussion is to make clear that mathematics is something that
people do.
People do mathematics essentially doing something very akin to making music.
In fact, in many psychological studies, it's often noticed that people who are good in
mathematics are often good in music.
So this at least suggests that the human mind is doing something rather similar when it
does mathematics or when it's doing music.
In some sense, we physicists are listening to these melodies.
The most striking thing about some of these melodies are the ones that describe natures,
the ones that sort of, to us, are a different kind of music and in them we find great beauty.
For many, many millennia, the only people who could do mathematics were people who could
master the symbols, who could in some sense master the scores.
You couldn't become a mathematician without reading the equations.
However, earlier in this talk, I alluded to the fact that mathematics, at least as scientists
use it, have pictures behind them.
Just as scores have music and rhythms and melodies behind them.
And to our world, we now have a device for playing mathematics.
This device is called a computer.
The computer, as we will be using in this course, will be a way in which I will be able
to convey the ideas from the equations, but we won't actually be showing the equations.
You know, it's interesting to think about computers in this way.
And if you have such thoughts, you might begin to imagine a different kind of future
where people interact with mathematics.
We may see the appearance of a genius who understands mathematics, not by writing equations,
but only by using computers.
This is kind of like a musical genius who doesn't know how to score.
This is, of course, a different way of thinking about engaging mathematics.
And in fact, it's so new, we don't really have any examples of this.
You might think of computer-aided conceptualization as a wave of future, as a new way for humanity
to access mathematics.
So in this series of lectures, we're going to rely heavily on the fact that for string
theory, which is mathematics, instead of presenting the scores and the equations, we're going
to be playing the mathematics with the computer.
So let's show some examples of this playing of the mathematics.
Let me take a real-world example, and then later we'll move into string theory.
I've picked an example that's relevant to understanding how energy in the universe was
distributed at the instant of the Big Bang.
So here you see a grid that's come up before you, and there are some lenses above the grid.
And now let's set the movie in motion.
Now these lenses will bend and flex.
Some of them will bend up, the other bend down.
And when you look through the lenses at the grid, you will notice that the spots on the
grid, depending on how the lenses are bent, either look either smaller or larger than
when we look at them without the lenses.
Now why is this relevant?
Well it turns out in our universe, the amount of energy that was distributed between gravity
and matter at the Big Bang acts like a lens.
So if we look at the picture here, you'll notice that on the left, where we have poked
the grid down, the space is actually a little bit smaller than the actual grid size.
On the right, where we've poked them up, they look a little bit larger.
And the point is that our universe has this behavior.
So let's put this movie in complete play and watch it once again.
As you can see, the lenses oscillate back and forth, and the apparent grid size changes.
We call this concavity, that is the bending of the lenses.
You can either magnify or shrink the apparent grid size according to the concavity of the
lens.
Why is this relevant to us in physics?
Well in lecture one, we talked about the cosmic microwave background, which is a remnant
that sits in the sky all around us.
It's a kind of snapshot of our universe when it was 300,000 years old.
The cosmic microwave background has brought us a beautiful piece of information that we
understand through Einstein's equations.
In fact, let me put up Einstein's equations.
This equation tells us that the cosmic microwave background is something that we can understand.
In fact, it kind of predicted the cosmic microwave background.
The equation also has another interesting feature, something called a cosmological constant.
This equation is the sort of thing that describes some of the most fundamental pieces of information
we know about existence.
It's called the Einstein field equation.
One of the things the equation allows us to do is to answer a question about a mystery.
And so what is this mystery?
It's a piece of mathematics, and the mystery is called the Big Bang.
Namely, at the instant of the Big Bang, was there more energy in gravity or more energy
in matter?
The cosmic microwave background acts like a kind of telescope that allows us to look
back and answer this question.
And we basically, when looking at the background, are looking at a kind of visual static.
And that's what we see in the image of the actual cosmic microwave background.
Now you'll notice there's an average size to these little red and yellow dots.
And we can superimpose above it the lenses.
And now, in the form of Albert Einstein's equations, we have learned something about
the way that energy was divided at the instant of the Big Bang, since the curvature of spacetime,
which we'll talk about later, acts like a lens.
And so there's more energy, and if there were more energy in the gravitational field, the
sizes would be smaller on average than we would expect from the predictions of the equations
of Albert Einstein.
On the other hand, if there's less, they would be smaller.
And if they're equal, then we can say, gee, the distribution of energy was equal.
It turns out we live in the universe where the distribution of size is the same, and
so we know that at the instant of the Big Bang, the amount of energy in gravity is the
same as the amount of energy in the rest of the universe in matter.
So here's an example of how we use mathematics to see back into time to an epoch where no
possible humans or any other conceivable life that we know about could have existed.
Earlier in this lecture, we talked about how we can see evidence of particles, the building
blocks of nature in the laboratory, and we can find particles in the mathematical equations,
for example, in Mr. Dirac's equations.
But we've never actually been able to see the particles.
That's because there's far too small for us to detect an ordinary means.
Nowadays, we can actually see atoms through a device called an atomic force microscope.
So let's talk about viewing the pictures behind the math that describes a part that
makes up the atoms.
They're the electrons, the protons, and in the next lecture, we're going to actually
talk about this in very great detail.
We earlier talked about Einstein's work in 1905, and here I have an animation of the
atom which we can see as a representation of that work.
So here it is.
You'll notice in this representation, everything is in motion.
The world of the small is not a static place, it's a dynamic place.
The atom itself is a dynamic quantity.
It's not a hard sphere the way many people imagine, and when you talk about the nucleus,
which are the little objects in the center of the atom, well gee, they're incredibly
small.
In fact, the size of the nucleus of the atom to the atom is about the size of one blood
cell to you.
One of the ways that physicists made fundamental advances in the 30s and 40s in understanding
nuclear energy was by thinking about the nucleus of the atom as a little drop, and we now have
the equations that know how to describe this, and that's what we're watching for pictures.
Our equations actually support this view, and this is very important for both nuclear energy
as well as nuclear weapons.
So these pictures have included in them mathematics that has profound impact on our world.
These little balls inside of the pictures are again things that we have at first had
no recognition, no observation, no possibility to dream about, but in 1969, little pieces
of matter inside the proton and neutron were seen in the deep inelastic scattering experiment.
The mathematical version of this experiment was run, and the only mathematical result
that explained what data came out of the laboratory was the one that says there are pieces of
matter inside protons and neutrons, we call these things quarks.
So mathematics allows us definitely to see our world.
We earlier talked about other things, things that are called pulsars, and again the relevant
point of the picture was that the waves that come off pulsars are a piece of mathematics.
Before 1916, no one ever dreamed that such mathematics made a prediction about a wave
of gravity.
I. Albert Einstein's famous equations of general relativity tell us that this is precisely
the case, even though we've never seen it in the laboratory.
This year, and around this time, our nation has constructed an observatory, it's called
the Laser Interferometry Gravitational Wave Observatory.
It's called LIGO as an acronym, and I talked about this previously in our previous lecture
when we saw that large L-shaped building with four kilometer long arms.
The whole purpose of the device is to detect waves of gravity.
How difficult is the detection?
Well, I have a picture for that one too.
If we go back to the nucleus, you'll notice there's a thin red line there.
You see that thin red line is how much the arms of LIGO will change.
It's an incredibly small distance, something like 10 to the minus 15 is the size of the
nucleus.
We're talking about one one thousandth the size of the helium atom nucleus and trying
to make this measurement with these large L-shaped arms on the device.
So we've never had this kind of technology before.
We've never had an instrument that could measure such a small distance, but we as a nation
have spent about four hundred million dollars to see if the mathematics that supports this
idea is actually right.
And now, let me end this lecture by saying you might think that all of this mathematics
has nothing to do with you, so let me put it in a personal context.
Einstein's theory of general relativity is often thought to be this esoteric thing out
there, but many of you I'm sure have used either GPS units in your cars or handheld
units.
It turns out that in order to properly understand the operation of the GPS, you need to understand
how the signals have their timing change as they go from earth to satellites and back.
These timing changes are there and are precisely described by Einstein's theory of general
relativity.
So unless you know about this mathematics, you can't properly build such a device.
So it's not so esoteric after all.
It is the basis for providing something that, well, it's nice like a GPS unit.
When you go for a walk on a hike, if you have such a unit, you won't get lost in the woods.
