In our last lecture, we began the process of learning how to see into higher dimensions.
It took us through a very strange detour.
We had to talk about a piece of mathematics, in particular something that many students
see in high school, namely the Pythagorean theorem.
But we had to extend that, because we want to talk about the world of the string.
Recall, the string is such an incredibly small object that, as of now, the only parts and ways and techniques that we have for studying it is by the use of mathematics.
Let's recapitulate our journey from the world of blood cells, which we have illustrated here, and go this time zooming down to the world of the string,
past the atom, past the nucleus of the atom, until we get to an incredibly small distance of 10 to the minus 34 or 10 to the minus 35 meters.
That's where we find the string.
Now, the other thing about the string is that it is an intrinsically quantum mechanical process.
It is describing processes that we can't measure directly.
These processes involve the laws of very tiny objects, and in the world of the quantum, things that sometimes you may think of as continuous, in fact, come in small packets.
We can see the analogy of quantization by thinking about the surface of a pond.
Imagine a very strong wind blowing across the surface of the pond.
At first, you might say, well, the pond is placid, so here we have a representation of a placid pond.
But with a very strong wind, then little chunks of water can be blown into the air as the spray that you would find on a windy day.
And these chunks, in fact, come in a smallest possible size, namely the size of the atom.
In the world of the quantum and the microcosmic world, energy has this property.
You may think it's nice and continuous, but it comes in a smallest packet, and that's what we call quantization.
The string is intrinsically a quantum mechanical object.
Therefore, our everyday experiences in thinking about the world may have to be modified.
In our last lecture, we imagined looking at a house.
So here's our house again, and you can see our house has a ladder laying next to it.
And let's walk up to the house and look at the ladder.
There it is laying flat on the ground.
And in the last lecture, we also talked about imagining a construction of two squares.
So here is a green square whose base is exactly the ladder of the house.
And below the ground, we can imagine a blue square whose top is also the ladder.
And therefore, the area of the two is precisely the same.
That doesn't surprise us.
But now we can take our ladder and lift it up the side of the house.
And there are squares. We're lifting.
And you'll notice another square appears as soon as we lift it up.
The remarkable thing about the Pythagorean theorem is that the area of the blue square plus the area of the yellow square
is exactly equal to the area of this green square, no matter how we lift or pull the ladder around the house.
And so there we see it. Those areas are always the same.
Now, of course, there's something else that we talked about in the ladder.
Something you should never do if you're climbing a ladder.
Let's go back and push the side of the ladder so that it is not aligned with the top.
Now, it would be very dangerous to climb this.
But nonetheless, we can see that another square appears which measures the distance we push the ladder over to the side.
And the remarkable thing about the Pythagorean theorem is that it says that the area still adds up to be the green square.
So here we see it without the house.
There's our blue square, our yellow square.
And then when we pull the ladder away from the house, the purple square appears.
And all three of these areas is exactly the area of the house.
That's the magic of the Pythagorean theorem.
So using that magic, we want to imagine a world where there are more than the three dimensions that we have seen here,
the three dimensions in which we move around.
Now, we've never actually seen extra dimensions, so it's very difficult.
But because of our discussion of the Pythagorean theorem, we can say,
if that world is there, then we know how the Pythagorean theorem should work.
In a world with one extra dimension, the area of the square attached to the hypotenuse is equal to the sums of the areas of the squares
attached to each leg in every single direction that we could possibly move in this imaginary world of four dimensions.
And then this brings us to a four-dimensional version of the Pythagorean theorem.
Now, a four-dimensional version of the Pythagorean theorem, of course, doesn't apply to our everyday living.
Or we could even be more radical.
Suppose there were lots of these extra dimensions.
Then we would add one area for every extra dimension that exists,
and still the sums of the areas have to add up to the area of the green square.
Now, in many places, the idea that time is a fourth dimension actually precedes Einstein.
And one such place we can find this is in the book The Time Machine by H.G. Wells, which was published in 1895,
ten years before Einstein's miracle year.
At the beginning of the book occurs the following passage.
Clearly, the time traveler proceeded, any real body must have extension in four directions.
It must have length, breadth, thickness, and duration.
But through the natural infirmity of the flush, we overlook this fact.
There really are four dimensions.
However, a tendency to draw an unreal distinction between the real three dimensions and that of time,
because that happens to be the one in which our consciousness moves.
So, even in the book The Time Machine, we find this idea that time is an extra dimension.
In fact, philosophically, this idea had been around perhaps for hundreds of years or even thousands of years.
At the time the book The Time Machine was written, in fact,
there was a professor, Simon Newcomb, who talked about a projection of a larger world onto ours.
It turns out that this character mentioned in the book was a real person.
He lived here in the United States, and he ultimately served a term as the president of the American Mathematical Society.
So this notion that mathematics provides for us a set of eyes is something that we will use extensively in our discussion of string theory.
However, HD Wells didn't get it all right.
According to the HD Wells picture, you think of time as just an extra dimension,
and therefore, if you believe it's an extra dimension, you simply write the Pythagorean theorem with one more area added to the ones that we can see in our world.
Well, in fact, Albert Einstein did something very radical about this.
He said, yes, time and space are part, ultimately, of a single kind of four-dimensional world,
but he did something that physicists often think about.
It's called units or engineering dimensions.
We measure distances in either inches, yards, or miles, and we physicists and scientists think of these units as being what we call the engineering dimensions.
All links can be measured in inches, yards, and miles, so we say that all links are equivalent.
But time is not measured in inches, yards, and miles.
We measure times, seconds, minutes, and hours.
So we think of that as a different dimension, engineering dimension, not dimension in the sense of extra dimensions.
So let's, however, imagine that time is very much like space.
Well, in space, when we saw our ladder, there was a length.
We can call the distance upward the breath, and then the distance to the side, the thickness.
For each of those, we could draw a square.
And now if we think of time as an extra dimension, we can draw a square for this extra dimension and add it into our Pythagorean theorem.
There's only one problem with this idea.
You see, an area is measured in terms of square units.
We can talk about an area that is four square units, four square inches, four square yards, four square miles.
But if you square time, you have to talk about something that is four seconds squared, or four minutes squared, or four hours squared.
And in science, the reason we cannot simply add this ladder area to the first three is because the units are different.
There's a principle in science that says, in order to get a consistent equation, every single term in that equation must have the same units.
So you can't add squares, squares, inches to square seconds.
They don't have the same units.
Now, one of the geniuses of Einstein's theory of relativity is that he figured out a way to get around this problem.
And the secret that he used was that light, which travels with about a trillion feet per second, actually more accurately, 982 million feet per second.
But the point about light is that it has both units attached to it.
A velocity is meters per second, or feet per second.
So the square of a velocity must be meters squared divided by second square.
And that is actually very handy.
Because what Einstein did in special relativity is to observe that if you constructed a square from, let's say, a unit of time,
so let's say you start with three seconds, if you square that becomes nine square seconds.
But you can't add that to areas because areas are measured in square feet.
But what Einstein observed is that if you take the area constructed from time and multiply that by the velocity of light squared,
the product of those two things had the units of square area.
So when Einstein talks about a four-dimensional universe, the first thing he does is say that whenever you have a length in time,
you have to multiply it by the speed of light in order to get something that has the same units of length.
Now, this is something we all know because if you tell me a velocity, let's say I'm moving at five feet per second,
and then you ask, then you tell me, OK, I want you to move for 10 seconds, then I take five feet per seconds,
multiply it by the time that I move, and that gives me 50 feet.
So I move 50 feet in 10 seconds.
But feet is a unit of length.
So velocity times time is a length.
So Einstein uses this trick.
He writes a Pythagorean theorem where the area associated with time has the factor of c squared associated with it.
So the Einstein version of the Pythagorean theorem reads,
these area of the hypotenuse is equal to c squared times the area that you construct from time,
and now true genius comes into effect because when Einstein writes his version of the Pythagorean theorem,
he judiciously inserts a set of minus signs.
Remember when we talked about the ordinary Pythagorean theorem,
it said that one area was equal to the sum of other areas.
You never used minus signs, but Einstein comes along and says, you must use minus signs.
And because of this, we can see the error in the discussion of the book, the time machine.
Because you see, if we follow the intuition of H.G. Wells, we would never insert those minus signs.
Everything would have a plus sign associated with it.
So, and in fact, Einstein was one of the first physicists to assert
that you should be able to measure something that's very similar to a hypotenuse,
but to use some plus signs and some minus signs.
For this reason, we will call this construct the Einstein hypotenuse,
very different from the Pythagorean theorem because it uses both pluses and minus signs for an area.
When I was a student studying special relativity in college,
the first time I was given this argument that Einstein's hypotenuse was in fact the Rosetta stone
that one could use to understand everything that he did,
I recognized it as an invaluable idea in trying to understand the mysteries of special relativity.
So, one thing about our ladder was that no matter which orientation we had for the ladder,
whether it was laying flat or whether we tilt it, the area that was attached to the ladder was always the same number.
Now, this brings an idea that we use over and over again.
It's called invariance, the fact that the area doesn't change no matter what orientation you have for the ladder.
An invariance is what we say is that the area is invariant or the square of the length is invariant.
The secret to understanding special relativity is that Einstein's hypotenuse is the invariant
that the laws of special relativity never change no matter what you do as a different observer.
So, let's see if we can put this idea to use.
Imagine that I have a light bulb here in front of me and at some instant I turn it on,
I wait nine seconds, then I turn it off.
So, according to me, the light bulb doesn't move.
It's just on for a while, then it goes off after nine seconds.
But imagine that you were in a spaceship that was whizzing by me as this was all going on.
What would you actually see?
In particular here, the magic of special relativity comes into play.
Let's say your spaceship was traveling at four-fifths the speed of light.
Then when you look at me and the light bulb, we're both moving from your perspective.
So, we both have a distance that we traverse.
Now, I claim that the light bulb was on for nine seconds.
So, it didn't move, but it was on for nine seconds.
The fact that it didn't move means that all of the areas associated with the links, I will say they're zero.
But I can construct an area associated with the time, because I can take C squared, the units of time,
and I get an area that I claim, describe what was going on with the light bulb.
Now, let's take your point of view in a spaceship.
From your point of view, the light bulb is moving in space and it's on for a certain amount of time.
Now, before Einstein, what every physicist would have said is that from your perspective,
the light bulb is on for the same amount of time that I claim, namely, five, nine seconds.
But what Einstein says is no.
The light bulb will appear to be on to you in such a way that the Einstein hypotenuse gives the same answer for whoever's calculating it.
So, how does this work from your perspective?
Well, from your perspective, the light bulb moves a certain distance.
You can therefore construct the area associated with that.
Also, however, it stays on for a while, so you can square that time and multiply by C.
And now you can take those two parts and put them into the Einstein hypotenuse.
You compare that with what I did to calculate the Einstein hypotenuse,
and according to Einstein, these both have to give the same number.
The only way for that to happen is that the time according to you is different from the time according to me.
In fact, what you will claim is that the light bulb was on for 15 seconds, not nine seconds.
That's exactly what you need in order to make the Einstein hypotenuse that you calculate agree with the Einstein hypotenuse that I calculate.
And that's where we see the invariance of special relativity, that you can trade space and time,
and they have to be traded in such a way that the Einstein hypotenuse is always the same for no matter who does the calculation.
So, that's the magic of special relativity.
But Einstein, in fact, went further than that.
He realized that his notion of the hypotenuse not only applies to areas and times,
but it also applies to energy and momentum.
Now, we're all very familiar with the idea of momentum, at least those of us who are sports fans,
because you often hear in a sports activity that one team gains the momentum over the other.
That means that they have gotten an advantage and it looks like they're just going to roll over the other team.
That's what we think of as momentum.
For a physicist or a scientist, the word momentum, however, is something very different.
For us, momentum means that an object has a mass and it has a velocity,
and we take the product of those two numbers, that's what we mean by momentum.
If an object is at rest, it has no momentum.
Energy is a more difficult concept to define, but we all have a sense of what energy is.
Energy means that essentially you have the ability to do more work,
and that can be made very precise with some notions from physics.
Now, if you have momentum, that's like a length.
So, if you square a little momentum, it gives you something that's very similar to an area.
What Einstein observed was, let me do that.
So, I'll take momentum and square it.
I get an area associated with every momentum.
And then he said, let me also now treat energy the way that I treated time before.
Well, you can't quite do that because energy and momentum have different units.
However, if you take energy and square it and divide by the square of the speed of light,
then you get something that has exactly the same units as the areas associated with momentum.
And so what Einstein does with this is he takes this area associated with energy,
divides by the square of the speed of light, and then subtracts from that the three areas
that associate with momentum moving the left to right, front to back and up and down.
When an object is not moving, its momentum is zero because it has zero velocity.
And in this case, we get something very familiar.
Namely, we get an equation which says the mass squared times the speed of light squared
is equal to the energy squared divided by the speed of light squared.
And the remarkable thing about this last formula is that this is where E equals the mc squared arises in physics.
It's actually Einstein's hypotenuse applied to an object at rest.
So let's review that in a slightly different manner.
What Einstein starts off is by telling us that the ideas of the Pythagorean theorem
can be applied to our world with three dimensions of space and one dimension of time.
However, in order to do that, he says that if you think of time as an extra direction,
you have to multiply it by c in order to calculate the area associated with that.
And then he further more asserts that if you believe that the Pythagorean theorem works for our world,
then in a world where there are four dimensions, you have to write the Pythagorean theorem
using both pluses and minus signs.
Einstein further asserts that the idea of the hypotenuse extends to energy and momentum,
where three other links are associated with the momentum.
The other link is the energy divided by the speed of light
and that the size of his hypotenuse is the mass times the speed of light.
When you get that, you get the equation that upon setting the momenta to zero
leads to the very famous E equals mc squared.
So the E equals mc squared is a statement about areas in this four-dimensional world
that Einstein creates for us.
So that's how we can see that mathematics is useful,
because it allows us to actually incorporate time as this extra dimension.
And the special relativity, the theory, and the theory of special relativity
takes advantage of this fact.
Now, I suspect that Pythagoras, if he had been able to view the far distant future,
would have been ecstatic to see that his very simple idea about how to measure
the areas associated with the sides of a right triangle
get used again in this marvelous way in order to construct a view of a four-dimensional world.
Now, of course, Pythagoras was not the first person to write the Pythagoras theorem.
It was known to Babylonian mathematicians over a thousand years earlier,
but he's the person that we associated with it, and you can just see the joy of such an idea.
Now, let's come back to string theory.
Remember, we zoomed down to the world of very small,
and I told you that the string was an intrinsically quantum mechanical object?
Well, that means, because Einstein's arguments never took into account quantum mechanics,
that when you combine a quantum object with the idea of the Einstein-Pie hypotenuse,
you must check to see whether it actually works.
Now, this was first done in modern physics around 1971 and 1972,
and there were a number of physicists who attacked this question,
but the answer they got was totally shocking.
What they found was that in order to have the Einstein hypotenuse apply to the mathematics of string theory,
which also took into account the quantization,
then they were in a very strange position because you look at the Einstein hypotenuse force,
the mathematics of the string, so at first it works just fine,
but then something terrible happens.
What they found was that you have to add all of these extra dimensions
even to get the theory to begin to work.
You have to imagine that there are 22 additional directions that we have never seen before,
and even if you do that, it turns out that one of the string's vibrations satisfies the Einstein hypotenuse,
but with the wrong sign for the square mass.
It's this minus sign that we see in the transparency here.
So we have all of these extra directions.
We have a negative mass particle, mass squared particle.
This negative mass squared particle is called the tachyon,
and in the early 1970s, when the first mathematical constructs called string theory,
or more specifically the bosonic string work it made,
this object was found in the mathematics.
The thing whose square mass is negative.
Well, this object tachyon had actually been thought about for a number of years in physics,
going back almost to the 1930s.
So the idea of the tachyon was not a new one to physics,
but it was also known that if such an object existed,
it would wreak havoc in the world of physics,
particularly if an object whose square mass is negative existed in our world,
such an object could never come to rest.
It would always have to move at least as fast as the speed of light.
And furthermore, when you combine the world of the quantum with such an object,
you then find that such an object totally destroys every consistent view
of what it means to describe physics.
The quantum world is one described by probabilities.
We can say that there's a certain number of chances that one event will happen.
There's another perhaps number of chances that another event would happen.
In fact, very much like our game of four coins in a box that we talked about previously.
And we saw that we could actually, just by counting the ways that things happen,
figure out probabilities.
Well, the quantum world is governed by probability.
You can only say what might happen.
You can never be exactly sure.
So when you take a tachyon into this world of probability,
what you find is that when you talk about what might happen, some terrible things go on.
In particular, in our world, if something definitely happens, we say it has a probability of one.
If it never happens, we say it has a probability of zero.
Well, in our world, something can happen or it cannot happen.
Our world is a very definite place.
In the quantum world, an event might occur with not probability one, but some smaller number.
It might occur with half of the probability of a half,
which means that half the time you observe it happens, and a half the time you observe it, it doesn't.
Or maybe the probability is one-third.
One-third of the times that you look at it, it happens.
The other two-thirds, it doesn't.
In the quantum world, these are allowed outcomes.
But the thing about probabilities in the quantum world, in order to make sense to us,
you must always sit between the numbers one and zero.
Either very definitely it happens or it never happens.
Or anything in between.
That's allowed in the quantum world.
It happens with the probability of one-tenth, which means one-tenth of the time you look at it, it happens.
But one thing that's not allowed to happen in the quantum world is that you cannot have a probability that is greater than one,
because what does it mean to have a probability of something that's greater than one?
We have no way to interpret such a number.
The other thing that we have to have is true, that the probability can never be less than zero.
When you put a tachyon in the quantum world, you find out that probabilities can be greater than one or less than zero.
That means that the mathematics that you're writing for the quantum world in the presence of a tachyon is mathematics that doesn't describe anything.
In fact, it's mathematics that has no physical interpretation.
So the tachyon is a kind of a monster.
If it existed at all and obeyed the rules of quantum theory,
then what we would find is that the tachyon would destroy the universe.
It would be a mathematical monster that would tear down all the foundations of modern physics.
In 1971, when the first generation of string theory was explored, the tachyon was found.
And therefore, people who did not believe in string theory said, we can get rid of this idea.
The only hope that string theory could be useful was that somehow the tachyon must be put in a kind of Pandora's box.
Do you remember the story of Pandora?
All of the evils of the world were trapped into this box.
And as long as the box was closed, the world was one where we had peace and harmony.
But if anyone would open the box, then all of the evils would come out and destroy the world.
The tachyon works like that in the mathematics.
So in 1971, no one quite knew how to find Pandora's box in order to capture the tachyon.
In the next lecture, we're going to find out how the tachyon was captured.
