We are deep into the world of string theory now.
We've met the tachyon which threatened to bring the entire enterprise to an end.
But we also found out, thanks to the initiative and industry of three young physicists, Niver
Schwartz and Ramon, that there is a way to get out of this trap.
There's a way to find Pandora's Box.
Once this way is used, then the tachyon is banished and string theory becomes more like
our world.
An important ingredient in this is in fact to incorporate something of our world into
this mathematics.
The first generation of string theory had no electrons, had no quarks, had, roughly
speaking, nothing that corresponds to the matter in our universe.
If we look at our familiar table of denizens, the leptons, namely the electron and its trends,
we find out that there are lots of objects that spin at a rate of one half.
So the electron is the E on our table here.
The mu is another particle, 200 times as heavy as the electron.
The tau particle is another particle, 1700 times as heavy.
In addition to the electron, we also have the quarks, up, down, charm, strange, top,
and beautiful.
And all of these objects act as though they are spinners.
And we now know what spinners are.
That was one of our great discoveries.
These are things that sound almost like they're from science fiction.
If you think of them as an arrow, you walk around a spinner once and look at it before
and afterwards.
And when you look afterwards, the arrow is pointed away from you.
You walk around it twice, looking again before and after beginning a journey.
You find out it's pointed towards you.
And for every even journey around, it's pointed towards you.
For every odd journey around, it's pointed away from you.
This is a property of all quarks and all leptons.
But they have an even stranger property.
And that's the one we're going to visit with in the lecture today.
The universe of mathematics is a playground for the human imagination.
We make up numbers, but often with hints from nature.
But sometimes she is not so immediately obliging.
These often seem to have an almost instinctual neural software that manifests itself as an
affinity for numbers.
For those of us who carefully study fundamental questions about physical reality, it often
seems as though nature is as teaming with mathematics as our planet is teaming with
life.
We come across different number systems at various early stages of our life, for example
the counting numbers, then the number zero, fractions, the so-called transcendental numbers
such as pi.
These are things that most of us encounter in the course of going from say first grade
to twelfth grade or to college and beyond.
For the counting numbers, we can surmise that one of the first lessons learned by humanity
was how to count items that constituted food.
The question of how much is not an abstraction when it's part of the issue of survival.
So at some point one can imagine a herdsman going to sleep one night counting the numbers
of animals in his or her flock and then wanting to be sure the next morning that the same
number of animals was there because our survival depended on that.
So at that point humanity, the human family gains what we might call numeracy, the analog
of literacy, the ability to abstract numbers in the world around us.
Now counting is fairly obvious.
In fact, many ancient systems developed numbers across the course of history.
A fair number of them, interestingly enough, did not include the number zero.
Positional notation, well what do we mean by that, well when we modern people write
a number like 123, we write the one to the left followed by a two followed by a three
as we read from left to right meaning 100 plus 20 plus three and this idea of positional
notation seems to have appeared first in Babylonia and India.
The number zero seems to have occurred sometime between the period of 200 and 650 AD.
It took almost 500 years for the present Arabic Hindu number system to be accepted in Europe.
Also fractions in Europe were not generally used as they are today until the 1700s and
on the other hand there's evidence that as far back as 1800 BC the Egyptians were writing
fractions in a base ten type system and similarly China had such a rich history of using fractions
that dates back to about 100 BC.
Now of course when you come to a course of string theory you don't expect to hear about
mathematics and yet the recitation I just gave you was all about mathematics.
The transcendentals by the way of course is the famous pie discovered by Archimedes.
Nature is not so instructive about numbers and we have to dig a bit to get to them.
String theory makes use of all kinds of mathematics so today's lecture, this lecture will be
about another piece of important mathematics with string theory which turns out to be critically
important in the removal of the tachyon.
Well I don't have a dollar bill in front of me but if I did, if you look at what's called
the opposite side of the dollar bill there occurs a frustum.
Now what's a frustum?
Well I have a little movie here which makes it simplest to see so let's visit the movie.
Let's begin with a pyramid that has a square base so there it is.
Now let's imagine we start chopping off the top of the pyramid in a line that's parallel
to the ground so there we are cutting the pyramid down and now this object that I achieve
after I've cut off the top of the pyramid is the so-called frustum.
Now as I said a moment ago if you look at a dollar bill on the opposite side you'll
find this shape there with an eye that appears right above this shape.
It's called the eye of providence, a Masonic symbol.
But what we want to address ourselves with a frustum is a problem, a problem that's
actually very famous in human history.
So here's our frustum, let's continue to rotate it so we'll look at it from different
angles and now let's imagine that I take some sort of measuring rod and simply paste along
the bottom of one side of the frustum.
I can get a number for that length, we're going to call that number B. Now again since
it's a real object imagine climbing to the top of it and measuring the similar number
that goes along the sides on the top, we'll call that number T. So this is the length
of the top and the length of the base.
And now finally there's one other number I'd like you to imagine, let's imagine that we
can dig a hole from the top of the frustum directly down to its bottom and take some
sort of measuring rod along with us in this direction and we'll call that number whatever
it is we'll call it H. Now what's the problem?
Well this object is a real object, it has a volume and if it were an ordinary box it's
very simple to figure out that volume, it would be the area of the base times the height
of the box but this thing is clearly not a box, it's something more complicated.
So how do you find the volume for this?
Well with the invention of calculus via Sir Isaac Newton as well as Leibniz, it's a simple
problem in integral calculus to figure out this volume.
But remarkably enough the formula which answers the question for the volume seems apparently
to have been known to the Egyptians and we're not quite sure how they worked that out.
Nevertheless the answer turns out to be that in order to find the volume of the frustum
one takes its height, remember the height is digging the hole through top and bottom,
you take that number, multiply times the square of the base, so we marched along the bottom
of the base to find that number, then you add to that the product of the base distance
and the top distance, so you take the product of the length along the bottom, multiply that
number by the length along the top and then finally add that to the square of the length
along the top.
So we take the length here and basically calculate the area.
You take those three numbers, you divide by three, you multiply by the height and there's
the volume.
Well, as you can see that's a pretty daunting process and in fact if you stop and think
about this the way I've talked about measuring this volume has one extremely difficult part.
Namely, you can imagine that it's fairly simple to march along the base of the, of what would
be the pyramid, as well it is fairly simple taking a measuring rod to measure the length
of the top, but do you really want to drill down through the bottom of the, from top to
bottom of the frustum, that's a lot of work.
So this presents us with an opportunity.
Instead of destroying this object that we're building, we imagine that we're ancient Egyptian
engineers constructing this, instead of destroying our work, there's something else that you
might imagine.
Instead of actually digging from top to bottom to measure the height, there's another height
that's easily measurable, namely let's just take some sort of measuring rod and lay it
along this edge of the frustum.
That's easily measurable, we don't have to destroy our, our engineering marvel in order
to get that number and it's an easy thing to find.
So the question is, suppose instead of the height from top and bottom, we instead measure
this length along an edge, how is the volume related to that?
Well, this is a problem again that one has to sit down and draw some figures, it's, it's
the kind of thing we do in geometry.
This is what geometry is good at.
When you do that, what you find is something very interesting, namely that the height through
the middle, that's going from top and bottom, is actually related to the distance along
this edge.
We're going to call that distance S or slant edge.
And the relationship is that the, in order to get the height, you take the square of
the side along the slant edge, you subtract from that one half of the differences of the
base length and then subtract from that the top length, square that and take a square
root.
Wow, that's a mouthful.
But nonetheless, it's actually easier to know this piece of mathematics than it is to dig
down through the frustum and the ancient Egyptians actually knew this.
Again, we're not completely sure how they worked it out, but we have lots of evidence
that they did.
Now, this sets us up for a struggle that takes about 1500 years of human history.
You see that formula that we have sitting here, that H is equal to the square root of
the slant edge squared minus a half of the difference and the lengths of the bottom and
the top.
That formula leads to something interesting.
Suppose it were the case that the S term, which I'm pointing at here, is actually smaller
than the difference term.
Then in fact, since this thing is smaller than that, you try to take the square root
of a minus number, of a negative number.
Now the thing that's interesting about that is that it took 1500 years before we as a
species figured out how to take the square root of a negative number.
This problem arises as soon as you think about the frustum and as someone of mathematical
bent decide that you're going to play with this formula.
You find out that, gee, you've got to take square roots of numbers that have negative
signs.
Now the problem with that, of course, is that if a number has a negative sign, it's not
obvious what the square root should be.
For example, if we take minus one times minus one, that's actually plus one.
If we take plus one times plus one, that's also equal to plus one.
But there's nothing that you can immediately put your hands on that when you square it,
you get minus one.
In fact, it calls for us to do something that some of us are a bit uncomfortable doing,
and that is to make up numbers.
It is a human facility to make up numbers just like we make up music.
Now this may sound odd or strange to you that, boy, we're allowed to make up numbers, but
yes, we make up numbers.
And so the way to solve this problem of finding the square root of minus one is to make up
a number.
There's actually a book about this whole process.
It's called An Imaginary Tale, the Square Root of Minus One, which is, I recommend hiding
for someone who wants to understand how we struggle as a species sometimes to make up
numbers.
Solving this problem of square root of minus one leads to what are called imaginary numbers.
Now as a teacher of mathematics and physics, I always have to smile a little bit when I
introduce the idea of imaginary numbers to my students.
And you might wonder, what's the joke?
Well, you see, most of the numbers that we use, we sort of think about as being around
us.
I can have one glass of water.
I can have two glasses of water.
So the notion of two is connected to things around me.
And so in some sense, the number two seems very real, or perhaps I have three glasses
of water.
That makes the number three very real.
If I want to think about fractions, well, give me a piece of cake and cut in half.
Gee, I have half a piece of cake.
So the number one, the fraction, one half, is again connected with something in the world
around me.
Things like pi.
Well, that's a little bit more difficult.
I have to take a circle, take a tape measure, and lay it around the edge of the circle.
That measures its circumference.
And then I take the tape measure and measure along the diameter, the longest core of the
circle.
That actually gives me twice the diameter of making that measurement.
If I take the ratio of those two numbers, I can use that to define pi.
So the number pi is somehow connected with the shape of circles.
There are lots of other such numbers called transcendental numbers that mathematicians,
physicists, and humans have been discovering over the years.
There's something else called E that is the natural log.
Very useful for taking logarithms.
So numbers normally seem attached to the world.
And that's the way that we as a species, I'm sure, came to our numeracy.
But sometimes it's required that you think of objects that don't seem to be in the world
around us.
I is one such thing.
So now let me talk about another property, which you won't be surprised about.
Suppose I wanted to buy a carpet to cover this stage.
Let's imagine that the stage is not quite square.
I would take a tape measure, measure along the front edge of the stage, measure along
the side.
That would give me two numbers.
I would multiply those two numbers and go to a carpet store and say I want, for example,
let's say we got four feet across the front and three feet across the side.
I'd go to a carpet store and say I need 12 square feet of carpet to cover my stage.
Now how do I get 12 square feet?
Well, I took four times three that gave me 12.
But what's wrong with taking three times four?
Why can't I take the three first and multiply by four?
Doesn't that give me 12?
Well, the answer is yes.
Of course it does.
So one of the things that's really interesting about how to measure areas is it doesn't matter
which number you put first.
We can write this as an equation, and in fact I've done this on the transparency.
I've written that three times four minus four times three is equal to zero, which is true
because each of them is 12.
Well, rather than talking about the numbers three and four, we can pay homage to Al-Jibra
as originally brought to us from Iraq.
And instead of writing three times four minus four times three is equal to zero, we can use
letters and write A times B minus B times A equals zero.
It's the same thing.
Well, in the 1800s between 1844 and 1862, a mathematician by the name of Grasman decided
to throw the rules all the way.
He said, I don't want the usual rules to be true, namely A times B minus B times A is
zero.
I want A times B plus B times A to B equals zero.
He exactly reversed the rules.
Now the thing that's really interesting about that is if A and B are the same number, then
this says that a number times itself is zero.
We know of no such numbers like that in the world around us, except for zero itself, right?
Zero times zero is equal zero, but there's nothing else that has that property.
Well, mathematicians, of course, are not tied necessarily to the real world.
If you give a mathematician a set of ideas, what they want to know is whether these ideas
are logically consistent, and it turns out that they are.
You can have numbers where that if you, let me say it this way, there's a kind of number
which we now call the Grasman number named after the first mathematician who thought
of it.
If this stage were made of Grasman numbers, when I measured the four feet across the front
times the three feet across the side, if I do the multiplication in one order, I get
twelve square feet, but if I do the multiplication in the other order, I get minus twelve square
feet.
I don't know how to go to a carpet store and order minus twelve square feet.
The salesman would look at me and wonder what my issues were.
Well, the thing that's remarkable is that instead of talking about measurements along
the edge of the carpet, there are things that obey Mr. Grasman's rule.
And perhaps you might be surprised to know, but some of these things are electrons.
It turns out that if you take two electrons and try to measure properties simultaneously,
they obey Mr. Grasman's strange rule.
Let's do this slowly by first talking about things that act like links.
Those would be the photons.
Photons act pretty much like ordinary links.
So let's put a transparency up here to help us through this.
If I take my carpet example, where I have four times three, that's the same thing with
a plus sign as three times four, and that's what I can order in a store.
On the other hand, according to Mr. Grasman, I should be allowed to think about a number
where the opposite sign occurs.
The first one we call commuting multiplication.
The second we call anti-commuting multiplication.
And now let me tell you the amazing thing about our world.
You see, if I take two photons and try to measure their properties in the order one-two,
and then compare that with measuring the same property but taking the photons in order two-one,
in our world, these both give the same result.
And in terms of mathematics, it's appearing on my transparency now.
We say that the property of the first photon times the second is equal to the property
of the second time the first.
Well, that's just like our measurements of area.
On the other hand, if you take two electrons and measure a property that relates to the
one electron, call it electron one, and then a property that relates to the second electron,
and then compare that to the measurement where you measure the property on the second electron
first, and followed by the property on the first electron, you get a minus sign.
The minus sign you find is exactly Mr. Grassman's minus sign.
And the remarkable thing about that minus sign is that it is the source of chemistry.
You see, the reason you can't put two electrons in the same place at the same time is because
if they were, there would be no way to distinguish them.
But according to Mr. Grassman's rule, one electron times another is minus the order.
But if they're the same, it says something is equal to minus itself.
The only way something can be minus itself is that it's zero.
You can't put two electrons in the same place precisely because they obey this weird mathematical
rule of Mr. Grassman.
Now for us, and we want to use this in string theory, remember that for the string, we're
allowed now with the so-called spinning string or super string to have modes or vibrations
that have the properties of electrons.
So that means modes of vibrations or the notes of the string that have the properties
of electrons, when you interchange your order, give you a minus sign.
So now we are in position to eliminate the tachyon.
How does it work?
Well, let's imagine that we had the tachyon where it somehow, for example, bounces off
of two objects like the electron.
When it bounces off them in one order, you'll get a plus sign.
When it bounces off of them in the opposite order, you get a minus sign.
And now the way the rules of quantum, the quantum world work is that anything that can
happen must happen.
So now let's go back to our full new string that has both fermions and bosons.
Sometimes fermions bounce off the tachyon in one order, and then another time there's
a probability that they'll bounce off in the opposite order.
Once the two events should have the same probability, one gives a minus sign relative to the other.
On the other hand, let's let our tachyon bounce off of bosonic modes of the string.
When they do that, then the order in which the bouncing occurs doesn't matter at all.
And now something quite remarkable happens.
When you ask, what's the impact of the tachyon not on itself, but on the things that it's
bouncing off of?
It turns out that when you look at the possibility of bouncing off of fermions with their funny
minus sign or bouncing off bosons that don't have the minus sign, then you can make a miracle
occur.
If the number of fermion bounces is equal to the number of boson bounces, then the tachyon
has no effect on the fermions or the bosons.
This is quite remarkable by having an equal number of modes that act like the electron,
and that should be equal to the number of modes that, roughly speaking, are like the
photon.
If you arrange for that to be true, it is as if the tachyon is not present in string
theory.
So, it was discovered that when you have the property where there are equal numbers of
bosons and fermions, it is as if the tachyon is not present at all.
In other words, there's a special class of models where you set the number of boson vibrations
equal to the number of fermion vibrations, and when that occurs, we've got our Pandora's
box.
The Pandora's box is to work in the models where the numbers of modes are the same.
It turns out that there are lots of different ways to do this.
The simplest way of doing this is what's called the in equal one spinning string.
We take the in equal one spinning string and we allow for equal numbers, and when you do
that and ask, how is it possible for this string with both sets of modes to vibrate,
you find out all of the modes of vibration obey the Einstein hypotenuse, so all of them
look like particles in our world, but something else very remarkable happens.
You remember in the original version of the bosonic string, there were two problems that
occurred because of the probabilities.
We had to have 25 directions and the tachyon had to be banished.
Recall when we talk about spatial directions, we have the idea that there's something like
the Einstein hypotenuse that extends all the way from 1 to 25 in terms of spatial directions,
but we're always including time, so we physicists use the numbers 25 and 26 interchangeably.
When we say 25, we mean 25 spatial directions, one temporal direction.
In this new generation of strings, it turns out we have banished the tachyons by have
equal numbers of bosons and fermion vibrations of the string, but what is more remarkable
perhaps is that if you ask, well, how do these modes of vibration satisfy the Einstein hypotenuse,
the answer turns out to be you only need nine spatial directions, not 25.
In other words, you need the three directions that we're familiar with in our everyday experience
of physics, or plus an additional set of six directions.
Well six is much, much less than 25 or 22, and therefore the super string with its equal
numbers of bosons and fermions looks more like our universe.
But that's great because in our universe there are things like electrons.
We want there to be things like the electron that have a half a rate of h bar as its spin,
and thereby includes the Pauli exclusion principle.
And so when this was discovered that it was possible to include super strings, it was
an enormous boost for string theory.
Now it hadn't yet become physics, but it meant that we could get rid of the embarrassing
problem of having probabilities that were greater than one or less than zero.
In the super string it turns out all the probabilities are between zero and one, and that's consistent
with our view of the quantum world.
In the quantum world probabilities can only be between zero and one.
Well the story is a little bit more complicated than that because it turns out that there
are more complicated ways to accomplish this banishing of the tachyon.
One of these more complicated ways is to include even more fermionic particles, more things
that obey Mr. Grassman's number rule.
The next most complicated set of objects is what are called in equal two strings.
In equal two strings are really bizarre.
Most of the time we physicists don't talk to the public about in equal two strings,
and there's a simple reason for why we don't do that.
You see, if you ask for the Einstein hypotenuse for what we call an in equal two string, you
find out that you need two time directions and two space directions.
That's nothing like our universe.
And so the in equal two string you probably have not heard of in the popular literature,
but it exists for us physicists.
We've been studying this strange object for almost since its inception in the literature.
And now you say, well gee, if you, why stop there, maybe you can do more.
The answer turns out to be yes we can write even more cancellations banishing the tachyon,
but none of these others look at all like our world.
And the other thing is if you do more of this same kind of adding fermions, what you find
is that the tachyon comes back in a different guys, not the original tachyon, but new tachyons
occur.
And so the numbers of strings that we can actually write that keep the tachyon in Pandora's
box is relatively small and include all of the ones that you've heard about.
For example, in works like the elegant universe or in hyperspace.
