In this lecture, we're going to begin by talking about some physics in the real world.
The same theory as I emphasize is not yet science, it's not yet physics, it's mathematics.
But the peculiar thing about this mathematics is that it looks like the mathematics that
we use to describe the real world.
And so in some ways it is mathematics that's inspired by the science that we know and it
actually begins to make predictions that are things that ultimately we will want to test,
but it's not there yet.
So we're going to go back in time for the beginning of today's lecture to the year
1861.
In that year, a young Scottish physicist by the name of James Clark Maxwell produced
the first color photograph.
Now that surprises lots of people because most often people think that color photography
is a new development, but in fact this young man had the capabilities and the technology
to do this at that point in time.
What's really more interesting in the story, however, is that he first figured out how
we see color and that's how he was able to produce the technology.
Maxwell was the physicist upon whose shoulders Einstein most clearly stood in producing the
theory of special relativity.
Maxwell's 1873 paper entitled A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism contains four equations
and from this equations humanity was led to an understanding of what is light.
The equations tell us that light is an electromagnetic wave propagating.
No one had ever thought of such possibilities before and in order for this to happen we
need to have electric and magnetic fields that change as they move through both space
and time.
They play in fact a sort of a game of leapfrog.
First there's a little bit of electrical field that has to change in space and time,
that generates a magnetic field which then must change in space and time next to an electric
field and this happens over and over again at a certain speed.
In fact the speed is the speed of light.
So this was Maxwell's great discovery and all of our new high technology, all of our
communications technology in fact can be traced back to these four equations.
Sometimes in talking to the public I call these equations the DNA of modern information
technology because they contain the instructions for how we build things like radios and televisions
and what have you.
Now Maxwell's predictions start off as a piece of mathematics because remember I said
there were four equations that he wrote.
The way mathematics gets turned into science is that someone tries to falsify the equations.
Science is really not about truths, that's what people often say is the notion of truth
in science but in fact science is about finding beliefs that are less false.
So when someone asserts that an equation applies to that world what you try to do is prove
that it doesn't.
This was done in 1888 by a German physicist by the name of Heinrich Hertz who actually
built an experimental device and detected these waves of electromagnetic energy that
were predicted by the equations.
Oh yeah Hertz as in megahertz, that's where we get the expression from it.
The Hertz in the word megahertz is tribute to the work of this physicist.
Now interestingly enough after Maxwell's great triumph of discovering these equations he
tried to describe gravity.
Wow think of that.
You know this guy just figures out how electricity and magnetism works and then immediately sets
the goal for gravity and unfortunately in an echo of Einstein's experience he also failed
but roughly speaking his attempt occurred about 50 years before Einstein tried to take
his theory of gravity and combine it with electromagnetic.
So in some sense the two of them are wonderful bookings in history that both tried to achieve
the same goal but from two different points and both failed.
Now in the description of the photon I said they have to change in space and time.
Let's talk about change a little bit and for this purpose I have a video.
Have you seen this video before?
This is the one where we talk about how an invariance occurs when you can take a right
triangle and look at the respective areas on the side.
Well when you look at the picture here it's still but we can put it in motion and now
we can see changes.
In fact we see a change in the area of the, as a blue area gets smaller the brown area
gets larger but they do so in such a way that the sum of the two is always the green area.
So that's the whole notion of change but let's talk about change in a slightly different
way.
This illustration is supposed to be two bowls of ping-pong balls and as you can see the
two bowls are different in terms of how many ping-pong balls are in them.
One has clearly more ping-pong balls than the other, the one on the left is fuller than
the one on the right and now let's induce a change.
The change is that we're going to take ping-pong balls out of each bowl so here we go but you'll
notice that what happens is that even though the bowls are filled to different capacities
the number of balls that go out was actually the same.
So this is actually a very interesting idea because it says that you can take two things
that are actually different but the change in them can be the same.
Now the reason this is a very important idea is because this is what Maxwell's equations
tell us about the relationship between electricity and magnetism which is something that we can
measure in the laboratory and these things that we'll call photons.
Remember we've talked about the quantum of the electromagnetic field, the thing that
is the message carrier for the electromagnetic force of the photon.
Well what Maxwell's equation tells us is that it is actually the change in the photon that
produces the electric and magnetic fields.
The equations are even more remarkable because what they also tell us is that if there is
no change in the photon then you don't actually produce electromagnetism.
Now our example of the two bowls have a very important lesson because what they tell us
is that it's possible to have two photons where each of them experiences the same change
even though they're different but because the electric and magnetic fields are produced
by the changes not by the photons themselves the two photons are indistinguishable.
This is a very important idea in physics.
In fact it is so important that it gets a special name.
We call it gauge invariance, the fact that it's the change in photons that produce the
things that are physically measurable not the photons themselves.
Now this idea that the change is what's responsible produces for us a very interesting result
because suppose we imagine that we have photons in a box, well you can actually do that, build
a box that has mirrors on the inside and shine a light beam in there, it's full of photons.
So what we want to do is ask a very simple question, how much energy is in a box caused
by the photons?
That's an interesting question because we know that for a given E and M field which
are what causes charges to move and or would bend a magnet if we were to put it in a box,
we know that for a given E field more than one photon can produce that but that's interesting
because we can imagine two boxes where the electric and magnetic fields are the same
but the photons are different but their changes are the same, that's the important message.
We can go on to the question of energy, it turns out that the energy that's in each box
actually depends on the photons but now we have a puzzle because since it's actually
the change in the photons that produce the energy, the electric fields and it's the electric
fields that we can measure then we cannot in fact directly measure the photons and that
leads to a very important principle.
It's called charge conservation, the fact that you cannot directly tell which photon
produces how much energy is the result that leads to charge conservation.
This was actually first understood by the mathematician by the name of E. M. Neuther.
In fact there's a very great result in mathematical physics that's called the Neuther theorem.
What it tells us is that if you have some quantity that changes but that physically
measurable quantities don't depend on those changes then there must be conserved currents.
Well let's stop and think about this for the photon.
We're talking about these changes and we know that we can't quite measure photons directly,
we can only measure the change in them.
So what's the conserved quantity associated with that?
Well remarkably enough it's electric charge.
You probably heard in your science class that charge is a conserved quantity.
Well it is, but it turns out that because of Neuther's theorem we understand that the
conservation of electric charge is actually a lesson about the ability of two different
photons to produce the same electric or magnetic field.
So we've learned a very great lesson here that it's not in physics always the quantity
that's of interest, sometimes it's the change in the quantity that's of physical interest.
So now let's talk about the fact that our world is quantum mechanical.
Remember we have in previous lectures actually gone down in size leaving our world and going
down to the world of what I call the denizens of the quantum world, the quarks, the leptons,
the photons, the intermediate vector bosons, the force carriers, those were the denizens
we meant.
In their world the laws of motion are very different from the laws of motion in our world.
Now that has an important implication for charge and in order to show this implication
I have another image that would be useful.
Here's a bowl and as you can see there's a ball that's on the side of the bowl and
now what we're going to do is to watch what happens as we put this in motion.
We're going to let the ball roll down into the interior of the bowl and you'll notice
there's a hole down there and so it rolls down and falls through the hole.
If we put a second ball in the same place it does exactly the same thing along exactly
the same path.
We put a third ball there it does the same thing.
The fact that all of these balls do the same thing if you put them in one place is a result
of classical physics.
Classical physics says that if you put an object in a certain position in the same way
it will always follow the same path and that's what we see in this idea.
Now imagine these balls are actually charged objects then what this is a picture of is
a conduction of current and we can see that all the amount of current we put in that is
putting the balls on the side of the bowl goes out the bottom so all the current in
is equal to all of the current out.
That's actually charge conservation that's what we physicists mean by charge conservation.
Okay so that's how charge conservation works at the classical level at the level in which
we're used to looking at our world but remember in the quantum world things are different.
So let's go and visit the quantum world and ask about the same experiment.
Here again we see our bowl with this time we're going to put several balls on the lip
of the bowl.
Watch what happens as they roll down into the middle.
Well as you can see they don't all travel along the same path.
In fact they can travel along different paths.
Now why is that?
Well first remember how the quantum world actually works.
In the quantum world we cannot say with definite precision what exactly happens between the
time we observe something at one time and observe it at a later time.
So let's go through this again and see if we can figure out what's going on with their
balls.
So we would observe the ball when we put it on the lip and then as it moves down towards
the hole it can take many different paths.
In my illustration here I have a green ball, a white ball, and a red ball and they sort
of want some of them wander around as they try to make their way towards the hole at
the bottom of the bowl.
This wandering that's quantum mechanics at work because even though we put the balls in
the same place at the same time according to the laws of quantum mechanics they're allowed
to wander around and trying to reach the bottom and so now we can see the wandering.
Some of them go to one side, some to the other, eventually all of them go out the bottom of
the hole.
Now that contains an important lesson.
Even though the laws of motion are different in the quantum world as long as all the balls
that are placed on the lip of the bowl get out the bottom, charge is still conserved
even though the world is quantum mechanical with all the wandering in the middle.
Well is that the only outcome that's possible?
Well the answer interestingly turns out to be no.
There's one other outcome which is actually very startling.
So since the balls can wander what would happen if we put a number of balls on the same place
one after the other and watch them wander but suppose some of them never wandered out
of the hole in the bottom.
We put them in the top but they didn't get out the bottom.
What would that mean?
Well since it's actually the putting for every ball that you put in the top must go out the
bottom that's what we mean by charge conservation.
If some of the balls never get to the bottom it means charge is not conserved.
This is such a startling result that even physicists had a hard time accepting this.
This was actually first discovered in the 1950s that in a quantum mechanical universe
if you watch how charge propagates sometimes it is not conserved.
So here we see an example where if we watch our balls instead of all of them going down
to the middle and going out of the hole some of them just wander around the bowl forever
and never go out the bottom of the hole.
That's what physicists call an anomaly.
Now all of the things I've just told you are properties of our world and we have mathematical
descriptions to describe these things.
So now we want to take some of these properties and put them into our picture of string theory.
So how shall we do this?
We've learned about anomalies.
We've learned about the fact that sometimes things that are physically measurable are
actually related to changes as opposed to being directly related to the objects present.
When anomalies was first discovered as I said a moment ago even physicists had a hard time
accepting that.
In fact there's a story.
Let me tell you a story about this.
Supposedly there was a graduate student who made a calculation and found that when he
did the calculation one way he saw charge conservation.
He did the calculation in a slightly different way.
He concluded that charge was not conserved.
At first because of this he was convinced that he had made an error in the calculation.
So he checked the first method of calculation, found out again that charge was conserved,
checked the second method of calculation, found out that charge was not conserved and
this young student who had hoped to become a theoretical physicist concluded that whatever
was going on with his calculations he wasn't wrong and he became an experimental physicist
instead of a theorist.
Now I don't know if the story is true but one often hears the story about the discovery
of anomalies and what it has done.
So anomalies are truly bad news.
Why?
Well you see if charge is not conserved then it means that the changes in the photons actually
have relevance.
But if the, I'm sorry, that the part of the photon that doesn't change has relevance.
But if that's true then there's something, there's a part of the photon, at least for
the mathematical description of the photon, which is an object we physicists call a time-like
particle.
Now that name may not scare you but the only problem is time-like particles act like tachyon.
In our discussion we have seen that tachyon has the power to destroy physics.
It renders all of our predictions nonsensical.
Time-like particles have exactly the same property even though technically they're slightly
different from tachyon.
So if you have a theory with anomalies it turns out that is a theory that makes no predictions
about the real world.
Now the interesting thing about anomalies and tachyons is that the anomaly doesn't
just have to apply to the force carrier for the electromagnetic field, any kind of force
carrier, potentially when you look at it at the world of the quantum, the world where
the denizens run around, any kind of force carrier might have an anomaly.
The presence or absence of anomalies was worked out by three physicists, Adler, Bell
and Jaquith.
They gave the mathematical criteria which basically said that for every ball that you
put at the top of the ball it goes out the bottom, that's when charge is conserved.
But they also found out what conditions had to be satisfied when you put a ball at the
top and repeatedly do that and find some of them that wander around in the bowl and never
go out the bottom.
It's called the Adler, Bell, Jaquith theorem.
It can apply to mass and energy because Einstein's great discovery was that energy and mass
are the same thing.
It can apply to the other forces in nature not just electromagnetism, we've talked about
the two forms of nuclear energy, the strong interaction and the weak interaction.
Each of these can be subjected to anomalies and if an anomaly occurs, time like particles
appear for all the force carriers totally destroying the quantum world and our ability
to make calculations.
Well, the thing that's really interesting because this so far has been a story about
our world is that the mathematics of anomalies actually occurs in string theory.
You remember string theory is really, it's a mathematical construct.
It tells us that at very small levels, at the very tiniest levels, our universe looks
like it's somehow constructed by little pieces of pasta, little filaments.
The mathematics of that is what we string theory is actually study.
We study how these things are described in terms of their mathematics and it turns out
that as we've discussed, when a string vibrates, that vibration is too small to actually produce
sound.
Instead, the vibration from our level appears to be a particle.
So if that's the case, then it means that all of the force carriers that we know in
our world, which are actually from this point of view vibration to the string, it means
that if each of these force carrier or any of them acquire anomalies, then the string
itself must be subjected to anomalies.
So if the string is subjected to anomalies, what does that actually do?
Well, just as anomalies destroy our ability in the real world to make predictions, the
presence of an anomaly in the mathematical world of the string has precisely the same
effect.
We find that objects that are very similar to tachyon appear.
We know that the effect of tachyon, or the tachyon more properly, is that it destroys
the notion of probabilities.
Time-like particles do exactly the same thing.
You get a mathematical description where probabilities can be greater than one or less than zero,
and of course we have no way to interpret such a thing.
So let's now pick up the story about strings because around 1982, a marvelous discovery
was made.
We talked about the fact that strings come in several different varieties, and when you
add spin to strings and put a certain restriction that says that you want equal numbers of fermions
and bosons to appear in the oscillatory patterns, you get a property called supersymmetry.
Well, in 1982, two physicists, John Schwartz and Michael Green, actually worked this out
for the first time, how to see supersymmetry and use it to permanently banish tachyon.
They actually did more than that because they also started to ask the question, can we incorporate
forces that are like the electromagnetic force that are similar to the weak and strong nuclear
forces?
And they found out in their mathematical world that yes, they could actually do that also.
But this mathematical world is a world that's quantum, that is in the quantum regime and
therefore might be subject to anomalies.
In 1982, while in Aspen, there's a physics center in the city of Aspen, where typically
for the last 20 years you can find some of the countries in the world's most active physicists
working feverishly to derive new results, when in 1982 Michael and John were there.
They studied the question about whether this idea of anomalies had anything to do with
the forces and the force carriers that they had constructed for the so-called super string.
What they found was quite remarkable.
All of the forces, as we've talked about, have force carriers and all the forces also
have charges associated with them.
With the electrical forces, the electrical charge.
For the strong nuclear force, we call that the color charge.
For the weak nuclear force, we call that the weak charge.
So every single force is always associated with the charge.
You might wonder what's the charge for gravity, what's actually Newton's constant.
So every charge is associated with this force.
Now if you have many, many forces, it means you've got to have lots and lots of charge.
So in 1982, Greenish force did a calculation very similar to our bowl analogy.
They looked at the mathematics and the theory, they started putting little balls in, and
then they figured out which theories have the property that all the balls that you put
in the top of the bowl get to the bottom.
What they found out was that only two such mathematical constructs exist.
In one of these constructs, they found that you need exactly 496 charges.
Where in the world would you get such a number from?
496 charges.
Well, since string theory is about mathematics, and since by now those of you who have been
listening to me have actually, in some sense, peaked into PhD level training for mathematics,
we can explain this number 496.
When we go back to talk about our areas, and we'll do that one more time, bring that back
because it's a very useful concept, when we talked about our areas and the invariance,
we could do it in two dimensions where the statement was that the green area is always
equal to the sum of the blue plus the brown, and that's true no matter how we orient the
two areas.
So we can make the brown area larger, we can make it smaller, but the sum of the two is
always the same, or we could do something else, we could actually take the areas and
construct the third one, which was, as we can see here, in terms of my ladder, it means
I've tilted the ladder over.
Now each of these areas can be sort of thought of like charge, at least in the context of
the calculation that Green and Schwartz did.
And so, how do you get the number 496?
Well the answer turns out mathematically to be the following.
You see in our world, we can do rotations, so I can rotate like this, that's what we
physicists like to call a rotation about the z-axis, because z is up for us physicists.
Or if I hold my hand like this and did a back flip, I would rotate about my arm, that would
be a rotation about the x-axis, or I could hold this arm out at 9 degrees with respect
to the first arm, and do once again do a back flip, that's what we would call a rotation
about the y-axis.
So in our world, there are three basic rotations.
In the world of the string, one way to get the number of 496 is to consider a world in
which there are exactly 32 ways in which to rotate, because this number 496 is the number
of rotations that you could construct if the world had 32 directions.
So for this reason, the string that Green and Schwartz found in 1982 was called the
SO-32 string, because it's a way to understand where this number 496 comes from.
Why is it magically that for 496 charges, all of them make to the bottom of the bowl?
Whereas if you pick any other number, you always have an anomaly, if you have an anomaly,
you get time-like particles, if you get time-like particles, that destroys probabilities, and
so only for this magical number of 496 do you get a piece of mathematics that you can
use to make predictions about our world.
This was the real birth of super string theory, and in 1982, it became clear that the goal
of Einstein was within our grasp, and what was this great goal of Einstein?
But early in this lecture, I talked about the fact that both Maxwell and Einstein actually
tried to do the same thing, but from two different points.
Maxwell wrote the equations that described electricity and magnetism, and after they
were successfully written, he wanted to include gravity.
Einstein, on the other hand, as we've learned in a previous lecture, wrote the equations
that described gravity, and after he was successful, he wanted to modify those equations to include
electricity and magnetism.
So both of them wanted to do the same thing, and both of them failed.
In Einstein's case, after a 30-year-long search, the last 30 years of his life, he still didn't
have this single description of both gravity and electricity.
Well, the work of 1982 made it clear that we could grasp this thing, that we were almost
at the goal of Einstein, because this magical 496 that I was talking about was in the context
of a string theory.
Now the difference about a string theory is, if it's one of the closed strings, one of
the ones that looks like a little hoop that we've seen in previous animations, all such
theories necessarily describe gravity.
On the other hand, the string is capable of vibrating in many different ways, and one
of its other ways of vibrating describes the force carriers that are associated with things
like electromagnetism.
So if you could find a theory that had in its mathematical structure the description
of photons as well as the description of gravity, then you have succeeded where both Maxwell
and Einstein failed.
So it was clear that it was within grasp, and when the SO-32 string was completed, that
grasp became not a potentiality, but an actuality.
The world's first unified field theory was born in 1982 with the work of Green and Schwartz
and the construction of the SO-32 string.
Now this was a source of great joy in the physics community because it meant that this
30 year long quest of Einstein had been fulfilled.
By the end of Einstein's life, most of the physics community sort of thought of him as
kind of passe, someone who was off on some journey that had no useful purpose for physics.
Very few people by the end of Einstein's life followed his quest for the unified field.
Einstein died in 1955.
It was 1984, some 28 years, 29 years later when his dream was realized in Aspen, Colorado.
