In a sense, humans are creatures of light.
I mean, in order to see this many examples suffice, one for example is to go to the beach
on a sunny day, you'll find it full of people.
Most of us are familiar with the properties of light.
It has brightness and color.
Scientists call the former intensity and call the latter either frequency or wavelength.
And Maxwell's great discovery was that light is a kind of a wave.
We have a few graphics to show us some of this.
It's a kind of wave, but the thing that's interesting is that it combines two different
oscillating objects, or objects in quotes there, or more formally fields.
There is an electric field and a magnetic field associated with light.
Remember I told you it was a game of leapfrogs, so you have to talk about both of them.
On this animation, what I've done is try to show you these two objects, these two entities,
these two quantities that we call fields.
The blue balls, which you can see laid out along the x-axis, you can think of as electrical
fields.
The green balls, as you see, laid out among the z-axis, which is up and down, you can
think of as a magnetic field.
And then as a wave of light goes by, the two of them actually oscillate together, and there
you can see the electric field sort of vibrating in this plane, and the magnetic field vibrating
like that.
That's what light is.
It's a dual vibration of electricity and magnetism.
That was Maxwell's great discovery.
Well, it turns out light has another property called polarization, and polarization is a
little bit more difficult to get our minds around, as some people say, so we're going
to do this in several steps.
Again, in order to simplify things, I'll forget about the magnetic field and only talk about
the electrical field.
So here's another picture of a light ray, and if you look at this, you see it has a
characteristic shape of a wave.
You'll notice that there's a crest on the left-hand side of the image, as well as a
crest on the right-hand side.
If you go the distance between these two, that's what scientists call the wavelength.
And interestingly enough, for light, that is exactly the definition of color.
If you know the crest-to-crest distance of a light ray, you know it's color.
And for humans, we can only perceive light when it's in a particular range.
So outside of that, the light is there, but we can't see it, but within a certain range
we can, and that's typically the colors of the spectrum in which we see.
Now, this property called polarization, we're going to approach in two different ways.
Let's imagine watching the electrical field as it comes towards us.
One thing that it can do is simply vibrate up and down, and then that's what we scientists
call linear polarization.
Another thing that it can do is actually more interesting, which is what we call circular
polarization.
When a circularly polarized light ray approaches us, if we watch the electrical field lines,
they rotate around.
In fact, I have an animation to show both of these, and here they are.
In the middle, we're going to watch linear polarization.
What we'll find is that the blue line will simply go up and down, and that's what linear
polarized light is.
The electrical field vibrates only along a single line.
The two green arrows that you see in this illustration, however, will wind around as
we watch them, and that's what we mean by circular polarization.
The electrical field line, in that case, winds around.
So here we set the movie into play, and there you can see the linear polarization with the
blue line going up and down, but each of the green lines moves around in a circular path.
Now, this last property of polarization is there in the mathematical description of light,
but most of us cannot detect polarization with our eyes.
But interestingly enough, it turns out some people can actually see polarization.
This was first discovered by a geologist by the name of Von Heidinger, and in 1846, he
noticed that he could actually correlate a particular image with the polarization of
light.
This effect is now called Heidinger's brush, and it's due to some peculiar natures of the
structure of the human eye.
In fact, cameras cannot see polarization, but people can, and it's even a skill that
you can learn.
So it turns out that the way that Heidinger's brush works for those who can see it, and
let me tell you, I'm not one of them, but I've read the phenomena, is that when someone
who's sensitive to polarization actually looks at a bright sky, they will see a diffuse pattern
that roughly speaking looks like two figure eights.
One of them is vertically oriented, the other of them is horizontally oriented, and that
figure eight shape is actually caused by the polarization of the light.
When such a person looks at a bright sky, if they turn their head to one side, it will
seem as though that figure eight will rotate one way, and that will be caused, for example,
when the light is polarized, such as we see in the circle that I'm pointing to in the
image, let me set it in motion to remind you what happened.
So there we see one of the polarized beams, so for a person sensitive to polarization,
when they turn their head to the side, they actually see this figure eight rotate one
way.
If the light is polarized in the other sense, and they turn their head to the same side,
the figure eight tilts to the opposite direction, that would correspond to the circular polarization
that I'm indicating with my pointer here.
And if the light is linearly polarized, then the figure eight doesn't move at all, it just,
they turn their head and it still keeps the same orientation, and that corresponds to
the center image where we see the light, the electrical field associated with the light
beam simply vibrating up and down.
This is quite remarkable, in fact, before I was preparing this course, I was not aware
of this phenomena, that there are actually people who are sensitive to the polarization
of light, and I think most of us are totally unaware of this optical phenomena, but apparently
some people are.
So that's what polarization of light is, it's actually detectable by a small number of us,
we have many, many devices for detecting polarization, and in fact, polarization actually is something
that we could take advantage of in constructing things like polarized glasses.
Let me show you how that works.
Here we have, again, a depiction of our electrical fields, it's the balls that you see lined
up along the axis that the pointer is indicating.
Now, if we set an electrical field in motion, you'll notice a wave starts to form, but we
have an object that's blocking the wave, and when that happens, the wave never makes it
through the object that's doing the blocking.
In terms of light, that means that if we think of this light coming in, if we have this orientation
that blocks it, then the light that goes through doesn't make it.
On the other hand, we can also say, well let's rotate the object doing the blocking, so here
we see this, and again, we set up a light ray, it comes through, but because the orientation
of the blocking object is exactly lined up with the electrical field, the electrical
field or the light makes it to the other side.
Now, although these are simple models, we actually know how to build these things.
They're called Polaroid Glasses.
The reason Polaroid Glasses cut down on the amount of glare that one sees in the day is
because glare typically comes off of a surface with what's called a horizontal polarization,
so if you have, that means that the electrical field line is moving like this, so if you
set up your opening and your blocking so that it does like this, it means that light doesn't
get through and you don't see the glare, so this is how Polaroid Glasses actually work.
Now, of course all of this is real physics, and several times during this presentation
I'm sure you find yourself asking, why in the world is this guy telling this stuff that
has nothing to do with string theory?
Well, the reason is because every single physical phenomenon that I have described, in fact,
has an echo, has a remnant that shows up in string theory, and today's lecture is going
to be about how the analog of Heidinger's Brush was used in 1984 to construct a new
string.
You will remember at the end of our last lecture, we got to talk about anomalies.
These were phenomena that occur because the world of the quantum is complicated and motion
can occur in ways that we could never see in the world around us.
For currents or charges that move, in the quantum world, if you put some charge into
a wire, you would like to get the same charge out, that's called current conservation or
charge conservation, but in the quantum world because the objects are free to wander, not
all the charges you put in come out, and when that happens we get an anomaly, an anomaly
as we discussed in the last lecture was a horrible thing to have around.
Greenish-Wartz looked at the mathematical properties that were associated with anomalies
in the string, the super string first constructed explicitly in 1982, and they found an amazing
result that if you have exactly 496 charges, then the string would have no anomalies, it
would be as if you put 496 different colors of balls in our example, and every time you
put one of the balls in, for every ball you put in, one would come out.
That's the current conservation, that's the great discovery of the super string.
Now, this 1984 construction, which completed the anomaly freedom of the string theory,
actually led to a puzzle. In my last discussion, I explained to you in some sense where the
number 496 appears in mathematics. It's the number of rotations that one can perform
in a mathematical world in which there are 32 different directions about which one can
perform rotations. Now, if one looks at that, then the number
of rotations appears, and in an earlier stage, well, we were talking about rotations.
In some lectures ago, I talked about the fact that there's a particular form of mathematics
that's exactly associated with the idea of rotations, or more generally, what physicists
and mathematicians like to call groups. So, when you have something like 496 that works
for a particular set of rotations, you can go often to the mathematical literature to
study the properties of these things, and roughly speaking, this occurred after Green
Schwartz anomaly freedom was discovered. In fact, they realized almost as soon as they
wrote the paper that in addition, in fact, the comment is actually in the same paper,
in addition to the rotations around these 32 axes, which gives you this number 496, there's
another way to get the number. Now, this other way was actually discovered by a mathematician.
In fact, it's the mathematician Cartan, who we've mentioned several times previously
in these discussions, who's really the person who pulled together the idea of how to describe
mathematical objects that are the most general possible that are similar to rotations. Now,
Cartan actually solved the problem of finding the most general mathematical rotation. He
observed that there are lots of different possibilities, but there's one possibility that's extremely
exceptional. In some sense, it's the most complicated rotation that one can describe
in using these mathematical formulations. This particular set of rotations goes by
a name. It's called E8. The E stands for the word exceptional. Now, the interesting thing
about E8 is that one thing about rotations, to keep in mind, is that rotations are described
by angles. When you rotate something, you can always talk about by how much angle I've
rotated. If you have 496 rotations, there must be 496 angles that tell you by how much
the rotation was performed. Well, back to the story of E8. Turns out that the mathematical
object E8 has exactly 248 rotations and, therefore, angles associated with it. Well, you don't
have to be Einstein to figure out that 248 plus 248 is 496. But 496 was the most general
magical number that prevented the anomalies from causing havoc in string theory, in super
string theory. So, it was, therefore, a puzzle in 1984 that if we found this one set of mathematical
rotations for which the string, the super string, was a consistent theory, then why not the
other set? And this led to a very great puzzle. Now, let me say a little bit about the SO32
string, because it has played an important role in understanding string theory. We describe
how the string itself is kind of like a filament. But one thing about the SO32 string is that
if you ask about these charges that I described earlier, these 496 charges, one physical question
you can pose is, well, where exactly on the strings do these charge occur? And the answer
turns out to be rather interesting, because for the SO32 string, what one has to do is
to consider both open and closed varieties, and you can put the charges at the end of
the open type of string. Now, before 1984 or 1985, this was the only way in which physicists
knew how to describe a string that had charge, namely, it carried charge at the end of the
filament. The middle of the filament never carried charge. So, there's something interesting
going on here, because now we get into the business of whether the string is a little
hoop, or whether it's a filament, because the charges are always at the end of filaments.
Now, that's kind of strange, because why must the charges only be restricted to the
ends of filaments? And in fact, one of the really interesting parts of this question
is that a moment ago, we talked about light, how you could have linear polarization, where
the electrical field simply goes up and down, or you could have circular polarization, where
the electrical field seems to rotate in either clockwise or anti-clockwise sense. This is
actually related to string theory. Some lectures ago, I talked about the fact that a closed
string actually must have the properties that are very similar to having a sound wave in
a pipe. Perhaps you remember that animation. If you have a closed pipe and you look at the
average displacement of the air molecules at the ends of the pipe, they're not allowed
to move, so you see a bow shape that is tied down at the ends. If you have an open pipe,
the ends are free to oscillate back and forth. In string theory, this exact same mathematics
occurs. The closed pipe corresponds to a string whose ends are tied together. These are the
kinds of strings that always describe gravity among the particles that seem to occur as
specific oscillations. The open strings, the ones that have the charges at the end of them,
always describe things like photons, but they never describe gravity. So, we have a picture
here then that if you want to describe a theory with both gravity and with charges, it seems
like you have to have a string that combines both open and close. And since the open strings
have the charge at the end, that's the only place that you find the charges. Well, in
1984, a remarkable occurrence happened at Princeton University. This discovery was led
by David Gross, a recent Nobel laureate in physics, but for a different work, not this
work which we will describe now. It is as if David Gross, Emil Martinek, Ryan Roem and
Jeff Harvey were mathematically able to perceive Heidegger's brush. Remember, I talked about
polarization. Not many of us can actually see it, but there are some people who can.
Well, in some sense, what happened in 1984 is that this group at Princeton, these four
physicists at Princeton, became mathematically conscious of the fact that there was a kind
of brush associated with open and closed strings, particularly with closed strings. And they
used this to their advantage. By the way, this group of physicists, since there are
four of them and they were Princeton, we now refer to them often as the Princeton string
quartet. So what do the Princeton string quartet actually do? Well, in order to understand
their work, we need to go to look at closed open strings. So, here's a picture of a string.
This particular picture I have is of a closed string and in a moment we'll set it into motion
so that we can actually watch it moving. And we imagine that we've deformed it and now
let's set it into motion. There it goes. As you can see, it's oscillating back and forth,
but one of the interesting things about these oscillations is that as you can see where
my cursor is right there, the string is actually not moving at that point. That point of no
motion is what we physicists call a node of vibration, a point that's fixed even though
the extended object is moving. And as you can see in this picture, the node, there's
not just one node, so here's one at the cursor here. There are other nodes, so let me go
to another such node. Notice I can put my cursor there and I'm always touching the string
even though it's vibrating. So this particular string, this closed string, the one that is
mathematically described by this picture, has nodes in it. And now there's something
very interesting about those nodes. They all sit at the same place as we watch this string
vibrate. What David Groesson and his collaborators realized was when you looked at the mathematics
of closed strings that had been written up to 1984, every mathematical description of
a string had this property that the nodes of the closed strings always sat at the same
location. Well, once you have the idea that these nodes sit at the same location, roughly
speaking, that is like looking at light, so here's our light once again, like looking
at Polaris light, and realizing that this is the analog of the middle picture here where
the electrical field simply goes up and down, but it never actually rotates. It only touches
the sphere at two places, either at the top or when it rotates all the way down to the
bottom, touches at the bottom, but those are the only two places. So in the first figure,
if you ask, where does the light touch the circle? It's at two places, once at the top,
once at the bottom. That's like the nodes that we saw in string theory. So once you
know these nodes are here and understand the connection to Polaris light, the next most
natural thing to do is ask, in the mathematics of string theory, is it possible to introduce
objects that correspond to Polaris light? In other words, whether we can find mathematical
objects where when we watch the electrical field lines, what we see is that they rotate
around as the upper two examples do, as opposed to just touching the circle at a single point.
Now this is actually important for string theory, because you see, if we can find such
a construct, then the charges on the string do not have to be just at their ends. The
charges can be distributed throughout the length of the string. So David Gross and his
collaborators set out to find such a construct. And of course, since we're doing the mathematics
by pictures as opposed to actually writing the equations, it's pretty easy for us to
figure out what we need. Here's such an example. Here again is a string very similar to our
first, and now let's set this one into motion. And you'll notice the nodes move in this one.
That's different from the closed string. The nodes move, and in fact, we call such motion
left-movers, or left-handed motion. So that roughly speaking corresponds to a kind of
left-circuitly polarized light. In a similar manner, if you can write this mathematics,
then gee, maybe you should be able to write the mathematics which describes right-movers.
And so in this famous paper of 1984, indeed, the Princeton string quartet were able to
describe right-movers, where the nodes move in the opposite sense. And so a new kind of
string was born. Now you'll remember I talked about the mysterious number 496, and how in
the original construct of Reno Schwartz they saw that SO 32, that is rotations in 32 dimensions
would lead to this number. Well, what Gross and Company did was to write down the mathematics
that took advantage of Cartan's second observation about how to get the number 496. You can get
it from 2 E 8, 248 plus 248 equals 496. And this construction had a very significant
as a very interesting interpretation, because you can also interpret this kind of construction,
which is called the heterotic string, as being the logical bringing together of strings that
live in different dimensions. That is, you imagine that the left-moving string is a super
string, and we've talked about what that means. It has spin associated with it. But all the
right-moving parts of the string are associated with the old bosonic string that had the tachyon
problem. Remarkably enough, this synthesis works. And when you study this synthesis,
you find out that the problem with tachyon is banned, because the supersymmetric part
of the string, which is sort of the left part, actually gets sort of tachyon. On the other
hand, the right-hand part of the string is like an open string, and that allows the charge
to be distributed throughout the entire heterotic string. So, heterotic string theory was this
amazing synthesis that truly set off a revolution after it was born, in the period of 1984 and
1985. And if you look at the physics literature, you'll find an enormous number of citations
in the literature about this. Now, this bringing together, jeez, that sounds like a bit strange
sort of thing. It certainly was very startling, because when it was done, no one first thought
it could be done. In fact, I remember being on a visit to Berkeley talking with a friend
of mine, who's a mathematical physicist, who said, well, gee, how can you actually do
this business of making the SO-32 and the E8 cross E8 work? Fortunately, this bringing
together mathematically had the parts necessary lying in the physics literature. Two physicists,
one by the name of Sakamoto, and another by the name of Siegel, had provided precisely
the mathematics that tells you how to bring these parts together. One of these, the one
by the description by Siegel, uses a piece of math we call chiral bosons. That basically
means a mathematical object that describes something that spins around. And when you
put these things together, then you find that you can describe the heterotic string. Well,
there's actually a little bit of a puzzle here. Remember, I kept talking about 496,
how that was the magic number of charges? Well, in fact, if you do the description, if
you look at the description that Gross and Company wrote in 1984, you'll find out that
they don't actually introduce 496 of anything. And so then you have to wonder, well, where
the charges that we're talking about? This part of the story has a very interesting connection
to a gentleman, a Scotsman, in fact, who was out riding his horse in 1834. His name was
John Russell. And one day while riding at the Union Canal near Edinburgh, he observed
a single wave that formed. In fact, let me read his description of this. He said, I was
observing the motion of a boat, which was rapidly drawn along a narrow channel by a
pair of horses, when the boat suddenly stopped, but not so the bass of water in the channel
which had been put in motion by the boat. It accumulated around the prow of the boat
and then rolled along with a great velocity, assuming the form of a large solitary elevation,
a rounded, smooth and well-defined heap of water, which continued on its course along
the channel without change of form or diminution of speed. He followed it on horseback and
did so for several miles. This strange wave that he observed in the canal is something
that we've actually seen a number of times in physics. In fact, I have an animation here.
Normally we think of waves as the nice gentle sort that you see rolling in at the beach,
and they come in one after the other. You don't see solitary waves. The kind of wave
that John Scott Russell reported that day was sort of something like this, where you
see a single solitary wave as it moves along a channel. Now, this kind of wave is very
special. Even though it's a wave, it actually has properties of particles. You know, particles
when, after all, if you take two particles and bump them into each other, they bounce
off of each other. Ordinary waterways, if you collide them, actually pass right through
each other, but not these objects. If you take these waves, these solitary waves, which
we call solitons, then, in fact, they have the properties of particles. A very strange
result. Solitons, in fact, have been observed in many, even to this day we observe solitons.
For example, there are pictures that NASA takes of the ocean where you can actually
find single large solitary structures that stretch out for hundreds of miles, and in
fact, they're examples of these solitons. So solitons are a feature of our world. They're
waves, but they have the properties of particles. And now, remember this mystery of the 496th?
I told you that Gross and Company didn't have 496th anything in their work. Well, the point
is that the bosons, or an alternative description called kyrofermions, also called heterotic
fermions, can be used to describe solitons. And in fact, if you look at the original
paper of Gross and Company, what they do is say that the charges that make this magical
number of 496th are distributed between the ordinary waves of their theories, the things
that are described by the kyro bosons or the kyrofermions. These are mathematical words
for ordinary waves. And then, they need to find the remainder of this 496th. It turns
out that when you study these ordinary waves, the equations for the ordinary waves in the
theory, you find out that if you add up all the ordinary waves and all of the solitons
that these waves can describe, these single waves that we've seen in our animation, the
number adds up precisely to 496th. So in a sense, the heterotic string, which is the
thing perhaps that most forcefully tells us that Einstein's dream has been realized, because
the heterotic string is different from the SO-32 and makes it glaringly obvious that unification
of the type that Einstein wanted, his so-called unified field theory, is a mathematical reality.
In a sense, the successful construction of the heterotic string owes part of its intellectual
debt to a Scotsman who was outriding his horse in 1834 and observed a solitary wave and tried
to write equations to describe it. The same phenomena was what was necessary for the success
of the heterotic string in Princeton.
