In a previous lecture, we've talked about the fact that strings are very peculiar in
many ways and it's mathematics that we're doing. Throughout most of these lectures,
however, I've endeavored to remove the mathematical language and instead to talk about the mathematics
in terms of the pictures that sit behind it. There are sometimes, of course, when it's
good to go back to mathematics because there are some essential points to make. The transparency
have on screen here is one reason for doing this. The old Bosonic string had 25 spatial
directions and one temporal direction, so that if we talked about the Einstein hypotenuse
for such a string, it's this awful formula that you see here. Every one of these L's
has a different direction, so L1 would be the first direction, the second direction until
you get all the way down to the 25th direction. Now, the other thing that had happened in
string theory in our previous discussions is that we've learned that when you introduce
supersymmetry, the form of the Einstein hypotenuse changes and becomes simpler. In fact, instead
of having this expression go from L1 to 25, we would only need it to go from L1 to L9.
Not L25. Now, I have to reveal something to you that I've kept secret before now. You
see, each one of these L's really is a mathematical entity that we find in string theory. So when
we talk about the string being 25 dimensions, in fact, there are 25 mathematical objects
that you need to talk about the string. Now, the important thing of this observation is
it means that the string is really more like a string instrument. It's not like a single
strand at all. And in fact, the old Bosonic string should be thought about as kind of
a guitar, some sort of a guitar or violin or whatever your favorite string instrument
is. The old Bosonic string has 25 plus 1 strands. The newer versions, the super string has
9 plus 1 strands attached to it. So that's the only use for this, is that we have to
recognize that strings, although we talk about string like it's a single object, it's actually
more like a string instrument, very much like a musical instrument. Now, we in our last
lecture followed the Princeton string quartet with the construction of the heterotic string.
You remember the heterotic string is this interesting object that combines left movers,
right movers, and standing wave modes. Let's look at their pictures once more. So here
we have a standing wave mode and we'll watch it oscillate. As you can see, the red dots
in this diagram do not move. The red dots are what we mean by the nodes of the vibration.
On the other hand, you can see that these lobes that periodically disappear and reappear
in the strings, the number of objects that we see there constitutes the modes of vibration.
So you must distinguish the word node from mode. Basically, node means a point that's
at rest. Mode means a way of vibrating. And of course, a tool connected because you can't
have nodes without modes. On the other hand, in addition to the standing wave modes, we
have the left moving modes. Here's a left moving mode. As you can see, it's actually
this previous picture, but where the entire string rotates around. So therefore, the modes
are rotating, the nodes are rotating. They have to move as a single unit. And this was
a picture of the left mover. Then, of course, they're also right movers. And as you can
see, the only difference is that the modes rotate in the opposite sense. In our last
lecture, we also discussed how this is an echo of real physics that's been known since
the 1870s. When Maxwell wrote his equations about light, it was observed that there's
a property of light called polarization, which essentially tells us what's going on with
the electrical field associated with a particular light ray. Now, we've also solved a puzzle
in our last lecture. We said that you needed to have 496 magical charges in order to avoid
the anomaly. And when Gross and Company wrote their paper on the heterotic strings, the
first two papers, at least, you will, in fact, not find 496 strands, because that's the important
point to note. The strands that we talked about previously, which only apply to configuration
space, and let's review this idea. In our world, I can move front and back. That's one
independent direction. We would need one strand to describe that in a mathematics. We can
move left to right. That's a different direction. In terms of mathematics, we would need an
object to describe that. And then, finally, we can move up and down. That would be a third
object. Anything else we'd do is a combination of those three. Three strands would suffice
to describe our world. But, of course, we need time also. So, at a minimum to describe
a world, string would consist of four mathematical objects that we would call the string, but
you can think of them as the strands of the string. It turns out that in order to get
this magical 496, Gross and Company had to appeal to a very strange mathematical object
called a soliton. I had explained in the last lecture that there are these strange ways
that can have been observed in nature, can be observed, and they have the property that
these are ways that actually bounce off of each other just like real particles. Now,
this is a very strange way to describe the theory, because you might say, well, gee,
if you have these strands for describing space, is it possible to look for this strand-like
description of the charges in the theory? Now, in the original papers of Gross and Company
we'll find no such signs of such a description. In one of their mathematical descriptions,
they have a set of objects that are bosons, and again, I remind you, bosons are things
that spin at even numbers times the spin rate of the electron. They have 16 bosonic strands
in their original papers, and then they count 480 of these solitonic waves. The other thing
that their original paper does is introduce 32 fermionic strands, and then they count
the solitons associated with that, and they turn out to be 464. So the sums of these numbers
are always adding up to the magic 496 that we need in order to get the charge conservation
and the absence of the anomaly. There's something here you ought to stop me about. How can it
be that these two things describe the same mathematical object? After all, I told you
in our world things like bosons are the force carriers. The particle of light is a boson,
the gravity, the graviton is a boson, the intermediate vector bosons, even have the
word boson in their name, or bosons. These are things that carry the forces in our universe.
On the other hand, the objects that the forces act upon, things like the electrons, are fermions.
They all obey the Paul exclusion principle, which is the basis for chemistry. So when I
tell you this, you ought to stop me because you should say, wait a minute. Bosons and
fermions are not the same objects. They're not the same kinds of objects. So how can
you use them to describe a single mathematical entity? Well, the answer to that turns out
to be related to some aspects of our world. And I've endeavored throughout these lectures
to make sure that although we talk about the mathematics of string theory, because it is
a theory of mathematics, we always try to make contact with the mathematics that is
used to describe things in our world. So we're going to do this one more time. In 1911,
Mercury was cooled for the first time to 452 degrees below zero. When that happens, Mercury
loses all resistance to electrical currents. You can send a current through Mercury cooled
to that level and it flows with no loss of energy. That's very different from our world.
Now when that occurs, we say that the material has become a superconductor. And superconductors
are one of the holy grails for our technology because you see an ordinary wires that we
use today. As you send a current through the wire, well part of the energy that current
goes to heating the wire up. Well, that's kind of inefficient because that means that
all the wires that go from the generator stations to your house are eating up energy that you
don't get to use in your house. And in fact, that energy shows up in heat and we can't
do anything with that heat. So if we had a superconducting wire, it means that we could
actually save energy because instead of wasting some of the energy in the wires, it would
all go to households to be used. So that's why superconductors are so important.
Well, superconductors, although they were first discovered in 1911, they weren't really
understood until 1957. Three physicists, Barting Cooper and Schriefer, wrote equations to explain
how superconductors work. In these equations, there's a secret. In our world, charge gets
transported in electricity because electrons are carrying the charge back and forth. What
this mathematical work about superconductors showed was that sometimes electrons, even though
they're fermions and therefore they're the polyexclusion principle, sometimes they can
join together as if they're a single object. Now, the single object that you get out of
the composite, in fact, has the properties of a boson. And this turns out to be a very
important fact that allows superconductivity to work. So you can now ask the question,
well, that's interesting. We take an electron and electron and join them together in some
manner, and they then behave like a boson. What would happen if I took an electron and
somehow magically joined it to a photon? What would that object behave like? Well, the answer
turns out to be it behaves like a fermion. And in fact, there's one final thing you could
ask is, well, suppose I join two photons together, what does that composite behave as? And the
answer is it behaves as a boson. In fact, the statements we've just made, we can put
in the form of a little multiplication table. And here it is. It says that if you take two
bosons and join them together, you get something that behaves like a boson. If you take a boson
and a fermion and join them together, you get something that behaves like a fermion.
And if you take two fermions and join them together, you again get an object that behaves
like a boson. Now, you might say, well, gee, who cares about all that, but it has important
implications. But if you actually look at this table, you'll notice something else.
Bosons and fermions in this little table act exactly like the numbers plus and minus one.
After all, plus one times plus one is plus one. Well, that boson times boson is equal
boson. Boson times fermion, well, that's like minus one times plus one, but minus one times
plus one is minus one. Well, gee, that's fermion. And similarly, if you take two minus signs
and multiply them together, you get a plus sign, but that's a boson. So the message here
is that joints, when you take joint products of these objects, you can actually figure
out their behavior by simply assigning the number of plus one for every boson, the number
minus one for every fermion. Now, in our world, even when the electrons join themselves like
this together, at the end of the day, we can tell something if it's made of two bosons
that are put together or two fermions that are put together. But in the world of the
string, remember, the string is effectively a two-dimensional world because the string
has an extent and there's a time at which you look at it. So that's two dimensions.
In the world of the string, however, it turns out that this multiplication table that we
just went through is exact. In a two-dimensional world, fermions can perfectly disguise themselves
as bosons. And this explains the mystery for why the original work of Gross and Company
has two different descriptions that apparently describe the same theory because in one of
them what you have is that the fermions are joining together to behave as if they are
bosons. Well, there's something else about this 496 that we can talk about because we
haven't actually seen it. If you look at the original papers on the heterotic string,
we have the strands, but we never have the strands actually equal to 496. We have the
strands plus the solitons equal to 496. Now, there's a reason why this is not completely
satisfactory because if you're asking the question, what is the energy of the string,
the easiest way to do that is to count the amount of energy that's carried by each strand.
Since the original descriptions of this heterotic string don't have all of the objects that
are necessary, remember we had to count solitons to get the charges right, that suggests that
there's another formulation of this original work in 1984. Now, to get at this other formulation,
once again, I'm going to turn to the example of my ladder. I know you're probably tired
of it by now, but it contains so much essential physics in terms of understanding the issue
of symmetry and that's what we keep returning to is the issue of symmetry. So here's our
return to our favorite house and there once again is our ladder laying on the ground.
We can of course again bring ourselves close by it and grow our squares so that there's
one square with an area and we can, this ladder for this one is the base of the square, but
we can grow a second square downward where this ladder acts as the top of the square.
And since these are both squares, the areas are the same. Now, as we tilt the ladder up,
we begin to learn about invariance one more time. The area of the green is equal to the
area of the brown plus the area of the blue and this is true no matter how we orient the
ladder. In fact, we can put the ladder totally against the wall in which case it's the brown
and green areas that are the same. So why do we need that in our discussion here? Well,
in the context of the ladder that we just saw here where there was something that was
the same, namely the area of the green, but you could trade it back and forth between
the brown and the blue. You could imagine writing some equations that show that. And
I've kind of done that on this transparency. When the ladder is directly on the ground,
we can say, well gee, there's one number that's the total length of the ladder and since none
of it is up against the wall, the other number is zero. On the other hand, when we have our
ladder totally vertical, then the first number that used to be the entire length of the wall
is zero and the second number which used to be zero is now the entire length of the ladder.
So that's the mathematics. Let's look at the two pictures. Here it's the second length.
Remember the second number talks about how much of the ladder is up against the wall.
Well, how much of the ladder against the wall is exactly its length in this picture. Whereas
when we go all the way back to the first picture, it's actually the length along the ground
that's the entire length of the ladder. That's typically the way symmetries act. So what
turns the ladder? Well, if I had a real ladder, I would have to do it. I would have to take
the ladder, have it laying on the ground, lift it up until it's standing vertically
against the wall. Now, there's a mathematical description of that process and it involves
describing an object whose role is to exactly take the ladder from its position on the ground
to putting it up against the wall. We've met these objects before in our lectures and
they're called generators for symmetry. So we need a generator here. Now, in the heterotic
string, we have our 496 generators. Those are the things that, remember, the heterotic
string is acts as though it's an object that has 32 different directions in which you can
rotate. That's where the number 496 comes from. So we want to try to get the 496 in
a more explicit way. Now, Leigh, Sophus Leigh, the mathematician who first invented the kinds
of descriptions of these things, gave us the tools for describing rotations. And in particular,
he wanted to use his tools to provide one more description of the heterotic string.
This final description, as I mentioned earlier, will allow us to account for energy. In fact,
what we're looking for is a description where there are exactly 496 strands in addition to
the ones that are necessary for space. Remember, we need nine spatial and one temporal strand
to talk about position and space for the heterotic string. But we also want a theory
where there are 496 strands that allow us to talk about the energy in a way that's completely
consistent. There's another reason why we want to find this formulation. Remember when
we talked about the standard model. In the standard model, there were the force carriers
and each of the force carriers is also associated with one of these generators. That is one
of these things that effectuates a rotation. So in order to make the heterotic string appear
mathematically closer to the standard model, you would actually want to find the angles
that are associated with the turnings that are present in the heterotic string. Now,
this was not in the original work of 1985, 1984 for the heterotic string, but you know,
in physics, we keep trying. So how do we find this last formulation? The answer turns out
to be remarkably simple. The angles that I talked to you about earlier, well those angles,
one can interpret themselves as being the missing strands that we're looking for. However,
in order to write the mathematics in such a way that is consistent, what we have to do,
which is quite remarkable, is identify the angular variables that we have been speaking
about with the variables that describe the 496 strands. So in particular, the way to solve
our missing strand problem is to look at the right movers and not to introduce a single
right mover. Imagine that there are 496 right movers in this picture. That will be the missing
angles that we need. Now, what about the left moving part of the heterotic string? Well,
in the left moving part, it turns out that we don't actually need any additional left movers
if we compare to the original paper of gross. All the left movers in the original paper of
gross and company are in some sense contained in the standing ways. And you might say, well,
Jay, wait a minute, you keep saying left, right and standing. Well, let me show you a
secret to that. Perhaps you'll remember in our discussion of light. I've shown this picture
before, and I said that the middle picture talks about a light way where the electrical
field simply moves up and down. If we put this in motion, there it goes, electrical field
vibrating up and down. Now, there's actually something quite remarkable about this picture,
which is that if one were to take the right mover, so let's watch right movers in the
upper right hand corner, you'll notice it rotates around in a right-handed sense. Compare
that to the left mover, which rotates around in a left-handed sense. And now let's do something
remarkable. Let's say, suppose we were to take the two top pictures and put them one
right on top of the other. What would be the result? Well, the answer turns out to be,
if you take the picture in the upper left-hand corner and add it to the picture in the upper
right-hand corner, you get exactly the picture in the middle. Now, how can that be? Well,
let's see if we can figure this out. You see, the upper left-hand picture here has a green
arrow, which is oriented exactly in the same direction as this one. If we were to put these
two pictures together, this green arrow would sit right on top of that one. And therefore,
if we tried to figure out the total, we could slide it along, and we get a total length
that's twice the length of a single arrow. Well, if you look very carefully in our middle
blue line, it's actually twice the length. So now let's move the two arrows until they're
pointed like this. Now, you'll notice there's something interesting. The two arrows, which
you can sort of think about as two forces pushing against each other, are exactly canceling
each other out because they're equally large. Well, in the middle picture, we see there's
nothing there. They have canceled each other out. And now finally, rotating the arrows
continuing, we see that when they point down, the middle picture points down exactly. There's
a lesson in this. The lesson is that in the heterotic string, if you look at the standing
wave modes, they actually contain both left and right modes hidden within them. When you
consider these 496 strands that we're talking about, the way that the picture works is as
follows. You simply do a bunch of additions. You need 10 of these middle pictures because
those describe the structure of the 10 dimensional world in which the heterotic string lives.
You actually need also, curiously enough, 10 left movers. We can consider those left movers.
And you need those for the heterotic string, but not to describe motion and space. Remember
the heterotic string is supposed to spin? Well, you need the mathematical description
to provide that spin. That's what these objects are. And now finally, we need these mysterious
magical 496 charges. That's what these are. So the heterotic string, if you want to think
of it this way, is that you take 10 times the middle picture here, you take 10 times
the picture on the left, and you take 496 times the picture on the right. That's the mathematical
structure of the heterotic string that we're looking for. This has the angles that look
just like the angles associated with changing things in the standard model. Now, you might
say, wait, Professor Gates, you didn't talk about angles in the standard model, but you
see I did. In our last lecture, we talked about the fact that photons are actually not directly
measurable. It's the change in the photons that cause the electric and magnetic fields,
and that's what we can measure in our world. If that's the case, you will also recall that
I talked about that you could have two different photons, but whose changes, even though they're
different, the change in each of them is the same. And so therefore, two photons that are
totally different are able to produce exactly the same electric and magnetic fields. So
what's the relationship between these two photons that produce the same electrical field?
The answer turned out to be they're related to each other by an angular variable. And therefore,
this mysterious thing that leads to charge conservation is also related to the appearance
of a certain kind of angle. Now, in our world, when we talk about the forces for electromagnetism,
we don't actually see any extra angles. We just see the force carriers that are related
to one to another by fields that we can measure, things that are the electric and magnetic fields.
This ambiguity and the relationship between the measurables and the mathematical descriptions
are the things that give us these angles. So in our world, we have the gluons, there are eight of
them. That means that there are eight angles actually associated with gluons. In our world,
we have one photon. That means there's one angular variable that's associated with a photon.
And finally, in our world, there are three force carriers associated
with a weak nuclear force. Therefore, there are three angles. So these angular type variables
actually occur in our world, but they don't refer to directions that we normally see. They refer to
the fact that you're talking about the change in a photon or the change in a photon like object.
So we've actually solved the puzzle here in terms of finding this last
formulation of the heterotic string where these angular-like variables appear.
Now, I must admit that I'm really happy to have the opportunity to talk to you about this last
formulation because you see this last formulation is my own research. Although the heterotic string
was constructed in 1984-85, this final formulation where we only found all of the
angular variables associated with the string didn't occur until 1988. This was in work that I
carried out with a colleague. In fact, his name is Warren Siegel. And this final formulation has
all the angles. So I'm going to give you three scores for the heterotic string now.
In the original work of Gross and Company, there's what I call formulation A. You can think of this
as a score. And I've used some very sophisticated mathematics to shrink it down to this simple
expression. So this is the formulation where they use what we call fermions. Those are the
minus one variables that we talked about at the beginning of the talk. There's a second formulation
where they use the bosons. These are all the plus ones in our discussion of bound states.
But neither of these formulations had the 496 angles that make the heterotic string
look like our world. There's a third formulation, which is the work here, which is my own research
with my colleague, Warren Siegel. And it is only in this third formulation that we clearly see
that the exact same mathematical structures, which describe the standard model in our world,
are precisely present in the mathematical description of string theory. This gives us confidence
that string theory is really connected with our world. One of the things that this last piece of
work does that's different from the others is allow us to measure energies in a much more
precise way for all of the vibrations that come from the string. In particular, there are lots
of vibrations that are called spin-zero vibrations that are very difficult to see in other ways of
writing the thing that are very apparent in this last one. So for me, the net lesson is that you
get to have fun in physics where you can make a contribution by following these very advanced
topics. And you get a very great sense of satisfaction that perhaps, just perhaps, you've added
a single nugget, a single strand in the tapestry that will be physics. And if we're lucky, perhaps one
day, perhaps in a few hundred years maybe, this kind of mathematics will be important for constructing
some useful device or process in our world. After all, that's the purpose of theoretical physics.
We pursue it at one stage where it's mathematics. If we're lucky and get it right at a final stage,
it becomes something important in our world. We saw this in the story of Maxwell. He predicts
that electromagnetic radiation from his mathematics is light and we get cell phones as a consequence.
