If you looked at the last lecture, there was something you might have caught in my discussion
about the angles in the final formulation of the heterotic string.
This something has to do with what exactly is a dimension?
In string theory, it is often said that strings require extra dimensions.
That in fact is not quite true and in this lecture we are going to talk about that.
In science, ideas come into fashion and with the use of experiments go out of fashion.
Prior to Einstein, the scientific establishment believed that light was similar to all other
known waves.
In particular, all other known waves must have a medium in which they propagate.
Water waves after all travel on water.
Sound waves propagate through the air.
Since there is no air in outer space, there is no sound.
So since Maxwell's equations described light as a wave, even Maxwell thought there had
to be something that supported these waves.
This something was called the luminiferous ether or ether for short.
Now the previous lectures have also covered the discovery of Einstein in the form of special
relativity.
In special relativity, Einstein tells us that the way that one measures time and space actually
depends on the kind of motion one is performing.
But an important consequence of Einstein's idea is that although things appear to be
different to different observers, that doesn't mean something is actually happening to an
object.
What do we mean by that?
In order to illustrate, let's use my arm.
If I lay my arm directly out in this direction, you could come along with a yardstick and
measure its length.
Let's say you've got three feet.
If you laid the yardstick in this direction, you would get zero because my arm's not pointed
in that direction.
So you could write two numbers, three and a zero.
On the other hand, if I bring my arm to this position, the numbers that you write are very
different.
You would write zero for that direction because now the yardstick doesn't measure anything
in that direction, but you would measure three feet along this direction.
Now nothing actually happened to my arm as I swung it back and forth.
It's the same arm.
It's just that the two mathematical descriptions are different.
The important thing that Einstein realized is that this is what happens to time and space.
But the time that you measure, if you're in one frame of reference and the length that
you measure in that frame of reference, can differ from the measures made by someone else
in a different frame.
But that doesn't mean that something actually happens to the object.
That's the important message.
In fact, the mathematical description of how you trade the time as measured by one observer
and the space as measured by one observer and compare those to the time and space measurements
of another observer are given mathematically by a formula called the Lorentz transformation.
You notice they're not called the Einstein transformations.
And the reason is because they were actually written down by another physicist by the name
of Lorentz.
You see, Lorentz also believed in the ether.
However, when people did experiments to try to measure the velocity of the earth relative
to the ether, they got no results.
They got no results.
There was no obvious way to measure the ether.
One way to explain this result is to say that the devices with which you're making the measurements
were actually shrinking, and therefore that's why you didn't find the measurement that you
were looking for.
So that's a distinction between Einstein's view that there's nothing going on with the
object.
It's the relationship between the numbers that are changing and the previous point of view
about the ether.
Now, so the ether has gone out of fashion in physics.
On the other hand, the idea of quarks as we've talked about in this presentation is very
much in fashion in physics.
We have lots and lots of experimental evidence that quarks exist, even though no one has
ever isolated a single quark in a laboratory.
So some ideas we believe in, others that we don't, how do we distinguish?
Well as I tell freshmen in my physics classes, physics is not what we write on the black
board, it's what is happening in the laboratory.
So if you find the evidence of the quarks, we are forced to believe them.
Now in string theory we have this idea of extra dimensions, but we have no experiments
yet that force us to believe that they have to be there, even though you will often hear,
in many discussions of string theory, that string theory requires extra dimensions.
This statement is technically false.
String theories are consistent with extra dimensions.
They don't actually require them, and this confusion actually turns out to be tied up
with something that we talked about in the last lecture.
We use the word dimension, and so the question is, what exactly is a dimension?
Well, from the point of view of adding extra dimensions, which we sometimes call space
invaders, that's the extra dimensions that you hear about often in string theory, there
are extra pieces of space that come into existence.
Now this idea that these things are there is, in fact, part of the standard view of physics
as is widely accepted now.
In fact, during 1999, two physicists by the name of Randall and Sundrum proposed a view
that perhaps our universe is described in a larger world as if it's a plane of glass.
This is called a brain, by the way, and these kinds of views of physics are called brain
world scenarios.
If you believe in brain world scenarios, it turns out that certain things in physics
become much more obvious.
For example, we've talked about the coupling constants in nature.
Here we, in fact, have a plot of them.
In our world, the gravitational force is the weakest of the force that act on matter.
Then there is the electromagnetic force, the weak nuclear force, and the strong force.
As we go up in this plot, we're looking at stronger and stronger forces.
Now, why is gravity so weak as a question people have asked?
One way to understand that is if our world really is like a plane of glass, then perhaps
some of gravity is leaking into the other dimensions, and that's what the brain world
scenarios propose.
It certainly has something to commend it, and there are other reasons for believing in
extra dimensions.
However, we still have to come back to the question of whether they are real.
Let's talk about extra dimensions and how it actually entered physics, because the idea
of extra dimensions did not start with string theory.
In fact, we can go back to the 1930s when a physicist by the name of Kalooza wrote a
paper in which he proposed that we needed at least one extra dimension.
This paper had difficulty being published.
In those days, you had to send your papers to a great physicist.
He would approve it, and then it would get published.
In the case of this paper, it went to Albert Einstein.
On Albert Einstein's first reading of the paper, he thought it was nonsense.
But upon reflection, he realized that there was something very interesting about this
paper.
That is, if you allowed one extra dimension, then you could find Maxwell's equations among
the mathematical results that lie in the extra dimension.
But the problem is, of course, no one had ever seen an extra dimension.
This was fixed by another physicist named Oscar Klein, who pointed out that if this
extra dimension were really very, very small, it would be very easy to overlook it.
So often when people hear the words extra dimensions, they think it's science fiction.
But let me give you another way to think of it.
Suppose you were in a house that had many rooms, but that you had a door to one special
room that was so small that you couldn't get into it, then effectively, that other room
is not there.
If you were able to get into it, it would be pretty much like the rest of the house,
but it's the door that's the problem.
So one of the ways to avoid extra dimensions is to think about them being very small.
So we can't get into it.
We can't shoot atoms into it.
We can't shoot light into it.
And if that's the case, then maybe they're there, but we can't detect them by ordinary
means until we find the experiments that are precise enough to exceed the limits imposed
by these small dimensions.
So the Kalusa Klein idea was actually started in the 30s, but then it went out of fashion
until the 1970s.
In 1978, a group of physicists were studying something called supergravity.
We'll come back and talk about that in a later lecture.
But they realized that the equations for the most complicated version of this theory were
much simpler if they could introduce 11 dimensions.
Wow, we're hearing the word 11 now.
Remember string theory likes 10 dimensions.
That is nine space and one time.
This construction wanted 10 spatial dimensions and one time, so it goes up by one.
So when string theory actually had its breakthrough in the 80s, physicists were already talking
about extra dimensions because of this previous theory called supergravity.
Now are the extra dimensions real?
Well, it's easy to miss things in our world because we are limited by technology.
When we looked at our denizens, we found out that the electron had a friend called a neutrino.
The neutrino for a long time was thought to only become in one spin.
We could only spin in a right-handed sense because that's all we were able to measure.
A few years ago in an experiment called super-camioconde, it was verified that neutrinos that spin
in the other sense actually do exist, but we simply had not had the technology to find them.
So here you can go from an idea of something that's not there and you find suddenly it's
there if you increase your technology.
Now this idea about extra dimensions has also shown up in another way.
You'll notice that electric charge comes in chunks.
Now in the old days, we used to think that the smallest electrical charge was the size
of that which the electron carried.
The electron has negative that number, the proton has positive that number.
With the realization of the existence of quarks, the scientific evidence showed us that electrical
charge could come in fractions of one-third of that size.
So a charge quark has two-thirds of the unit of the electron.
A charge quark has two-thirds the charge on an electron, or minus one-third the charge.
So charge still comes in chunks, it's a smaller size.
Why is that?
Well, this is a question that actually physicists have worried about for a very long time.
One of the ways to answer that question was proposed by an English physicist by the name
of Nicholas Kimmer.
In 1938, he made the following observation.
We've talked in this series of lectures about the fact that electrons only seem to come
in two varieties, either spin up or left-handed varieties spin down.
That's kind of like electrical charge.
After all, at that time, people thought electrical charge was either plus the charge on the proton,
minus the charge on the proton, or zero.
So there were three possibilities instead of two, but still they're discrete.
So what Kimmer observed is something very interesting.
He said, you know, let's look at the mathematics of spin and try to apply that to charge.
When you do that, you find out it can actually work.
Now he did this in the context of an actual system in which he was thinking on exploring,
namely protons and neutrons.
If you look at protons and neutrons, one's charge, the other's neutral.
The neutron actually weighs a little bit heavier than a proton, but there, that's like one
part in 1800, so they're almost the same in terms of their mass.
So what Kimmer said was the following.
He said, suppose it were the case that in some deeper level reality, protons and neutrons
have the same mass.
If that's the case, it's only the charge that distinguishes them.
And then he had a brilliant proposal.
He said, suppose that charge is like spin, and so that, in fact, protons and neutrons
are not different objects, but the same objects spinning in different ways.
And here we put the word spin in quote.
It turns out that mathematics works exactly fine.
And this was borne out by the idea of isotopic charge space.
Now it's an imaginary space.
It's not a space in which we can move, but it means that the mathematics of spinning
objects that we're used to in our world can actually be applied to things that have electrical
charge.
So Kimmer's notion of charge says that there are things that are like angles that mathematically
behave as angles, but they're not dimensions that we have access to.
Now this idea that you can have mathematical quantities that are important for physics
that have the properties of dimensions, but yet are not, is all over the standard model.
We talked about this earlier.
It's in fact this business that if two photons have a change that produce the same electrical
feel, then they're related to each other by something, some mathematical object.
And this mathematical object, it turns out, acts like a dimension.
So even if you don't believe in extra dimensions, which there are many physicists who don't,
it turns out that when they write their mathematics for describing the electromagnetic force,
that mathematics behaves in many ways as if the world in which we live has the usual three
space and one time dimensions.
And then one other dimension which is described by an angle, but this angle, of course, is
actually the business about two photons producing the same electrical feel.
So the notion of dimension is not as all as simple as you might imagine from your everyday
experience or previous exposures to the discussion of string theory.
And in fact, it even gets more confusing because we have touched on the aspect of the heterotic
string.
So now let me tell you one of the dirty little secrets of the heterotic string.
We've seen this diagram before.
I've used this.
I call this the Lariat diagram.
And we've used it in many, many ways in order to describe polarization of light and in order
to describe what's going on with standing waves, left-moving waves, and right-moving
waves in this heterotic string.
I'm going to use this in one more way and tell you a secret.
You see, the standing wave mode which we have used in the middle corresponds to one of the
strands on the string that describe space.
So you need nine of these standing wave modes to describe the space of the heterotic string.
And then you need one more to describe the time.
And now it's a standing wave mode, so we can watch it vibrate back and forth.
But now we can do something different.
If I took the two pictures on the side, and this kind of looks like Mickey Mouse.
So let's imagine we blew up the two circles on the side and superimposed them on the middle.
Then all that would be left is, in fact, the middle picture, and you would see a standing
wave vibrating both up and down and nothing else.
Can we reverse that process?
Can we take a pure standing wave mode and pull it apart into its left and right movers?
Here's another way to look at a standing wave that we've used, namely, take a standing wave
of the heterotic string, and remember, when I show you these pictures, I'm actually thinking
about equations.
So here's a standing wave mode.
There is a process known as Fourier analysis, which is very well known in mathematics.
It goes back to the 18th century to the French mathematician Fourier.
And if you apply this mathematical tool to the standing wave, what you can find is that
it is exactly equal to a mathematical expression for a left mover and added to the mathematical
expression for a right mover.
So left and right moving waves, when added together, gives one standing waves.
Now, remember, in the heterotic string, when we say standing wave, we also mean something
that's not neither left mover or right mover, but those were the dimensions.
And so therefore, it means that in string theory, if you think you're looking at a dimension,
you have to be very careful, because anything that you think is associated with a standing
wave actually can be pulled apart mathematically into left movers and right movers.
And why is that important?
Well, it turns out that the angular variables, the things that are associated with the change
in the photon, are always either left movers or right movers, but they're never standing
waves.
If you have this understanding of string theory, then it has a kind of flexibility about it.
Namely, what you think is a dimension can be pulled apart and traded.
So you go from a theory with, say, 10 dimensions to a theory that has less, but in the process,
you have to introduce more charges, because effectively, what you do is you trade off
directions for charge.
Now, this idea is actually a very potent one, because it means that in studying the mathematics
of the heterotic string, there are two alternatives, and it's not just the heterotic string.
All string theory has this aspect, all closed strings.
There are two alternatives to interpret the mathematics that one is looking at.
The one that is popular is to look at the mathematics and say, we are seeing the presence
of extra dimensions.
By Mr. Fourier's mathematical trick, an alternative version is available, where you can say no.
Part of what you think are extra dimensions are actually these angular type of variables
that are associated with the change of force carrying particles.
And so the notion of dimension in string theory itself morphs into become something that is
much more flexible.
So string theory has this really strange aspect of it, that what you think is a dimension
may actually be two kinds of charges, left charge and right charge.
Now in the heterotic string, we learned that all right charges go into this number 496,
and we were in nine spatial and one temporal dimensions.
Now let's imagine an experiment.
Let's take one of those nine mathematical objects that we think of as describing the
space of the heterotic string, and let's pull it apart as I've described.
What do you get then?
In fact, let's not stop with just pulling apart one of them, let's pull apart precisely
six of them.
We go from an object that exists in ten dimensions to an object that exists in four.
Well gee, that looks a whole lot like our world, because in our world, we have three
directions, front-back, left-right, up and down, and time.
So the mathematics of the heterotic string turns out to allow one to go down to four
dimensions, but in the process, you have to introduce more than 496 charges.
And now you might also be worried about the corresponding left movers, because remember
I said every time you take a dimension, you pull it apart to get a right piece, which
is a charge, but there's a left piece that's left over.
So what's this left piece all about?
And shortly after the period that I was working on string theory and we found in collaboration
with my friend Warren Siegel, this third score for the heterotic string, we actually pursued
this idea of pulling the string apart.
And when you do that, what you find is another formulation of the heterotic string.
It has more charge than the original version, and it has something else the original version
does not have.
When we went through the denizens, I pointed out that nature is very prolific in an interesting
way.
We have the electron.
We have a copy of the electron that's 200 times as heavy.
It's called the muon.
And then we have a third copy of the electron, which is 1,700 times as heavy.
It's called the tau particle.
When one writes a string theory in four dimensions, what you find is that the particles in the
theory come in copies.
And so in fact, a string theory in four dimensions looks more like our world than a string theory
written in higher dimensions.
So in some sense, you trade space for charge and copying, but this is a very natural explanation
for why copies exist.
Why is it that the electron has a copy?
Well, without string theory, we have no way to answer this question.
With string theory, what we can see that it corresponds to is that in some sense it's
an extra, what we used to think of, direction that has been pulled apart into a charge
piece and a piece that is responsible for what we call family number in the standard
model.
String theories are more complicated than you thought.
They're more complicated than most physicists thought, actually.
So this idea that you can pull them apart, we've described in terms of words, but let
me give you a different picture.
In fact, most of the people who work on string theory and most of the discussions that you
may have heard tell you about this process called compactification.
Now how do I understand compactification?
Now suppose other directions really are out there in some sense, and if they're there,
let's imagine, we've already imagined that they're small, but let's imagine that they're
incredibly warped.
In fact, in most discussions of string theory, you'll find discussions of these warped extra
pieces that are called Kalabiyao manifolds, at least in their most popular guise.
It turns out that physicists are prolific in the ways that they can warp things, too.
There are other ways of warping besides the Kalabiyao manifold.
Now what's the difference between taking an extra dimension and warping it and starting
with these extra angles?
Well the difference is that you actually have to do something to warp an extra dimension.
And if string theory really allows extra dimensions, then they ought to explain why you have to
warp them.
That's something that we have never seen a consistent and complete explanation given
in the context of string theory.
On the other hand, if we start from the point of view that string theories ought to describe
our world as we see it, then by definition almost we should allow for the string theory
to give us the copying processes that we see in the standard model, as well allow the string
theory to directly let us see the angular variables that are not associated with actual
motion, but associated with the changes in objects like the photon.
If you take this view, then string theory comes to live comfortably in four dimensions.
And in the four dimensional point of view, it's not a question about warping because
the theory has no options, whereas if you believe in extra dimensions, the hidden question
is why did the theory warp itself?
This is a question that we don't have an answer for.
Now the actual settling of these questions is going to probably take decades, maybe centuries.
Is string theory an actual four dimensional construct, or is it a higher dimensional
construct where you have compactification?
Well, the point of view of four dimensions I should also make some comments about additionally.
This is not just my work.
In fact, in the middle to late 80s, there were three groups of physicists who seriously
studied this question of four dimensional strings.
There was one group led by a physicist whose last name was Antoniaides.
He was joined by Bakas, Kunis, and Windy, and they extensively studied the idea that
the heterotic string is an actual four dimensional construct, and they use a particular mathematical
approach that are called free fermions.
That's a way of saying that we'll work with, remember that we talked about the two descriptions
of the heterotic string, that it had a bosonic description and a fermionic description, well
they essentially used all the fermionic description.
A separate group of physicists led that was composed of Dieter Lüst, Stefan Tysen, and
G. Zupanis used a technique called the covariant lattice, and the covariant lattice that's
like using the old bosonic formulation totally for the heterotic string that we discussed
in the last lecture.
So at least three groups of physicists have concluded that string theory really is, or
rather can be, interpreted as a four dimensional construct.
The drawback in this is that all of these objects as four dimensional theories are much more
complicated to write than their higher dimensional analogs.
Now, let me return to the discussion of warping, because I told you that there was more than
Kalapyao.
Well, in most recent years physicists have been looking at things called G2 compactifications,
spin bundle compactifications, and they've added an additional concept called fluxes.
So these are all different mathematical tools for imagining starting with higher dimensions,
rinding and bending the space in some way, and getting something that winds up with a
four dimensional description.
But there's an interesting question about this.
You see, we live in a particular universe.
So if you start with a string theory in some higher universe, and you want to come down
to four dimensions, if you believe in higher dimensions, you've got to explain the warping.
In particular, you have to pick the warping that agrees with our universe.
Well, every few years a physicist comes along or a group comes along with a new way of compactifying.
So we have no guarantees yet that if you believe in the higher dimensional point of view that
we have figured out the right way to bend the extra dimensions to produce our world.
On the other hand, if you start with the four dimensional view of string theory, start
with the theory where the parts of our world, that is the standard model, which is carriers,
are present in the string, and we know how to do that.
And then it turns out that the string requires you to add many more parts that we don't see
in a standard model.
That's something we don't quite understand the process for doing.
That's in fact one of the unsolved problems for string theory.
It involves something called modular invariance, a very complicated process.
If one day, however, we discover how to do that, we'll be able to write many copies of
the string that contain our world and other stuff.
Gee, that other stuff might worry you.
Well, in lecture one we talked about things, stuff called dark matter, things that are
not like the electron and the proton.
Well, in a four dimensional string, you copiously produce dark matter.
So in fact, as far as string theory is concerned, it's a good thing that dark matter is out
there because that's the price that we pay for bringing a string down to four dimensions.
So are the extra dimensions quark-like or string-like?
We don't know.
I want to end this presentation by showing you the difference between the mathematical
description of the higher dimensional strings and the four dimensional ones.
You'll see for yourself why so many physicists have chosen to believe that we live in a universe
of higher dimensions, but to which you have to bend the extra directions by this process
called compactification.
Now I've shown you part of these scores before.
Remember for the heterotic string as first found by the Princeton string quartet, their
papers contain essentially two scores.
So I've shown you these two scores, let me quickly put them up again.
That's their first score, that's their second score, and then there's this third score that
I personally was involved in with my colleague, Warren Siegel.
Now all of those mathematical expressions I've shown you describe theories in ten dimensions.
This last one is everything that you saw in the last transparency plus this extra stuff.
It's more complicated.
It's more difficult to write.
So in many people's minds the ones that are simplest to write are more elegant, but you
know nature does not necessarily follow our rule for elegance.
In fact Einstein once said, in the search for truth, leave elegance to the tailor.
