At the end of the last lecture, I talked about the possibility that we've seen about half
of our world in the course of studying particle physics. We put a transparency up of a very
balanced world where for every matter particle that we've seen in the laboratory, there
is a superpartner that we have yet to see. I should be a little bit more specific, however,
when it comes to Higgs particle because if supersymmetry is realized in our world, in
fact, there are two Higgs particles and that's kind of an unusual feature. Now, when the
idea of supersymmetry was first presented, it was a wild speculation. There were very
few physicists who took the idea seriously. I was a graduate student when this happened.
This was the middle 70s and I was working towards a doctoral degree. In my third year,
I came across a research paper by Vessens Amino where I first saw the mathematics of supersymmetry.
I understood pretty quickly that this mathematics described the possibilities of new forms of
matter and energy that no one had ever thought about. I got very excited. I ran around the
Center for Theoretical Physics at MIT where I was a student trying to find out if any
of my faculty could help me learn this new subject. None of them could. In fact, I was
the only person at MIT in those days who had any interest in the idea of supersymmetry.
So I persevered. I had an advisor who helped me learn the material and after completing
some works where I tried to combine the idea of supersymmetry with the equations of Maxwell,
I set my sights on trying to next study supersymmetry combined with the ideas of Einstein. In 1977,
I wrote the first PhD thesis at MIT on the subject of supersymmetry. Fortunately, it
was not the last. Now, the other thing that we want to talk about today is a slightly different
way to find the super partners. We would like to, of course, see them in the laboratory.
That's the most direct way that we know that this mathematics is an accurate description
of our world. There is, however, an indirect way that we can know this and that's what
I want to talk about today because it is much more likely that it will be this indirect
method that provides the first evidence in an experiment that we live in a supersymmetrical
world. So again, let me remind you of something you know. Let's go back to our high school
science class. If we have two charged objects and we want to know the force between the
two, then we learn in high school science that the force goes like the product of the
charges divided by the square of the distance. And if the charges are electrons, then we
have to use this incredibly small unit, the electron charge. Now, this equation we have
learned also arises by using Feynman's picture making method to understand physics. Now,
let's think about these pictures. We've seen it many times where we have our particles
being exchanged with the photon traveling between the two and the electrons in the exterior
of the diagram. So here's our familiar picture. Now, there's something rather interesting
about the mathematics of this picture. Remember, in the high school science class, we were told
that the force goes like the product of the charge divided by the square of the distance.
Each one of the factors of the charge is associated where the electron lines and the photon lines
are associated with, where they touch each other. There are two places in this diagram
where it occurs. On the left hand side, as the electron first makes its V in its path,
we should think about, oh gee, the electron charges at this point. On the right hand side
of the diagram, the other electron makes its turn, and so that's also associated with
the factor of the electron charge. So now let's do something interesting. Suppose we
set the electron charge to zero. Remember, it's a mathematical expression. We can do
whatever we want to with the mathematics. Of course, we can't do that in the real world.
But let's, in the mathematics, set these coupling constants as they are called to zero. What
happened to our picture? Well, something very interesting. We would find that the wiggly
line in the middle no longer touches the V-shaped lines on the exterior of the diagram. That
would mean, of course, that there would be no force, but that's exactly right. If the
force law goes like F is equal to the charge squared over the distance squared, and you
set the charge to zero, then there's no force. In the quantum world, it's the message carrier
that's responsible for the force. So when you set the charge to zero, you stop the message
carrier from carrying its message. So that's a consistent view. So the coupling constant
controls how strongly the force is repelled or attracted. If we have like charges, they
repel, unlike charges attract. Now, there's a story, of course, that's rather famous about
Archimedes. The story says that he was sitting in a bathtub one day and jumped out of the
tub because of a certain thought and ran out of his house yelling Eureka. Now, I don't
know if this is a true story, but it's one that one often hears. One of the interesting
things about Archimedes is recently we have found evidence that he, not Newton Enlightenets,
may well have been the first inventor of calculus. It's a very interesting story, but I'm sure
that's for another course. Why did Archimedes jump up? Well, the idea was that he had figured
out why objects float. It's something we now call Archimedes principle. What it basically
says is that when you put an object into water, the amount of force with which the water presses
up is equal to something we call the acceleration of gravity, the difference in the density
of the object that you put in the water and the water itself, and the volume that is displaced
when you push the object underwater. So that's the Archimedes principle. So now we're going
to use the Archimedes principle to think about something slightly different. If you were
to go and float in the ocean, you might make a measurement about how far you sink into
the water. On the other hand, if you were to go to the Great Salt Lake and simply lay
out and float in that body of water, you would find that you float at a higher level. Now,
the reason for this, as many people know, is that the Great Salt Lake has lots and lots
of salt dissolved into the water, and what that causes is for the density of the liquid
there to be greater than the density of the liquid in seawater. Now, remember, Archimedes
Law says that the buoyant force is proportional to the density. So if the density of the liquid
increases, it means that the force upward increases, and therefore you sink less. That's
why you float at a higher level. So in this example that we're talking about, we can actually
see this behavior of what we called a coupling constant in our previous talk about electrons.
Let's imagine we could set the density difference to zero. If that's the case, then there is
no buoyant force. That's just like setting the coupling constant to zero in our Feynman
diagram. So in this physical situation, we can see that the amount of force that's applied
by the liquid depends on the density, and there are things that you can do to change
the density of the water. Well, that's actually an interesting observation because in 1953,
two physicists, Stuckelberg and Peterman, found that the electric coupling constant in the
quantum world acts exactly like the density of water in Archimedes' principle. In other
words, the strength with which two objects repel each other actually depends on the energy
at which you make the observation. That's like adding salt to the water, a very surprising
result. So the quantum denizens, because when you actually try to figure out what's going
on in terms of pictures, what you essentially find is that the more complicated pictures
of the quantum world, when added to the classical picture, change the way with which the electron
communicates with the charged particle, and the higher the energy of either the photon
or the electrons to which the photons are communicating, then you find out that the coupling constant
effectively changes. In other words, energy is in the quantum world as salt is in the
water for the Archimedes' principle. Now this turns out to be true not just for the
electromagnetic force, because we have learned in our discussion that there are four fundamental
forces in the world. There is the force of gravity, there is the weak nuclear force,
there is the force of electromagnetism, and there's a strong nuclear force. And each one
of these forces is characterized by a coupling constant. For the force of gravity, that coupling
constant is Newton's constant G. For the other two forces, we introduce different constants
that are sometimes called GW, which means the coupling constant for the weak force,
or GS for the coupling constant for the strong force. But their role is to play exactly the
same role that we saw for the electromagnetic force. By that I mean the following. In our
famous V diagram with the exchange of a message carrier in the middle, instead of saying that
the outside particles are electrons, we can replace them by, for example, quarks. So how
do quarks interact? Well, quarks interact by exchanging gluons. That's what keeps them
permanently bound in the interior of objects like protons and neutrons. So if they have
a coupling constant once again, you can imagine mathematically what happens when I set the
coupling constant to zero. And then what you find is just as in the case of electromagnetism,
the exterior lines which represent the quarks no longer send message carriers back and forth.
And without the message carriers, there are no forces. This is true for gravity. Again,
we're taking our same V-shaped diagram, which is called a Feynman diagram, which I should
probably technically say. If we take the Feynman diagram and imagine that one leg is the earth,
the other leg is the moon, and we're trying to understand the attraction of the earth
to the moon, then it's the exchange of gravitons that are responsible for that. If we set Newton's
constants to zero, then the graviton does not carry the message from the earth to the
moon, and therefore there's no longer any attraction. So this is a universal way of
understanding how forces arise in the quantum world. And of course, this also applies if
we think about the weak nuclear force. So we learn that the coupling constants of nature
aren't constants, a very surprising result, but it's a quantum mechanical result, not
something that affects us in everyday life. And thank goodness it doesn't, because you
see if it were true that the charge on the electron in our everyday experience changed,
then for example, we would have no guarantees about having reliable electricity, we would
have no guarantees in having reliable electronic communication techniques, no reliable phones,
no reliable televisions, no reliable radios. So at our level, it's a good thing that the
constant doesn't vary. In 1974, a second part of this story appears. That year, three physicists,
George I, Quinn, and Weinberg showed that the rates at which the coupling constants change
can be calculated. Now that's a very interesting result, because that is, if we talk about
our analogy with the buoyant force, you could ask the question, if I add a little bit of
salt, by how much bigger does the difference between the two? So that's a good question.
How much of salt, by how much bigger does the density change, or how much smaller? And
if I add salt at a faster rate, how does the rate of the density change? So there's
a correlation between how you change the density, how much salt is added, and how the density
is changed. The 1974 result of these three physicists show that the rate of change of
the coupling constants in the microcosmic world are calculable. And they found the equations
which describe this process. Nowadays, what we say is that the equations describe the
running of the coupling constants. So let's see if we can illustrate this with a diagram.
So first of all, we would just want to plot out our coupling constants. So we're going
to take an axis, one, I'm sorry, a plane, one of the axis in the plane we will label
as the energy axis. So we'll use the letter E square, so we'll measure square energy.
The other axis that we, with which we label the plane, we'll call the coupling constant
axis. That means it's G if it's gravity, it's E if it's the electron, it's GS if it's
the strong force, or it's GW if it is the weak force. Now in our world, gravity is the
weakest force. This is then followed by the electromagnetic force, and then a little bit
stronger we have the weak nuclear force, and finally the strongest force is the so-called
strong nuclear force. So here we see the coupling constant for the strong nuclear force, here
we see the coupling constant for the weak force, here we see the coupling constant for electromagnetism,
and here we see the coupling constant for gravity. So that's the order in which they occur in
our world. The strong force really is strong. And now let's imagine performing an experiment
where we perform the experiment at higher energies. Well what does that actually mean
in higher energies? An experiment's energy is defined by how fast we accelerate particles.
Remember energy exists also due to motion, it's called kinetic energy. So the faster
an object moves, the more energy it has. So you could for example imagine taking two electrons
and measuring the force of repulsion between them when they're moving fairly slow. You'll
get an answer. Now take the same electrons and shoot them at each other with a greater
speed. Since they have a greater speed, they have a greater energy, once again try to measure
the force between the two. Remarkably enough the results that we have described from the
quantum world tell us that the coupling constants change, and here we see them in our image.
If you look to see the coupling constant you'll notice that the strong coupling constant is
actually a little bit smaller than it was when we previously looked at it. The weak
coupling constant is about the same. The electromagnetic coupling constant has actually gotten stronger
and interestingly enough the gravitational coupling constant has gotten stronger. Well
what happens at even higher energies? In fact the coupling constants become even closer
together. Gravity gets a little bit stronger, the weak interaction gets a little bit stronger,
the electromagnetic interaction stays about the same, and the strong interaction decreases.
In fact if you look very carefully you'll see that the electromagnetic and the weak
coupling constants look very close together. So what happens at higher energy? They merge.
They merge. If you perform an experiment at high enough energy it is impossible to distinguish
between the electromagnetic force and the weak nuclear force. We call this energy the
electro-weak unification energy. It is mathematically implied precisely by the equations of Yang
and Mills. You'll remember I discussed in the previous lecture that there were these
equations that started out being incorrectly used, but later some 20 to 25 years later we
found they actually describe the force carriers. Well in order to produce mass for these things,
which is a process which deserves a lecture of its own, it turns out that you must at
some level regard the forces as having the same strength. Now this measure of the coupling
constants changing is something we've actually seen in the laboratory. So we know that at
higher energies the electromagnetic force does stay about the same, but the weak nuclear
force actually grows. Suppose we work at even higher energies. Then if you look at our diagram
you'll notice that there's another unification. At this stage the strong nuclear force, the
electromagnetic force and the weak nuclear force have all joined and had the same strength.
The only outlier is the force of gravity, which is weaker than the other three. And now
finally if we work at an even higher energy, gravity joins the crowd. There's an energy
which is of some place very close to what we call the Planck energy. The Planck energy
is about the highest energy that we can measure constructed from fundamental constants. Very
close to that level, gravity and the other forces are indistinguishable. And if you look
at the top of my transparency you'll notice that I've in fact been adding the forces all
together. So on the far left we had electromagnetism, then we had the weak force, the electromagnetism
and the weak force joined at a high energy, electromagnetism, the weak force and the strong
force joined and then finally as we approach the Planck energy all four forces are indistinguishable.
So that's how coupling constants run in the microcosmic world. This has very interesting
implications for the standard model. In fact let me run this process once more, but this
time using some tracks. So there we see our coupling constants before, but I have their
after images now painted in. So you can see that the first we achieve electro-weak unification
there, then we achieve electro-weak and strong unification, and then finally only as we
approach the Planck energy are all four forces joined together. This set of paths that you
see is precisely what was calculated by Weinberg and Quinn and their collaborator that I mentioned
earlier, that the coupling constants, that the path of the coupling constants can be joined.
And there's something very interesting about these paths. You will notice that the electro-weak
unification occurred before the strong force joined in and then after the strong force
was joined to the other two, gravity joins the crowd. Well, that provides an interesting
mathematical laboratory to think about the supersymmetric version of the standard model.
Remember we talked about the standard model has all the particles that we've seen in the
laboratory, but they're somehow unbalanced. The world would be a more balanced place
if they have super partners. Now, if there are super partners that has an impact on the
running of the coupling constants. And it's pretty easy to figure out why this is true.
In the pictures that I have shown you, this picture making way of understanding the forces,
in the middle parts of the picture, if there are super partners, they can play that role.
Not the standard force carriers, but the super partners. Since the super partners have slightly
different properties, it means that they will change the way that the coupling constant
runs in a slightly different way. In particular, we can rerun the last image
asking if our world is supersymmetric, how do the coupling constants come together? How
do they run in the expression of theoretical physicists? So let's run our movie and answer
this question. Let me, before I do that, mention the physicists who actually first did this.
There's a Russian physicist by the name of Kazakov, and this calculation was actually
done in 1984. So now let's see what the result of the calculation reveals to us. So there
are coupling constants that are about the energies that we think of as ordinary energies where
we can perform experiments today. So now we're going to imagine doing the experiments at
higher and higher energies. Once again, we see that there's a convergence, the strong
force becomes weaker, the weak force becomes stronger, electromagnetism dies a little bit,
and gravity grows a bit stronger. But the thing that is interesting about the supersymmetrical
model is that you will notice that when the unification occurs, the strong, weak, and
electromagnetic forces all unify at the same energy. That's a very different behavior than
we saw in the standard model without super partners. In fact, we can go back and make
a comparison. So here's the unification in the supersymmetric version. Here is the unification
in the standard model, which we experimentally have support for. And as you can see, in the
standard model version, there is a unification first of electromagnetism and weak, and then
only later does the strong force join in, whereas in the supersymmetrical model, all
three forces outside of gravity unify at the same place. Physics is often driven by a sense
of elegance, although it is often perhaps very hard to define what we mean by elegance.
In this case, many physicists have argued that the picture that is provided to us by
the supersymmetrical standard model, where three of the forces join at exactly the same
place, is a more elegant result than in the standard model, where first you have a joining
of two forces, and then the third non-gravitational force joins the crowd. So this remarkable
result about what the role of supersymmetry is, in some sense, looks pretty. But again,
remember, physics ultimately is not about our sense of beauty. Our sense of beauty does
not determine what we call physics. Physics is determined by a laboratory experiment,
and now we have another window with which to find out if our world is supersymmetric.
In my last lecture, I described one way we could discover supersymmetry, which is by
actually seeing the superpartners. We've never seen them in the laboratory. Depending on
their masses, this may, if we're lucky, occur before 2020. If we're unlucky, we may
have to wait hundreds of years in order to actually see a superpartner. In the latter
case, of course, the entire time of the debate would be whether this mathematics is physics
or is it philosophy. The coupling constants offer a different path. You see, the ability
to measure coupling constants does not depend on us first seeing the superpartners. Instead,
what it relies on is a very careful measure of the ordinary forces between ordinary matter
as we already understand them. If that's the case, then another way to detect the presence
of superpartners or perhaps something else is to actually measure the paths that the
coupling constants take. If we perform experiments at the Large Hadron Collider and they indicate
that the paths of the coupling constant are the ones that we associate it with the standard
model, that will be pretty damning evidence against the existence of supersymmetry. On
the other hand, if we perform experiments at the Large Hadron Collider and we find that
the paths of the trajectories for the coupling constants point to a single point of unification
between the strong, the electromagnetic and the weak coupling constants, that will be fairly
strong evidence that we live in a supersymmetrical universe even though we will not have seen
the superpartners. So they have an indirect effect on how the structure of our universe
with ordinary forces and ordinary matter behave. So this is a second window which will be one
that will be looked to be exploited at the Large Hadron Collider. You have to, as you
can see in these plots, you have to be able to work at higher and higher energies to watch
the running of the coupling constants. But with that ability, you can plot the paths,
you can then make predictions about where they will meet and if they all meet in the
same place, we can be fairly certain that our universe is a supersymmetrical universe
where even though we have not seen the superpartners, this balanced picture that we've constructed
mathematically will actually turn out to be a picture of our universe. Why is this important?
Well the simplest thing I can tell you about why you should care if superpartners exist
is to repeat a story of something that happened in the past. I mentioned perhaps that the
electron was first thought of as an idea. We now, of course, use this idea to base a large
part of our technology and our quality of life upon this idea. Whenever we discover new
forms of matter and energy, it means potentially there are new forms of technology out there
that are waiting for us to exploit them. So what might these technologies be? Again, this
is in the realm of speculation. I can't tell you exactly, but I can imagine. Suppose it's
possible to transform ordinary electrons into electrons. We know, for example, that if you
turn off the charges of electrons, they'll still repel each other. But if you turn off
all the charges on electrons, since they're bosons, they can pass right through each other
up to quantum effects. So imagine a device that changes electrons into electrons, everything.
Then you might perhaps have a new way to transport the electrons, that is change them to electrons,
transport them, then change them back. Does that mean perhaps that you might be able to
transport them even further or faster or perhaps maybe through ordinary matter? We don't know.
But some prospect that perhaps looks to us very much like science fiction may well be
out there if these new forms of matter and energy exist. That's the importance of new
forms of matter and energy.
