String theory did not begin as a project to eat the entire universe.
In the early days of string theory, around 1968, the goals were much more modest.
We are simply looking for a way to understand nuclear matter.
Earlier in our lecture, we have visited the quantum world, and in the quantum world there
are many denizens, among them are the ones that form nuclear matter.
Here for example, we have kind of a representation of a proton.
It consists of this bubble, the bubble itself is the actual proton, and then in its interior,
the smaller pieces of matter that we call quarks.
In this case, it has to be a proton, it has to be two up quarks and a down quark.
However, the quarks have got to be combined in such a way that you take one of each color.
So here we've illustrated one red quark, one yellow quark, and one blue quark.
Nuclear matter also comes in a second form, objects that are called mesons.
This is a representation of a meson.
Instead of having three quarks in the interior, you have to have a quark and an anti-quark.
So although it's really difficult to tell from this illustration that one of these is
an anti-particle, that's what it has to be in order to form a meson.
So physicists were struggling with trying to understand how nuclear matter was put together.
At the time, one possibility was something called the dual resonance model presented
by Gabriel Veniziano as a possible explanation.
The other competing model was called the relativistic constituent model.
Ultimately, the relativistic constituent model won out the battle and banished the dual resonance model.
Now the dual resonance model is actually what went on to become string theory.
And in using the ideas of string theory, ultimately it was realized that it's much more potent
than just trying to understand nuclear matter that it potentially can be used as a way to understand our universe.
Now remember, when we talk about strings, there are two varieties.
They're the kind that have their ends free and then they're the kind that are closed.
The closed ones look like little loops and when we look at them, notes or more technically
the modes of vibrations of these things, we can find one distinguishing feature.
Among the closed strings, there's always a mode that is a manner of vibrating that has
the properties from our level of looking like a particle which carries the force of gravity,
the graviton.
The open string on the other hand always has one mode of its way of vibrating that looks
similar to a photon.
So now the thing that's interesting is that we learned many lectures ago that strings
seem naturally to want to live in higher dimensions.
So when the open strings were first studied, it was thought that these must describe something
that's kind of like Maxwell's equation but in a dimension with nine spatial directions
and one temporal direction.
If you understand the mathematics of such objects, you can actually count the numbers
of degrees of freedom.
We've talked about this notion of degrees of freedom before and the numbers of degrees
of freedom for a 10 dimensional photon is different from that of a 4 dimensional photon.
That's in fact, in general, the dimension minus 8.
So open string theory, string theory fails for hadron physics but then it comes back
and starts to perhaps talk about things that look like electromagnetism.
Now one of the things about strings which we've talked about is that if you have an
open string, you can put charges at the end of the string, you have to go all the way
to the heterotic string before you can actually distribute charge along the string.
And in 1969, no one knew that and the only method for putting charge in string theory
relied on the work of two physicists whose names were Chan and Peyton.
They used to write equations which describe the charges on the end.
These charges on the end were called Chan-Peyton factors.
Now it doesn't have to just be electrical charge on the end.
For example, now that we've studied the quantum world, we know that there are additional charges
such as the weak nuclear charge or the strong nuclear charge.
Those could also be at the end of one of these open strings.
But if you choose something other than electrical charge, then the particle that I was calling
the photon must be replaced by the appropriate object.
For example, if we put color charge at the end of the string, then instead of a photon,
we must be talking about objects that have properties like the gluons, the things that
keep the quarks bound to the interior.
Two very interesting observations have been made in recent years.
And by the way, you might wonder, wait a minute, weren't we talking about string theory?
So why have we returned to talk about protons?
Because the topic of this lecture is the research that's going on most currently in the field,
namely string theory is being used to try to understand how protons and particles like
mesons actually work.
You see, there's a mystery about them.
Let's look at this mystery for a second.
You've seen this drawing before.
We've used it to talk about the way that the strength of a particle's interaction varies
with energy.
If you direct your attention to the strong interaction, remember we use a color-coded
scheme, so the red dots that you'll see on our diagram correspond to the strength of
the strong coupling constant.
So there it is.
You can see we have gravity on the bottom.
We have electromagnetism on top of that.
We have the weak force, weak nuclear force, and then the strong nuclear force.
And the strong nuclear force is the strongest.
So now, suppose we imagine looking at the particles that constitute a proton or a meson
at much, much smaller energies, then we go backwards in the scale.
We don't move to the right, we move to the left.
If you look at the plot for the red dots, you'll notice something very interesting.
They are shooting upward.
And what that means is that as you probe an object like the proton at smaller and smaller
energies, the force which couples the quarks together must become stronger and stronger.
Now in fact, if you look at our three coupling constants, you'll realize the one for the
strong interaction is the only one that's shooting up off the top of the graph.
And of course, that's what we need because the quarks must be permanently bound to the
interior of a particle like the proton or one of the mesons or other forms of nuclear
matter.
Now there's a problem with this graph.
You see, no one actually knows how to calculate that coupling constant that shoots off the
edge.
We think that's the right answer.
We have lots of experimental evidence that that's the right answer.
We know that as you probe to higher energies, that coupling constant decreases.
In fact, a recent Nobel Prize was awarded for the work which was about the decreasing
of the coupling constant.
So this problem of trying to understand why quarks can never get out of the interior of
hadron matter reduces to understanding why does this coupling constant for the strong
forces shoot off to infinity as we probe to smaller and smaller energies.
These are very uncomfortable when we cannot explain something.
So in recent years, some new ideas have come about trying to understand that strange behavior.
And interestingly enough, these ideas have actually come from string theory.
Remember string theory that describes the entire universe?
One recent times because of these two new developments, it has returned to its point
of origin, which somehow completes a very nice circle historically.
Part of this work comes to us from three physicists in 1986, Kauai, Llewellyn and Tai, and what
they showed is something very interesting.
You'll remember that closed strings always have a mode of vibration that looks like
the graviton, and you'll perhaps also remember that at an earlier lecture, I showed you that
a closed string, which is our standing wave mode, a closed string can always in some sense
be decomposed into left movers and right movers.
Perhaps you want to review that lecture to go over that point again, but it's actually
the case.
So this 1986 observation was that, well, wait a minute, but the left movers and right movers
are what you need to describe open strings.
But open strings describe things like the photon or the gluons.
And so therefore, there must be some very deep, hidden mathematical relation between
a theory of gravity, that's what closed strings provide, and the theory where the movers are
either left movers or right movers, but those are equivalent to open strings.
So there's some mysterious connection between these two things that no one had ever thought
about.
If we review for a moment what we mean by right movers and left movers, let me put some
images up for you.
Remember we use our red dots to tag the way the string is rotating, and here we see a
typical picture of a right mover, or we can look at the picture of the left mover.
It's rather similar.
The only difference is that the rotation occurs in the opposite sense, and so we see the red
dots moving in the opposite sense.
So each of those separately have something to do with photons or gluons or other force
carriers that we see in the standard model, but not the graviton.
So there's this mysterious connection.
In fact, this mysterious connection is so powerful and so useful that it's now called
the K-L-T observation, or the K-L-T relations, and K-L-T stands for Kauai, Lulel, and Tai,
the physicists who first noted this mysterious connection between gravity and gauge particles
like the photon, and in particular for the gluon.
Now this more accurate understanding that we're looking for, remember we want to find
an explanation for why is it that the quarks are the only particles whose force carrier
has a coupling constant which runs off into infinity as we look at smaller and smaller
scales.
Now the conventional picture, which physicists have been discussing for about 20 years, goes
as follows.
If we think about the hadron as a bubble, we've seen pictures of it, imagine that you could
grab that bubble and start to pull on it with the quarks inside.
So in particular, as you pull the parts of the bubble up to greater and greater distances,
then the bubble has to deform.
Remember that when we write Feynman diagrams, the forces between the objects are always
carried back and forth by messenger particles, these things we call gauge particles, and
for the strong force these are the gluons.
As you pull the object apart, you imagine, if we had some kind of supervision, we could
actually see the gluons going back and forth between the two quarks, and something very
interesting about gluons which distinguish them from photons.
You see, if I have two electrical charges, the photons are essentially allowed to fly
around any path that go from one positive charge to a negative charge, they can take
the direct route, or they can go 100 billion miles away and come back.
For gluons, this is not allowed.
The gluons have to bunch tightly inside of the bubble, and so effectively because of
that, when you pack gluons together, they start to increase their energy.
Well, Einstein taught us that energy and mass are the same thing, so when you pull the quarks
further apart, the gluons increase their energy until finally they have enough energy to convert
that energy from the energy of a gluon, or masses of gluons, to become the energy in
the form of new quarks.
This is very interesting because if you have new quarks, then the bubble is allowed to
split, and instead of having one maze on, you wind up with two.
One with a quark and an anti-quark moves off to the right, one with a quark and an anti-quark
moves off to the left.
Now, everything that I've told you is a quantitative view, namely, no one has ever done a calculation
to prove that all of that works.
We think that's how it works, but we don't know for sure.
So one of the things that this Kauai, Llewellyn, and Thai relations have done for the physics
community is to give it an alternative way to study this process.
However, even more interesting things have been occurring in recent times.
In 1997, something totally new happened, and this totally new idea goes by the name ADS-CFT.
Now those are letters.
They stand for something.
The ADS part stands for anti-decider space, and we'll come back and explain what that
means.
The CFT part stands for conformal field theory.
Well, let's start with the ADS part.
In the 1930s, a Dutch astronomer whose last name was decider was the first person to argue
that we live in a universe where the curvature tensor, and I hope you remember the curvature
tensor, is this thing that actually describes gravity, but decider's assertion was in our
universe the curvature tensor is non-zero and positive.
Now decider actually had discussions with Einstein about this point, because after all,
Einstein had invented general relativity, but that's what we mean by ADS.
On the other hand, CFT, let's talk about that for a moment, well, if we lived in a universe
where there were only particles like gluons, then the only sources of energy that you would
be possible to describe must be the energies associated with gluons.
However, if you write down the mathematics of a theory that is only describing gluons,
what you find is a very curious property, namely, imagine taking such a whirl and studying
it with a microscope.
What you would find is no matter how you look at the system with a microscope, whether you
set your microscope to power 10, power 20, power 100, power 1000, the physics would always
look the same.
Now physicists have a name for this kind of a system, it's called a conformal system.
So the C in CFT is conformal.
The field in CFT is actually the field of the gluons, and then, of course, T is theory.
So ADS CFT tells us something that if you're studying a theory where there are only gluons
that have this funny property, it is related in some mysterious way to an anti-dissider
geometry, a geometry where the curvature is negative.
Now this amazing discovery was made by a physicist named Juan Maldesena from Argentina,
and he's actually a student of Edward Witten, who is one of the leaders of the string revolution.
The discovery marked the beginning of what's called the second string revolution.
The first string revolution had occurred after Green and Schwartz discovered the magical
496.
So why are these discoveries so important?
Well, in order for the explanation for the shooting up of the coupling constants to be
derived from mathematics, we need to find some new mathematics.
We have for over 30 years not been able to derive this result.
So some new mathematics and some new ideas have appeared in the idea and in the form
of objects that are called brains.
So let's take a visit to the world of brains.
Here we have a transparency, and if you look in the middle, you see a little dot.
So I want you to think about that dot for the moment as a charged particle.
For example, that might be an electron, and if it were a real electron, then of course
it's free to move about.
Okay, so I'm going to give a new definition at this point.
I'm going to instead of calling it a dot, I'm going to call it a zero brain.
So if that's a zero brain, what's a one brain?
Well, now we've got a line.
In fact, that could be one of our strings.
So we're going to again introduce a new word.
Whenever we have something that has one dimension associated with it, we're going to call it
a one brain.
So why stop at one?
Well, in fact, there's no need to.
We can go to two dimensions.
Now let's take our string and roll it out.
Now we have something that has a two dimensional plane.
We would call that a two brain.
Now in our world, of course, the only other object one could write would be a volume,
and that would be a three brain.
But in the world of the mathematics of the string, nothing stops you from doing this
process all the way up to ten, because in string theory, the mathematics looks like
they're ten dimensions.
And one of the interesting things about this process, however, is that we started with
the electrical charge, which was a single zero brain.
It was allowed to carry charge.
Since we know how to control the mathematics, we can let these other objects carry charge.
By the way, the collection of all possible brains are called DP brains, where P can be
arbitrary basically.
So we're going to talk about the P brains.
So if electrical particles like the electrons couple to the photon to transmit forces, can
these DP brains A carry charge, and if they do, are there force carriers that can couple
to them?
The answer mathematically has been known for a long time, it's yes.
So these other objects also can give rise to electrical forces.
Now this is very important because if you look at the mathematics of these other objects,
these DP brains, is that strings end upon them.
Dirichlet was a mathematician whose work is important to understand modern string theory,
even though his work occurred almost 200 years beforehand.
The important point about these DP brains is that strings end upon them.
Remember we first talked about charges being at the end of the strings?
But in fact, charged DP brains can be at the end of strings.
It was the physicist Joel Polchinski in 1990 who first focused the string theory community
on studying these objects, even though another physicist by the name of Warren Segal had
actually first written his thesis about them in 1977.
So what's so neat about these DP brains?
Well, by using DP brains you can actually prove that this weird connection between the theory
where there are only gluons and some connection to a theory with only gravity actually exists.
In fact, people have used the notion of DP brains to derive an equation which connects
gravity to a theory that only involves the gluons.
So there's a lot of excitement in fact in the physics community because for the first
time, instead of arguing in terms of pictures or words about why the coupling constant is
shooting upward for the strong forces, for the first time physicists are now being able
to calculate this process of the coupling constant going up.
In fact, Edward Whitten has made an even more startling suggestion about how string theory
can contribute to our understanding of the strong force.
Now, this last suggestion of Whitten's is kind of curious in many, many ways.
You remember the notion of anti-commuting numbers.
In fact, let's put it back up so we can see it.
Ordinary numbers when you multiply them don't care about the order in which you multiply
them.
Four times three is the same thing as three times four.
In the 1800s, the mathematician Grasman decided to study numbers that had a different property.
Namely when you multiply them, you get a minus sign.
Now in talking about string theory, this second kind of object where the minus sign occurs
leads to a description of string theory which is called the Nevers-Schwarz-Ramon theory,
the NSR theory.
And in the NSR theory, you have the strands which describe the string, but you also have
different mathematical strands that have this kind of multiplication law attached to them.
Now it turns out that you can, in fact, do something very interesting, namely start for
every strand of the string that's there, introduce a mirror copy of it that possesses the wrong
multiplication law.
When you do that, you can produce, you can say, well, I will do one mirror copy for every
strand, that's the n equal one Nevers-Schwarz-Ramon string, or you can introduce two copies.
If you introduce two copies with the anti-commuting multiplication, you get what's called the n
equal two Nevers-Schwarz-Ramon string.
From this object emerges an even more interesting beast.
I hope you remember spinners.
The electron is a spinner.
It's this notion that there are objects in nature that you have to walk around twice
before you find out that they're pointing at you again.
We talked about this a long time ago, but it's relevant here.
In these so-called n equal two theories, spinners also exist, but they can have another name
entirely.
They're called twisters.
So why did we make this excursion into twisters of all things?
Well twisters have, first of all, been around for a very long time.
In fact, they were first proposed by the physicist Roger Penrose in the 60s, but usually people
have only tried to use twisters to understand various aspects of gravity.
But you perhaps won't be surprised because of our ADS-CFT connection where we learned
that gravity is connected with gauge theory and gluons.
You might begin to suggest that gee, maybe twisters are useful, and in fact that's precisely
what Edward Whitten has done in an impressive paper quite recently.
Now there's one other very mysterious thing that I have to tell you about this so-called
n equal two string.
Remember the basic idea is that for every strand of the string, so it has an x direction,
a y direction, a z direction, and six friends, you introduce two copies that are anti-commuting
quantities.
If you do that and ask what is the Einstein hypotenuse for the notes produced by such an
object, you discover something quite remarkable.
The notes obey the Einstein hypotenuse, but only if there are two time dimensions.
So even though you may have never heard about the discussion that says that strings can
produce theories where there are two times, such objects are well known, and it turns
out that twisters are exactly connected to them.
So in this way, a lot of rather esoteric mathematics is starting to be marshaled for
the purpose of understanding not some kind of particle we've never seen.
Remember we've never seen a super particle, we've never seen a squark, or a slepton, or
a geigino.
We've never seen those super partners that we talked about, but we have seen nuclear
matter.
Protons, we know neutrons, and we know mesons, and the rest of the nuclear zoo.
So string theory, while many people like to say it's not something that can be tested,
there is this new horizon on string theory where it is in fact the only piece of mathematics
that we have acquired that has allowed us to calculate a physically interesting property,
namely the running of the coupling constant.
The next time someone tells you that string theory is not testable, remind them of the
ADS-CFT connection and how in fact physicists right now are starting to test string theory
in a new and exciting way.
Have we finished yet?
You might ask.
Well, not quite, because even though this ADS-CFT notion has started to yield something
that looks like real physics, it's not quite there yet.
What's the problem you might ask?
Well, ADS-CFT is an interesting and exciting new idea.
The only way we know how to actually test this idea is to work in what's called a type
2B string.
I know you're holding your head by now saying, wait a minute, what is that?
In the next lecture, we're going to actually talk about the 2B string.
In fact, we're going to talk about all the strings.
There are going to be five of them in TOTO, and I'm going to explain what they are.
But this particular one, the 2B string, was initially thought to describe only gravity.
But the ADS-CFT connection tells us, remember, that gravity in some mysterious way can be
connected to the world of gluons.
So the actual use of the ADS-CFT theorem to date has only occurred in the context of
the 2B string, and when you look at the 2B string, there's only one problem.
As I've described supersymmetry for you, it's the notion that for all the ordinary
matter that you know, there's a mirror partner.
But you could say, well, wait a minute, why only one partner?
Why not many?
In fact, there can be, at least in the realm of mathematics.
So instead of having just one partner for the electron, there could be two partners.
Let me call that N equal 2 supersymmetry.
There could be four partners, that would be called N equal 4 supersymmetry.
In the same way, for a gluon, there might be not just one gluinal partner, there might
be two or perhaps four.
When you look at the actual mathematics that comes from the ADS-CFT construction, you find
out that for every gluon, there are actually four gluinos.
That means it's N equal 4 supersymmetry.
Well, you know, it's a hard task to accept that for all the matter that we have seen
the world, there's a hidden super partner, but it's even a greater leap to say that
there must be four of these things.
So although mathematically N equal 4 supersymmetry is very well defined, and is the actual mathematical
tool by which we have been exploring the ADS-CFT connection, in point of fact, we're not quite
there in looking at our world.
One thing we're going to have to do, at least as a beginning step, is to learn how to get
rid of the other three super partners that we don't believe should be present.
Nonetheless, this leads to the most precise calculations we have to date of the running
coupling constant in QCD, quantum chromodynamics, and it is not string theory talking about
some mysterious other particle, it's string theory talking about our world.
