If you were to pick up a physics journal any time in the last 20 years, and I don't
mean like physics today, but the hardcore journals that the physicists actually used
to do their research, you would likely come across the word Susie, S-U-S-Y, usually in
capital letters.
This means supersymmetric.
In this lecture, which is titled, If You Knew Susie, we're going to try to understand
a rather unusual aspect associated with this.
Now, in many of our lectures, we've talked about the possibility of hidden dimensions.
Maybe our world has more directions than we are used to thinking about and that we
experience in everyday life.
In some ways, even though a bit odd when one hears such an expression or such an idea,
these extra dimensions, these hidden dimensions, if they're there, they're pretty conventional.
They're kind of like the space that we already know, it's just more of it.
So, what if there are even more bizarre kinds of hidden dimensions?
Well, what else could there be?
In 1974, a physicist from Pakistan, Abdus Salam, working together with John Strothde
of New Zealand, proposed a really radical answer to this question, what other kinds
of hidden dimensions might there be?
They, in fact, had to invent a new kind of space to accommodate our kinds of dimensions
as well to accommodate these extra bizarre dimensions that are even more bizarre than
the hidden ones we've discussed so far, and they call this construction super space.
Now, in our world, we can make measurements, and again, I will go back to an example I've
used several times before, putting carpet on the floor.
If you want to go to the store and buy carpet to cover floor, you have to tell the salesperson
how much carpet you want.
So, if you have a room which is 5 feet by 8 feet, then you multiply those two numbers
together and you get 40 square feet.
Now, the other thing that's interesting about this process is that which measurement
do you take first?
Do you have to measure the length that's 8 feet long, or do you have to measure the
length that's 5 foot long?
Well, it doesn't matter.
You can measure the 8, measure the 5, do the multiplication, 5 times 8 is 8 times 5, so
it doesn't matter which one you measure first.
But now, let's use that algebra again.
We can write an equation.
It says 8 times 5 is equal to 5 times 8, and everyone will agree with that.
But if we use algebraic symbols for these things, where we'll call the number 8, we'll
call x1.
The number 5, we'll call x2.
We get an equation which says x1 times x2 is equal to x2 times x1.
But wait a minute, we've seen this kind of thing before.
If we subtract the x2 times x1, then we see that, well, wait a minute, lengths are commuting.
They're like these commuting numbers that we keep talking about.
So the obvious question that this raises is, is it possible to have some kind of a universe
where lengths do not behave as ordinary numbers that we're familiar with, but instead behave
as anti-commuting quantities, much as electrons are anti-commuting?
Well, this is a very bizarre idea, and in fact, no one had ever thought of such thing
before 1974.
So the work of Salam and Strathdy is exactly this idea that in order to describe physics,
not only do we need numbers that correspond to the lengths that we know that are commuting
objects, but we also have to investigate the possibility that some of these extra dimensions
that are popular in string theory might not be numbers at all in the typical way that
we think of numbers.
Now the reason why Salam and Strathdy did have such a thought had to do with something
that was going on in string theory already.
Remember string theory gets its start at the end of the 60s.
So in 1974, string theory, although not very popular and also not very well studied, had
a few people that were investigating it.
And among the results that were found from these investigations was this strange thing
that you're allowed to trade bosons for fermions.
You can trade something like an electron for something that has properties like the photon.
Very different and new and exciting idea at the time.
So Salam and Strathdy were looking for a simple way to understand how this was possible at
all, and they hit upon an idea, and the idea is quite simple.
It involves extra dimensions, so we have to have one variable that stands for time, one
for what we physicists like to call the x-direction, another variable for the y-direction, a third
for the z, so you have to have four variables to talk about the position in space as we
understand it, and then they went beyond that.
They said there are extra dimensions, but we're not going to use numbers for these extra
dimensions.
Instead, we're going to go back and use Grassman numbers as first discussed by the mathematician
Grassman in the 1800s.
So they didn't just introduce one of these objects, they introduced four.
We can write these objects again using algebra.
Remember, algebra for us is a picture, a tool for thinking about ideas.
So we can introduce four of these objects, we'll call them theta 1, theta 2, theta 3,
and theta 4.
If we were to multiply any two of them, we get an anticommuting object.
So theta 1 times theta 2 is by definition minus theta 2 times theta 1, or if we multiply
theta 1 times theta 3, that's equal to minus theta 3 times theta 1.
More remarkably, the square of any one of these objects is vanishing.
So these certainly are not numbers that we're used to in any usual description of nature,
but they're going to be useful in talking about supersymmetry.
You should have a couple of questions.
Why four?
Well, that one's pretty simple to answer.
You remember when we were talking about the electron, I said that the electron kind of
has four degrees of freedom.
What did I mean by that?
Well, we can talk about an electron, but it can spin in a right-handed sense or left-handed
sense.
It's still an electron, and interestingly enough, the anti-particle to the electron
can either spin in right-handed and left-handed sense, so that's four degrees of freedom,
but you might be tempted to say that the anti-particle has nothing to do with the electron.
Well, Richard Feynman actually settled that a long time ago.
If you look at the mathematics which describes an electron, and then look at the mathematics
that describes its anti-particle, also called the positron, those two pieces of mathematics
can be mapped one into the other if you interpret the anti-particle as being the particle moving
backward in time.
Again, a very strange notion, but mathematically precisely defined.
That means that anti-particles are not, in some sense, distinct from the particles to
which they mirror.
They are, in some sense, those particles moving backward in time.
If that's the case, then it makes sense to say that the electron spinning in either right-handed
and left-handed sense is still an electron, and its anti-particle, the positron, spinning
in either a right-handed or left-handed sense, is still an electron.
So there are four different versions.
That's why Salaman-Straffi introduced four of these numbers.
Now remember, another property of the electron, in addition to the fact that it obeys the
polyexclusion principle, is that it's a spinner.
A spinner, well, sort of think of an arrow.
It's this funny kind of arrow that we cannot actually build here in our universe in the
world of the everyday experience, but it's an arrow that you have to walk around either
two times or four times or six or eight times to find out that it's pointing at you if it
was before you started, but if you walk around it an odd number of times, it's actually pointed
away from you.
That was our basic working definition of a spinner.
But since the electron is a spinner and it takes four degrees of freedom to make up an
electron, then Salaman-Straffi reasoned that if they wanted this extra dimension to be
a spinner, you needed four of them.
That's why they introduced four.
Now they were not the first people to introduce anti-commuting numbers into physics.
This honor belongs to a Russian physicist named Berazin.
And Berazin was concerned not so much about particles, but he wanted to know about reasonable
properties like how does current flow through wires, how does heat flow, what is the tensile
strength when you take a wire you're concerned about how to bend it, how strong it is.
So these are real practical problems to be concerned about how gases conduct heat, practical
problems.
But for some reasons and for some calculations, Berazin found that introducing the notion
of these strange numbers actually simplified the calculations.
Berazin is truly the father of what's now called superanalysis.
That means doing mathematics with these things that have this peculiar anti-commuting property.
However, Salaman-Straffi went beyond Berazin because they wanted four of these.
Berazin had never introduced more than one of these objects to simplify his calculations
about the on the properties of ordinary matter.
So now, what's a super space?
Something that has the coordinates of our world.
We can think of that as duration, length, breadth and thickness, or physicists would
say something like time, x direction, y direction and z direction, they mean the same thing.
And in order to make it a super space, we put four of these extra anti-commuting numbers
as directions.
That's what's called an equal one super space.
More complicated versions of super space are possible.
For example, we could imagine taking a mathematical construct that includes the coordinates of
our world, duration, length, breadth and thickness, and put two copies of these anti-commuting
numbers.
So we go from one to four and one copy and then from five to eight for a second copy.
Such an object would be called n equal to super space.
And you can imagine doing this more and more times, you could have higher and higher copies
and that's called in extended supersymmetry, where in is whatever value you decide to pick.
One of the most remarkable things about this construction is that you can take the equations
of ordinary physics and rewrite them over this other thing, this super space, and the
equations that you get look remarkably like our equations.
In fact, not only remarkably like our equations, they are our equations, even though you started
by saying these extra directions are there.
There's an upper limit, however, and this upper limit occurs in a very strange way.
In our world, there's a force of gravity and many lectures ago, we learned that Einstein's
great genius teaches us that gravity is somehow connected with the curvature of space and
time.
So if you actually try to take this idea of Einstein and apply it to super space, you
run into a limit.
This limit says that the most number of copies of the anti-commuting coordinates that you
can introduce is eight.
Now why is super space interesting?
Well, in our world and in ordinary spacetime, particles can move about and you can measure
their properties.
And so if you believe that slum is strongly constructed, something is interesting, one
question you could ask yourself is, what happens if an ordinary particle moves into
one of these strange directions they've proposed?
If you study the mathematics, it's amazing, namely, suppose I had an ordinary electron.
If I have an ordinary electron, I can move it front and back, it's still an electron.
I can move it left and right, it's still an electron.
I can move it up and down, and it's still an electron.
If I wait two seconds and look at it, it's still an electron.
So for ordinary particles moving in ordinary space, they don't change their identity.
But remember, Salamis Dothi said there are these other directions.
So what happens if we take an electron and move it into one of these other strange directions?
And remember, we can only do this with mathematics, it's not that we can tell a story, we actually
have to study equations to answer this question.
There's an answer that one can find from these equations, namely, remember in the world of
supersymmetry, the electron has four superpartners, they're called electrons.
What happens in the mathematics of super space is if you take an ordinary electron and move
it into one of these extra funny directions, you find out that the electron changes its
identity.
In fact, it becomes one of the electrons.
And so we, in fact, have a simple understanding of why the superpartners appear if you believe
this super space exists.
Remember a moment ago, I described Feynman's observation that one way to understand the
presence of antiparticles is to think of particles moving backwards in time.
We now have a relatively similar observation.
If we use the notion of super space, when an ordinary particle moves into one of the
super directions, it becomes a superpartner.
And now, of course, we can see why we had to have that balance that I talked about when
we looked at the standard model.
Remember for every ordinary particle, there was a superpartner.
Well, if all that's happening is that the ordinary particles are moving into these strange
directions, then for every ordinary particle, after it has moved into one of these strange
directions, it would be a superpartner.
And that's the reason we find this nice balance.
So that means that the notion of supersymmetry, namely that we have this balance here, is
just the statement that ordinary particles are free to move in any direction in super
space.
Well, that's a nice geometrical result.
In fact, we can use it in order to rewrite all the equations with a sense of geometry.
We have an intuition about how geometry works in our space.
Now we can apply that intuition about geometry to this larger construct.
And when you do that, that's how we discover that the superpartners, in fact, obey the
equations of our world, because we apply exactly the same geometric intuition.
There is one funny, very, very strange thing, however, about moving around in super space.
Let me tell you a story.
Let's imagine I had a soccer field.
So there is a ball on a soccer field.
And there are some children who wish to play a game.
One child decides that they're going to kick the ball in that direction.
And they'll follow the boundary of the soccer field.
So you start in one corner, one child kicks the ball.
It rolls along the boundary of the soccer field until it gets to the other edge.
And there's a child there that stops it.
That child then kicks the ball along the orthogonal direction, the direction at right angles.
And the ball travels around the soccer field, and a child stops it there at that end.
That child then kicks it to another child, who then kicks it back to the first.
So this is something that's easily possible to imagine.
When the ball gets back to the first child who kicked it, it's still a ball.
Because after all, in our world, just by moving doesn't change the identity of something.
Let's imagine that these children have access to super space.
And so the first child kicks the ball into one of these strange directions.
When it gets to the second child, it's no longer a ball.
It's a super ball.
The second child kicks the ball in at the direction that's right angles.
Well, when you do that, since it starts off as a super ball, by the time it gets to the
child over there, it's an ordinary ball again.
That child then kicks the ball along a third leg of the field.
And by the time that it gets to this third child, it's again a super ball.
And now the fourth child kicks back to the first, it turns back into a ball.
So you would say, well, the first child would therefore not notice any difference in moving
around an ordinary space versus moving around in super space.
There's only one problem with that.
Remember, the only way we can answer these questions is by actually using equations.
So we do the equations that tell that story.
And what we find quite remarkably is that when the ball gets back to the original child
who kicked it, it's up off the ground.
And it's not there because any of the children tried to kick it up.
It has no choice.
It must come back off the ground.
Now what does it mean to be off the ground?
Well, in my story, super space was the soccer field.
Up is where we live.
Up would be ordinary space.
And so what happens in super space is a very strange process.
You try to move around in super space, and whenever you try to get back to the point
where you started, you move back into ordinary space in a different position.
Now mathematicians have actually been studying structures like this, not in super space,
but in spaces where we have ordinary coordinates.
And whenever this kind of story happens, mathematicians have a very special name for
that kind of a space.
They say it has a property that is called torsion.
So super space has torsion, but it's not the only space that has it.
Now super space turns out to be a fairly gentle excursion away from the mathematics
of our world.
It's one reason why it's very simple to explore the possibility of physics in such a construct.
So now we can ask a really important question.
Does Einstein's idea about curvature apply to super space?
Super in ordinary space is the notion of curvature of space and time that leads to
a description of gravity.
So if this super space is so much like our space, can it support curvature?
In 1977, this question was answered first by Julius Vess and Bruno Zumino, and later
by Stanley Desert.
And they found that you could write a curved super geometry.
This is a construct that uses super space and also incorporates Einstein's notion of
curvature.
In ordinary space, when you incorporate curvature, you get led to gravity.
In super space, when you incorporate curvature, you get led to super gravity.
But in fact, we've already met super gravity.
In our lecture where we explained how it was that the super partners could have been missed
in experiments, we said they had to grow a mass.
In order for them to grow a mass, we actually had to introduce a partner to the graviton
that ate up what we call the ghostino.
Remember, the ghostino was something that actually caused the mass.
But the ghostino itself is also not visible, so something has to more or less devour it.
This object that devours the ghostino is called the gravitino.
It is the actual super partner to the graviton.
So it's actually a consistent view that we get.
We apply ordinary laws of physics to this very strange mathematical construction and
out pops the super partner to the graviton.
Now the other thing about this sort of idea is you can say, well, if you can do this for
gravity, can you do it for Maxwell theory?
He answers yes.
That's where we get photon and fotinos.
In fact, every single equation of physics that we have discovered for about 150 years,
we can apply in super space and all that comes out is the super partner.
In Einstein's question to explain gravity, he had to learn new mathematics to describe
curvature.
This same mathematics more or less exists for the string, I mean for super space.
But the discovery of Einstein's equations in their most fundamental form was in fact
a problem that persisted for a short while.
I was in fact very fortunate to be working with my friend Warren Siegel at Harvard in
1977, and we found the super space analog of the Einstein's equations.
Now what does this all have to do with strings?
Well now I can tell you why there are so many strings.
Why is it?
Well, remember we talked about the open string, but suppose you take an open string and add
to it 16 of these Grassman variables.
Why 16?
Because a spinner in ten dimensions has to have 16 components, not four.
So you add 16 of these Grassman coordinates, and also suppose that these coordinates support
vibrations that move in a left handed sense.
If you can do that, you get what's called a type one super string.
Suppose that you take a closed string and again add 16 Grassman coordinates, but you
allow their motions to be both left moving and right moving.
If you do that, you get the closed type one super string.
If you take a closed super string and add not 16, but 32 of these Grassman coordinates
where their vibrations are both left and right, you get what's called a closed type
2A super string.
If you do this in a slightly different way, again adding 32 of these extra coordinates,
you get the closed type 2B string.
The 2B string is actually different from the 2A string because the spinners are all left
handed in the latter, whereas in the first, some are left and others are right.
Then finally, take the closed string, add 16 of these Grassman coordinates, make sure
that they only move in a left handed sense, and then add in the angles that we saw associated
with gauge theories, and which in fact in a previous lecture, when we discuss the dimensions
there or not, the same angles, that leads to the heterotic string.
It turns out that there are no other consistent ways to play this game.
So when you actually count the number of theories that come out of this formalism, the number
turns out to be precisely five.
So around 1995, if you had read the literature on string theory, you would have found people
talking about five different super strings.
To review these five super strings, we can take an open super string, add to its 16 left
spinning anti-community numbers that are also only left moving vibrations, that gives us
the open type 1 super string.
Before we could take the closed string, add 16 left spinning anti-commuting variables,
however that support both left and right vibrations, that gives us the closed type 1 super string.
The next alternative is to start with the closed string, add to that 16 left spinning anti-commuting
variables, which support vibrations that are both left moving and right moving, and
add to that 16 more right spinning anti-commuting spinning variables, which both support left
moving and right moving vibrations, that gives us the closed type 2a super string.
This is followed by the closed type 2b super string.
We start with the closed string.
We add 32 left spinning anti-commuting variables, which nonetheless support both left and right
rotations of the string.
This is the closed type 2b super string.
And then finally, we can start with the closed string, add 16 left spinning anti-commuting
coordinates, that only support left rotating modes of vibration, and then add to that
right moving modes of vibrations that describe either SO 32 or E8, and this gives us the
heterotic string.
In our last lecture, we talked about the fact that currently string theory is not off just
trying to explain the world, it's trying to explain how quarks and gluons are held
in the interior of nuclear matter.
The starting point for this construction was the ADS-CFT conjecture, also by the way known
as the Maldesena conjecture, named after the young physicists who first had the idea.
One of the strings that I just introduced you to at some level was the 2b string.
The work of Maldesena was precisely in the context of the 2b string, so what Maldesena
actually says is you have to start with the 2b string, you have to work on a geometry
which is anti-decider, so it's a space that is curved, and the output of that is not a
theory with gravity, but a theory that contains the gauge fields, things like gluons, things
like photons, things like the intermediate vector bosons that occur in the standard model.
So now we in fact know something more about how current string theory is attempting to
make connections with the real world.
So it's not all about gravity, it can be about quarks.
In the heterotic string case, I made a small contribution myself because the Kenmer angle
work, that is the work where you introduce the dimensions, and remember dimensions means
many things first now, in particular it means if you have a force carrier, it's the change
in the force carrier that causes a force, and so you can have two different force carriers
whose change is the same, but they're different, and so you need some way to relate them, we
also call that way a dimension.
So in 1986 working with two of my students, Roger Brooks and Fouad Muhammad, we were able
to show that these dimensions that are associated with forces in our world exactly follow the
patterns that are appropriate for string theory.
So now we know what Susie is, so the title of the lecture was, if you knew Susie, well
we do know Susie.
It's a strange construction, again it says our world has hidden directions.
In the super space construction however, the hidden directions are not numbers, they're
grassland numbers, objects whose square is equal to zero.
They're much more gentle than ordinary numbers, and so doing physics over super space actually
produces the kind of physics that we know, but with a difference, it says for every particle
that we have seen, there's one super partner.
