If you listen to the last lecture, you found an explanation for why in the middle to late
90s most physicists would have told you, those at least interested in the topic, that there
were five different strings.
Now there's a little bit of a problem with that because you see strings supposedly describe
everything. So how can there be five different everythings? A slight embarrassment to say the
least. There's another embarrassment however that was around at the time. A few people worried
about it and this has to do with a theory that is not a string theory but closely related to one.
Before I get to that embarrassment, let's return however to the notion of a mode because we want to
make sure we have a very clear understanding of that. If you look at the transparency I'm running
or the animation, you'll see that there is a closed string and it's vibrating in such a way that
there are three lobes that appear and disappear. You could say, well gee, why only three? Why not
more? The answer is you can get the string to vibrate with more. You could have a picture in
instead of having these three lobes appearing and disappearing. You only, you have five lobes
appearing or disappearing or six or any number that you want. In fact, you could have less
instead of having these three lobes that appear and disappear. You could have two lobes that appear
and disappear. Now the number of lobes that you see in this thing is what we mean by a mode of
vibration. So this is actually not the simplest mode of vibration. This is what we might call the
first excited state. The simplest one would be where there would only be two lobes that appear
and disappear as the string vibrate. Now, why was that relevant? Well, when you have a string, of
course, all of these are possible. You can have two lobes. You can have three, four, five, six,
17, 137, 2,618, 3.6 billion. All of those numbers could appear and they're all possible ways in
which the string can vibrate. Now, remember, every time the string vibrates in a different way,
from our perspective, it looks like a different particle. So rather than talking about the entire
string, we can consider only its simplest mode of oscillation. The simplest mode would be the one
where only two lobes would be appearing in this picture. It turns out that if we restrict ourselves
to the simplest way of vibrating, we're no longer talking about a string. We're only talking about
part of a string. So now let's do this to the strings that were known in 1994. Remember, there
are five of them. One of the interesting properties of these five strings is that they
are most simply described if the world has nine spatial directions and one temporal direction.
That's what we mean by 10, d equal 10 string, or super string. So in 1994, these are what were
known. And in the last lecture, we talked about what these names meant. Now, instead of taking the
entire string, we now want to truncate the string and only consider its lowest mode of vibration.
That's the two lobes appearing and disappearing. When you get that truncation accomplished,
you're no longer talking about a string. You're talking about a particle theory because remember
the ways of vibrating course onto particles. So if you take the open string and do this truncation,
you wind up with what we call 10 dimensional supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory.
If you were to take the closed type one string and perform this truncation, you get 10 dimensional
n equal 1 supergravity plus super Yang-Mills theory. If you were to take the closed type 2a
string and perform the truncation, you get 10 dimensional n equal 2a supergravity.
If you take the closed type 2b super string and truncate, you get d equal 10
n equal 2b supergravity. And finally, if you take the heterotic string and perform the truncation,
you again get 10 dimensional n equal 1 supergravity plus super Yang-Mills theory.
There are some slight differences, however, between Case B and Case C.
So now we've left behind the world of strings and we're at the level of studying the kinds of
equations that describe the standard model. These are the same equations that we use to describe
electrons and neutrons and I'm sorry, the quarks in the neutrons, muons, gluons,
photons, and all of the zoo that constitutes the standard model. These are the same equations,
except in these truncations we're in 10 dimensions where our world is four dimensional.
Now, one of the interesting things about these truncations that I've told you is that many of
them were discovered without knowing anything about string theory. So for example, the 10
dimensional string was actually not constructed using string theory, but by some other techniques
that more or less mimic the way that we construct the standard model.
In a previous lecture, I talked about the fact that the graviton has a number of degrees of
freedom that change in the dimension in which you're describing the mathematics. In our world,
the graviton has two degrees of freedom. It's sort of like the photon. It can spin in a left-handed
sense or it can spin in a right-handed sense, but it spins at four times the rate of the
electron, but it still only has these two states. The numbers of degrees of freedom in the graviton
are given by the formula which says take one-half, multiply times the dimension in which you were
trying to make the description, and then multiply that yet again by that same dimension minus three.
You plug in d equals four here, you'll find out that it equals, that that leads to two degrees
of freedom, the two ways in which the graviton can spin in our world. For d equals to 11,
you can also substitute into this formula, and if you do that, you find that a graviton
in a hypothetical world of 11 dimensions has 44 degrees of freedom. Now the reason why we bring
this up is we're going to try to discuss supergravity in the context of 11 dimensions.
Let's go back to four once again. In our world, we mentioned that photons can also come in left-handed
spinning varieties and right-handed spinning varieties, although the rate of their spin is
actually twice that of the electron. There's still only two varieties, so the degrees of
freedom of a photon in our world is two. Again, if you write the mathematical equations for a photon,
nobody tells you what dimension in which the photon ought to exist, and so you can ask the
question what are the number of degrees of freedom for a photon not in our world, but in an arbitrary
world. You will find, by some method of analysis, that the photon for an arbitrary hypothetical world
of d dimensions has d minus two degrees of freedom. Now the photon, as we've talked about in many,
many lectures, actually is a force carrier, and typically it carries forces between charged
objects. In our world, between electrons or between quarks or anything that possesses electrical charge,
that's force of repulsion that charged objects acquire is due to the exchange of photons.
So in this hypothetical world of 11 dimensions, let's ask could there be something like the
electromagnetic force? Well, the answer turns out to be yes, but there are some complications.
Let's remember that for, as far as we can tell, things like electrons behave like
point particles, and we've seen point particles. Here's our little movie of our bouncing point
particle. We can think of it as an electron. In a previous lecture, however, we have also
discussed the fact that in addition to point-like objects, we can construct
essentially things that are lines, and we call them by many different names. We've called them
strings because a string effectively is a line. We've also called this object a one brain.
One brain can be charged. If we consider not a line, but instead a plane, we then reach
what's called a two brain. A two brain can be charged. We don't have to stop with two.
We can let this line grow thick.
And now we have a three brain. Now all of these objects can carry charge, and since they all
can carry charge, we can ask ourselves a natural question. Namely, forget about strings. When you
just talk about particles, how do these things couple to their force carriers? The answer turns
out to be something that was worked out in 18th century mathematics once again. You have to
introduce objects that are called forms. Now forms are pretty much like photons, except that they
can couple to these extended objects, whereas the photon, in fact, directly cannot.
So we can ask ourselves, well, for these forms, how many degrees of freedom do they have?
Now for the form case, we have to be a little bit careful because remember, I took us through a
sequence of objects. We started with a point, then we went to a line, then we went to the plane,
and then we went to a volume. The point was the zero brain, points coupled to photons.
Photon is also known as a one form, so points coupled to one forms. If we take a single line,
that's a one brain. One brain, in fact, coupled to objects that are not photons, but are very
similar to photons, things that are called two forms. Remember we said that there's this mathematics
that was developed in the 18th century, and this is what it's good for in terms of physics.
If we take a three brain, it actually couples to a three form. So for every single object that
can carry charge, there's a corresponding form that plays the role of a photon. So now let's do
some counting, because we want to look at this issue of the degrees of freedom. And I have a
little table here where I have worked it out for the case of the two form and the three form.
Remember, we're interested in this problem not necessarily in our world, but in a world where
there may be more dimensions, a world where D controls the number of dimensions. And so if
that's the case, what we find is that a two form has one half, the dimension in which we're interested
in minus two multiplied by the dimension minus three. There's degrees of freedom of a two form.
On the other hand, the degrees of freedom of a three form is one sixth times the dimension in
which we're interested in minus two times the dimension in which we're interested in minus
three times the dimension we're interested in minus four. And what's interesting to us is this case
of the three form, because if you plug the number D equal 11 into this mathematical equation,
it tells you that a three form has exactly 84 degrees of freedom. Now we have to actually go back
a moment, because this after all is taking us a bit of feel, and remember that the graviton
had in 11 dimensions 44 degrees of freedom. A three form and a graviton are bosonic particles.
So you will never have supersymmetry with those objects. To get supersymmetry, you have to have
bosons and fermions. But the sum of the numbers 44 and 84 add up to 128. Now why is that 128 important?
Well, you'll remember that in super space,
gravitons can move into one of the super directions and become gravitini, or gravitinos,
the super partner to the graviton. If we therefore imagine looking at an 11 dimensional space and
say if we start with the graviton and allow it to wander into one of the grassman directions,
it's no longer a graviton, it's the super partner to the graviton. And now we can do
something rather interesting. We can ask, if there is a super partner to the graviton in 11
dimensions, how many degrees of freedom does it have? This question was first answered in 1978
by three French physicists, Kramer, Julia, and Scherck. And if you ask the question,
the answer turns out to be the super partner to a graviton in 11 dimensions has exactly 128 degrees
of freedom. Well, if you've been following our discussion of supersymmetry, all sorts of bells
should sort of start to go off now, because the graviton and the three form had numbers
of degrees of freedom that added up to the number 128. We have now found that the super
partner to the graviton has degrees of freedom that add up to 100, that are 128. And therefore,
remember supersymmetry requires a balanced numbers of degrees of freedom. Here's a system
that has exactly a balanced numbers of degrees of freedom. And so this theory was actually
constructed in 1978 and is called 11 dimensional supergravity. Now remember, this is not a string
theory. What we've done is use the techniques of the standard model, but we've used those techniques
in a space of 11 dimensions, but we haven't allowed for any strings. Now, there's actually
something interesting about this, because all of the strings we've talked about exist in 10
dimensions. This theory of supergravity that we've talked about exists in 11 dimensions,
one dimension higher. So for many years, it was a question, what is 11 dimensional supergravity
related to? Remember, we went through the truncation process. Every single 10 dimensional theory,
instead of looking at all the vibrations of the string, can be truncated to its lowest vibration.
And when you do that, you get a theory of particles. So this 11 dimensional supergravity
that was constructed, people began to wonder, was it the truncation of a bigger theory? Now,
there were attempts to try to construct this bigger theory in the 80s. There are objects
called membranes, and people tried to study these things and then truncate them to show
that they were 11 dimensional supergravity. There was only one problem with that program.
If you take a membrane theory and you look at all of its nodes and modes of vibration,
you find out that it is infested with tachyons. Well, from these lectures by now,
you know that whenever we hear that word tachyon, it strikes fear in the heart of theoretical
physicists because you can't have probabilities that work if there are tachyons around.
So this program died in the 80s and people said, well, gee, 11 dimensional supergravity,
whatever it is, is not tied to some kind of bigger theory. And it was just out,
thought to be on the side of curiosity. In 1995, Edward Whitten proposed a surprise
answer. He suggested that this thing that we call 11 dimensional supergravity was the truncation
of something bigger. He named this something bigger M theory. Now, M theory is truly mysterious
even to theoretical physicists. And in fact, maybe the M stands for mysterious. We're not
completely sure why Whitten gave it this name. There are lots of explanations. Some people say
it's magical. Others mysterious, a couple of other explanations. So it's nice to think that maybe
this other thing exists and can truncate to 11 dimensional supergravity and Whitten made a
conjecture that this was the case. The way that Whitten reached this conjecture was rather
interesting, however. Remember in 10 dimensions, we know lots of strings. So we know what those
theories are as large theories and their truncations. So Whitten actually proposed the following
suggestion. Start with the type 2a string in 10 dimensions. Well, we know what that is.
We also know that the world of string theory is intrinsically quantum mechanical. So he said,
so calculate with this theory, but use the properties of the quantum world. And in particular,
remember that in the quantum world, when you want to calculate a force, you start with a picture,
then you start adding lots and lots of other pictures to get the quantum corrections. So
Whitten's prescription was add not just many pictures, but try to add all possible pictures
that describe a force. When you do that, the calculations indicate remarkably enough that
the theory in 10 dimensions with which you began starts to look like 11 dimensional supergravity.
And so this was the first suggestion that there's an actual connection between 11 dimensional
supergravity and something that's extended like a string. This set off the third string
revolution, as it's called, with many, many physicists trying to find the way to see if
string theory was really related to something bigger. Let's talk about this more globally,
because M theory turns out to have other implications. We can think of these, we will
illustrate these theories as dots of light. So there they are on screen. There is the heterotic
string up in the upper right hand corner of my diagram, close type one, open type one,
close type two B, close type two A. And then in the upper left hand or yellowish dot, we have
11 dimensional supergravity. Now, I already told you that Witten was able to find connections
between the supergravity of 11 dimensions and the close type two A string in 10.
In the early 80s, during in my own research, I proposed some kinds of relationships between
supergravities that were different. These things are called dualities. The thing that Witten had
found was also a type of duality. Well, when you give physicists a good idea, they're going to
obviously use it to go look for other connections. And very rapidly after Witten's observation,
connections between all of the strings and 11 dimensional supergravity via quantum corrections
were found. Now, this is actually not a bad thing because, remember, we often think of strings as
a theory of everything. But if there are many different strings, then does that mean that
there are many different everythings? Well, that's clearly unsatisfactory sort of from a
philosophical viewpoint. On the other hand, if all of the strings are part of a single
mathematical entity, then it makes sense that you have a theory of everything because you've,
in fact, covered all possibilities. So M theory, in fact, was enthusiastically embraced by the
theoretical physics community. And in fact, we have been studying it ever since. The unfortunate
thing about the study, however, is we still know very little about M theory. Now, because of this
situation, it's always unsatisfactory for theoretical physicists to have conjecture in place of
calculations. So one of the things that we constantly do when discovering these new mathematical
objects are try to find calculations that support or can falsify their existence. Remember, physics
is really not about finding the truth. What it's really about is being less wrong. So if you believe
something, and it's falsifiable, then it's science. And we can quantify that and make
progress in our understanding by removing those parts of our belief that are not correct.
So here's this proposal for M theory. Is there a way to prove it is falsifiable? Or is there a
calculation that supports its existence? In 1997, such a calculation to support its existence, in
fact, the most precise definition of M theory that we've seen, came from four physicists, banks,
Fischler, Schenker, and Susskin. And the way that they found the support, we can understand
by a little parable. Let's imagine that we had the most powerful microscope that was ever conceived.
So powerful that it could see well beyond anything that our technological capability
supports. Right now, with our most powerful microscopes, we can see atoms, but we can't
see much, things much smaller than that. So in the world of imagination, I want a super duper
microscope. So let's use this microscope and look at the string. So we get the eyepieces in shape,
and gee, there's the string. And sure enough, it's a string. Now, since this is the most powerful
microscope that we conceive, let's turn up the gain and see what happens.
Well, still it looks like a string to me. And let's continue, increasing the resolution of the
microscope and its resolving power, looking at smaller and smaller structures. And guess what?
The thing that we thought was a single strand, in fact, looks more like a strand of pearls.
Now, this story turns out to be exactly what happened with the mathematical investigation
by Banks, Fischler, Schenker, and Susskin. They carried out the calculations, and what the
calculation showed was that if you start with a zero brain, remember a zero brain is a particle.
When we turned our powerful microscope on to the string, what we saw were little beads. Beads
are about the same as particles. So there was a calculation that was performed by, as I said,
Banks, Fischler, Susskin, and Schenker, where they, with mathematics, went exactly through the process
that we did with our story of the microscope, and at the end of the day, what they found was a sort
of bead. Now, this bead had actually appeared in physics before. It's called a parton. Partons were
discussed in the physics literature when people were struggling to understand the structure of
protons and neutrons. In fact, one of the main proponents of partons back in the 60s was Richard
Feynman. So it's an idea that had been in the physics literature for 40 years. Partons, however,
have of interesting life. On the one hand, they turn out to be calculationally useful. That is,
there are experimental physicists to this day who use the parton idea to calculate properties of
protons and neutrons and nuclear matter. And guess what? It works. So partons certainly are useful.
On the other hand, what is a parton? Well, partons sort of don't exist at a fundamental level.
They were displaced by the notion of the quark, but still, as I said, calculationally useful.
In the calculation of 1997, looking at 10-dimensional Yang-Mills theories, partons were found.
And furthermore, the calculation supported the idea that these partons were the beads
that appear in the string of pearls in our story. In other words, that under the string itself,
there may be a more fundamental object, and these would be what are now called the impartons.
So, wait a minute. That means we just went in a big circle. We began these lectures by
describing how particles don't provide us a way to reconcile the laws of the quantum
with the laws of generality and gravity. There are calculational supports that suggest
that if you get rid of the idea of particles and replace them by filaments, there is a possible
resolution. We now find that our resolution, however, when looked at by certain mathematical
tools that look like microscopes, tell us that these strands are actually strands of pearls,
and that the things that play the role of the pearls themselves are particle-like structures.
So it's a very strange circle to go in, and now do we believe it? Well, M-theory continues to be
less than well understood. The calculation I described for you in 1997 makes a suggestion that
this is a consistent picture. There's only one problem with it. That calculation only works
if you're looking at what's called the infinite momentum frame. That's a kind of approximation
to saying things are moving very fast. We do not do the calculations in the other way,
and because of that, we cannot be completely sure what would happen if we would calculate
at a velocity like something less than the speed of light or at the speed of light.
So there is still controversy, or some degree of controversy, about whether M-theory exists.
Let me tell you, however, another way of thinking of M-theory, another set of calculations.
In 1999, two physicists, Pin-Ping Pan and Pierre Ramon. Now, the name Ramon has appeared several
times in this lecture. This is the guy who first added spin to the string in the 1970s.
He's still doing physics today, but using one of the groups of cartons, what these two physicists
found is that there are an infinite number of copies where, remember, we started with 11-dimensional
supergravity. We had the graviton, the three-form, and the gravitino. They have found that there are
an infinite number of copies where the numbers of degrees of freedom exactly balance, and that
would be the condition you need for M-theory. So M-theory is probably out there. It's waiting
for some incredibly beautiful idea before we can see its full beauty.
