Mathematics is Power, Lecture 3. Calculators, Computers, Computation, and Large Numbers.
This lecture is on Calculators, Computers, Computation.
A question that plagued me until I took calculus, but really even until I was a professor was,
how do calculators and computers work?
I mean, we all know that there's power cells, great evermore compact batteries.
There's complex chips, clever circuits, and coders write software that are going to get things done.
But really, if I want to know what the sign of a number is, or the cosine,
or I want to find the exponential, the logarithm,
I mean, how does it actually give me a number in response?
It's certainly not the case that it's stuffed with magic computing elves,
that when I type in digits, they say the answer and somehow it appears on the screen,
and I was really curious, how is it that these things work?
Again, all the engineering is tributes to the ingenuity of many, many contributors.
There's centuries or millennias of development beyond.
There's the abacus, the slide world.
One throw in for fun, the Jacquard loom.
The Jacquard loom was in 1801, and the person who constructed it
realized that beautiful, brocaded patterns could be woven into cloth
by using algorithms or sets of instructions that
complicatedly switched different things around and beautiful things could be produced.
At some point to it is a precursor of the early modern computer.
There's also a question of bootstrapping.
We need equations to solve engineering problems to construct things like slide rules,
calculators, or computers.
How do we solve those equations until we have slide rules, calculators, or computers?
Given that architects, engineers, chemists, physicists, and all kinds of scientists
and other people needed to compute exactly specific numbers to solve problems,
how did they do this?
How does a calculator find the tangent of an angle?
How do we find square roots, cube roots, or any other roots?
How are exponentials computed?
And as a side question, why are exponentials important?
Exponentials talk about population growth or decay.
They're used for computing compound interest.
They're used in carbon dating.
They're used to solve all sorts of different kinds of equations.
How are logs computed?
John Napier, published in 1614 after 20 years of computing basic equations,
published log tables that people could suddenly use to solve different kinds of problems that involve logs.
What are logarithms? Why are they important?
Well, they were used in astronomy, navigation, surveying.
They were used as a basis for slide rules.
Slide rules are used to compute different numbers and perform calculations.
They solve certain kinds of interesting equations again.
There's natural phenomena that scale like logarithms.
You might have heard the phrase logarithmic spiral.
This is a ratio again, and the golden ratio pops up here too.
You can see it in the parts of the sunflower that spiral into the center.
It's complicit in the golden mean.
So all these kinds of things that have proven to be remarkably useful and important need logarithms.
They need exponentials.
They need sines and cosines so that scientists and engineers could do science and engineering.
How did people find these numbers before calculators and computers?
The answer stems from calculus, and it is remarkably deep.
There's a whole bunch of things we need to understand,
but we're going to do it one step at a time and get there.
First is, what's a polynomial?
