The law of large numbers says if you keep flipping coins even if you got those three heads to start
over time you'll start getting about half heads. So if you flipped a coin a hundred times
you'd expect there to be about 50 heads. You wouldn't be surprised if there were 48 heads
and 52 tails. You wouldn't even necessarily be surprised if there were 45 heads and 55 tails
but you might start to get a little bit surprised if there were 40 heads and 60 tails.
Now the bigger those numbers begin to become disparate if you got 20 heads and 80 tails
you'd start to think this coin is not a fair coin. There's something desperately wrong here.
The law of large numbers says keep flipping that coin. It is possible you'll have a very strange
streak at the outset or sets of streaks but over time if you flip and flip and flip eventually it
should move towards about 50-50. As an anecdote there was a mathematician, a British mathematician
who was taken prisoner by the Germans during World War II put in solitary confinement prisoner of
war camp. Because he was bored because he had time because he knew about the law of large numbers
he tabulated something like 30,000 flips of a coin and found that he got something like 15,100
heads, 14,900 tails. It might even have been closer to 15,000 than that. He demonstrated at least to
his own satisfaction the law of large numbers and also the concern that maybe a coin wasn't perfectly fair.
So if you think about it in terms of casinos they are set up by very wealthy corporations
or groups of people for the purpose of making money. Although it may be entertaining gambling is
not designed to give you money. It's designed to keep you entertained and in a little bit of a happy
fog so that you keep wagering money. The casinos have set up games to ensure that your probability
of winning is always less than a half. The law of large numbers says then if you keep gambling
you're going to keep playing something over and over and over where you have less than a
half chance to win and that means you're going to lose. Now some games you have a much greater
chance of losing than others. A mathematical analysis has shown that Blackjack gives you the
best chance of winning and it's around 0.49 your probability of winning. So if you play Blackjack
for a very long time and you play thoughtfully and carefully or even randomly your chance of winning
or walking out with the money you came in with is pretty good because for every two bets you place
you'll win one and double your money on that bet. But in the long haul you'll walk out with less
money than you came in. Now how does this apply to streaks? I talked earlier about flipping coins
but one of the kinds of streaks that people care most about these days is something like hot hands
and basketball. You know a shooter is on a hot street. Make sure that the the guy who's doing
really well gets the ball. Statisticians and probabilists have analyzed this phenomenon
and have concluded that because you have people taking many shots over a series of many games
it's not at all surprising that there would be long streaks where shot after shot after shot
drops. Now the interesting thing is if we think more psychologically that might build someone's
confidence to where they think I can't miss and it's possible that thinking that they can't miss
and having that surge of confidence will in fact help them take better shots.
But you could easily and sensibly argue the opposite which is that the more confident the
shooter gets the more irrational the shooter gets and the more that that shooter thinks that
nothing can go wrong and then inevitably shots stop dropping and then we say oh that shooter
cooled down. They lost their hot hand.
