The most important idea, the most powerful idea behind data collection is sample size.
The larger the sample, the better the information. If I commute just a couple days and try to base
a conclusion on that, it could have been that it snowed one day or it could have been that
conditions were perfect and it was Sunday morning and there was no traffic and I got to work very
rapidly. The more samples that I take, the more the different kinds of circumstances will occur
and affect how my outcome goes. This is the heart of statistics. By taking as largest samples I can
get, I believe that as many different circumstances as I'm likely to encounter and there are normal
ways they happen, you know, I'm not going to typically get huge snowstorms during the year,
although they will happen occasionally. I'm not going to typically hit huge traffic jams from
turned over trucks, but that might happen once every year or two. I'm not going to typically get
beautiful weather and no cars on the road. You know, with enough time the outliers become clear,
I get all kinds of possibilities in different circumstances and out of that I can figure
by taking the average pretty much what I should expect on a given day. So I take my data from
my large sample size and I use it to collect a number that I believe is a fairly good predictor
of what it is that I want. We'll talk more about voting in the lecture on fair division and game
theory in voting, but for the moment the interesting thing is that if a thousand people are sampled,
if a thousand people are asked their voting preference, there are tens of millions
of voters in America, yet asking a thousand will give a fairly accurate picture of how they'll vote.
Now how can that be? Well, if you asked just your next door neighbor, your next door neighbor
might be a lot like you. They probably live in a similar socioeconomic position, they may well
have grown up by you, and it's quite possible that your friends and therefore share many affinities.
It wouldn't be surprising, although it's not guaranteed, that your next door neighbor would
vote the same way you do. But if you went around your city and asked a thousand different people
how they planned on voting, and you tried to make a real effort to go to all different parts of the
city, if you went into shops in downtown, if you live in a city where there's a downtown, if you
talked to commuters, if you talked to people who drove to work, if you talked to people who stayed
home, if you talked to people who stayed home and took care of their kids, you'd get a much
broader sample of all the different sorts of people there are in America or in your country,
and that thousand will give you a fairly representative sample of the whole population,
if you do it with some amount of diligence and concern, and then based on that, you'll have a
really good idea of how people will vote. There's some high-level math involved, the bell curve and
central limit theory that say the larger your sample size, the more probable it is that the
average you take from your sample will be like the mythical average. Think of it this way,
there's 300 million people in America about. If you wanted to find out the voting preference of
all of them, assuming that you could track everyone down, assuming that they gave you
accurate information and didn't lie to you or just hang up or slam the door in your face,
you'd have to ask 300 million people what their voting preference was. But assuming that everybody
did have a voting preference, there is something known there. But we'll never know it exactly
because the logistic difficulties of getting to talk to them are insurmountable. But the power
of statistics is that by taking a thousand or up to three thousand for the better polls,
you get a good cross-section, you get a strong sense. This applies to baseball and to a lesser
extent football. People are trying to develop better statistics for football and basketball,
but in baseball, the sample size is much larger. There's 162 games. That's a lot of games. Each
game goes on sometimes for a long time and many pitches and many hits, and the larger the sample,
the better sense we can get. This is why batting average was considered a very good statistic for
a while because it told you if a person got up, how likely they were to get on base to get a hit.
