Fans and journalists now are using ever more sophisticated methods of statistical inference
to try to predict how players will do.
Team owners obviously are too, as well as managers, because that way they have a greater
chance for winning and a greater chance to keep up fan interest and greater chance to
make lots more money.
Fans are interested because they bet on players and play fantasy leagues.
And so this kind of ever sophisticated analysis is helping people make more and more money.
One idea I want to talk about in context to that too is regression to the mean, what
it is and what it means.
In fairly simple terms, we imagine that if we could look at a player's batting average
over their whole career, even before their whole career is done, that will have a certain
average.
Now they might have a great year one year, but that means pretty likely they'll have
a much less great year the next.
They'll regress towards the mean.
A team that wins a lot one year probably won't win as many the next year because they will
regress towards the mean.
And this is why players who consistently do better than the league average or teams that
consistently win are considered all-stars or dynasties in the forming.
It means whatever they're gifted with, brilliant insights, extraordinary luck, tremendous skills,
they manage to win much more than it seems like they should.
One of the most powerful way statistics is used as well is in quality control.
Now there's a difference between handmade, say, artisanal sporting rifles and mass-made
weapons of destruction.
For the artisanal sporting rifles, you have an individual gunsmith who works to create
each piece of the rifle, assembles them all, and when it's done, it may well work perfectly.
But parts are not likely to be interchangeable.
For mass-made weapons or mass-made automobiles or mass-made anything, parts can be swapped.
If something goes wrong in your car, you drive to a dealer, and sure enough, if they don't
have the part they order it and they can pop it right in, it fits and it works.
How are they able to do that so well?
The answer is by careful quality control and inspecting the pieces that come out, trying
to machine them all to the same tolerances and randomly sampling, say, every 10 or 100
or 1000 that come out to make sure that they are within those tolerances.
If they all stay within the tolerances, the parts will be interchangeable.
Believe it or not, this started with Guinness beer.
Guinness makes, to my mind, a delicious dark stout beer, and they've been making it for
a long time.
They wanted to keep their market edge and ensure that they had one of the best dark
beers available.
So they hired someone to begin quality control, and he began to experiment with different
kinds of grains to use for the beer, and he kept careful track of which grains produced
what kinds of beer, and by doing that, he began to do statistical analysis, take samples,
and see what the outcome was.
A related question is warranties.
Why does it always seem like nothing goes wrong while your car or your computer or your
oven is under warranty, and as soon as the warranty elapses, then something goes wrong?
Well the answer is, for something like automobiles or refrigerators or computers, the manufacturer
might have put out millions now.
They know what parts are going to fail most likely, they know that if something goes wrong
early on, it really was a defective part, and they're happy to replace it for free.
But they know that after six years, the seal is going to break on your refrigerator or something's
going to go wrong with the transmission of your car after 80,000 miles, and that's why
the warranty cuts off where it does, and that's what explains what the warranty length was
to begin with.
The manufacturers used the power of statistics, the power of a very large sample, to make
predictions on what would fail and when and create the warranty.
For one last extraordinary example of quality control, the United States sent a rocket probe
to Mars millions of miles away, at least 36 million miles away.
That rocket probe managed to land on Mars, take a Martian automobile off it, collect
mountains of data, and send the signal back.
Now beyond the basic engineering problems, which are enormous, and my hat's off to all
the people who solve them, how do they make sure that all those many parts work?
How do they make sure that nothing goes wrong on this hodgepodge, multi-billion dollar project?
They had to test each part over and over and over again, and make sure that the tolerance
were up.
They used statistics to predict that the performance would be accurate within some tiny tolerance
of error, and they pulled it off.
The Martian probe is a remarkable example of science working hand in hand with mathematics
and statistics and probability to ensure that something that had to be right the first
time worked right.
The power of statistics and probability is the power to make accurate predictions about
the future, to collect data and be able to say what will happen based on a much smaller
sample of what isn't already known.
The next lecture is on cryptography.
Now sure, there's a romantic picture of spies sending coded messages and invisible ink, and
although that's nifty, there's much more than that.
There's also the astonishing way in which prime numbers combine with obscure number theory
and group theory to allow us to log in remotely and safely purchase items over the internet.
Without modern cryptography, there would be no e-tail, there'd be no internet, no amazon.com,
we would not live in the information age we currently do.
This ends lecture four.
