So I'm going to stand off to the side here because I've got to look back at them like
in the old days where you have to look back at the slides and use a laser pointer rather
than.
So go ahead to the next slide.
This is just an overview of some of the work that we do in our group because many times
there will be criticisms of those who speak at conferences like this that they're not
practicing scientists, that they read papers and they write books, but I write very few
books.
In fact, I've only written one book and I'll never do that again.
I've written chapters for books, but only at great urging.
Usually I just publish papers and we publish papers in journals.
That's what we do in my world.
And so we work in a number of different areas and the reason I'm telling you all this is
because I want you to see that I really am a practicing scientist and this is, I rarely
attend conferences like this.
I'm usually in conferences with scientists and engineers, but we work in an area called
laser induced graphene.
That's where we can take this polyamide sheet and hit it with a laser and write patterns
of graphene.
Graphene is single sheets of graphite, one atom thick and it's the strongest material
known at that level.
And generally it's made at high temperatures and this is all done in the air with a laser.
This is on bread.
That's not dropping down ink.
That is converting the carbohydrate atoms in the molecules in the bread.
These carbon atoms in that bread to graphene.
So we convert that.
That's a coconut.
We turn it into a super capacitor.
So we can do it on food.
You say, why would you want to write patterns on food?
Well, why wouldn't you?
So if you have, for example, a potato and you can just mark it very quickly just on every
one of your plastic bottles, it's a water bottle that has a little laser scribe date.
If we can laser scribe electronics very quickly, you would know exactly what field that potato
was picked from, what date it was picked on.
And if you build in electronics, you can put an E. coli sensor, a salmonella sensor.
You could build in electronics into food very rapidly.
We split carbon nanotubes and we use these in medicine and we use these also in electronics
and batteries.
This is two-terminal memory.
This is all gone commercial now.
This is commercial memory now, two-terminal memory.
We work in the area of traumatic brain injury and stroke.
There'll be a company launch this year for that and also dementia.
We work on super capacitors.
This is where we've taken asphalt and we can trap over 200 weight percent CO2 in it and
we use it for removing CO2 from natural gas.
That's all licensed by Apache.
This is the leg of a cockroach that we can turn into graphene.
I wanted to take something of negative carbon value.
What has negative value?
What do you pay people to take away from you?
That's carbon.
I figured roaches.
We've done it with dog feces.
We can actually turn this into graphene.
Now, just giving you an idea of why you would want to do this, we did this with Girl Scout
cookies.
If you calculate all the carbon in a box of Girl Scout cookies, which is $4 and you convert
that into graphene, that graphene that you could convert just from one box of Girl Scout
cookies would be worth $15 billion.
It shows you that the value of material is not in the atoms itself.
How those atoms are arranged.
Just like if you take a person, what's the value of a human being?
Just take away the spirit.
Just the physical entity, just like a robot.
What would be the value of a human robot?
If you take that entity and you cremate it, you get less than a penny of CO2 and water
out.
Same atoms arranged differently bring the change in value.
A piece of coal, $60 a ton.
Same atoms in diamond, which has very high value.
They're just rearranged differently.
This is where we take graphene and grow carbon nanotubes.
This is a company that started, it's being built up right now just outside of Houston.
It's for lithium batteries.
We work a lot in these areas of cleaning up water.
We work in these area of nanomachines.
If you click it once, this car will start to go, so you click the slide advance once.
Oh yeah, that's not going to run, I forgot, because it's been transferred.
That's okay.
Just trust me, that moves across the surface.
What happens is this top part spins and pushes the car along.
It spins at 3 million rotations per second and propels the car.
These cars are so small, we can part 50,000 of these across the diameter of a human hair,
50,000 of them.
They have little motors that are all light operated.
Now what we're doing is we're taking these same motors that spin at 3 million rotations
per second.
We put on a peptide and that will direct it to the surface of a cell.
A cell of choice, depending on the peptide add-in we put there, and then we activate
the motor and it spins at 3 million rotations per second.
It drills right through and the cell is dead in one minute.
These drilling into cells, so we're looking at this.
If you'd advance to the next slide.
These are just transitions to companies in the past five years, graphing quantum dots.
That's commercial now.
It's working in anti-counterfeiting platforms and also for frack water tracking, two-terminal
ultra-dense computer memory, lithium metal batteries, corrosion inhibitors are already
on the market.
We're working on spinal cord repair, peripheral nerve repair, optic nerve repair.
We want to do the works of Jesus Christ.
We want to make the lame walk in the blind sea.
We've already made the deaf here.
So we're trying to build technologies that can do this and this is real.
We do this type of thing.
We can cut a spinal cord completely in half in a rat and fuse this back up so the rat
within three weeks has a 19 out of 21.
21 is the highest mobility that can be achieved, so it can get to near perfect mobility within
three weeks.
So that's a company now that's going in Tel Aviv, Israel.
Treatment of pancreatic cancer, that'll be in clinical trials within one year at MD Anderson
Cancer Center.
DNA sequencing, this is doing the entire human genome map, entire human genome, not
just 23 and me, the entire genome for $100 in one hour.
This opens it up now to everyone in the world.
We work in this area of water purification based on laser-induced graphene.
We have inserts for texting with long fingernails, so if you have long fingernails and it's hard
to text, you just put it on your fingernails and you can text just fine.
There's actually a big demand for that.
I mean, this is real stuff.
This is the traumatic brain injury stroke and dementia drug that a company will launch
this year.
A synthesis at $100 per ton in energy costs, going to concrete plastic and metals that
will launch this year.
And then the molecular nanomachines to kill cells that's going into cancer and the killing
of superbugs, these things that are not resistant to antibiotic resistance.
We can drill right through them and a friend of mine here, Richard, is here and he works
on this as well.
So these are areas, so we're real scientists.
We do real things.
Okay, next slide.
And the next slide.
This movie is not going to run, so just go to the next slide there.
There's Richard there, and let's go to the next slide.
That was the research group.
So we're going to get into the talk at hand.
I'm not going to make any reference to God, any reference to intelligent designer or anything.
I'm just going to allow science to critique the science.
What do we have to say about origin of life?
What does science tell us?
What can we infer here?
And so by choice, I am not going to mention God, because if I mention God and Jesus Christ,
people will say, oh, to introduce the baby Jesus to talk about this, it's not a real
talk.
All right, this is pure scientific talk.
This would work in any medical school, in any chemistry department.
Next slide.
So this is a cell.
What is the origin of life?
How do you get a cell like this?
What is the origin of something like this?
This is an amazing machine.
A cell is an amazing machine.
It's not just a blob of protoplasm.
Every day, it gets harder to have the origin of life, to come up with a scenario, because
the origin of life becomes more complex every day.
A cell is a factory.
It has the lipid bilayer, which is extremely selective to let certain things in and not
other things.
It has all of this substructure in here, these little areas where energy is made in
here.
It has these microtubules which can form, so you can move matter from point A to point
B.
If you go to a factory, what you see is you see these overhead hanging machines that
are moving materials from point A to point B in these systems.
And the way they do this is they build these racks, but the same thing happens in a cell.
You get these microtubules to move material from point A to point B.
And then as soon as the material is done moving, the microtubule breaks down and then assembles
some other place.
You say, well, why doesn't it leave it there?
Because then the cell would become too rigid.
So it just rebuilds it.
It's just an amazing factory.
What's happening in a cell?
This is what we have to make.
If we want to have origin of life, you've got to start here.
You don't start here.
You start with a single cell.
Just build a single cell.
That's what we have to do in origin of life.
Nobody has ever done this.
If you've been taught that simple forms of life have been made, that is a lie that you
are believing.
Somebody told you a lie that has never been done.
Next slide.
Organisms care about life.
Molecules don't care.
Chemistry on the contrary is utterly indifferent to life.
Without a biologically derived entity acting upon them, molecules have never been shown
to evolve toward life.
Never.
Molecules don't care about life.
They don't know anything about moving toward life.
They have no brain.
Organisms want to move toward life and keep life going.
Molecules don't care about life.
Nobody has ever seen molecules assemble toward life.
Never.
It doesn't happen without a biological entity working on them.
I asked all my colleagues, can you show me an example of this?
Of molecules moving toward order.
Moving toward an ordered system where you have a non-regular assembly.
An ordered assembly is like A, A, A, A, or A, B, A, B.
That you can get pure thermodynamic assembly.
But non-order assembly is a non-regular pattern.
That's what you have in DNA.
We know from computer science you have to have non-regular patterns in order to have complexity
for living systems.
I asked my colleagues, do you have any example of molecules without a biological entity acting
upon them moving in to give an ordered assembly that is a non-regular pattern?
And they sent me papers where chemists have taken molecules and assembled them in that
way.
It's a non-biological entity.
You can't have a human doing this.
Molecules don't move toward life.
Well even if you want to have molecules move toward life and you have human beings working
upon them, can the human beings do it?
And the answer is no.
Next slide.
So almost every chemical synthesis experiment in origin of life research can be summed up
by a protocol analogous to this.
They purchase chemicals generally in high purity from a chemical company.
So that's what they do.
They first purchase the chemicals.
They mix those chemicals together in water in high concentrations in a specific order
under some set of carefully devised conditions in a modern lab.
Then they can obtain a mixture of compounds that have a resemblance to one or more of the
basic four classes of chemicals needed for life.
So what you need for life is you need carbohydrates, nucleic acids, amino acids, and lipids.
That's what we know.
All life we know composes those four building blocks.
So they try to make those four building blocks.
Then they publish a paper making bold assertions about origin of life from these functionless
crude mixtures of stereochemically scrambled intermediates, much like Miller did in 1952.
Nothing has changed in 66 years.
Nothing.
Nothing's changed.
Only where we were in 1952 is exactly where we have remained.
Think about what's been done in science in the past 60 years.
Think about how we have now satellite connectivity.
Remember in 1952 there had never been a satellite.
Now we have satellite connectivity.
We have cell phones.
We have structure of DNA.
We can manipulate DNA structure.
Nothing has changed in origin of life studies in 66 years.
That's important to realize.
Then you engage with the ever-ever-gullible press to dial up the knob of unjustified extrapolations.
Watch the mesmerized layperson exclaim, you see, scientists understand how life formed.
Then you encourage a generation of science textbook writers to make colorful, deceptive
cartoons of raw chemicals assembling from cells which then emerge as slithering creatures
from a pre-start pond.
That is exactly what has done every one of their experiments.
It's all done like this.
Every one of their experiments can be fit into this.
So what's going to happen is I'm going to go back and a bunch of you are going to send
me articles.
Look at this.
These people have made life, haven't they?
It fits into this.
Trust me.
It fits into this.
Every one of them.
Next slide.
So here's the synthesis problem.
If you just want to make the molecules, remember we have to make those four classes of molecules.
If you just want to make the molecules, here's what you've got to do.
The composed living systems almost always show homochirality, meaning that they have
one handedness and not the other.
The vast majority of biological molecules, except for very small ones like water and
acetic acid, anything larger than that, they're mirror images, just like your left hand and
your right hand are mirror images.
They're non-superimposable.
You can't put a left-handed glove on your right hand.
It doesn't fit.
All molecules are like that in biology.
That is hard to make.
It is very hard to make just one mirror image of a compound.
It can be done, but it's very hard.
So that's part of the problem.
When you're building molecular systems, constant redesigns are needed to take the synthesis
back to step one, that take the synthesis back to step one.
So in other words, when you're going and you're making something, you're like, oh boy, those
conditions didn't work, my stuff decomposed.
So you go back to step one and you bring through more starting material.
And so you take small amounts, you try this, you try this.
Anything that would be happening in a prebiotic earth, it's marching along trying to make
something.
If it makes a mistake, you can't pull that entity off.
Very hard to pull the entity off.
Once it's on there, it's on there.
So you've been going along, say, for 400 million years if you want to take these sorts of numbers
and all of a sudden it's put a wrong moiety on there.
Uh-oh, what am I going to do?
You got to go back to step one.
I got to go back 400 million years.
Yeah, you got to go back there.
Well, I don't know how to go back.
Why not?
Because I never kept a laboratory notebook.
When you don't keep a record of it, you don't even know how to go back.
You don't even know what you're going toward because it doesn't know that it's moving toward
life.
Remember, molecules have no brain.
They don't know where they're going.
That's the synthesis problem.
And they don't know how to stop the course of progression or why to stop.
There's no target.
They don't know.
I think we'll form life today.
I think we'll make a certain, you don't know that.
Molecules don't know that.
So they're going along and things, chemical reactions are happening.
It doesn't have a target.
When you're in the lab, you're going toward a particular target.
You know where you're headed.
Here it doesn't know when to stop or how to stop.
Maybe it's made of carbohydrate.
It doesn't say, why?
Made of carbohydrate.
I think I'll stop.
Synthesize.
No.
It'll go on and make something else from that.
It doesn't know how to stop.
Time, although claimed to be the great savior of abiogenesis, that's before there's biology.
Chemists can actually be the enemy.
For example, carbohydrates are kinetic products.
They undergo caramelization or the Canizaro reaction.
They decompose.
So in other words, when you make a carbohydrate, that is not the final product that would
form in that reaction mixture.
You have to stop the reaction.
So a chemist watches the reaction and they stop it at a certain time to stop that progression
of the molecule going on.
If this is just undirected, unguided, it keeps going to other garbage.
Which are kinetic products, meaning that they caramelize.
They polymerize into a bunch of trash.
Just like when you take sugar and you heat the thing up on the oven and things turns
into caramel.
That's what happens to carbohydrates.
They don't stay nice, simple carbohydrates.
They end up actually dehydrating.
A prebiotic system doesn't have the ability to easily purify the structures.
You have to be able to purify because if you cannot purify, then the byproducts build up
in the system and they start using up your starting material and they start inhibiting
the reactions that you want.
You have to be able to do purification without purification.
You can't work.
Every chemist has to run a reaction and you stop.
You purify.
You get it pure and you go on the next step.
Once in a while, if it's a really pure reaction, you can go on one or two steps, but you have
to purify.
Reagent order is essential.
Reagent addition order.
You can't just say all the reagents mixed together and you get what you got.
You're making a cake.
You got your flour.
You got your milk.
You got your eggs.
You say, well, I think I'll just add the frosting now.
No, there's an order to this.
This is real.
This is what you do in chemistry.
Things have to be added at certain times.
You can't just add it whenever you want to.
Reagent addition order at proper timing is critical.
The parameters for temperature, pressure, solvent, light, no light, pH, atmospheric gases have
to be carefully controlled in order to build complex molecular structure.
There's no way around it.
This is what's needed.
You have to have characterization at each step.
This is hard to do.
Chemists have to characterize things at each step because you have to make sure what you've
got before you can go on to the next step.
How does nature characterize?
Well, right now, biological systems characterize things.
By every time it makes something, there's an enzyme that checks that structure.
If it's not the right structure, there are other enzymes that come and chop that up into
smaller pieces and try rebuilding it again.
You get a mistake in the DNA.
You have enzymes that run up and down the DNA.
Find this mistake, excise it, and stick in the right base there.
But in a pre-biological world, there are no enzymes.
How does it check it?
And every time, whatever it's using to check it, whatever system is needed to check it,
is more complex than the system that it's checking.
So where'd you get that from?
Nobody knows.
Everybody's clueless on this, but nobody wants to admit it.
There's the mass transfer problem.
This seems like not a problem to you, but let me tell you something.
This is the killer of it all.
Are there any synthetic organic chemists in here?
Any synthetic chemists here?
Any synthetic chemists?
Get your hand up high.
One there.
Okay.
And one there.
Okay.
If I say something that's not true, I want you to stand up and just say, liar, all right?
If I say something that's not true, just stand up, all right?
Because I want these people to know, for all they know, I'm lying.
You have to verify on this, all right?
The mass transfer problem.
Anybody who's done complex organic synthesis, what you do is you start with like a half
a kilo of material and you go along and your yields are never 100%.
You're purifying.
And you end up with two milligrams and you're not at your target yet.
So what do you do?
Then you go back to the beginning and you make more, and you follow the defined route
that you had defined before.
And so now you can keep your yields higher, but you keep having to go back and pull up
starting material from the rear.
You're bringing up more material.
How do you do that?
So say in nature they started, say somehow it started and then got a kilo of formaldehyde
and acetone and it's going to start combining these.
So these are going to go along and start reacting.
At some point it's going to run out of material.
How do you go back to the beginning and get more?
Again, you never kept the laboratory notebook so you never know how you got there.
So even if you could repeat it, go down the same junky path and you'd run out again.
You'd never get to where you want to go.
Nature keeps no laboratory notebook.
Next slide.
So this is just the motor part on the nanomachines.
We were building nanocars.
We actually won in 2017 the international nanocar race.
It was the first race.
We went 150 nanometers in an hour and a half.
And that sounds like a long time to go 150 nanometers, but we actually, the second place
people behind us were the Swiss team took them five hours beyond us.
So it took them six and a half hours total.
And none of the other international teams were able to complete the race in 30 hours.
So it's not easy to go 150 nanometers when you're driving these little cars.
But anyway, so this is the motor on just the car.
And so you see these different steps.
You reacted at all these different temperatures.
Here's, you have to have it at five degrees and cool it to minus 10 and minus 15 and then
minus 50 degrees here.
And then you run these reactions.
This one's done at 130 degrees.
This one's done at 60.
And she's like, what's with the temperature?
What's your problem?
Cold, hot, cold, hot.
Why do you do this?
Oh, because we just like to.
We just like to cool things, cool things down.
And he thinks, no, you have to each step needs its own parameters.
How does nature know that?
Well, it was, you know, it's some deep sea vent.
Okay.
So it warmed up there.
And then what?
And then it left the vent and then it, you know, ended up at some other really cold place
and then went back and then went back and back and forth.
Nobody, nobody knows any, any, how any of this ever happened in nature.
Nobody knows.
Next slide.
So this is the experimental procedure.
So what do you do?
You take an oven dried three bottom, three neck, round bottom flask and you charge it
with 33.
You add magnesium sulfate and dichloromethane and you cool it down, cool it down here, cool
it down.
This is one step, just one step on that thing.
And then, then you get the yield.
This is just one step.
There's all these things you got to do.
You have to know what you're doing.
Even if I just gave this to you, you wouldn't know what to do.
So you have to be an experienced chemist to take this and to be able to repeat this.
So what is a mindless, a biological system?
How does it know how to do?
Nobody knows.
Next slide.
Then you have to characterize it.
Once you make what you want, you have to characterize this.
We have this tool called NMR and you get these peaks.
And from these peaks, you assign the structure so you can get the exact structure.
This is how all the pharmaceuticals that you take, this is how the structures are assigned.
You run these spectra.
And you say, well, nature doesn't have to do this.
It doesn't.
Nature uses a more complex system.
It has a different glove for every hand in nature, a different enzyme that detects
structure problems.
It's more complex than this.
This is a general tool.
The next slide shows us, next slide, this is what we have to write to convince our colleagues
that we got what we thought we got.
A combination of standard what, deuterium, proton, C13, depth 135, C13 experiments with
standard 2D, H1, H1, cozy, H1, H1, NOE.
So you go all through this.
Not done.
Next slide.
So that's part two.
All of that needed to just characterize the one molecule.
Characterization is harder than synthesis.
It really is.
Any chemist will tell you.
You can make something, but it takes you a lot longer to characterize.
And you have to know the structure because you have to know what to do for the next step.
Nature is confronted with the same thing all the time.
Making molecules is hard.
Next slide.
This paper had 281 pages of supplemental characterization data.
I showed you a paragraph of characterization, 281 pages of that, to convince the world
that we made what we were making when we made those light-driven motorized nanocars.
How does a dumb, abiological world ever do this?
Nobody knows.
They're all clueless, but scientists aren't saying how hard it is.
Next slide.
This was the first generation motor that we put in the car.
It worked, but it only rotated 1.8 revolutions per hour.
When we rebuild it without that sulfur atom there, then that five-member ring, then it
goes three million rotations per second.
All right?
So small changes can make a big difference.
Well, what do you do?
So what do you do is you just come here and you erase that sulfur and you do that.
Now that you can do on a blackboard, but this took us back to step one.
This is what I'm talking about.
When something, you're going along and you want to build and you say, oh, I'm just near
life.
If you have one thing wrong, it doesn't work.
It's like, well, you just modify this and it'll work.
All right?
Go back to the beginning.
Go back a billion years to the beginning.
It's too hard.
Nobody knows how this thing is solved.
You can't build the molecules.
Next slide.
And then, so remember, these, just to make the molecules, the simple molecules, you got
to have the carbohydrates, you have to have the lipids, you have to have the nucleic acids,
you have to have the proteins.
Even if you make an amino acid, how do you hook the amino acids together?
Amino acids don't hook together by themselves.
We're not even talking about order.
How do you just get them to hook?
I mean, somebody sent me a paper just last night.
I mean, here's a paper just came out on self-folding molecules.
Well, duh, that doesn't prove anything.
You build a molecule, it folds up.
Big deal.
How do you get these things to hook together in the first place?
Nobody knows.
That's with amino acids.
How about with nucleotides?
You want to get these things to hook up?
People will make a new, oh, you see, we got a nucleotide.
We got DNA.
No, you don't have DNA.
You got to get these nucleotides to hook up.
Look at a DNA synthesizer.
How many steps of blocking, protection, deep protection you need to do the complex chemistry
just to get one linkage made?
Nobody knows.
You can throw all these together in a flash.
People say, well, the concentration of nucleotides was very high.
I've read this in high school books, it was very high, and these things came together.
You calculate the concentration, the world would have to be raining nucleotides.
And even if it were raining nucleotides at those concentrations, they wouldn't hook up.
They don't hook up.
You need enzymes to hook them up, but this is prebiotic.
There's no enzymes here.
Or you need very complex DNA synthesizers.
Those weren't there either on early Earth.
Now you have to assemble it.
So say we had the molecules.
How can you get them to assemble?
So here's the assembly experiments.
A protocell is a self-organized, endogiously-ordered spherical collection of lipids proposed as
a stepping stone to origin of life.
So that's what a protocell is.
But most so-called protocell assembly experiments in origin of life research can be summed up
by a protocol analysis to this.
You purchase homochiral diacyl lipids from a chemical company, or you synthesize stairs
scrambled lipids from smaller molecules.
Add those lipids to water and observe a small amount of it to form simple and expected thermodynamically
driven assembly of those lipids into synthetic bilayer vesicles upon agitation.
Sometimes the researchers will add other molecules that are getting engulfed by those vesicles.
Then you publish a paper claiming that the synthetic vesicle is a protocell and suggestive
of early forms of life, engage with the media, hype it up, watch the layperson be misled.
Every assembly experiment I'm telling you can be summarized in this.
Whatever you send me, don't send me any more.
I've dealt with it all.
All right?
I get enough of them.
And people say, well, what about this one?
What about this one?
And it fits all into this.
It's all garbage, all garbage.
Next slide.
Next slide.
Okay.
So the complex cellular membrane.
So this is actually what the membrane of a cell looks like when it's made really, really
simple in cartoon form.
So researchers have identified thousands, actually 40,000 different lipids now have
been identified in cell membranes.
Not just one.
Every protocell experiment, they use one type of lipid.
Actually a cell is made up of thousands of different types.
And mixtures of monoacetyl lipids destabilize the system.
So when they have their monoacetyl lipids, those would destabilize the systems.
You can't use those.
Lipid bilayers surround subcellular organelles such as nuclei and mitochondria, which are
themselves microsystem assemblies.
Each of these has their own lipid composition.
So this is a lipid bilayer.
You have some pointing out toward water, some pointing in toward the water on the interior
of the cell.
And the outside ones are different than the inside ones.
Nobody knows how that was done.
Nobody knows.
Clueless.
Nobody knows how that was done.
Every protocell experiment just uses homogeneity throughout the whole thing.
And so it's not really a protocell.
It's not really reminiscent of a cell.
Now, within each one of those, you have other organelles like nuclei and mitochondria that
have their own bilayer assemblies with their own constitution, different than what's on
the outside of the cell.
Nobody knows how that was done.
Plus, these have these proteins.
So there's this non-symmetric distribution, then there's proteins that go through here.
These are ionophores.
That allows certain things into the cell and certain things out.
Without that, you can't let anything into the cell.
It's going to kill the cell.
It has very discreet sensors that allow certain molecules to get in, certain other molecules
to get out.
It has ionophores that allow certain ions in, certain ions out to keep the ionic concentration
at a certain level for maintenance of that cell.
As soon as that ionic concentration gets off, you know what happens?
Boom, the cell explodes because the ionic concentration has gotten off.
It blebs and explodes.
Nobody knows how that is done.
None of the protocell experiments, none of them, have these proteins going through them
as these control gateways.
Then there's also lipid bilayers, have a vast number of carbohydrate appendages.
Off of these, this is a carbohydrate appendage.
It's called a glycan.
The artist is just showing us a few of these.
A cell is covered with these.
This is how cells recognize each other.
How does one cell recognize another cell?
By these carbohydrate assemblies that they recognize each other, they have this recognition
patterns.
You can tell one cell from another.
If you just take nucleotides, if you just take DNA, DNA, DNA is so complex and it has
so much information.
If you have six A bases, A, A, A, A, A, A, A, how can you arrange those?
What are the different ways you can arrange it?
Just that one, A, A, A, A, A, A, A, that's it.
One way you can arrange six bases.
Look at carbohydrates.
If you just take the carbohydrate D-pyrinose, just the standard carbohydrate, just D-pyrinose,
you have six of those.
Has over one trillion ways it can assemble.
One trillion ways it can assemble, just with six of them.
These have much more than six, and if it's not assembled right, guess what?
The cell dies.
You change any one of the carbohydrates that results in cell death.
There is much more information stored in carbohydrate assembly than in DNA.
Yeah, much more information can be stored in carbohydrates.
You want to build a massive computer, build it based on carbohydrate assembly, much better
than DNA assembly.
It's just that carbohydrate assembly is really hard to control.
Nobody knows how to control this, nobody.
But somehow, on a prebiotic earth, with nobody around, under a rock, it figured this out.
How do origin of life researchers address this problem?
They don't.
They don't.
Next slide.
Interactomes.
It's the noncovalent interactions that function within a cell.
Nobody knows how a viable cell emerges from massive combinatorial complexity of its molecular
components.
And of course, nobody's ever synthetically mimicked it.
An interactome is the whole set of molecular interactions in a particular cell.
If one merely considers protein-protein interaction combinations in just a single yeast cell,
the result is an estimated 10 to the 79 billion combinations.
That's estimated by these folks at Johns Hopkins and Brussels.
That's not my estimation.
These are biophysicists.
Just to give you an idea of how big that number is, that's 10 to the 90th is the number of
elemental particles in the universe.
That's 10 to the 90th.
This is 10 to the 79 billion.
That's a big, big number.
People do not understand numbers.
They just don't.
You say a million dollars, a billion dollars, and what's the difference, a million dollars
or a billion dollars?
Well, let me put it in a way that you understand.
A million seconds is 11 days.
So you ask somebody, will you marry me?
I'll tell you in a million seconds, okay.
If they say a billion seconds, that's 32 years.
All right?
You feel that now?
A million to a billion?
And then if they say a trillion seconds, that's 32,000 years, huh?
You see the difference when you go up three orders of magnitude?
You go a million, 10 to the sixth, to 10 to the ninth, to 10 to the 12th.
That's 10 to the 79 billion.
That number is crazy big.
That's just in a single yeast cell, the interactions between the non-bonded interactions.
So how does an information flow?
Information flows through non-bonded interactions, through electrostatic potentials, which physicists
call a virtual photon.
Information goes down these at the speed of light.
That depends on ordering between molecules, non-covalent interactions.
These have to be all kind of assembled right.
And that's why this information, you don't dehydrate cells and rehydrate them and get
them to work properly.
When a cell divides, it collapses down, puts the information on both halves, and brings
it into both sides, so that that information keeps going to the next and the next generation.
Because when you lose these intermolecular interactions that are non-covalent, non-attached,
you've lost your information flow.
Big problem.
Nobody has explained, nobody, nobody in origin of life ever mentions the word interactomes.
Never will you hear it in their literature.
Next slide.
Proto-Turkeys.
Origin of life proto-cell assembly is akin to buying 20 pounds of sliced turkey meat,
adding a gallon of turkey broth, warming, sticking a few feathers, and suggesting that a live
turkey will eventually come gobbling out.
If given enough time, or that a proto-turkey or extant turkey has been synthesized.
This is exactly what is done in origin of life experiments.
Is exactly what is done.
If given enough time, a turkey is going to come out.
And people buy this stuff.
There's a whole area of research called origin of life research, and they've been doing
this same thing since 1952.
Next slide.
Critical for life is the origin of information, DNA or RNA.
The information is primary, and the matter is secondary.
We can't even get the matter, carbohydrates, nucleic acids, lipids, proteins, let alone
the information.
What is the code?
Even if you had the nucleic acids, and even if you could hook them up, what's the code?
Where do you get that code?
So we heard a little bit about this earlier in this conference.
The information is primary.
That's the information.
It can be stored on all sorts of mediums.
So I have an idea, and then I transcribe this onto a piece of paper, and now it's on the
paper.
And then I type this into my computer, and it goes into DRAM.
And then when I hit save, it goes into flash memory.
And then when I upload it to the web, that same information I was going through an RF
wave into a box on the wall.
And then from that box on the wall, it's going through a wire to some server farm someplace
where it goes right back down into transistor-based flash memory.
That same information, which was here in my hand to the paper, in my computer in several
different forms, in an RF wave, same information, different medium.
The information is primary.
The medium can change all the time.
So for example, the molecules in our bodies are always changing.
It used to be said that the molecules in our bodies turn over or changed every seven years.
And that's a bunch of nonsense.
They're changed continually.
It's much less than seven years.
And some guys wrote, well, the molecules in your teeth aren't changed.
And then I did one second Google search.
I mean, your teeth are constantly, you get dissolution, redeposition, constantly changing.
Every molecule in your body is undergoing a proton exchange.
Proton comes with a spin up, a proton comes with a spin down.
Every one of these now is a different molecule in the sense that it has different atoms that
make it up.
Maybe the same pattern of atoms, but a different atom.
You had a different proton exchange.
Every molecule is continuing to change.
We are dynamic structures constantly changing.
What is the real me?
I don't know what the real me is.
If you want to say it's the matter is the real me, then you got a big problem because
it's constantly changing.
This is what we were talking about earlier, the difference between brain and mind.
What is the real me?
Next slide.
You try to build a cell, even hypothetically, get the dream team, get the smartest people
together.
Can they build a living cell?
I'll give you all the chemicals you want in homochiral form, and I'll give you even
the informational code.
I'll give you the whole code.
In other words, you tell me how you want the DNA set up.
I'll give it all to you.
Now just assemble a cell.
Go ahead, you got all your diacea, lipids, all in chiral form.
Make your proto cell.
Take it, put in your peptides any way you want, set it up, get your carbohydrates out
there.
I'll even hook the carbohydrates together.
You just tell me the pattern you want.
Then you got to stick them on your cell.
Can you do it?
No, nobody can.
Nobody.
Nobody's ever done it.
Nobody can do it.
That's not to say it won't ever be done.
I'm just telling you, as of today, it hasn't been done, and it's far, far away from being
able to do it.
People will quote to me this, synthetic cells.
Well, in 2010, Craig Venter's group copied an existing bacteria genome and transplanted
it into another cell.
What happens?
I buy, say, a Corvette.
What do I do?
I take the computer control box out of that Corvette, and I go to my clean room at the
university, and I copy the chips.
I copy them, and I put my chips that I copied into that control box, and I go back and I
stick that in my Corvette, and I say, I built that Corvette.
I made that Corvette.
I did that.
He just copied the same chip, and you put it back in.
That's all he did.
He took another one in 2016, and he did something similar, but he took the control box, and
he knocked out all but 473 of the working devices, and he stuck it back in the cell,
and he was like, whoa, you made a cell.
No, he didn't.
You just made a cell worse.
You just chopped out a bunch of stuff and left just a few pieces to keep it operating enough.
He didn't make the cell.
There's all this complexity, all these interactives.
Nobody ever made that.
Nobody knows how to do it.
Next slide.
So here's what's written in books that people read, people like you.
What is life?
I never read these books.
You never see people like me read these books.
This is the masses, but this is what they tell you.
So here's this science writer, Regis.
He says, life began with little bags of garbage, random assortments of molecules doing some
crude kind of metabolism.
That is stage one.
The garbage bags grow and occasionally split into two, and the ones that grow and split
fastest win.
That's in his book on what is life by Oxford University Press.
Well, few origin of life researchers would state it so shamelessly.
Nonetheless, little bags of garbage are precisely what they've been making, and those little
bags of garbage have little more resemblance to living cells than a big bag of garbage
to a horse.
Next slide.
So you say, well, that's a book from 2009.
Well, let me show you the primary literature, 2018, in the journal Nature.
This is our top journal.
You want to see what nature will publish in this area?
None of us could get away with this, except origin of life researchers do.
This guy is Nobel laureate, Jack Sostak.
Here's what he writes on how did life begin.
Let's go through it.
I'm interested in it.
How did life begin?
I mean, the guy's a Nobel prize winner.
He must know.
The early atmosphere had no oxygen.
It consisted mainly of nitrogen, carbon dioxide, with smaller amounts of hydrogen, water, and
methane.
Lightning, asteroid impacts, UV light from the sun, acted on the atmosphere to generate
hydrogen, cyanide, a compound of hydrogen, carbon, and nitrogen.
Raining into volcanic or crater lakes, the cyanide reacted with iron, brought up water
circulating through rocks.
The resulting iron cyanide compounds accumulated over time, building up into a concentration
stew of reactive chemicals.
Okay, cool.
Where are we?
Life, as we know it, requires RNA.
Some scientists believe that RNA emerged directly from these reactive chemicals nudged
along by dynamic forces in the environment.
Huh?
Nudged has no, you can't put nudged in any of our articles.
No scientist knows what nudged means.
They don't know.
Nucleotides, the building blocks of RNA, eventually formed then joined together to make strands
of RNA.
Some stages of the process are still not well understood.
You think?
How do these things look together?
Show me the chemistry.
It's not there.
Once RNA was made, some strands of it become enclosed within tiny vesicles formed by spontaneous
assembly of fatty acid lipids in the membranes creating the first protocells.
As the membranes incorporated more fatty acids, they grew and divided at the same time internal
chemical reactions drove replication of encapsulated RNA.
That is nonsense.
Next slide.
Here is, next slide, the figure that he showed.
This is the figure.
From nature.
This is his figure.
Sinide derivatives and simple sugars.
Those are not sugars.
He says this is oxygen, carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus.
That's fictitious.
I don't know any sugars that have that chemical composition.
You don't know that.
He's lying to you.
That's not real.
Is this HCN?
I mean, there should be a carbon, a nitrogen, and a hydrogen if that's HCN.
I'm colorblind.
I can see that's not really HCN.
I don't know what that is.
Maybe that's phosphate.
I can see that.
That'd be phosphorus, oxygen.
Maybe that's phosphate.
Okay.
You got an RNA nucleotide.
But the problem is that's not a nucleotide.
It's the wrong structure.
By far that's the wrong structure.
He didn't even put the right structure.
At least he could have put the right structure.
He didn't even put the right structure.
Well, what's acting upon this to make it do this?
Well, heat from here, UV light from there.
Boom.
Nobody knows.
That's in nature.
That's not in an eighth grade textbook from 2018.
People think I selectively choose these things from crazy places.
No.
This is nature, 2018.
This is what confuses even professors.
See this?
And they think, oh, yeah, people know.
Nobody knows.
This is a bunch of garbage.
This is garbage.
Next slide.
All right.
Exquisite exactness is needed in synthetic protocols.
This is one of the kingpins in origin of life research from Oxford, John Sutherland.
I've never spoken to John.
I'm not sure he likes me.
So this is from Nature Chemistry 2015.
Next slide.
So you go back to his protocols.
You go to the supplemental procedures, you read his protocols.
It is amazing how hard it is to make the things that he says he wants to make.
And then he makes a little bit of it and it's a bunch of junk.
And so then he says, well, we'll just use synthetic organic techniques, real techniques
to make more just to simplify handling procedures.
Come on, because you could only make like a fraction of it and you wanted to carry it
on.
But it was just a bunch of junk.
It was just a peak.
It's not real.
And even with all your synthetic prowess.
And these are just for intermediates, not even the real compounds.
Next slide.
So to give you an idea.
So he takes copper one and he says he makes it, copper chloride was mixed with potassium
chloride to generate the Newland catalyst at 70 degrees.
So this is supposed to mimic a prebiotic earth.
But he's using all clean glass where he's not under rock, he's in an advanced organic
lab.
Separately generated source of acetylene was prepared from calcium, carbide and water.
This gas was bubbled through the Newland catalyst, prepare acrylonitrile.
This is a highly unstable molecule.
You look at acrylonitrile, it'll polymerize.
When you buy it, you buy it with stabilizers to keep it from polymerizing.
So he has to properly inhibit its polymerization and store it.
Then he treated with a potassium cyanide for one hour with five equivalents of ammonia
as a 13 molar, ammonia, ammonium solution adjusted to pH 9.2 with sodium hydroxide to
generate the desired amino propion nitrile.
I mean, this is hard chemistry to do.
Even if I gave this to synthetic chemists, this would be hard to pull off.
Hard, hard chemistry.
There's all this.
Even the most skilled synthetic chemist preparing a very simple precursors to very few of the
molecules within the building block class and all the precursors.
And then we're all racemic at that.
Next slide.
Then he even goes so far as to say all the cellular subsystems could have arisen simultaneously
through common chemistry.
That is crazy, man.
I'll tell you, if you work in the era of nanotechnology, you try to build systems.
You take molecules to build into a system that functioned.
He says they all could have arisen simultaneously through common chemistry.
That's a lie.
And it's accepted in the best of journals.
This is crazy.
All he made was a couple of precursors and he's going into the assembly of all subsystems.
Show me.
If it could have happened, show me.
He'll never show you.
Next slide.
So then here's an article from 12 December 2018.
So this is like a month ago.
This comes out now in nature communications, prebiotic chemistry and human intervention.
So now they're saying, yeah, you know, if you're really going to copy prebiotic chemistry,
you can't have too much intervention.
So they're beginning to catch on.
I'm surprised the journal took this.
He says such a pure chemical scenario is unrealistic prebiotically but necessary.
He's saying if you want to do something prebiotic, you got to have clean chemicals.
He says nobody's really explained this.
Furthermore, the ideal experiment does not involve any human intervention.
So this is this guy, Clemens Richard, they're beginning to catch on.
Next slide.
How close have researchers come to making an artificial cell?
Well, we know now.
We know how far they have closely come.
How do we know?
Because in November 2018, it's just a couple of months ago, Science Magazine top journal
says biologists create the most artificial, like the most lifelike artificial cells.
Whoa, I want to see what they've made.
That's how see how far along it really is.
Next slide.
So they're commenting on this article, which appeared in nature communications in November
2018, communication and quorum sensing in non-living mimics, a few karyotic cells.
Wow.
And they're communicating with one another, quorum sensing, meaning that they can tell
distance between each other.
Let me read about this.
Next slide.
So semi-porous microcapsules were made of plastic, plastic, from acrylate polymerization containing
clay were prepared using modern microfluidic techniques done within the fabrication devices.
So you go into a clean room, you build microfluidic devices, and you take, you polymerize, you
make polymers around clay.
That's all well-known how to do that.
That's what they did.
These are plastic shells.
Clays have a high affinity for binding DNA because clays are positively charged, DNA
is negatively charged.
So you add DNA to the solution, it goes through the porous plastic and binds to the clay.
Then they add in, they buy ribosomes and RNA enzymes and reagents were purchased or extracted,
and they add that to the medium.
Those diffuse into, and the normal protein synthesis starts taking place, which is normal
synthesis and then some of that diffuses out of those, and then the nearby ones they add,
some of it diffuses into the nearby ones, the ones that are nearer get more diffused
into them than the ones further away.
Well, duh, that's normal diffusion gradient, the ones that are closer get hit more often.
The chemistry is going to work.
Next slide.
The chemistry of the exogenously added reagents will work regardless of the container, whether
it's a plastic semi-porous microcapsule, as was used, in a test tube or in a large industrial
production vat.
The chemistry is the same, it's done all the time.
You take these biological derived systems, you add them together, proteins will start
being made.
This is how proteins are made.
You buy these drugs, how do they made?
They're made in vats.
Well, this guy did it in a little microcapsule.
That's the most lifelike system that's ever been made, according to Science Magazine.
That's it.
So it is far from the press hype claims of gene expression and communication rivaling
that of living cells.
That's what the press is saying.
There is no rivalry here.
No one.
Further, one might arguably agree that these are indeed the most lifelike artificial cells
yet, but that only serves to underscore the point.
Nobody has ever come close to generating the workings of life.
Nobody's even close.
You do this chemistry in the lab all the time.
So they did it in a microporous capsule and they said, whoa, this is life.
My test tube is life then.
Next slide.
Fool's gold.
So if you take sulfur and you add it to different metals, those metals can turn yellowish and
then they'll turn golden looking.
Iron sulfide.
Well, when alchemists made iron sulfide, don't you think they would think that, wow, if you
add enough sulfur to different elements, it's going to start being gold?
They knew it wasn't gold.
It didn't have the same ductility, didn't have the same melting point, but wouldn't
they have thought, hey, at least we're going in the right direction?
They would have thought that, but no, you're totally wrong.
You can add sulfur to any element you want all day.
It's never going to turn into gold.
We know now the only way to make gold from another element is you change the number
of protons.
Then you need a nuclear process, which is a lot more expensive than gold.
So you can get thrown off just because it looks like gold.
It's not really gold and you're way off base.
Next slide.
So what I'm saying is I'd like to have a moratorium on the origin of life research so it changes
warranted and we've got to change the way we do things and we need to address fundamental
problems here in origin of life research.
Next slide.
Again, one more slide.
Here's the ramifications of Colin Conjecture's facts.
Claims that mislead the patient taxpayer are unhelpful and the public will even distrust
scientific claims into other fields.
Unfounded or unfounded assertions jeopardize science beyond a singular field, especially
since there's mounting distrust of higher education in general.
Condescending comments toward the public or a student if they will not embrace our conjectures
as facts will lead to continued division between our scientists and non-scientists, which
can yield public reluctance to fund our research.
We must tell the truth with specificity.
If it is a fact, say it.
If it's not a fact, say it.
Blackballing scientists, if they bear legitimate, non-conformist views by excluding them from
professional societies and academies, withholding their funding or denying them tenure is anti-scientific
and it will retard the advancement of science.
Next slide.
I'm just going to finish up quickly.
Now I'm done with the technical talk, I'm going to come back to the Bible.
A scientific fact, water has two hydrogens, one oxygen, that's a fact.
That's not going to change anywhere in the universe.
There's never been discordance between the scientific facts and statements in the Bible,
so there's no need to reconcile them.
So-called scientific facts, which are really theories, are constantly changing even on the
order of decades and certainly on the order of a century.
So trying to twist the Bible to fit the scientific theory is a frustrating endeavor.
Don't let professors with their bold claims of facts upset you.
Theories or conjectures are not facts, but unfortunately and shamefully, many professors
themselves do not make the necessary distinctions.
This leads to the confusion of generations of students and even professors themselves.
I am telling you, professors are confused on these issues.
Professors think that simple forms of life have been made.
They're confused on these issues and I'll close with this Bible verse.
Next slide.
You must not listen to the words of that prophet or dreamer.
The Lord your God is testing you to find out whether you love him with all your heart
and with all your soul.
It is the Lord your God you must follow and him you must revere.
Keep his commandments, obey him, serve him and hold him fast.
When your students go off into the universities and they hear these things, these are false
prophets speaking to them.
Some of them are sincere, but they're sincerely false prophets.
Some of them are sincerely misleading people.
As believers, you must not listen to the words of that prophet or dreamer.
The Lord your God is testing you to find out whether you really love him or not.
He's testing you.
Keep his commandments, obey him, serve him and hold him fast.
Thank you.
