I want to welcome you and thank you for joining the conversation on this elusive subject of
consciousness, which is our topic this evening and continues with our presentations tomorrow
morning.
My name is Gendo Allen Field. I'm a lay ordained Zen Buddhist monk and teacher. I lead practice
at the Upper Valley Zen Center in White River Junction and also at the Zen practice group
here at Dartmouth College. This year several of our Dartmouth Zen students are studying
cognitive and neuroscience and from our conversations emerged the idea of a cross-disciplinary,
cross-cultural conference on the nature of consciousness. Professor Marcelo Gleiser
and his Institute for Cross-Disciplinary Engagement, also known as ICE, here at Dartmouth
seemed a natural partner for this effort and his enthusiasm and backing have made this
event possible. We are also indebted to Amy Flockton, administrator for ICE and to Amy
Zhang, the Dartmouth senior who designed our poster. Is Amy here by any chance? Sorry she's
not here, but I was very pleased with her poster. I'm also indebted to the Tucker Foundation
and Chaplain Devine Litvin for financial support and to the Church of Christ at Dartmouth for
the use of their gathering hall for our meditation both this afternoon and also tomorrow morning
at eight o'clock. So our purpose has been to bring together three perspectives on consciousness,
the scientist, the philosopher, and the Buddhist. I am grateful to the presenters we have assembled
that you will meet in the course of this conference and I'm personally grateful to
Shinge Roshi for accepting my invitation to join us. After today's presentation the conference
will resume tomorrow with an opportunity as I mentioned for meditation practice with Shinge
Roshi at 8 a.m. There will be morning presentations concluding at 11.20 with a panel discussion.
At 12.30 everybody is invited to join our presenters for lunch, which may be purchased
at a cost of roughly, I think it's $10 at the class of 53 Commons and directions will
be provided. I want to conclude with words from our proposal for this conference. Our
aim is dialogue across cherished distinctions between academic areas of study and between
science and, quote, religion. It is a timely conversation in a changing world where openness
and acceptance of different views contend with anger and fears of lost identity. Consciousness
is not merely an academic concern, but one that underlies a meeting of minds across all
that divides us. Please welcome Professor Marcella Gleiser, who will introduce today's speaker.
Okay, welcome everyone. My name is Marcella Gleiser. I'm a professor of physics and astronomy
here at Dartmouth and I'm also the director of the good eyes. There's the bad eyes and
the good eyes, so this is the good eyes, the Institute for Cross-Disciplinary Engagement.
Our mission is to do something that people talk about a lot, but it's very hard to do,
which is to bring the sciences and the humanities into constructive engagement. We do that through
a series of different activities. One of them is we promote public dialogues in theaters
and big cities across the United States. Just to give you an idea, in February we had a physicist,
Sean Carroll, and a Buddhist scholar, Alan Wallace, talking about the nature of reality in San
Francisco. We had almost 1,500 people in the audience. We really hit big because you had all
the techies with the physicists and all the people interested in other ways of knowing with Alan,
so it was a wonderful experience. We also have a fellows program and other things. Within the
fellows program, we are fortunate to attract people to Dartmouth that are very distinguished in
their fields. Two of the speakers they are going to hear from are currently ICE fellows, so Evan
Thompson who is going to be talking today and Adam Frank who is going to be talking tomorrow.
So I invite you to visit our website, ice.darmouth.edu, where you can find out about our many,
many activities, lots of lectures, lots of interesting things that we promote, an amazing
collection of video interviews with people from experts in Lucretias, the cosmologists thinking
about the multiverse, and also a virtual library which is open and free to the public on many,
many different topics that we cover. So please do visit ICE. And so let me thank Alan for being
the initiator of this whole thing. He came up to me and said, you know, we should try to do this
cross disciplinary conference on bringing different perspectives on the question of mind.
And I thought what a great idea. It does indeed fit very well with what we do at ICE. So I was
very happy with that and it's so nice to see an idea become reality, you know, and have you all here
present today. And we should have many different ways of thinking about this, which is again a
reflection of the question of the mind problem, right? It is not something that we can solve
only through science or through philosophy or through spirituality. It really needs a multiplicity
of views in order for us to move forward. And I think that's what we're here for today, to learn
from each other and to hopefully come up with, again, this constructive engagement of these
different ways of knowing, which is really what we're here for. So to open our discussions, we have
here Evan Thompson. And I'm going to read this description because I couldn't do anything better
than this. He's a professor of philosophy at the University of British Columbia. He writes about
cognitive science, phenomenology, the philosophy of mind and cross cultural philosophy, especially
Buddhist philosophy in dialogue with Western philosophy of mind and cognitive science,
which is, I have to say, a very rare thing to do in academia and something that should be
celebrated right there. Well, as a child, Thompson was homeschooled at the Lindisfarne
Association, so very radical stuff. A think tank and a retreat founded by his father,
William Orwin Thompson. In 1977, Thompson met Chilean phenomenologist Francisco Varela,
when Varela attended a Lindisfarne conference, which was organized by Thompson, his dad, and
Gregory Bateson. Thompson received a PhD in philosophy from the University of Toronto in 1990,
and an AB in Asian Studies from Amherst College in 1983. Thompson has taught at the University of
Toronto, Concordia University, Boston University, and York University. While at York University,
Thompson was also a member of the Center for Vision Research. Thompson has held visiting
appointments at the Center for Subjectivity Research, what a great name, in Copenhagen,
and at the University of Colorado Boulder, so he picks his places very wisely. Thompson worked
with Francisco Varela in Paris, and during this time, Varela and Thompson wrote The Embodied Mind,
Cognitive Science and Human Experience. Thompson's book, Mind in Life, Biology, Phenomenology,
and the Sciences of Mind, explores how life relates to mind, and his most recent book,
which is quite a wonderful achievement, is called Waking Dreaming Being,
Self and Consciousness in Neuroscience, Meditation and Philosophy. So Evan, please.
Before you start, as MC, let me just tell you a little bit about how this goes.
So hopefully you'll talk for about 45 minutes, and then I have invited two of our guests to
offer commentary if they wish to do so. If they do, wonderful. If not, I'll open it to questions
from the audience, okay? All right, good. Well, thank you very much for that very generous
introduction, and for the invitation to be here, and thank all of you for coming here this afternoon.
I'm going to be speaking about the nature of consciousness, a neuro-phenomenological approach,
and I want to begin with an image that I imagine many of you are familiar with.
This is a lithograph by MC Escher that's from 1956, and it depicts a man in a gallery
viewing a print of a seaport, and the gallery in which he's standing is one of the buildings in
the seaport. The picture exemplifies what Douglas Hofstra calls a strange loop. The gallery is in the
town, the town is in the picture. The picture, as a picture, is mentally in the person viewing it,
that is sort of as a content of his perceptual experience, but the person is in the picture,
and of course we are the ones viewing this strange loop, so it's in us in a sense.
And at the center of this strange loop is a circular void, or emptiness, where Escher
has signed his name. Now in Buddhism, this absence at the heart of presence is called
shunyata, emptiness, and it's one of our themes of the meeting. And in one of the very early
Indian Buddhist philosophical texts by the Indian philosopher Nagarjuna,
the fundamental stanzas of the middle way, Nagarjuna says, whatever is dependently
co-arisen, that is explained to be emptiness. So we have these linked concepts of emptiness
and dependent origination or dependent arising. Now I think in contemporary Western philosophy,
there are a number of ways in which this idea is echoed in thinking about the relationship
between the mind and the world, the idea of dependent origination. So for example,
Hillary Putnam, in one of his classic books from the early 1980s, says the mind and the world
jointly make up the mind and the world. Some decades earlier, the French philosopher
Maurice Meloponte said in his phenomenology of perception,
the world is inseparable from the subject, but from a subject who is nothing but a project
of the world. And the subject is inseparable from the world, but from a world that it
itself projects. Now I want to take two guiding thoughts for what I'm going to tell you today
from these strange loops. One I'm going to call the primacy of consciousness,
and what I mean by that is that there's no way to step outside of consciousness in the form
of lived experience. Everything we investigate, including consciousness and its place in nature,
is always disclosed from within the horizon of lived experience, and this includes when we're
doing science. The second thought is what I'm going to call the primacy of embodiment,
and that is that lived experience never shows up apart from our embodied being in the world.
So with those introductory thoughts, here is the outline of what I want to present
to you today. I want to say some more things in detail with a bit more philosophical precision,
I hope, about what I mean by the primacy of consciousness, and then I'm going to say some
things about the problem with physicalism. Physicalism is the philosophical or metaphysical
thesis that everything that exists, or at least everything concrete that exists, leaving out
math and logic and things of that sort, everything that concretely exists is physical,
including the mental. So I'm going to say some critical things about that, and then the question
will arise, well does that mean that panpsychism, that everything is fundamentally mental? Is that
how we should think about things? And I'm going to say panpsychism does have an insight, but
no, it's not quite right. And that's going to take us into the primacy of embodiment,
my second guiding thought, and then I'm going to end with some remarks about neuro phenomenology.
Okay, so to talk about the primacy of consciousness, let's go back again to this
quotation from Merleau-Ponty. The world is inseparable from the subject, but from a subject
who is nothing but a project of the world, and, and this is the one I want to emphasize for our
purposes at the moment, the subject is inseparable from the world, but from a world that it itself
projects. So the primacy of consciousness here can be thought of as the idea that in knowing the
world, we cannot step outside the horizon of our lived experience. So let, let's think about this
metaphor of the horizon for a moment. The line of the horizon is a limit beyond which we can't go,
but it's an apparent line and a structure of our perception, and it travels with us.
So on the one hand, we could say the horizon is indeed real.
It's the farthest point the eye can see before the Earth's surface curves away beneath our view.
But we could also say, in the philosophical sense of the term ideal, that it's ideal. That is to say,
it's a structure of our perception. It's not something that exists independent of perception.
That doesn't mean that it's in my head. It's a relation between me and the world.
Now, in phenomenological philosophy, particularly the writings of Husserl, we have what could be
called a horizonal conception of consciousness. Husserl uses the term horizon throughout his
writings in a number of different ways. But very generally, we could say that the horizonal
conception of consciousness is the conception of consciousness as the horizon from within which
the world is present and disclosed to us. Wherever we find ourselves, whether we're observing
something in a scientific context or whether we're out on a boat sailing, we always find
whatever we find from within the horizon of our lived experience. Now, if you're a philosopher
or you're familiar with contemporary philosophy, the horizon is, let's call it, a phenomenal
structure of consciousness. It's not a particular phenomenal property like the sourness of lemon
or the redness of the sunset. It's not, in other words, a quailie, that is, qualia in the way
that philosophers use the term qualia to refer to the particular qualitative properties of a given
perceptual or sensory experience. Indeed, qualia and phenomenal contents, that is,
whatever you're experiencing, whether you're awake and perceiving, whether you're mind wandering
and caught up in some thought, whether you're falling asleep and seeing images play before
your eyes, whether you're in a dream, whether you're having a lucid dream, whatever it is
that you're experiencing, those contents appear from within the horizon of consciousness. So,
this horizonal notion is not a content, any particular content. It's a structure. It's
a structure of awareness, but it's a phenomenal structure. Now, here we come upon the first sense
in which I think we can highlight the primacy of consciousness, and I'm going to call this the
existential primacy, because consciousness, in this horizonal sense, is not something we have.
It's rather something we are, or we could say it's something that we live. So, it has existential
primacy, and phenomenologists talk about this in different ways. Heidegger talks about our being
in the world, Mello Ponti talks about the lived body, Husserl talks about the life world, the
horizonal consciousness of the life world. There are different terms, and some may be better than
others, but they're all about this existential primacy of lived experience. So, if we think about
this though, horizonal consciousness in a way is nothing in itself, right? I said it's a structure,
not a particular content. It's whatever the contents that we are experiencing are structured in the way
that they are. So, in Buddhist terms, that is to say, it's empty, shunya, of own beings, fabava.
That is, it doesn't have an intrinsic reality of its own. Rather, it's nothing other than the
manifestation of the world. It's, we could say, the disclosure or manifestation of our life world,
our concrete lived reality and lived experience. Now, I just use the term life world, which is
another phenomenological term of art, Labanzelt. So, let's think about this for a minute in relationship
to the concept of the universe. If we're thinking as natural scientists, we might say the universe,
that is the totality of nature, contains the life world, contains our life world. And indeed,
that makes perfect sense, and there's nothing objectionable about that statement. But for a
philosopher, we also want to be able to say that the life world, and now we could elaborate this
as the space of meaning within which anything is intelligible, anything is thinkable,
anything is observable, that that contains the universe, because the universe is always disclosed
to us from within the life world. After all, our scientific endeavor of opening up new realms of
observation and new ways of intervening within them is always within our life world. So, a philosopher
wants to say, yes, of course, the natural science perspective on the universe has its validity,
but the philosophical position that reverses the primacy or the order of priority also has its
validity, and it's important not to lose sight of that. Now, this brings us to another sense of the
primacy of consciousness, which is its epistemological primacy. And in a way, I've already said this,
but I'm going to elaborate it in a bit more detail. As we live and as we investigate our world,
we open up new vistas with new horizons. We do this in all sorts of ways. I'm emphasizing science,
but of course, art does that in its own way. The way that we do this in science is powerful,
unique, distinctive, and it's by producing objective knowledge. Objective doesn't mean
independent of us. It means tested and it means consensual. You could say it means intersubjective.
So, let me spell that out. Lived experience is a point of departure and a point of return
for the production of objective knowledge, because the way science proceeds and the way it's
evolved historically, if we look from, say, Galileo up to today, is that we set aside aspects of our
concrete experience on which we can't agree. The particularities of my sensations versus yours,
or how I taste things, or aesthetically evaluate them versus the way that you do,
our values, our emotions, we try to as much as possible bracket those. There are questions
about how much we can do this, but that's the effort. And then what we do is we extract, abstract,
and idealized invariance, structural relational properties that are structural residues of our
experience. And then we can treat these as objects of consensus. We can test them. And these are
things like general propositions and logic or mathematical models or formulae.
And then we implement these abstractions by way of technology. And when we do that, we can intervene,
we can manipulate, we can measure, we can control phenomena, always in a contextually situated
and limited way. But all of that, of course, is registered in our experience. You have to
observe something. You have to record a measurement. That requires experience.
So an important implication of this is that claiming that consciousness in this now sense of lived
experience can be reductively explained. I'm emphasizing the word reductively now. Can be
reductively explained by one of its structural residues. For example, in the context of neuroscience
today where we're thinking about consciousness, something like Tononi's integrated information
theory, or the global workspace theory of consciousness and its neuronal architecture,
to claim that we can reductively explain consciousness in terms of that, rather than
establishing a relationship between the two, is to turn the whole epistemological procedure upside
down. And this is indeed Husserl's point in his work of 1938, the crisis of European sciences
and transcendental phenomenology. He argues that it's in principle absurd to think that we can
explain subjective experience by reducing it to certain objects of science, since these objects
are abstract relational structures extracted from the life world of lived experience. So it's to
invert the order, the epistemological order. He's not arguing against science. He's arguing that we
need to understand how it's situated in relationship to our lived experience. And Husserl thought
that the deep, you could say existential or spiritual crisis of our scientific culture
is that we constantly forget that lived experience is the source of science and its ground of
validity. This is what Adam and Marcelo and I have been talking about in terms of a kind of
blind spot in our scientific culture. Now finally, this brings us to a more difficult, but in some
ways more precise philosophical sense of the primacy of consciousness, which following Kant,
we could call the transcendental primacy of consciousness. And transcendental here is
being used in Kant's sense, not in say the sense of transcendental meditation. That dates me, I
suppose. So the idea here is that consciousness is the condition of possibility for scientific
knowledge. So let me read to you something that Kant says when he's defining the word transcendental.
He says, I entitle transcendental all knowledge which is occupied, not so much with objects, with
what? As with the mode of our knowledge of objects, with how, how we know, not what we know. In so
far as this mode of knowledge is to be possible a priori. So Kant says we have knowledge, we take
that for granted. And now the question is how is it that we know what we know? What are the
conditions of possibility for our having the kind of experience and knowledge that we have?
And that kind of investigation is a transcendental investigation in his sense. And the point here
is that consciousness then is not another object of knowledge, or we could say not just another
object of knowledge. It's that by which any object is knowable. And when we think about it this way,
that is to say transcendentally in Kant's sense and also Husserl's, consciousness is irreducible
to the domain of objects. It doesn't make sense to treat it as an object because it's the condition
of possibility for objects being manifest to us in all the ways that they are in the first place.
So to summarize, consciousness has primacy existentially in the sense of it's what we live,
our concrete lived experience. Epistemologically, it's the point of departure and the point of return
for science. And transcendentally, it's, this is a sort of English rendering of a German term,
as you can probably tell, it's the un-go-behind-able condition of possibility for knowledge.
Okay, so now, note, it does not follow from this argument. That is to say this argument
does not logically entail that consciousness has ontological primacy in the pan-psychist sense.
That is, it doesn't follow that the property of being conscious is an extra ingredient. This is
Dave Chalmer's term, in nature at the fundamental micro-physical level. And I'm going to come back
to this point later when I talk about pan-psychism. I just want to flag that nothing I've said so far
logically entails that way of thinking about consciousness, that it's everywhere in nature
micro-physically. I think that way of thinking gets something right, but I also think it gets
something wrong. So I'm going to come back to that. That's a sort of teaser, I hope.
Okay, so I've now told you what I mean when I'm using this expression, the primacy of consciousness.
So now I want to say some things about the problem with physicalism.
In a nutshell, physicalism I think is a useless thesis. Physicalism is the thesis that everything
is physical or everything concrete is physical. The immediate problem is that physical is not
well-defined. What does it mean? Attempts to define it make physicalism either false, empty,
not in the Buddhist sense, or non-naturalist. So let me spell that out. This is not a thought
by any means original to me. It goes back to the philosopher Carl Hempel and it's known as
Hempel's dilemma. And the dilemma is if we define physical as what contemporary physics tells us
is physical, then physicalism is very likely to be false. If we define, because physics obviously
is a work in progress and any inductive argument from the history of science is going to lead us
to think that physics is going to undergo radical revision. On the other hand, if we define physical
by what the ideal completed physics, if it even makes sense to think of that, but let's suppose
that it does, if we define it in terms of the meaning of physical for the ideal completed physics,
then physicalism is empty because we don't know what that physics will be.
We have no, we have no kind of tangible sense of exactly what that means. Now, at this point,
some philosophers, there's a, there's a kind of trend in philosophy today to try to define
physicalism for the scientists and for other philosophers. So some philosophers will say,
look, we shouldn't hand over all authority to the physicists or to physics to determine what's physical
because no matter how far the bounds of the physical stretch, it's a conceptual truth or you
could say it's an a priori truth that the bounds of the physical can't include fundamental mentality
or strong emergence, the idea of radically new emergent configurational forces.
Now, I don't think this works. This gambit basically shows that physicalists, and I'm talking
about physicalist philosophers now, are caught between on the one hand wanting to be naturalists
because the whole point of the term physicalism as opposed to materialism was to signal
the preeminence of physics, physical science. So on the one hand,
physicalist philosophers want to be naturalists, as indeed they should, who defer to science,
but they want to be metaphysicians too because after all, they're philosophers
and that leads them to place a priori restrictions or to try to place a priori restrictions on what
can count as physical. Now, I think that a number of years ago, Chomsky in one of his books,
basically showed that this is really wrong-headed. He points out that trying to restrict a priori,
what counts as physical, is like a 17th century materialist responding to Newton, trying to restrict
a priori, what counts as matter. And we know from the history of science that science simply
supersedes that kind of metaphysics or that way of doing metaphysics. Okay, so the upshot then
is that understanding the mind and its place in nature is of course
a genuine and extremely important scientific and philosophical enterprise,
but physicalism is useless to it.
All right, so now maybe panpsychism. Is that what follows here?
Well, I don't think so.
Panpsychism is undergoing a resurgence. You can see that in the book there, which just came out
last year, a collection of articles by a whole bunch of philosophers, very interesting articles
on panpsychism, exploring it as an option in philosophy of mind today or metaphysics.
So it's the view that everything is mental or phenomenal or experiential,
to put it in the most general way. And it's based on this recognition that you can't get consciousness,
quality, the qualitative characteristics of experience or subjectivity
out of the abstract relational properties of natural science.
Equations relating magnitudes, for example, are mathematical functions.
You don't get the consciousness out of that. You get an abstract relational structure.
So that's a recognition. That's an insight.
But panpsychist's response is to postulate that consciousness is everywhere as an intrinsic property
of physical nature. Now, I want to take you through the argument that leads to this thought,
or what I think is the best argument or the most interesting, I suppose, forceful.
And this is an argument that we see in some ways in Whitehead, although I wouldn't quite
call Whitehead a panpsychist in this sense, but in some ways we see elements of it in Whitehead.
We see it in the physicist Sir Arthur Eddington. We see it in Bertrand Russell,
and we see it today in Galen Strassen, all of whom are extremely interesting writers.
And the argument goes like this. Physics reveals to us only the relational properties
of physical phenomena. It gives us models with magnitudes and equations relating them.
Relational properties need intrinsic properties, are determined by intrinsic properties,
so this argument says, certain configurations of physical phenomena generate or constitute
phenomenal states, the brain and the body. So the intrinsic properties of physical phenomena
must encompass this power. Our own inner awareness reveals that phenomenality, the taste of something,
the quality of something visually, is an intrinsic property of our experience.
Indeed, it's the only intrinsic property that we know of, because science doesn't give us
intrinsic properties. So phenomenality must then be an intrinsic property of physical phenomena,
or at least of certain organized physical systems. That's the argument as we see it deployed today.
Now, there are two problematic assumptions in this argument.
One is that relational properties are determined by intrinsic properties. It seems to me entirely
possible that, and indeed it would be a Buddhist idea, that there are no intrinsic properties,
Svabhava, own being. There's just dependent arising and relationality all the way down,
all the way up, and all the way out. So this premise is contestable, and indeed there are some
very interesting technical arguments around this in Indian philosophy, Indian Buddhist philosophy,
and Tibetan philosophy as well. And then secondly, our own inner awareness reveals that phenomenality
is an intrinsic property. That is to treat our inner experience as if it were just a matter of these
special intrinsic non-relational qualities, which divests our experience of its embeddedness,
its situatedness, and its embodiment, its relationality in other words. So I don't find this argument
persuasive. Indeed, I find it subject to two different extremes, you could say. One is
what would be the, what in philosophy of science today is called the structural realist position,
though I would call it the structural reificationist position, which says that, well actually,
only relational properties are mined independently real, and they're real structural features of
the world apart from the mind, and that's what science is about. So that is to me to reify
scientific models. It's to forget that they are idealized abstractions out of our concrete lived
experience, but panpsychists fall prey to a different kind of reification because they reify
consciousness as an intrinsic property, and they forget its relational and contextual constitution
by way of embodiment. Panpsychism also has another interesting problem, which is called the
combination problem, and this is in a way a more interesting one because it leads me,
it's going to lead me positively into saying some things about embodiment. So if you think,
as a panpsychist does, that there are micro-level phenomenal properties or experiences everywhere,
then there's the problem of how do they combine to form macro-level ones? This is a sort of strange
mental version of a physicalist composition problem, now just transposed into the mental register.
William James put this very well in his writings when he was talking about panpsychism. He says,
take a sentence of a dozen words and take 12 men and tell to each one word. Then stand them in a
row or jam them in a bunch and let each think of his word as intently as he will. Nowhere will
there be a consciousness of the whole sentence. Where the elemental units are supposed to be
feelings, the cases in no eyes altered. Take a hundred of them, shuffle them and pack them as
close together as you can. Still each remains the same feeling it always was. So he's basically
saying, look, if you think that there are phenomenal properties scattered everywhere,
you need to explain how they cohere in or combine into subjects of experience and you
don't get that just by sort of putting them in a row. Now the panpsychist response to this
today is to say that, well, mental properties belong only to genuine individuals, not to mere
aggregates, not to mere collections, not to conglomerates. But then how do we determine what
counts as a genuine individual? This is the boundary problem. Do elementary particles count
as individuals? Well, it doesn't seem like they would count as an individual in the way that
say a bacterial cell would. So what's the principle of individuation here exactly? I think one of
the best statements of this is by Greg Rosenberg, who's to my mind one of the most interesting
panpsychist philosophers. And he says, the hard nut of the boundary problem is that animal
experiencers possess a kind of inherent individuality at a physical mid-level of reality, which is hard
to explain. If panpsychism is true, why do the boundaries exist just so? Boundaries are harder
to explain than combination. We are faced with the need to understand what it is to be an inherent
individual in the natural world. This takes us to embodiment because the boundary problem is,
in a way, the problem of embodiment. Because to be a genuine individual is not simply to be a
particular. It's to be a system that has some kind of bounded organizational unity through
ongoing internal material transformation. Again, think of a living cell.
So that kind of system is not any kind of particular. It's a body. It has an embodiment.
Okay, so this brings me now to the primacy of embodiment.
So let's recall our guiding thoughts, the primacy of consciousness, no way to step outside of lived
experience. But now we're looking at the other side of the coin, that lived experience never shows
up apart from our embodied being in the world. And in the Merleau-Ponty quotation I gave you
earlier, we're now emphasizing this thought, the world is inseparable from the subject,
but from a subject who is nothing but a project of the world.
Now, to illustrate in the most general way the emergence of individuality, I want to do it
in a schematic way by way of this figure. So the circles represent processes under some conditions
of observation. And the arrows represent enabling relations or relations of conditioning. So if a
circle has an arrow pointing to another circle, then that circle is enabling, is a process that's
enabling the one that is pointing to, contributing to it. Under observation, we see that some of
the arrows form a tightly interdependent network, the ones that are black. They have a unitary
character to them because they have, in the logical or algebraic sense, a kind of closure,
that is, every process in that network is the result of another process and is affecting another
process. It doesn't, closure here doesn't mean that it's separated from the environment because
indeed it's being, it's embedded in the environment in terms of the gray circles and the green arrows,
which indicate conditioning relations from the network into the environment. But when we have a
system that has this kind of network density, we have the emergence of a kind of individuality
where every process is contributing to every other process so that the network emerges under
certain conditions as having a robust individuality that continues for a time until it dissipates for
whatever reason. And each circle, black circle in the network, is doing what it does under
conditions of precariousnessness, precariousnessness, yes, that's a word. That is to say, if, if it
weren't for that network, the network is functioning as a kind of constraint on it. If it weren't for
that network, it would have a tendency to run down an atrophy. So it's holding together because of
this entangled mutual modification. Now, I put this in very abstract terms, but you could think of
this as, this is I think maybe the easiest way to think of it as the emergence of life of a proto
cell or of a cell with an internal metabolic reaction network that's constantly modifying its
activity. And I'm going to, I'm going to elaborate that in a minute. But before I do that, I want to
link this to a very important Buddhist philosophical way of elaborating this concept of dependent
origination that we began with earlier. So in Madhyamaka philosophy, particularly as it develops
later in India, the writings of the commentator on Nagarjuna by Chandra Kirti, the idea is that
dependent origination can be thought of in three ways or having three aspects. There's causal
dependence, dependence on conditions. There's the dependence of the parts on the whole. And we could
also say the whole on the parts because the, the parts give rise to the whole, but the parts are
what they are in context of the whole. And then there's an interesting one that Chandra Kirti
points out, which is dependence on concepts. That is, we've framed this in a certain way. We're
observing it at a certain scale of observation. We're picking out certain things as salient for
our purposes. When we do it that way, it then becomes an objective matter, a testable consensual
matter, what the nature of the situation is, but it's still being conceptually framed by us.
So there's a kind of conceptual dependence here as well. So this is what dependent origination
means as it gets elaborated in Indian philosophy. It's a very powerful notion. Okay, so let's
illustrate this more concretely now in the case of life. The Chilean biologists in Bertrand
Materana and Francisco Varela introduced this idea of auto poasis, self-production. And what
they meant by that is that a system in the molecular domain that's made up of molecular
processes that form a reaction network, that is, that catalyze each other's production, produce
each other in a way that also involves the fabrication or production of a, of a membrane
that makes the system bounded in space, that this is the minimal example of the emergence of,
we could say, a body. That is, an individual that's not only individuated, but self-individuating.
Because a system like this alters its boundary conditions in a way that, say, a candle flame
doesn't, doesn't alter its boundary conditions in the way that a living cell does. So they
talked about this as a kind of basic biologic. You have this auto poetic loop. It's a strange
loop in a way, you could say, using Hofstadter's term, that complex auto poetic systems are
adaptively related to the environment. That is, they can modify their behavior in relationship
to their zone of viability. What is, what is going to lead to the system's dissolution versus
what is going to enable it to continue to hold together. This is constantly driving it in
relationship to the environment so that we know, for example, that very, very simple bacterial
critters that they swim about with the flagella rotating clockwise, counterclockwise, tumbling
versus directed swimming, and that this is under the controls through stronger word, is under the
modulation of the ongoing auto poetic metabolism. And this is a kind of basic sense making.
Because these organisms differentiate in their environment things that are significant versus
insignificant. Sucrose versus heavy metals, things that will make it swim up gradient,
that enhance its metabolic continuation, things that will repel it and make it swim away. So I
like to put this by saying that living, even at this very fundamental level, is sense making
in precarious conditions. That's what it's embodied sense making in precarious conditions.
Now if we think of this in a, in a much more evolutionary sense where we're particularly
focused on animal life, animal life is about multi-cellularity, about a body that has many
kinds of cells with neurons that are needed to signal rapidly and across large distances,
sensory and motor ends. But it's the same kind of strange loop organization where now the
auto regulation is facilitated through the self-production of the neuronal cells in a dense
network like those circles with the black arrows that I showed you before. And in animal life,
we see what looks more familiar to us, what we would call cognition, emotion, affect, and so on.
And of course in mammal life, this is social from the ground up. There's, in mammalian life, no brain
is an island. Everything is about coupling and co-regulation. So this is very, very quick going
through a number of different things, but what I'm trying to bring out and emphasize to you
is what happens when we put life back into consciousness by way of the primacy of embodiment.
This perspective transforms how we think about what philosophers call the explanatory gap between
consciousness and nature. The gap is no longer, or the problem is no longer the gap between the mental
defined as fundamentally non-physical, or the physical and the physical defined as fundamentally
non-mental, which is how philosophers usually set it up. The problem is rather the passage
from the living body to the lived body and back again. How do we negotiate that passage?
And that's what I call in my book, Mind and Life, the body-body problem.
Negotiating it requires that phenomenology and science work together without one aiming to usurp
the other. We can think of this as a kind of mutual circulation or mutual illumination,
where phenomenology and science work together to illuminate each other by way of
the primacy of consciousness and the primacy of embodiment. Okay, so this brings me to the last
part of the talk, which is the idea of neural phenomenology, which comes from Francisco Varela.
He didn't invent the term, but he brought it into current currency and used it in a particular way.
And in his usage, it works under the assumption of the primacy of consciousness and the primacy
of embodiment and investigates the relationship between conscious experience and brain activity.
Varela's working idea, this is now back in the 90s, up to the time that he died in 2001,
was that the flow of experience, or what William James would call the stream of consciousness,
reflects what neuroscientists today call intrinsic brain activity or spontaneous brain
activity as much as or more than stimulus evoked activity. So the brain is constantly
endogenously generating its own activity and it's doing that in a way that's under the influence
of stimuli, but the way that stimuli are received and dealt with has to do with what the brain is
doing intrinsically, spontaneously. And Varela's idea was that a careful phenomenology of the flow
of experience can be used to illuminate intrinsic brain activity. It could help to,
as it were, recover noise, what would otherwise be treated as noise.
And that this kind of phenomenology would benefit from trained contemplative insight.
So you can think about it as, on the one hand, we have the phenomenology of consciousness,
now we're really talking about, of course, human consciousness, and the neuroscience investigation
of it, and bringing the neuroscience of meditation into the sphere of the neuroscience
of consciousness, and bringing meditative insight into the sphere of the phenomenology of consciousness
in this mutually illuminating, mutually mutual circulation way. Now there are a number of studies
that I just want to highlight for you. I'm not going to go through them in detail because we don't
have time that pursued this approach or at least tried to pilot it to some extent. One was a study
that Varela published or actually appeared after his death, where they looked at different qualities
of attention, antecedent to the presentation of a stimulus, which was a stereogram, a depth illusion,
and they looked at how the antecedent spontaneous activity and different qualities of attention,
distraction versus attentional stability, modulated the behavioral response to the stimuli,
and the vividness of the perception, and they were investigating this looking at frequency
phase synchrony patterns recorded through EEG, so oscillatory activity as recorded by EEG and the
temporal phase relationship between the signals. So this was published some years ago.
Another study that just appeared a year ago is one that I participated in,
which used experienced Terravada of Apasana meditators to report on when they first noticed
the arising of a thought, and the idea was to use this ability to track the neural activity
further back in time than would be possible with an untrained observer of the arising of
spontaneous thoughts as a way of getting a more fine-grain temporal portrait using fMRI of the
antecedent neural activity generating spontaneous cognition. And another study looked at using
real-time fMRI feedback and how people with attentional stability through meditation are able to
through the feedback about their own neural activity to modulate in a reliable way
the signals coming from, in this case it was the posterior cingulate as measured using fMRI.
So these are just all examples of some neuro phenomenological kinds of studies,
and if you're interested in the details of this, there's a short review paper that I did with
Sinha Fazlpur, who's a PhD student of mine on the brain dynamics and how they're viewed from a
neuro phenomenological perspective. Okay, so neuro phenomenology then is about, we could say,
cultivating the experiential side of the embodied mind through contemplative training.
And Varela's idea was to embed contemplative practice and mind science in a larger common
framework based on the primacy of lived experience where, again, there's a mutual illumination
and circulation back and forth between phenomenology and, in this case, neuroscience.
All right, so this brings me then to the concluding thoughts.
To repeat something that I began with, there's no way to step outside of consciousness
as lived experience and to measure it against something else.
Everything we investigate is disclosed from within lived experience,
and direct experience never shows up apart from our being embodied and situated in the world.
It therefore makes no sense to aim to reduce experience to something essentially non-experiential
as the physical is classically conceived to be,
rather understanding how consciousness is a natural phenomenon may require radical revision
to our scientific concept of nature, such that consciousness, in quotation marks because I'm
talking about the concepts now, such that consciousness and nature don't mutually
exclude each other at the outset or by construction as they have basically for a sense Descartes,
rather they imply each other or arise from something neutral between them.
At the same time, our ultimate and truly hard problem, our hardest task,
is not to solve an abstract mind-body problem. It's rather to live the mutual dependence
of experience and embodiment with benevolence, with mindfulness, and with care. This is especially
meant to, if you were at Adam's talk yesterday, to echo his discussion of the situation we find
ourselves in today on the planet, the Anthropocene, and whether that's going to be a good or a bad
Anthropocene. So I want to end with Stephen Batchelor's poetic rendering of one of the
verses from Nagarjuna's Fundamental Stances of the Middle Way. This is one of my favorite
ways of rendering some of his thoughts. You are not the same as or different from
conditions on which you depend. You are neither severed from nor forever fused with them.
This is the deathless teaching of Buddhas who care for the world. And in my favorite part,
when Buddhas don't appear and their followers are gone, the wisdom of awakening bursts forth
by itself. Thank you.
Thank you, Evan, for this. It was wonderful, very illuminating, inspiring, awesome in many ways.
Thank you. And I would like to know if the people I invited to comment will comment. I'll
count to five. If they don't, I'll move on. Ah, we have a hand. Okay, come over please. So this is
Professor Peter Tsif from the Brain and Cognitive Sciences, and he's one of our speakers tomorrow
morning. So it's a beautiful talk and an important perspective. So neuro phenomenology
is something I care about a lot. It's something that's missing in science pretty much.
So within neuroscience, as we could in principle have three basic sources of information,
everything associated with brains, including neurons and consequences of neural activity,
like bold signal and fMRI and EEG, then behavior, and that's associated with psychophysics. And then
there's our experience. And this is not really emphasized enough. And if you do emphasize it,
like I do in my own work, you have to kind of hide it behind the guise of hardcore psychophysics.
But the field could move in a true neuro phenomenological direction if it
allowed, for example, human neurophysiology, which it doesn't now, but it should, I think. And in fact,
I think it would be much less ethical for neuroscientists who do these experiments on each
other than on monkeys, where, for example, let's say I had a year left to live and I had my trusted
friends who are neurophysiologists opening my skull and controlling neural activity,
say going into particular brain areas that are involved in color perception or shape perception
or whatever, and manipulating that activity in a controlled way. There's an area called
B4. If I go in there, I can have 20 hertz stimulation, 30 hertz. And I could say,
you know, when you do that, I see red flickering here. And there's lots and lots of things we could
do. So my hope for the future within science is a real embrace of neuro phenomenology to take a
causal manipulationist approach towards subjective experience beyond simply bombarding us with
drugs like psilocybin, which has some consequences that might be analogous to some
Buddhist experiences. But let me say, you know, we do know that we can manipulate brain activity
through drugs like psilocybin or, you know, even banging you on the head and you see phosphines,
and that that triggers subjective experiences. So I think the assumption behind neuroscience that
subjective experience is realized in, or I suppose supervenes upon, neural activity is,
I think a good one to go with, at least for now, unless, until someone can prove to a,
to me or any other standard neuroscientist that there could be disembodied
subjective experiences. And I'm not saying that's what you're advocating, but
right. So if we assume that consciousness is embodied in the sense that it's realized in
neural activity, then it's a worthwhile enterprise to try to figure out what that relationship is.
Let me just close by saying that I think it's kind of cool to hear somebody point out the irony or
the absurdity of science, you know, neuroscience, which is taking the only thing that we know for
sure, which is our conscious experience, and then using that, based upon that evidence to
create models of things that presumably don't have subjective experience and then try to
eliminate conscious experience from the universe on the basis of these things that were derived
from that. I think that's a very good point. It's ironic and it's really foolish, but it
happens for deep historical reasons, I think. So Evan, you come from a tradition that goes
through, I would say, Merleau-Ponty and Heidegger, through Husserl to Kant and back to Plato's
Allegory of the Cave, something like that. And psychology and neuroscience, the traditions I
come from, well, I would say the traditions started with Wilhelm Wundt in the 1860s and
70s, who started a movement called structuralism, which was introspectionistic and reductionistic.
Unlike anything that it goes to now. It was reductionistic because what blew people's minds
in the 1850s was Mendeleev's periodic table. And they said, oh, okay, well, if there's atoms of
matter that can explain all the complexity of matter, well, maybe there's atoms of mind. Let's
find out what those atoms of the mind are. So it was reductionistic. What are the atoms of the mind?
And it was introspectionistic because he would take a grad student and put an apple there and say,
what are your subjective atoms? And there's a redness and roundness. Good, okay. So this kind
of movement started by Wundt, which is really the first peeling off of psychology from philosophy,
went on for some decades. It had two rejections. One rejection was the American rejection of
Wundt and structuralism, which rejected its introspectionism utterly. And this was John B.
Watson and his followers that are later known as the behaviorists. And they said, it's ridiculous
to have a science that takes unobservable subjective experience seriously. We have to focus on what's
publicly observable and that's behavior. That's behaviorism. Almost simultaneously around 1910
or so, you had a German rejection of Wundt's introspectionistic and reductionistic structuralism.
And that was the Gestalt movement, which rejected the reductionism, but kept the introspectionism,
which so they were both rejections of this, but the German movement almost got wiped out by
Nazism, because the founders, Max Wertheimer and Kafka were Jewish and
Wolfgang Kirle, who wasn't Jewish, they all had to come to America, couldn't get jobs because
it was dominated by behaviorists. So in neuroscience and psychology, what dominated overwhelmingly
was the American emphasis on the publicly observable. But there has been a recent re-invigoration
or rebirth of Gestalt psychology within these traditions. And I think there might even be
a merging in of these Husserlian traditions now, if we could really create a kind of neural
phenomenology that allowed us to manipulate human consciousness in a way that we could report.
And so that we could really understand the neural basis of consciousness. But I think it would
require a new kind of science, namely human neurophysiology.
We have another commentary from a different perspective.
Wonderful. Okay. Shingaroshi will speak tomorrow too.
That was really a very wonderful, rich and inspiring talk. Thank you. And your words about
the horizon reminded me of something that I asked my mother about when I was about seven or eight.
I wanted to know, is there a God? She said, oh, I don't know. I said, no, really, I need to know.
She said, well, here's a piece of paper and a pencil. Let me show you something. She drew a
circle. And she said, everything we can know can be proven by science, by the rational mind,
and it's all in this circle. And I said, but all I care about is what's outside the circle.
To that she had no response. And the other thing I wanted to say is you mentioned
what happens in the awareness of thinking, the awareness of what thoughts are arising during
meditation. And how important that is as we go further in contemplative work to notice thoughts
as they arise, because so often we get hijacked into what we might call a very negative mindset.
And that it's possible to change that right as it's happening. And, you know, in terms of
what we just heard about the needs of this very really crisis-ridden world we're in,
to be able to do that, for each of us to be able to do that and change our minds
again and again is absolutely crucial.
Great. Well, now I'll open to questions from the audience. I just ask you to raise your hand.
I'm going to bring the microphone to you because we have video recording this. Okay.
Hi. So I have a question. So one of the things that I
just find most interesting about the idea of consciousness is all these
ongoing works on machine learning, right? So a lot of these things now cards can drive,
you know, they can respond to you when you speak to your phone. So how do you actually
start to draw the line as to where is this just a machine doing some sort of, you know,
linear fitting or where is it actually conscious? When is it actually making decisions and how
does that really fit into the large, you know, big data area that we live in? How do you start to draw
out the same notions of consciousness and neuropsychology that you're talking about here
into a more technological space? Yeah.
So I think of all of those technological devices and advances, especially,
you know, coming out of computational work as examples of the re-implementation via technology
of the abstraction from concrete lived experience so that the concrete lived experience is then
altered by the technological re-implementation of those scientific idealizations, abstractions,
mathematical models and so on. With regard to consciousness, my own view, I didn't,
you know, I didn't argue for this today, but this would be my view is that,
or let me put it this way, that embodiment lived experience in the sense of embodied situated
experience requires a system that is going to have the kind of individuation or autonomy we
could say that we see in life in living systems and that we have not been able to achieve this
in robotics. It's proved to be an extremely difficult problem and that it may indeed someday
happen that we have systems of that sort, but simply building devices that are able to control
their own operation in certain ways is not sufficient to create a system that is autonomous
in that sense that it individuates itself in relationship to its environment and constantly
things in the world matter for it by because of that ongoing demand of individuation where,
you know, metabolism is the concrete example of that in terms of life. So I, you know, I think
we're far away from that and I think that, you know, that that's actually really necessary for
consciousness in the way that that I think of consciousness. Yeah, this is not something that,
you know, most people who work in AI would agree with. It's very much, there's a sort of line of
work in AI that emphasizes the importance of autonomous agency and the difficulty of building
truly autonomous agents, but autonomy means here what we see clearly in the case of a living organism.
The kind of autonomy that a living organism has is not the kind of autonomy that we see in any
artificial system yet. We may someday though.
I think the thing that excites me most about what has been said here both by
Peter C. and by Evan is the idea of a new kind of science, like something that is,
I don't know what it is, you know. It's something new. It incorporates obviously first person
subjectivity. And one of the things that I feel like has been maybe left out a little bit or I
haven't heard mentioned, the primacy of embodiment, you know, this is, this is the body and consciousness,
awareness, interacting with the body, being placed in different areas of the body. The body
itself adopting different positions, different movements, different experiences arising through
the body. I'm particularly talking about Qigong, but of course there are many other systems that
do the same kind of thing with an incredible amount of detail and power in terms of exploring the
nature of consciousness and the nature of embodiment. And I would see that, you know, very much as one
of the seasonings in the stew or maybe one of the, you know, vegetables, so the meat and potatoes
in that stew. Yeah, I mean, I completely agree with that. I'm a long-term
Tai Chi-Chuan practitioner, so I'm committed to the importance of the embodied perspective in
terms of body practices and what they can tell us about affect and emotion and attention and
intention and awareness. And there's some work in a neuro phenomenological vein that's been done
with some of these kinds of somatic practices. Not a lot, but it's a very interesting and, you
know, fertile area. My wife Rebecca Todd is a neuroscientist, but before she became a neuroscientist
and came over to the dark side, as I like to say, she was a contemporary dance choreographer. So,
and we have another person here who works in dance and neuroscience. So I think that's an extremely
interesting and very fertile area to explore. Yeah.
Thanks a lot for your talk. I was thinking about this model of the horizon and I wondered
if the question that's sort of coming to my mind is whether saying that all consciousness is
horizoned is the same thing as saying that consciousness is not all inclusive or that
it's limited. And if it's not, if it means something more than that, what more does it mean?
So, I mean, one of the things I like about the horizon metaphor is that
it's a structure that goes with you, but of course you move and explore and you open up new
horizons. So, you know, the way that Husserl, for example, thinks of it is that when we, we explore
what he calls the outer and inner horizon of things, we explore how things look from different
perspectives, how they're situated, you know, as figure to ground, how my view of it from here
refers to a possible view that I could have of it from there. And my perception is always a kind
of sensory motor exploration. So, we're constantly, you know, structured by a horizon, but we're also
changing the horizon and opening it up to new vistas. And then Husserl has this wonderful,
wonderful sort of way of saying that the world is the horizon of all horizons. And what he means
by that is that it's not just another horizon, it's the thought that we can think that all
horizons themselves open up into other ones and that at the limit, the horizon of all of that is
really what we think when we think the concept world. And he, in this context, has this marvelous
statement where he says, the world is one, but not in a sense in which it could have been two.
So, the horizon is, the horizon of all horizons is one all encompassing horizon, but not in a sense
in which it could have been, you know, two rather than one. So, I think of the horizon as an open
concept in that way. It's not a limitation. I mean, of course, it is a limitation in one sense,
but it's a limitation that always points beyond itself. And this is the idea in phenomenology
really of transcendence, that consciousness is that which always, in some sense, opens up to
what's beyond itself. Yeah. Let me just make a comment connecting to your image of the circle.
I call it the island of knowledge. So, there is some similarity there. And as a good island of
knowledge, you know, it's surrounded by the ocean of the unknown, the mystery, right? And perhaps
that's the horizon, right? I mean, it's this need that we have to go beyond the known into the
unknown, right? And that's where perhaps this human curiosity and transcendence is all root of that.
Yeah, this reminds me of, you know, way back in college studying philosophy and comparative
religion. One term that stuck with me, and I don't remember from where it came, but transcendental
subjectivity, just so it encompasses both. Yeah, transcendental subjectivity is Herschel's way
of talking about the primacy of lived experience. Yeah, it's that it's not, it's transcendental
because it's the condition of possibility for anything showing up in the way that it does for us,
which means that it's not, as a condition of possibility, it's not just another thing in the
world. It's transcendental. And he talks about this in terms of subjectivity. And then he shifts
eventually into talking about the life world. And some of us would see this as his kind of
grappling with his still being caught in Cartesian ways of thinking that are bound
to a notion of subjectivity, whereas he's shifting into trying to talk about the primacy of the
life world towards his later thought. Yeah.
Thank you. Thanks very much for that. I just wanted to ask you what you thought about the
fact that this term consciousness, I think part of the reason it's problematic is that it's,
it implies a thinness, so that whether we think of it as being either innate or emergent,
there's always this mistake that it's somehow something that is there, a property that things
have rather than this participatory field. And I wonder what you think about the possibilities for
turning towards more like attention or awareness, because there's at least overlap there with
fields like neuroscience, although then there is the problem of whether it's something that is
implicit or not. Yeah. I mean, there's always a problem with Ness words that they can get
reified. They're, you know, they're prone to that. I tend to try to vary the words that I use. So
sometimes I use consciousness. Sometimes I talk about awareness. I don't think attention is
synonymous with either consciousness or awareness. Attention for me is a cognitive function that
has to do with selection. And it's used in a lot of different ways, depending on the cognitive
science context itself, I suppose. So I do use attention when I'm really wanting to refer to
a specific way in which cognition or awareness is modified or modulated so that something is being
oriented towards and selected. That's usually the way the cognitive psychologists talk about it,
I suppose. So, you know, sometimes I talk about lived experience or sometimes I talk about embodied
experience or sometimes I talk about awareness versus the contents of awareness. And, you know,
at the end of the day, they're all words and it sort of depends who you're talking to and what the
conversation is. But I do agree that, you know, we need to be cautious with the words and be sensitive
to the ways that they can, you know, distort what we're trying to talk about. Yeah.
But it might be that attention and consciousness are as close together as can be without being the
same, like a married relationship. Yeah. Where that which we call consciousness is the domain of
everything that we can volitionally attend or are volitionally attending now. And so I would
challenge people, you know, can you can you find something that you are that you can be conscious
of that you cannot volitionally attend at your will or anything that you're volitionally attending
now that you're not conscious of. So that's true. It's like the relationship with an operator to
the upper ends. Yeah. Yeah, I mean, so this is a debate, I would say, in cognitive neuroscience
right now between people who think that there's a kind of phenomenal consciousness or phenomenal
awareness that is awareness or experience apart from any possibility of attentional access to
it and those who say that that's not really a coherent notion and that if it's if it's a
conscious, I mean, of course, you know this, right? If it's a conscious experience, then
there has to be the possibility of attentional access to it. So I mean, I'm inclined to think
to agree with you that when we're talking about awareness, there's got to be the possibility
of some kind of attention where that means some possibility of orienting towards it
and enhancing certain aspects of it for certain aims volitional or intentional. That's that's how
I would be inclined to think of it for sure. Yeah, but it just to be, you know, I guess open-minded
it's contested, right? Certainly within the context of Buddhist, say Abhidharma philosophy,
you know, attention, well, or the word that we translate as attention, which for them has in
that in that context, the sense of orienting towards something before it's even sort of selected
for like scrutiny, that that's what's called a constantly present mental factor. So any moment
of awareness has that factor and a moment of awareness is like a hand and there are the various
fingers that are always there that enable you to kind of cognitively grasp something. So attention
is like one of those fingers that enables you to sort of grasp something. But they but attention,
we wouldn't still reduce awareness to attention. Attention would be a kind of
aspect or component or factor of awareness. Yeah.
The that that particular that particular question
makes me feel like maybe it needs empirical rather than abstract investigation. Now that
may not be true of that specific question, but more generally, if we're dealing with
neuro phenomenology, the thing I love about phenomenology as opposed to most forms of
philosophy is that it includes an empirical practice of actual direct investigation, which,
you know, I think is essential to this whole endeavor. And, you know, I've
I've practiced various forms of meditation, which are definitely that. And I've read a
certain amount about the methods in phenomenology. And I'm continually frustrated at not being able
to find any source of clear descriptions or, you know, training how to cultivate the specific
methods of phenomenology. And so partly I'm asking you for references. Yeah.
I mean, so this is the situation in sort of the canonical phenomenological text, you know, text
by Husserl, text by Sartre, Merleau-Ponty is that you have these very rich descriptions.
And there's no real discussion of, you know, how these descriptions came to be in terms of the,
you know, the volition and the attention of the phenomenologist. You know, there's scattered
things in Husserl and Husserl is a kind of interesting case because his descriptions always
in a way outstrip his theoretical structure. So, you know, he's trying to do things theoretically
and they draw him into, you know, real concrete phenomena of, you know, of importance and interest
like our consciousness of time. And then he starts to investigate it and describe it. And
the descriptions actually outrun his theoretical constructions. Then he has to go back and rework
the theory. And this like his whole life is about this, which I mean is very fertile. That's not
a criticism. But by the same token, there's very little you can find about what exactly
is the attentional skill that's required to generate these kinds of descriptions. And of course in
contemplative traditions, there's obviously much more of that. There are practice communities
and traditions and instructions on, you know, how to do those kinds of things. Yeah. So this is why
the movement in phenomenology today is to try to be enriched by those practices.
Okay, you have one more question. I think there's one back there and Adam also had one too. Okay,
two more, three more questions. So let's make it brief. Very briefly. I'm not sure I understand
at all the idea of lived experience. I'm sitting here thinking, does your idea of consciousness
and so forth and lived experience exclude sudden blinding insights from some sort of beyond
something beyond I've ever lived in my experience?
No, it doesn't exclude that. I think there are countless reports throughout many traditions
of people who report sudden insights that they experience as beyond what beyond exactly means.
That's a whole other question. But experientially, no, I wouldn't I wouldn't dismiss that at all.
Oh, your discussion about the attention made me think a little bit about the unconscious.
Is there is that the main difference between consciousness and unconsciousness just attention
or are there other aspects of unconsciousness that can be applied with this neuro phenomenologic
point of view to try to figure out what's going on? Well, the idea of neuro phenomenology is that
increased stability of attention can facilitate access to aspects of
let's say cognition that would not otherwise be readily accessible. So it's it can maybe
change the threshold of unconscious versus conscious. But of course, from the perspective
of embodiment, you know, most of what we are is not accessible to our, you know, our cognition
or our consciousness, nor should it be wouldn't be a good thing if it were probably.
Are you sure? Oh, sorry. Okay. Okay, our last question.
That's to be really good. No pressure.
Well, I'd like to go back to the subject of the horizon. And you said it was
defined as a phenomenal subject. And you used qualia as the phenomenal content content.
I still would like to delve into why not? Why can't you go past that horizon? Maybe introspectively,
but and then you need to back out of that with the science behind it. Why not?
I'm not quite sure I understood exactly what you're asking. I mean, is it why can't you
go beyond the horizon? Is that the question? Well, I also heard you say that you can create
new horizons. Yeah, I mean, right. So and so you're, but not duality. So creating a single horizon.
And yet there's beyond the circle. So I mean, the horizon again, I would say is,
you know, if I go out and stand, you know, I don't know in the quad, I'm going to have a certain
horizon. But as I move, of course, I get a new horizon as I move. So I don't ever step outside of
having a horizon, but the horizon does change. So the idea is that it's a, it's a structure of the
field of awareness. Let's, let's not talk, let's use the word awareness maybe instead of consciousness.
It's a structure. Awareness has a field structure. There are the particular contents that come and go,
but they are local modulations of the field and the field has this horizontal structure. And I can
change the particular horizon as it were, but I can't ever, as long as there's a field of awareness,
not have a horizon. You can think. Well, inside there's a different kind of horizon, I would say.
Yeah. Yeah. It's, it's an information bubble that we live in, you know, and, and, and there is stuff
outside that information bubble, but you cannot get information from it because there are limitations,
physical limitations, emotional limitations. So I think that's the idea. Yeah.
Okay. So before we go, remember, we have tomorrow at eight o'clock at the White Church here,
there is a meditation session for those who are interested. And then otherwise we'll reconvene
here at nine o'clock for our planetary discussions. Thank you for coming and have a great night.
