There's gentlemen, welcome back to the Uncensored CMO. Now my next guest I've been trying to
land for some time. Scott Galloway is famously controversial and perhaps the most uncensored
guest I've ever had on the show. There are so many things I wanted to ask Scott and I
know people listening have also sent in many questions to put to him as well. He's famous
for his controversial opinions on marketing like he's brand dead for example and also
got lots of advice on life and business and success in general. He's also launching a
new book so I wanted to find out what that was all about and really get his tips for
how to be successful. This episode is raw, it's uncensored and it's full of real life
lessons. You're really going to enjoy this one. Here it is. I've got the man himself
Prof G on the show. Thanks brother, good to be here. Good to have you. Thanks John. I
thought I'll start with something I read that you wrote that it took you 25 years to
have an overnight success. Well sure, so people come up to me now. I got two people stopping
on the way over here. I walked from my place and Kara Swisher, my podcast care host is
constantly saying I made you famous and I joke that it's really rewarding for me to have
really rejuvenated her flailing career. But I would say after working my ass off for 25,
30 years, I'm an overnight success. So it's rewarding but it should have happened earlier
boss. Yeah, right. I mean most people focus on the success. It's easy to, isn't it? Well
of course everyone's heard of you. But what were the most challenging moments or the biggest
failures that led up that moment? Because that's often what people don't talk about.
We're going to need a bigger boat. I started investment banking. I didn't like it. I wasn't
good at it. I was living with my mother at the age of 25. Didn't know what to do with my life.
A lot of my early, I started a lot of businesses. Most have failed. I've had a company go chapter
11. I've been divorced. I've had pretty big personal failings. I've been shot in the
fucking face a couple of times professionally and personally. I think my lowest or my most
terrifying moment was when my first kid came along. It was 2008 and I kept doubling down on
this company and I was always, I never really understood the power of diversification. So I
thought I'm smart. I'm good at what I do. I've always made a lot of money. But I was kept doubling
down on one company, usually my company. And with this company in particular, Red Envelope,
I had borrowed money against my stock to buy more stock. A good company. I thought it was going
to be great. And then 2008 came along. Great financial recession. We had these weird things
happen at the warehouse where we were sending 20,000 gifts for the holidays to the wrong addresses,
which isn't good for business. And then I basically went from like financial security to
less than zero in about three months. And then my kid had the poor judgment to come marching
out of my girlfriend. And I remember just thinking, I remember being in the delivery room and I felt
so nauseous and just so awful. And they said to me, just so you know, if you go down, we're not
focused on you right now. And I remember thinking it's not childbirth that's making me so nauseous.
It's that I've like failed this kid on day one that I don't, if I just been a little smarter,
if I just put some money away and boring things, if I just been a little bit more disciplined,
if I hadn't tried to live so large and impress strange people, I could have just been so much
more mentally healthy and had such less anxiety. So that was a pretty big failure. I've had a lot of,
I've had a lot of, I mean, I just, I can't imagine anybody, anybody here not had a
lot of failure in their life and not tragedy. It's just, you know, you're gonna, if you love
people, you're gonna have grief. If you want to be really successful, you're gonna have failure.
So yeah, I've had my fair share, but I don't, I don't think I've necessarily had more than most
people. But I think one of the keys to success is your ability to endure failure and rejection.
Nothing great professionally or personally is going to happen unless you take an uncomfortable
risk. Unless you're willing to approach strangers, unless you're willing to be persistent, unless
you're willing to invest a lot in relationships, bring forgiveness, occasionally put your ego aside,
endure rejection. And unless you're willing to kind of, I call it the core, my core actually
does not choose my willingness to get out of spoon in each shit. I'm not afraid to call people. I'm
not afraid to ask strangers for money. I'm not afraid to ask strangers to join the company and
work for me. I'm not afraid to ask clients to be client or strange companies to be clients.
But that's such humiliating because most people say no. And so your ability to mourn and move on,
you know, most people really aren't willing to endure the pain of rejection. So they avoid
big opportunities. You know, it's, it's embarrassing to ask strangers for money.
It is. It's embarrassing to call potential clients. It's embarrassing to approach a stranger and
express romantic interest. It's just all this stuff is easier to stay at home and,
you know, try and trade crypto and lose your money and go on Euphorne and pretend you have
friendships on Reddit. It's just, you know, there's a reason romantic comedies are two hours,
not 30 minutes, real victory is enduring challenges and rejections and enjoying yourself. And I
worry that it's a bit of a word salad, but I worry that young people at the hands of the most
talented, deep pocketed organizations in the world are trying to convince them they can have a
reasonable facsimile of life without the risk of leaving their house or engaging with individuals.
But yeah, I've had a lot of, I've had a lot of low moments and the learning there is,
you know, you think you're never going to make money. Again, I've thought that you think that,
okay, I'm not going to be able to take care of my kids. I've thought that I've thought I'm never
going to have like a really wonderful relationship. I've thought that at the time it feels like you
know these things. Like it's just truth. And what you realize is if you keep going, you know,
all those things can and will happen. So I love the saying life isn't about what happens to you,
it's about how you respond to what happens to you. And my superpower is I can get pretty,
I can get punched in the face and I can get back up. That's always been my kind of core confidence.
That was insight and good to great, well great, great by choice, wasn't it? It was not that
anyone has more or less bad luck. It's entirely down to how you respond to the bad times,
response to good times that dictate some performance. Yeah, luck is fairly, if you live
long enough, luck is pretty symmetric. And the flip side is true too. You're never more prone to a
really big, stupid mistake than after you've had a big win. When you pick Nvidia and it goes up 12
fold and you start actually believing you know how to pick stocks. So you double down and you get
really aggressive or you get promoted at work and you start thinking, I'm very good at this.
You know, a lot of your success is not your fault. And so to have some humility when things go
really well, but also to forgive yourself when things don't go well. You know, I think about
49% of what happens to you is your individual actions, but 51% is a function of the environment
and things that are out of your control. So have some humility, but also forgive yourself
when you screw up. I met the England rugby coach a few years ago and he had this fascinating
mantra of be tough in victory and be gentle in defeat. So it was very similar insight actually.
He said, when the team won, he said, that's when I told them what they did wrong. And when they
lost, I told them how good they were. I liked that. I think that's, I think that's a, yeah, yes,
rugby, go rugby. So pivoting to the successes, because good to get onto that, and asking for
a friend on this one, but building your personal brand, you know, you've managed to build quite a
big business out of you, right? How do you scale yourself? You know, because you only got 24 hours
in a day. So how have you turned to sort of Scott Galloway, prof-G brand into a business?
Well, people spend a lot of time, especially in marketing, thinking about how to position their
company and what their company strengths are. And the people you oftentimes don't really
lean into, what is their point of differentiation? What is, you're going to be your strategy? What
are you good at? What is the market value that you're good at? And I figured out fairly early,
it was more genetic, something I inherited from my father. I'm a good storyteller. I have a good
gift to gab. I remember my father, you know, you remember the first times you really registered
emotion and nuance as a kid? I remember my dad's a handsome man with a Scottish accent. And I remember
people just being so enraptured by him. And I remember thinking, but what he's saying makes no
sense. And it's not that interesting. And I recognize, oh, it's the accent, and it's his charm,
and it's his body language. But I figured out early on, it's something I got my father as I,
I'm a good storyteller, I communicate well, I can write well, I do good podcasts, speaking,
I like this kind of stuff. So I leaned into that, I always knew I could make a good living
doing this kind of stuff, writing newsletters, that kind of stuff. But my superpower is my ability
to attract and retain good people. Because I could do one book every three or four years,
make X dollars. I do a book every 18 months, and I make a lot of money. And it's because I have
really outstanding people who help scale what we do. And we have almost zero turnover at PropG.
People think it's me in the kitchen with a camcorder doodling and doing things and like,
you must work eight hours a week. I'm like, no, I work 30 to 40 hours a week. But I have 12 very
smart people who are really committed, who I treat really well. And but yeah, greatness is in the
agency of others. You, you can make a nice living doing something yourself. But if you want to make
an exceptional living, you have to figure out a way to attract and retain good people. That's
kind of the whole shooting match in terms of scale. I like that phrase, greatness is in the agency of
others. Expand that a little bit. What do you mean by that? And how do you achieve that? I got six
things today. I don't even know where I'm going. My chief of staff, Mary Jean, is here. I have
two podcasts today. I have producers putting data in front of me. I've got a publicist
lining up all sorts of stuff for me. I've got lawyers reviewing my investment documents today.
I've got, you know, an editor who will a social media manager who will take clips from this and
other things and put it out there. Now, this is a position of privilege because I now have the
money to do these things. But good managers do a few things. One, they demonstrate excellence.
I'm good at what I do and I work pretty fairly hard. They hold people accountable. I have very
straightforward conversations with people when they're not doing well. And they also demonstrate
empathy. So what I found, one of the ways I matured as a manager was when I was younger,
I thought everyone just wanted what I wanted. I wanted to be rich and awesome. That's all I wanted,
right? I wanted a shit ton of money and for people to think I was awesome.
And so I assumed everybody else wanted the exact same thing. And what you find is
some people value, you know, people value different things. Some people really want to
manage other people. That's really important to them. They want to be a manager. Some people
want their name and lights. They want to be in the newspaper. They want fame. Some people are
totally focused. They're like, I'll work 80 hours a week. I'll give up everything. I'll have no
relationships, shitty health. I just want to make a lot of money. Well, that's fine. But if you take
the time to sort of figure out what people really want, like what's really important to them,
and then they see you trying to deliver against that. Oh, we got a call from the New York Times
that want to quote, I'm going to let you take this because I know how meaningful it is for you to
have some of that public airtime. Oh, you want to manage people? Okay, I'm going to put you in
charge of this group. You just want money? Fine. I expect you to work your ass off and I'm going
to pay you a lot. And that's okay because everyone around you sees you working this hard. It's okay
to pay you more. But loyalty is a function of appreciation. And the fastest way to appreciate
somebody is to figure out what they want and try and show, you can't always deliver against it,
but try and show your cognizant of it. And you're making an effort to deliver against it.
And I've tried to do that as a younger man. I don't think I was a good manager. I think I'm
getting better now. But trying to understand what does this guy really want? Like what's important
to him? And also creating a really nice collegial environment. The number one factor for retention,
people think it's money, it's not. The greatest predictor of retention is whether the person
has a friend at work. And so we were spending about a million bucks on an office space a year,
which made no sense. Ego, big office, check out what a baller I am. And we gave it up in COVID.
And now we don't spend all of that, but we spend most of it on, we have a policy at our company.
If any four of them are together at the same time, they have my credit card. And that is,
either they're going to a Broadway show or Tulum, which they've done. As long as there's more than
four of them, it's on me. And they have fun. And they like each other. Everybody interviews everybody.
They generally seem to get along and enjoy each other. That's not entirely possible when you get
to hundreds of people. But when you have a small company, you can have a group of people that
really enjoy each other. But I find that that's an incredible vehicle for retention. But I can do
this. I can seem like I work much harder because of the other people. Yeah. People always remember
how they feel, don't they? And experiences like that make people feel something, which
brings me, you talked about Daniel Kahneman in a recent episode I was listening to.
What impact has he had on you and how you think about how we behave?
He's had a lot of impact on me. That guy's, it's funny, I have Yoda's. I didn't realize this when
I was younger. You don't need to sort through everything on your own. Find people you really
admire, learn a lot about them, and make them sort of an invisible board of directors. I have a
decent feel for what Muhammad Ali, I got really into Muhammad Ali. I have a decent feel for how
he would approach decisions. I have a decent feel like Madeleine Albright. I took an interest in
her. I have a decent feel for how she would approach decisions. And I got really into Kahneman
around economics. And a few things, one very tactical level. Daniel Kahneman has this thing
called risk aversion theory. And basically, people would rather endure a series of small,
definite, guaranteed losses than the prospect of a big loss. And they overestimate the likelihood
of a big loss. That is the reason that the best business in the history of the West is insurance.
Because they know on average, they'll be, you know, that three of these million houses will be
wiped out by flood. So let's charge them enough that, you know, there's a one on 100 chance.
It's a million dollars to rebuild the house. Let's not charge them 10,000. Let's charge them 30,000.
And the fear of that catastrophic event and wanting to avert the big pain results in people
willing to engage in one of the biggest ripoff in America. And that's insurance. So seven years ago,
this is strange, I canceled all my insurance, including my health insurance. And you think,
oh, you're a bad citizen, right? And let me be clear, I'm not suggesting anyone canceled their
health insurance because I'm privileged, I can afford any health scare. So why would I have
health insurance? And between property, flood, I mean, I used to insure my vacations, health
insurance, health insurance for my family, because I'm a narcissist and I wanted the best insurance
is about $55,000 a year for my company, which is my money because I own the company.
And we found, I found that about half the time we weren't getting reimbursed because we don't
want to go in network, we want to go to the fancy doctors or whatever. And so in seven years,
$375,000 will buy a lot of health care. Now, there's a chance one of us gets really sick and
would cost a million or two million bucks. I can absorb that. So insurance is yet another
transfer of wealth from the poor to the rich, because people who are wealthy can afford to
take these kinds of risks. But Kahneman, that's one example, tactically, I essentially
canceled all my insurance. His other thing is the relationship between money and happiness.
And he's done a lot of work on it. And what he found is that there is a relationship,
we tell ourselves a myth that money can make you happy, that's bullshit, it can make you happy.
Middle income people are happier than lower income, higher income people are happier than
middle income people. That's the bad news. The good news is that it tops out. Once you can afford
housing, vacations, absorb a medical shock, take your appearance, in New York, that's probably
about a million, million bucks a year. But supposedly it's about 90 or 100 grand in most
of America. Once you get to that point and you have a decent amount of savings, the incremental
money adds very little happiness. It does go up slightly, but the returns are diminishing.
And it's changed my policy on tax policy. I don't see any reason why we wouldn't tax,
say over 10 million in income, 70 or 80% because it doesn't seem to be making 10 million a year
and 20 million a year for people blessed like that. It's not going to get you much. Whereas
going from 40 to 60,000 through child tax credits or some sort of negative income tax,
that can create a lot of happiness. So it's changed my views on social policy. He's changed
my views on the way I approach risk. So yeah, he was a great mentor. I like wonky stuff. I like
a Peter Drucker for my own personal life around fear and shaming. I look at Sam Harris. I got
off of Twitter because I'm like, why am I on Twitter? And these people are so mean. These
people ruin my weekend on a regular basis. So why am I here? But yeah, economy influenced a lot
of ways. Actually, one I reread after he sadly passed away was that nothing is as important as you
think it is in the moment. You'll think 100%. And that was so true, isn't it? Is that you obsess
about things? We get angry about things and you don't realize they're not as important as you
thought? Well, slow and fast thinking. I've been thinking a lot about just because this is uncensored.
So I like to go to the really sensitive stuff that gets people angry. I've been thinking about what's
happening at Columbia University and some of the protests on campus. And his seminal book was
thinking slow and fast. And the idea that we have really important instincts to think fast.
Alliance coming at you, you know, to run. Someone's threatening your family. You turn to violence.
You make snap decisions. And that was key for survival. So we have this reptile brain that's
just ready to defend to strike. And there's two keys or two sensations to the survival of the
species. One is that we need to continue to really enjoy sex. I think that's mostly taken care of.
The second is that we need to be able to get pleasure from binding together to fend off a
perceived threat or attack. And I think a lot of young people have a certain amount of rage and
aren't having enough sex. And as a result, try and find common enemies. They go on the hunt for fake,
you know, for fake perpetrators or fake evil. And I just can, I wish these kids would find other
means of finding Dopa hits than thinking some Jewish kid heading out of the library is really
a threat to humanity. Now she's just headed to a manicure boss. So try and figure out,
slow your thinking, find other ways of getting a Dopa hit. And really trying to imagine,
isn't this person most likely just like you trying to get an education,
had no choice in being born Jewish or not Jewish. And you're, you're being so aggressive and so
hateful with your rhetoric and you're intimidating these people. And I can promise as they get older
and their thinking slows down, they're just going to think kind of what the fuck was I thinking?
Why would I be this hostile towards somebody? And, and, and so I think young people deserve
a really wide berth. I'm a big fan of free speech, but at a minimum, I'm like, nothing says like
you're wasting $120,000 of your parents' money, like showing up to a rally to support our murderous
autocracy. And two, I think your grandkids should they ever see this shit. And unfortunately,
young people have a camera following them around, which I think is bad. I think your
grandkids are going to be really embarrassed that you were this unfeeling or weird and seeing this
.2% of the global population is a threat to your wellbeing. I just don't, I don't, I can't grasp
how these kids are not slowing their thinking down and being a little less hostile and being
a little bit more graceful, so to speak. So what role is social media playing? I know you've got
some strong points for you on that. How is that fueling what we're seeing playing out at the moment?
Well, it's speedballs at all because the worst thing that happened probably to society the last
20 years is that Mark Andreessen unwittingly didn't build in micro payments to the first
Netscape Grouse. What do I mean by that? If you had, if you saw a cool article on the Washington
Post or a video clip on Fox, I'm trying to be balanced here that you like, you should be able
to really easily go, yeah, I'll pay three or five cents for that. Instead, they didn't have that
technology, so it all became ad supported. And since 1945 to about 1995, the general consensus
in the marketing community was that sex sells. I'll have some, I'll have someone hot and that'll
get you to want to buy a Buick or wear a Nike's, right? And then we discovered something or the
algorithms discovered that there's something better than sex and it's rage. And if I go on Twitter and
I say mRNA vaccines all to your DNA, I, it's guaranteed that hundreds of comments are going
to come in. You're an idiot. You don't understand the biology. No, Scott is right. And by the way,
I don't believe that. There are a few things I love more than vaccines. Anyone here has a vaccine,
here's my fucking arm. I will get 17 back. I don't even need to know what it is. I love vaccines. I
think they're a gift to humanity. Anyway, but it, anything really hateful or course,
the algorithms elevate because people weigh in and every additional engagement,
every additional comment is another Nissan ad and more shareholder value for the company.
So our most talented people working in the most well-resourced companies have a vested profit
motive in enraging us, dividing us and making our discourse more coarse. And what it has done is
it's taken a population of people who are actually, you know, America's bad, but it's the least bad
place in the world. And it's given young people reasons to be really angry. And some of their
reasons are justified, but 30% let people, less people are speaking to their neighbors.
52% of Democrats are worried, are worried their kid's going to marry a Republican. Like when I
was growing up and we were dating and our name, we didn't even know what political part you wouldn't
even think about talking about this shit on a date or to your neighbors or it was just, everything's
become so coarse. And I think that if America were a horror movie, I think the call is coming
from inside of the house. We don't like each other. And so social media has speedballed that.
It has been a disaster for young people just as it's been really hard on girls, just as they're
coming into their years where they're thinking about social capital and wanting to be liked.
We put them, we basically have the cafeteria following them around 24 by seven. And we're
afraid because of politically correct doctrine to have an honest conversation around the difference
between boys and girls. Because if you talk about the differences, people assume that you're not
sympathetic to non-binary kids. And that's not true. You can have empathy for everyone,
civil rights in her white people, gay marriage in her heteronormative marriage.
But girls and boys, loosely speaking, are different and they're predisposed to different
types of behaviors. Reason I bring it up, boys bully physically and verbally, girls bully relationally.
They wait, they're calculating, they're smart, and then they strike. And we put their,
we put nuclear weapons in their hands in the form of smartphones. And they find someone who's weak
or someone who's pissed them off, they plan, they wait, and then they go after them on social.
And you have seen a dramatic uptick in self-harm and suicide, especially among young girls.
And when, and this happened, this is not an exaggeration. And this has happened a lot.
Fourteen-year-old teenager, teenage girl in the UK, Molly Richards apparently even heard about this,
is really down, really depressed, bullied at school, goes into her room,
you know, starts talking about being bullied, the algorithms pick up on it, and she gets this
exact email. Molly, here are some images on suicide we thought you might find interesting.
And it's a picture of nuisance, a picture of razors, and a picture of pills.
And you know how the story ends, her parents go in the next morning and Molly's gone, right?
Someone needs to go to fucking jail. It's just, how does that, how did we attach a profit motive
to depressing and enraging young people? And I get depressed and upset with social sometimes,
the algorithms that give people incentive to go after each other and be really coarse and really
mean. How does a 14-year-old modulate? There's absolutely no reason to have anyone under the
age of 16 on social media. They have weaponized it, they have lied about it, they've deployed
really charming people, Cheryl Sandberg to pretend she gives a flying fuck about young people,
and then depressed teen girls all over the world, to have an individual named Mark Zuckerberg who's
done more damage to young people while making more money than anyone in the history of the planet.
And then we have a feckless and effective leadership, average age 63, that's a cross
between the walking dead and the golden girls, trying to regulate these technologies, 40 hearings
on social media and impact on kids, zero legislation. Speaker Pelosi, when she had her first child,
Castro declared martial law in Cuba, and two-thirds of households didn't have a color TV,
but she really understands an 18-year-old girl getting extreme dieting tips on Instagram and
what needs to be done. She really understands a 23-year-old male is getting addicted to gambling
apps. So, I think we have minority rule, and I think we're very concerned with seniors and making
sure wealthy people stay wealthy, but I think we've totally abandoned young people. And the fastest
way to build a trillion-dollar company is to find a flaw in the species. So, young men are more
risk aggressive, they like gambling. Oh, girls are very sensitive about their social capital,
so they become addicted to aesthetics and kind of their self-worth in the eyes of strangers.
Think about what a place of perversion. I mean, downright perversion Instagram begins with.
We're going to have algorithms that reward 15-year-old girls for posing in provocative,
sexualized imagery such that her peers and strange men all over the world can evaluate her.
Doesn't that make the Catholic Church seem kind of upstanding? It's just like,
this shit is just so weird and so perverted. And I think when we look back on this age,
we're going to regret the weaponization of our elections, the coarsening of our discourse,
the income inequality. But I think the thing we just won't believe, and I think it will change,
is we're going to ask ourselves, how do we let this happen to our kids? And I think a lot of it
is because our elected representatives don't understand these technologies. These companies
are very smart. They weaponize Washington. There's more lobbyists, full-time lobbyists
in Washington who work full-time for Amazon than there are sitting U.S. senators. And they're
very good at deploying these attract. It's already happening. Sam Altman,
God, he's dreamy and thoughtful, hushed tones. I'm worried about AI, John. We really need to
be thoughtful about this. And I'll care like I give a flying fuck about anything but money.
And then I'll deploy a series of lobbyists to kill any legislation. We're being sandburged again.
And it's our fault. In America, to be rich is to be loved. So you can understand people making
incremental bad decisions or rationalizations so they can have billions of dollars and be
superstars. I'd like to be, you know, that would be amazing. But we don't vote in place people who
protect our children or have the skills to regulate these companies. There's more regulation
in this mic than there is in all of big tech. There's been no regulation in big tech, which
is just strange when you think about it. So I'm very worried about young people. I'm worried that
we haven't paid any attention to the externalities of social media. Fossil fuels are a great thing.
They produce carbon. We're concerned about it. Pesticides are a great thing. They produce
terrible emissions. So we have an FDA to say you can't use these pesticides, right?
What regulation is there converting attention to money at the expense of mostly children in
the mental health of America? So, anyways, big tech has not been good. Big tech has speedballed
a lot of the negative aspects of our society. It's too embedded, isn't it, really? With too much
vested interest in the economy. I wanted to move on, if I can, to marketing and obviously your role
clinical professor of marketing at NYU Stern. I heard this story. I just want to check that it
was true. But did you kick out a student for being late? And then your response to it went viral?
Yeah, that was my first brush with fame. Yeah. Tell me about that. That sounds exciting.
What reasons to get famous? No, a kid walked into the class about 15 minutes in
and I said, I'm sorry, I don't allow people late in the class. And it was an uncomfortable moment.
And then he walked out and then he wrote me a diatribe saying I was checking all the classes.
I was auditing the classes. I was going to be in your class for five minutes and go to another one.
And I said, okay, I get that, but I don't allow that. And I just wrote a response on my,
I xed out his names with people and I said, this is in my next syllabus. I said,
this is my late policy. And it got picked up by the media. And, you know, I had to go back and read
and make sure to see what I wrote. But yeah, that was my, you know, I say to young people,
get the easy stuff right. This is, I screwed up so much. I was late all the time. Work my ass off.
And then I'd be late to a meeting. I mean, get the easy stuff right. You know, show up, dress well.
Anyone can dress well. Get your sister a gay man. That's a hate crime now to say that the gay men
have better tastes than straight men. They do get, get your mom straight men have some something
is wrong in their brain around fashion. Literally, they're like, Oh, this Nick's tank top and a baseball
cap on backwards. I'm killing it. Right. Find somebody who has better taste than you to dress,
especially when you're young, show up on time. Don't speak your first six months of the job.
Just listen, there's just basics, you know, shower, like young men aren't showering.
Right. Just some basics, right. Get the easy stuff right. And I speak from experience. I used to
work so hard and I would get the easy stuff wrong. I wouldn't be kind sometimes, right?
Say stupid shit or, you know, I just get the easy stuff right. And I think there's some basic
blocking and tackling the young, have manners, follow up, you know, just basics. So many young
people don't, don't make the mistake of thinking anyone cares about your politics at work. That's
the one I hate. You know, people will nod and call you a leader for complaining and then memo to
self, next layoff, you're out of here. So get the basics, get the simple stuff right.
And you've taught a lot of marketing to MBAs. What would you say is the most important skill
for a marketer today that you might see lacking at the moment? It's the most important. If I could
give my kids any skill, we'd be storytelling. The ability to take a concept, a narrative,
and communicate it in a compelling way across mediums. Learn how to write, learn how to present,
learn how to get up in front of it. I'm not suggesting you need to be a great presenter,
you got to be able to present. So it can be very uncomfortable for people to modulate,
try and get to average, learn how to write, learn how to, you know, text. Some people give great
text, you know, those people are like, they can just in eight words summarize the situation and
they're funny, find the medium you are great at, it might be something on social, you might find
your grade on LinkedIn that you could post. I am really good in front of large crowds. I'm not
good one-on-one. If these people were here, you would find me intense yet aloof, right, or insecure
yet aloof. So I very rarely go to meetings alone. I like to have a foil there. I'm not good on the
phone. So I don't do important stuff on the phone. So it's important to figure out where is your
strength. But storytelling is the key. The animals have instincts. They can communicate live, but
they're not able to communicate to broader parts of the species. So they haven't evolved nearly as
fast as us. We can write pictures on cave walls and say, this is when you plant the crops. I can
communicate to you around how to get somewhere more efficiently, more effectively. So storytelling
and an ability to communicate is something that's really valued in the species. That's why Mick
Jagger gets to hang out with a 30-year-old ballerina, because he is an outstanding storyteller.
So if you can communicate something in a compelling way to somebody, you can only make a good living.
You're going to have friends. You're going to have a broader selection set of mates than you
deserve. So I don't know if it's... I remember 10 years ago, they were teaching Mandarin in high...
Anyone using the Mandarin lately? When I went to... I took computer science in college. I think one
of the stupidest things we did was replace civics class with computer science in high school. I
don't know if we're going to use many programmers. We'll always need storytellers. We'll always need
people who really understand how to communicate across different mediums. I think that's the
key. Yeah, it makes a lot of sense. Now, I put out a few questions to the audience to say. If you're
asking Scott one question, there was one question that overwhelmingly came back from everybody.
So you're in Cannes, in front of probably the world's most celebrated brand builders,
and you said, the era of brand is dead. What's the thought behind that?
Well, if you think about traditional brand building, from 1945 to kind of 1995 until the
introduction of Google, the primary algorithm for creating shareholder value was have a mediocre
product, a mediocre shoe, salty snack, car out of Detroit, and then sugary drink, and then wrap
it in these amazing brand codes, youth, European elegance, American vigor, sex, paternal love,
maternal love. We'll take 20 cents a tooth of peanut butter paste and turn it into $2
of maternal love because choosing moms choose Jeff. And then we had these incredibly inexpensive
vehicles of communication called broadcast medium, where 60 to 80% of the households every night
were in one of three places, ABC, NBC, or CBS. So take that shitty car, convince it you're tough
like a rock, and stuff the channel with it and print money, the Coca-Cola. You can dance like
Michael Jackson or was that Pepsi? Oh, I drink Budweiser because aren't those frogs funny.
And this was the primary means of creating irrational returns to shareholders. And then
the ecosystem got so crowded with channels that the returns went way down. And also,
your social graph and word of mouth and glass door said, okay, and I'll use Xemba hotels. I travel
a lot. I've spent probably 56% of my life on the road. And I always used to stay at the four seasons
or the Mandarin Oriental. Why? Because someone else was paying, and they always deliver a seven or
an eight. And when I'm in Istanbul, I don't know where to stay. But now with my social graph and
TripAdvisor and Google, I know that the solo house in Istanbul is the old American embassy,
and it's great. Whereas the Chilton Firehouse in London has the best room with a lot of hot
young people who I like to hang out with. So the brand used to be this weapon of diligence.
It was always a seven or an eight four seasons or the Mandarin Oriental. But now I can find the
nine for me with these new weapons of mass diligence called Google TripAdvisor. So quite
frankly, the brand has diminished in power and it sounds very passé, but product is the new
black again. If you have a truly better product, people will talk about it online and word will
get out. So a lot of the capital has been taken out of marketing and has been reinvested in things
like supply chain. Can I get you something within 48 hours for free? Can I produce programming for
less than money that's really good, squid games, parasite, money heist, and just, you know, what
are the companies that have added over $100 billion in value in the last decade have a common?
They don't advertise. How much advertising does Netflix, Google, you know, open AI?
What about Amazon? Because I mean, your Bezos quote of advertising is a tax on the poor products.
Yeah. And now Amazon are probably the one of the biggest advertisers in the world and one of the
most invested in storytelling actually about your storytelling point. I think they take a lot more
money in advertising than they put out. They're in one of their biggest groups is Amazon Media
Group where they advertise on their site. I don't see them actually as a percentage of their
top line income. I can't think of the last Amazon commercial I saw. They buy a lot of keywords,
but I think that they, all the big players don't spend that much. I think advertising kind of out
to you is not getting it. And I think this is true of that. If you're having dinner with strangers
all the time, it means you're selling an undifferentiated product. I was in the services
business and my life, when I really distilled, how do I make a living? I started a strategy
for when I was 26. I started an analytics business intelligence company when I was 40.
And I thought my life is renting my brain to old white guys. That's what I did. I developed these
proxy father-son relationships with the CMO of a big company. And I said, I'm smarter than you.
I'm going to wrench you my brain and I'm going to make you the CEO in three years or less. In
exchange for this, you're going to give me million to $2 million yearly consulting gigs so I can pay
all these other people and make a lot more money than if I was just selling my own time.
And I found it just exhausting. And what I say to people is if you're constantly having dinner
with strangers, it means you're selling an undifferentiated product. Google was a 10x better
product. Tesla is a better product even though I'm not a big fan of the owner. So all this money
has been taken out of branding, traditional branding, gone into direct response, Facebook and Google
and into the product itself. Nobody invested in supply chain. Amazon came along and said,
no, supply chain is the opportunity. And they made a staggering investment to get you anything
you want within 48 hours for free. No one was thinking that way. Everyone else was just trying
to lower the cost in supply chain. Netflix is supply chain producing stuff in different markets.
Nvidia is supply chain. They said we're going to design the chip, but we're not going to invest
in these factories. Xi'en, which is the fastest growing apparel company in the world, no stores,
no warehouses, no factories, no trucks, no stores, software using AI to look at the 50,000 to 500,000
people that are on the site at any given time, tracking very closely their patterns and movements.
And they go, okay, this top, we're going to need 1700 of them. And then the software goes,
what factory in the Philippines or in Vietnam can create 1700 most efficiently? The order goes in,
no humans. Order comes out, no humans. This is how we're getting it via air cargo,
to those addresses, no humans, all software, asset light, asset light supply chain model.
Anyways, it really is an air of product and innovation again. And so the CMOs and marketers,
we all love to be nostalgic and say, oh, advertising's coming back and we give each other
awards every day. There's less and less oxygen in the room. So if you're over the age of 40 and
you're traditional branding, write it out. If you're young and you can get out, get out. It's
an industry and structural decline. When I was young, I ran a brand strategy firm,
the players were IPG, Puberty, Omnicom, they were the masters of the world.
Google and or Meta will lose the value, all three of those companies in any one trading day or
loser gain it. So the sun has passed midday on traditional brand. Don Trapper has been drawn
and quartered. This notion you can have a mediocre product and instill it with great emotion and
just sell a lot of it. That's done. That's over. So I want us to come on to talk about your new
book, which comes out tomorrow. So we're calling this on Tuesday, it comes out tomorrow. I want to
start with the Marcus Aurelius quote, if I can, which I thought was fascinating. You have power
of your mind, not events, which I thought was a fascinating place to start. Yeah, life is about
what happens to you. No, sorry, life isn't about what happens to you. It's about how you respond
to what happens to you. That's it. It's the key, isn't it? Yeah. Well, not only that, I struggle
with anger and depression. That probably goes, is no surprise to any listeners or anyone who knows
me. And you're in the past, depression is basically a depression for me is in the past. I'll think
about this pod and I'll think about the one or two places I screwed up and I'll get angry and upset
and I won't be able to let it go. I don't forgive myself. And the past is the most immutable thing
ever. There's literally nothing you can do about it. Literally, and I can prove this,
nothing we can do about it. But if you're successful and I'm also successful, you're
constantly in the future, right? You're thinking about, okay, I'm going on, I'm name dropping
right now because I'm desperate for your affirmation. I'm going on, I'm going on Bill Maron
Friday and the shit going on at Columbia. I know he's going to want to talk about it. So
already tonight, I'm like, I'm going to text Jonathan Greenblatt, Jeffrey Sonnenfeld, and I'm
going to ask for their thoughts on it so I can parrot it and sound smarter than I am. I'm already
really thinking, I'm kind of, I'm mostly here because I like you and I like your hair, but I'm
mostly here, but I'm in the future. And that's the fear. The fear is that you get to the end of
your life. And if you're an atheist like I am, and I think that at some point I'll look into my
son's eyes and know our life, you know, our relationships coming to an end, I believe that.
You're like, okay, I was so much in the past, not forgiving myself. I was so much in the future
because I wanted to be successful, but I was really never there. Like, did your life really
happen? That's the fear, right? Were you never really there? So, you know, life, what I would,
if I could give myself anything or give young people something, it's like, okay, forgive yourself
when things aren't going well, recognize your life is how you respond to shit. When you're really
upset, it's usually not about what happened to you. It's about whatever chemicals are running
through your brain at that point. And just to ease up on yourself, forgive yourself, be nice,
be good to yourself. And also occasionally, try and just slow down. I think that's really the
gift of kids is they force you to be in the moment because they can be so disagreeable.
But what is it that can put you in the moment? Like, what can like, just slow you down? I wish
like presence, which is sort of, I think, and just recognizing you can control your emotions,
you can't control what happens to you. There's just so much of this, it's just so random.
That's huge, isn't it? Another thing that struck me in the book actually was the
impacts of compounding, which I mean, I've learned doing this podcast, it's been insane,
like the, you know, when you repeat something, you learn from it and repeat it again,
and keep at it over time. What you achieved this year compared to five years ago is just
astonishingly different. Yeah, look, the power of compound interest, if people had,
if you had decided to get a shitty Android phone, which I realize is not appealing,
right? Having an Android phone is sort of saying to the world, your life really hasn't
panned out the way you'd hoped. But if you had taken all the money we spend on iPhones,
I bought every iPhone. I buy every iPhone, automatic on the list. It cost, I think the
first one was 1500 bucks, last one was 2400. Someone did an analysis and said,
if you got in a free phone, you can get a free phone. If you got in a free phone and you take
all the money you had invested in Apple phones and you bought Apple stock,
you'd have $3 million right now. Wow. Because obviously Apple's gone insane, right? But what
you don't realize as a young person is, how old are you, young man? 26. Okay, when I was his age,
I could not imagine the flaw, one of the flaws in our species is that because we haven't lived
beyond 35 for 98% of our time on this planet, we can't calibrate time. So you're going to be around
probably, actually, you're probably going to be around another 80 years, which means if you save
$100 a month or let's call it $300 a month, which is boring, right? Because you're expecting to be
a baller and have them promote you and sell a podcast for a lot of money. But just in case you
don't, if you manage to get $300 a month into SPY, low-cost index funds, and you didn't look at it
for 50 years, not in 50 years, 30 years, you're going to have millions of dollars and hope this
shit goes big, right? Hope you are a great DJ. Hope you sell the next big great novel. But just
in case, if you can figure out a way to automatically save $300, so you never see it
a month at the age of 26, I can guarantee you by the time you're my age, I think I'm older than you,
you'll be a millionaire. So just in case shit doesn't work out, and I didn't have that maturity,
I remember telling my friend when I was 24, he was putting $2,000 in this stupid lame thing
called an IRA Roth. I'm like, if $2,000 means anything to me when I'm older, shoot me. And
he's made a fraction of the money I've made, but he's a multimillionaire because he was that lame
guy putting away money every month. It is amazing. 11% a year, which is what the S&P has done since
2008, sounds really uninspiring. 11% a year, it's nothing. Big deal. That means every 21 years,
your investment's going up eight-fold. So as I say in the book, the good news is,
I know how to get you rich. The bad news is the answer is slowly. But you want to lean
into your advantage. Your advantage is time. So if you just have a little bit of discipline,
one less Starbucks a day, round up on acorns, get away to have forced savings so it comes
out of your check and you never see it. Go into low-cost index funds. Don't believe anyone on
CNBC, alternative investments, hedge funds, people who claim they know more. No one knows.
My summary of the entire financial services community haven't been in economics.
I'm around the brightest people in finance. No one has any fucking idea.
That's the bad news. The good news is, the markets in America over the long-term are up
into the right. So you don't need to be a hero. Just save a little bit of money,
play into your strength. You're going to have a lot of time on this planet. A little bit of
discipline, a tiny bit of sacrifice. Always save. Never look at it. Don't think about it.
Don't day trade. Don't get near crypto. Jesus Christ. And try and live a little bit like a
stoic, recognize that people aren't as concerned with your shit as you are. Get a Hyundai. If you
ever want to get a car, before you own a home, live in a very small, clean place near work,
double down on work. Be the guy that doesn't stay at the club and doesn't feel a need to signal with
a bottle of gray goose. Go home. Have a plan. By the way, that's really attractive to women,
actually having a plan. And you're going to end up at a stage in your life where flexibility
and economic importance are really important. And also, that notion of compound interest,
it goes for relationships too. Most people when asked what the single relationship in their life
is, they almost say, always it's their mother. Even if you don't like your mom,
even if you don't get along with her, it's usually the singular relationship in your life,
if you have to identify one. And it's because of compound interest. Every day,
she'd made dozens of these little investments. My mom used to wake me up with a soft voice,
like Scott, right? Totally concerned with my well-being, teaching me how to drive, all this
shit, right? My dad wasn't around. You wake up, or she wakes up 30, 40 years later, and that
relationship is singular. She's a millionaire in my eyes, right? She's been gone for a while, but
like the wealth she accreted, making tiny investments every day. And so when you're young,
and I didn't do this, a little act of kindness, checking in on people, texting people,
you hear about a job opportunity, and you think of a friend, and you reach out to them,
you tell people, someone you admire them, you hear they're down, whatever it is,
just tiny little investments when you're young. I made some of those, and now those friendships
are just so big, right? So I think compound interest, most people acknowledge it in finance,
but they don't appreciate is how much little investments and relationships can pay off
as you get older. I mean, the friends I had in college where we made little investments with
each other are just these wonderful relationships now, because of that compounding of little things
we did for each other. Yeah. And to about the compound relationship point, that's really true,
because I think I found as my network has grown, good things just come, doesn't it? Because you
multiply the number of people you reach, and opportunities get created, and knowledge gets
shed is very impressive. It's a great point, because, and this is in the book, the difference
between being economically secure and the people who are really wealthy is there's a myth, and the
myth is kind of the Bernie Sanders, Elizabeth Warren trope that rich people, billionaires,
crawled over other people to get wealthy. And what I found in the research is that actually
wealthy people are generally speaking really good people, because what you want is you want to be
put in a room of opportunities without being in that room. And in order to be really wealthy,
you have to collect allies along the way. You have to have people that think of you
with opportunities, give you the benefit of the doubt. You also, wealth is a kind of what I call
a full person project. And that is the fastest way to steal or to grasp or snatch financial
insecurity from financial security is personal failings, the lack of character, a divorce,
which I have been through. I lost 60% of my net worth overnight. You split your assets, and then
you lose another 10% because you're supporting two households, and you become a four seller of
assets, which is never a good idea. And also, it showed me a smaller and medium sized company
that's doing really well, and that all of a sudden kind of folds. I'll show you people at the top
who are professionally divorcing. They're not getting along. So unless you're willing to bring
generosity, forgiveness, empathy to your personal and your professional relationships,
I don't think you're ever going to be that wealthy. I mean, some people are so fucking talented.
Kanye can do whatever he wants. He's going to be fine. Assume you are not Kanye.
You want to bring, generally speaking, the millionaire next door is someone who values
his personal relationships or her personal relationships, is a good person, and people
want this person to win. So character really is the most important part of being wealthy
are things you can't control. When and where you're born. Being born in the 60s California,
white heterosexual male gave me unfair advantage. But the things you can control, saving, compounding,
focusing on your talent, and being a high character person, being a generous person,
if you don't bring generosity and forgiveness to relationships, I think it's going to be very
difficult to be wealthy because you're going to end up with personal and professional divorce from
key relationships. Thank you. What I'd love to do actually is bring some questions in at this
point. So I think we're getting to the PowerPoint. Shall I start?
Yeah.
It just keeps going because they're not changing their approach. Yeah.
In this come to Jesus moment that I hope to God is going to happen,
how do we manage the fact that really this tech and social money took over from,
you know, the kind of dying off of industrialization in America. We need the money.
The tech people are the people who are supporting the people running for office. That's why
nothing ever happens. Like what has to break for us to get there?
So first off, I think big tech and their leadership are culpable, but the culprits are
Congress and Senate and to a greater extent us. If we don't elect people that hold these
companies accountable, we've had 40 hearings on social media and danger to kids. We've passed
zero legislation, right? So like SNAP got grief for their solar system where basically you got
to see where you were in importance to a friend and it ended up really upsetting kids. Like,
wait, this person doesn't care about me. I'm not even in their inner orbit.
And I would imagine that people at SNAP didn't see that happening, but when it happened,
you canceled it. Most social media CEOs do not do that. They're like, unless it's outlawed,
why would I put myself and my shareholders at a disadvantage when it's not law?
So here's the bottom line. I generally believe nothing gets better until someone does a perp walk
because we can't come up with fines big enough. They have so many lawyers.
They have an ability to reduce these fines. Facebook is violating a consent decree lying
to Congress. They'll find $5 billion, $5 billion. It's nine weeks of cash flow.
So if I put a parking meter in front of your house that costs $100 every 15 minutes,
but the ticket was $100, I'm sorry, but the ticket was 25, the meter costs $100 every 15
minutes, but the ticket was 25 cents, you'd break the law. You would just break the law.
And the incentives, there's no algebra of deterrence. Then no one goes to jail.
They thine serve. It's like a nat hitting a windshield. They make so much money.
So until everyone has to be off their phone under the age of 16, until every social media
company is subject to liability and someone can go to jail if they send out suicidal ideation emails,
until everyone is subject to these penalties, to wait for their better angels to show up.
Just don't hold your breath, folks. America becomes more like itself every day.
To be rich in America is to be loved, to be able to take care of your kids, your parents,
to have a broader selection set of mates. That is really appealing. So you will make incremental
decisions that might have a really negative impact on the Commonwealth unless you are regulated.
Ford would still be pouring mercury into the river if it wasn't outlawed, because if they
weren't pouring mercury into the river, General Motors and Chrysler would have a cost advantage
when they continued to do it. So the people really failing are us, until we hold these
companies accountable, until we pass laws that say, you realize, Newscore, Fox, they get $800
million for distributing and spreading false information about Dominion voting machines.
That was a dumpster fire compared to the nuclear mushroom cloud of misinformation on Dominion
that happened on META. But META passed this legislation that inoculates them from any
liability. That makes no sense. So remove 230 elect people who are going to pass laws to hold
these companies to the same level of accountability. We hold any other industry. So I think it's up to
voters and our leadership to do what we've done in every industry and say, okay, if you knew that
not putting airbags in this car and a steering shaft that doesn't collapse and windshields that
are not shatterproof and people start dying everywhere, they get to sue you. You can't even
do that with social media. They can't be sued. They have liability shields. There's almost
nothing you can do to them. So I see us as at fault. I think we've got to put in place
people who understand these technologies, can regulate them, and I think we need to restore
the algebra deterrence. Thank you for the question. Hello. Hi, Rob. What does the agency of the future
look like if someone is young and creative and would normally go into advertising, marketing,
whatever? What would they go into in the future if that's not necessarily what you see is going to
be the case? I think there's going to be a lot of services needed. I'd see agencies evolving to more,
I think for lack of a better term, supply chain and innovation and storytelling across new mediums,
really helping companies work through issues around AI. I think there's going to be a ton of help,
a ton of demand for smart people who offer outsourced service. The great thing I used to pitch
consulting, right? I was in your business. I started a brand, started a firm. I was like,
you can fire me more easily than you can fire an employee and you're not sure of this brand
and you buy into it or not, but give it a test, hire us for a year, ring fence your investment
to half a million bucks. If it doesn't work, you don't have an entire department to lay off, right?
Companies trying to figure out AI, companies trying to figure out storytelling on all these new
mediums. I would imagine there's a lot of niche opportunities. It's just that a great business
model was to come in with really attractive, compelling people to tell a story and then convince
you to spend more and more on broadcasts so they could take eight to 12%. That was a really
compelling business model and I feel like a lot of the agency world is still clinging to that model
and I don't think it works. I think I would, a business model, I would suggest retainers.
We're smart people. We'll answer your two or three biggest problems around brand or media and
you're going to pay us 50, 100, 200 grand a month and we're just going to be your department, but
you're not going to have to pay us health care. We're easy to fire. You can swap us out in two
years when we run out of ideas. We're not politically weaponized. We don't know what the PEP projects
are here and I think that a lot of companies are going to want to outsource a lot of this,
but I think there's a, I think there's so much insecurity around there, around branding,
storytelling, innovation, AI, supply chain that I think it's going to be a great time to be in
the services business, you know, and then also people who are great, hire young people or great
athletes. The great thing about the services business is it's incredibly, it's an incredible
training. You have to be a great athlete. You have to be good with clients. You have to know
how to manage your business. You have to be able to attract and retain people. The bad news is,
I've always thought of it, unless you absolutely love it, it's a young person's game. It took a
huge toll on me. It was roaming the planet. It took a huge, oh, you know, Samsung call. The CMO
wants you at the board meeting and it's sold tomorrow. Can you be there? Sure I can. I mean,
just ting, ting, ting. Being in the services business, I think it's a great training. I think
it's a difficult way to have sustainable relationships. I don't know if you found that,
you don't need to tell me, but I think it's a great time to be in the services business.
I just think it's going to be a difficult time if you're banking on traditional media
and also just very crudely. As far as media, your return on your human and financial capital
will be inversely correlated to the screen that you're servicing. So you want to be in the business
of creating media for a 50 meter screen called a movie theater. You better have rich parents.
It's that business. All this majestic nostalgia around movies are back and barbenheimer.
Movie receipts are off 20% from 2019 this year. They were up 20% this year.
They're down 20% from 2019. I mean, I go to the movies because I have kids,
but I used to go to the movies twice a week. I used to see movies four or five times when I was
a kid. I saw the empire strikes back seven times and that was normal behavior. That is no longer
the way the content in your home is so amazing now. Next smaller screen, your TV, big business,
growing a little bit on the whole, but tough, getting tougher. This thing, you can tell stories
on this thing, champagne and cocaine. So whenever I hear a kid talking about creative or media, I'm
like, what size screen are you producing content for? And if you want to be in the movie business,
oh my gosh, that is a tough, tough business. When I meet movie producers, I'm like, oh,
your spouse is rich, right? It's true. Or they're like amazingly talented, like crazy,
freakishly talented, right? And when I tell young people is, serve for the waves are easy.
Go to an industry that has an employment rate of more than 90%. I wanted to be an athlete and I
quickly, when I went to UCLA, I realized I was not in the 0.1%. So it was a blessing to be living
with exceptional athletes and realize that I was mediocre at it. But here's the thing, in brand
strategy, consulting or analytics, you just need to be good, not even great, just be good and you
can make a great living. So going into an industry that I also think another, another graph I have
at this last day of my class at Stern, I have a graph, the correlation between the return on
your investment in your career is, it's inversely correlated to how sexy the industry is.
You want to open a member's only club for artists and fashion industry? Oh my God,
that sounds awesome. Expect to lose a lot of money. You want to be in food, fashion, the arts,
anything that sounds remotely cool. It's over invested, which drives down returns.
You want to build a software scheduling platform for healthcare maintenance workers? Jesus Christ,
that sounds awful. Ka-ching. Ka-ching. The most boring, non-romantic businesses
offer the greatest return on invested capital. So if you want to go into a sexy industry,
just be clear, you better be in the top 1%. SAG-AFTRA. It's not easy to get a SAG-AFTRA card.
This is the union for actors and actresses. I guess they call them all actors now.
180,000 are the most talented people in the world. Hard to get that card.
87% will qualify for health insurance because they make less than $23,000 a year.
You really want to be in that industry? You really want to be in that industry?
I went to UCLA with the best athletes in the world, went to the Olympics,
played professional baseball, professional basketball. Reggie Miller and Troy Ackman made a
shit ton of money. Those were my classmates I'm aging myself. Everyone else was calling me at
27 looking for a job. They went to the Olympics. They got a bronze medal. Great, great experience.
There's no money in it. There's sex here in industry. And by something super sexy on a big
screen, you're fucked. So ROI inversely correlated to the size of the screen and how sexy an industry
is. So if you're going to be an advertising your own agency, service the just worst-sounding
industries in the world, be like the agency for plumbing supplies or something.
Hi, Jasmine Ferrera, JP Morgan, which I'm laughing as I say if you're a financial
comments, but I totally agree. Right now, I'm going back to the social media thing because
it's just with the listeners, it's just such a hot topic. We know it's not right today,
but what can we as marketers do today to get it right without the regulation in place?
Oh, I don't know. I'm not sure.
Try and reward platforms to be hit, but it's so hard because
you're a marketer. I can't stand Metta. I advertise on Metta. I have an online education company.
I choose me over, I mean, it's very hard. You'd be doing your clients a disservice if you decided,
Alphabet radicalizes young men or Metta is depressing young teens. So we don't advertise
for our clients. You'd be doing our clients a disservice because these are monopolies
and they kind of control the ecosystem. So I don't know. I think I was asked this question.
I presented to Elliot a few days ago, which is one of the largest hedge funds.
The only people who pay my speaking fees now are these large hedge funds. By the way,
I speak at JPMorgan all the time. Look, I think the best thing that JPMorgan can do
or a big successful financial services firm is to stop what I'll call certification-based
hiring. What do I mean by that? Try and allocate 10, 20, 30% of the professional track positions in
your department to kids who you develop a what I'll call a skills-based assessment as opposed
to a certification-based assessment. And that is we fetishize kids from elite universities.
And at Morgan Stanley, and I imagine JPMorgan, it's very hard to get past security unless you
went to an elite college for a professional track job. And the problem is when you decide you're
only going to hire people from elite universities, you're never going to hire a single mother.
You're going to hire very few Latinas. And there's some really good kids out there that just aren't
cut out for college. Only one third of kids get a traditional college degree. So I'm wearing
with a hedge fund right now to come up with a skills-based assessment. And they just hired their
first non, they've hired a woman who was a high school dropout that's like a math wiss. And they
gave her a test and she has great critical thinking. You know, took the GSE or whatever
you call it, she dropped out of high school. She had an addiction problem, but she's very,
very smart and they think it's going to work out. So 10, 20, 30, 50 percent of jobs try and go through
the effort of finding someone who maybe doesn't have an elite college degree who could potentially
be successful. Because I worry that me and my colleagues are creating a new caste system
where the small number of people who graduate from elite colleges who are one of two things.
They either have rich parents or they're freakishly remarkable at the age of 17.
I mean, I don't know about any of you. I was not freakishly remarkable at 17. But UCLA had a 76
percent admissions rate. This year's going to be nine. And so, and the tale that wags the dog
for colleges is recruiters. So I think that JPM Oregon, a company that's as powerful as JPM Oregon,
if they decide they say we're moving to a skills-based assessments as opposed to a
certification-based assessment, and we're going to try to make sure we hire from a lot of what
I'll call the non-name brand schools and figure out a way to identify the best kids at those schools.
I think that's the best way for an organization like JPM Oregon, much less the marketing department,
to kind of move society forward. Me and my colleagues, every morning we wake up and we look
in the mirror and we ask ourselves the same question, how do I increase my compensation
while reducing my accountability? And the way we have figured out
how we can do that is by LVMHing colleges. Harvard has grown its endowment 5,000 percent
in the last 40 years. It's increased its freshman class 4 percent. So we have these incendiary
arguments over how many non-whites we let in or how many gay kids we let in. It's a total
misdirect. It's not who we let in. The question should be how many, right? We should be letting
in more trans kids, more non-white kids, more white kids from Appalachia, more conservative kids.
We just need more. But until we get to that point, I think the big corporations that are
amazing platforms, like someone gets a job at JPM Oregon. I have this conversation all the time.
They come into my office and they'll say, I got a job at JPM Oregon, but I really want to start
my own company. I'm like, don't be fucking stupid. Go to JPM Oregon. These big companies,
the American corporation is the greatest wealth builder in the history of mankind.
They're huge platforms. They'll have that mold removed. They'll figure out for you,
wait to save money. They care about you. You can totally fuck up and they'll forgive you.
They will invest for you. They are just amazing. You got to put up a lot of bullshit, right?
People less smart than you will get promoted. You'll get an email from someone will tell you
there's a new policy and you won't even know why or who decided and you have to comply with it.
But if you can put up with that and you're patient, you can get wealthy slowly. They'll
invest in you. They're nice people. They try to be civic minded. They try to comply with the law
and they try not to discriminate. They will give you, what's maternity leave at JPM Oregon?
For example, in the UK, you can get up to six months now.
Okay. Dudes get six months paternity leave. Do you know what paternity leave was when I was
at Morgan Stanley? It was, oh, you're not committed. Take the afternoon. That was paternity
leave. Take the afternoon. That was literally, my mom was a secretary. They didn't have maternity
leave. I mean, they had unpaid, but they didn't have maternity leave. So big corporations have
come really far. I think that we romanticize entrepreneurship and we don't give big corporations
the power or the prestige they deserve. The key is how to big corporations start hiring people who
haven't been fortunate enough to go to elite universities. That was a word salad, but I would
say just make it your own personal in the department in JPM Oregon. I've talked to Jamie about this.
You got to hire more unremarkable kids. And when I say unremarkable, I mean, they didn't go to
elite universities. Their parents aren't rich, right? Are they good kids? Are they smart?
Do they test well? Whatever it might be. I'd like to see corporate American universities be
like the Navy SEALs. Anyone can go try out for the Navy SEALs. Anyone can show up day one
for the Navy SEALs. Not everyone makes it, but everyone gets to show up. I think that's what
college should be like. I mean, you're always going to have elite colleges, but 76% when I apply
to now it's nine. Just weird. Anyways. We're out of time, Scott, but thank you so much.
Thank you. Really appreciate it. Big round of applause.
Thank you very much for listening or watching Uncensored CMO. I hope you enjoyed that. If you
did, please do hit the subscribe button wherever you get your podcast. If you're watching, hit
subscribe there as well. I'd also love to get a review. Reviews make a big difference on other
people discovering the show. So please do leave a review wherever you get your podcast. If you
want to contact me, you can do. I'm over on X at Uncensored CMO or on LinkedIn where I'm under
my own name, John Evans. Thanks for listening and watching. I'll see you next time.
