Perhaps one of the most scandalous tenets of some schools of ancient Christianity is
that the cosmos around us is inherently evil, forged by a psychopathic demiurge and ruled
over by a host of planetary demons bent on nothing less than the torture and enslavement
of the divine spark hidden within each human being.
The origin and nature of those rulers are archons and ancient Greek remains one of the
more obscure issues in this quite honestly provocative theology.
But the discovery of a wealth of ancient magical texts and a small library from Egypt has shed
more light on the very beings these Christians felt must be finally defeated and surpassed
as the soul escaped our cosmic prison.
In this episode I want to explore what we know about the archons, their origins in
Greco-Egyptian cosmology and magic and how ancient Christians, though now known often
as Gnostic so problematically, thought they could soar beyond the terrible clutches of
these beings.
If you're interested in magic, hermetic philosophy, Gnosticism, alchemy, Kabbalah, or the history
of the occult, make sure to subscribe here to Esoterica and also check out my numerous
other content and topics in Esotericism including curated playlists on a range of topics.
Also, if you want to support the work, this work of providing accessible, scholarly and
free content on topics in Esotericism here on YouTube for free, I hope you consider supporting
my work on Patreon, you can use a one time donation, you can also take advantage of the
super things option just below the video, or you can pick up some of our black metal
merch over on the store tab for the channel.
But now let's explore the wardens, the prison guards of our cosmic cell, our cosmic prison,
the archons of ancient Gnosticism.
I'm Justin Sledge and welcome to Esoterica where we explore the arcane in history, philosophy,
and religion.
The world of the second and especially the third centuries of the common era was a world
increasingly coming apart, a world tearing itself apart at the seams, especially from
within the traditional perspective of ancient Egypt, it was something of an apocalypse,
it was really the end of the world of ancient Egypt.
Centuries of Hellenistic hegemony, Roman conquest, along with widespread economic and political
stability made for a world very much worth escaping.
And a great many schools of theological, spiritual, and philosophical escapism, frankly, emerged.
The inward turn of stoicism as a coping philosophy, the mystical ascent spiritualities of Jewish
Merkava and Hermetic philosophies, and the afterlife oriented anti-worldly redemption
offered by the Christianities made for a veritable menu of technologies for just that
cosmic escape.
Perhaps none was more radical, none more extreme than the early species of Christianity that
have come down to be known as Gnosticism.
Now to be frank, I just don't have time to do a deep dive into the incredibly complex
mythologies of the Sethians and the Valentinians and the Ophites and the Basilideanians or
the Canites, though I've done episodes on many of those and they are probably worth
watching, especially the episode on the Apocryphal John and the section on the Valentinian Christianity.
Those are going to be really important connective tissues to get an idea of what's going on
in this video.
In fact, I have a whole Gnosticism playlist you can check out if you're interested in
really going deep on the Gnostic train, but the central thrust shared by many of these
theologies is that the true reality is a spiritual reality, not this.
It's a spiritual reality presided over by an ineffable deity whose outflowing, whose
emanations generated a host of beings known as the fullness or the pluroma in Greek.
However, one such entity, Sophia, or wisdom, sought to create on her own without the consent
of the great invisible spirit.
This mistake created a horrifying being, a nightmarish creature known variously as Sacklas,
Samael, Yaldabaoth, or the Demiurge.
Unlike Platonism, Stoicism, Judaism, or other species of Christianity, for whom the creator
of this world was a benevolent deity who created a maximally beautiful world, a maximally
good world, these Christians held that the physical cosmos was a kind of prison, ruled
over by that hideous Demiurge, the craftsperson, along with a retinue of malevolent beings
known as the rulers, or archons, in ancient Greek.
In this myth, the upper spiritual realm ultimately takes pity on us, the poor human beings,
and smuggles within them a divine spiritual spark, and ultimately sends Christ, Jesus,
who reveals the truth about our cosmos and the means by which to escape it, and, of course,
to return with him, finally, to that divine light.
Of course I'm greatly simplifying the mythology there is an enormous amount of variation both
in these schools of thought and between them, frankly there's not just one Gnosticism,
but in a structural sense the core myth system remains remarkably consistent.
There's an effable spiritual reality in which a metaphysical tragedy occurs engendering the
creation of the malevolent Demiurge, which in turn creates the physical reality around
us, the physical cosmos, in which divine elements are trapped or encased within human beings,
and we as human beings have to escape this world.
In this episode, however, I want to focus in on one element, just one element of this
mythology, the origins and nature of the cosmic prism wardens as it were, the archons.
Now of course I'll be coming back to do another episode on the origins of the most shocking
element in all of this, the origins and nature of the evil creator, or the Demiurge, Saclas,
Samael, Yaldabaoth, but the archons turn out to be a crucially important element in this
mythology because in a very important sense they have created this physical prism, including
our bodies in which we are trapped and deluded into believing this is all real, they are
responsible for tricking us into believing that any of this is real, and even our thoughts
and emotions are just inner puppetry to control us, and that these entities must be ultimately
defeated and bypassed in our final jailbreak back to the spiritual world of light, beauty,
and oneness.
So what do we really know about the archons?
The term archon would have struck ancient years as powerfully political, though without
much of the majesty or any association with royalty, I think that's important, thus
a Latin equivalent might be magistrate or governor, they're basically political functionaries
who have ruled locally but not totally, and if you've ever worked in retail, they're
like the assistant manager with a chip on their shoulder who get off on making your life miserable
because they got picked on when they were little, they need therapy, not managerial positions.
Most of what we know about the archons can be found spread through the literature written
by the so-called Gnostic Christians themselves, and the polemics against some written by other
Christians such as Irenaeus, Hippolytus, and Epiphanius.
As I've mentioned earlier, in most of these mythological systems, these are beings created
or somehow generated by the malevolent divvijurge, both for its own narcissistic needs, but also
to act as secondary creators and enforcers of this physical prison cosmos.
In an important sense, they are the beings most intimately responsible for this whole mess,
and also they are the first major hurdle that one faces in one's escape back to the realm of
spiritual fullness, so I hope you could understand that knowing a bit about them seems germane to
making just that escape. Many, if not most, of the Gnostic creation myths contain some mention
of the archons, though the details on them vary greatly from text to text. Perhaps the most
instructive and popular narrative is represented by the Apocryphon of John, or the secret teachings
of John. Following the ignorant and mistaken creation of Yaldabaoth, the divvijurge with
the hideous body of a snake in the head of a lion, its eyes flashing as if bolts of lightning,
that being Yaldabaoth mates with itself, it mates with the mindlessness within itself,
to produce a series of 12 fiery beings. The names of many of these beings have their origins in
Jewish mythology, while others are more mysterious. Very strange, I'll come back to those in just
a minute toward the end of the episode. The first series of 12 archons probably represents the
creation of the zodiac, and thus the fixed dome of the cosmic system. This is sort of the
background of everything. Now, from among these, and separately, are extracted. Again, the text is
confused here, and it's probably two separate traditions that have been fused together in the
Apocryphon of John, but from these it seems that 12 independent kings are pointed over the spheres
of the heavens. These seven rulers are thus associated with the visible planets or the
wandering stars of the geocentric world. These beings represent not only the spatial dimensions
above us, but also the course of time itself, corresponding as the text says to the days of
the week. We even learn a bit about their physical appearance, each having the face of various animals
such as a sheep, a donkey, a hyena, even one of flaming fire. This is a feature that probably has
its origins in traditional Egyptian religious iconography. It's typically the idea of human
being like creatures having the heads of animals in religious depictions of gods. The demiurge,
having created these rulers, then transferred some of his fire to them, perhaps activating them or
emanating them at some level, such that they would believe he's, well, he's the only god,
and in his equally ignorant and narcissistic declaration, I am god. There is no god aside
from me, taken from the Genesis creation story. There's immediately issued a declaration which
is basically a rebuttal by a voice from the upper supernal spiritual realm. In fact, Yaldavoth goes
so far as to model his inverse realm of darkness and matter, our world, on the supernal realm,
though often with satanic inversions mirroring the upper worlds. And from these, the archons would
emerge 365 angels, though it would be better to think of them as demons for, well, for obvious
reasons. Once the physical world or our cosmic prison was constructed, the demiurge decided,
again, in an act of extreme narcissism to create a being in his own image. However,
it apparently required the aid of the archon demons and thus Yaldavoth declared,
let us, let us make human beings in our image. This is, by the way, the hermeneutical answer
given by the Gnostics to that statement in Genesis that's in the plural, the radical plural, rather
than the divine singular, which is anomalous. It's not the monarchic plural. It's literally a bunch
of demons making human beings. The apocryphon of John infamously identifying the creator of the biblical
Genesis story with the evil demiurge. But Yaldavoth, the archons are demons and they all set
forth to create the primordial human being, each forging a specific anatomical feature,
first the psychical features, the psychical elements of the body, and then the physical
elements of the primordial human body, the Adam. Again, many of these names of the beings that
construct our physical bodies and our psychical bodies are very obscure and I'll come back to
them in just a moment. Following the creation of the 365 elements of the psychical body, remember
there's 365 of these archons of some level, including this would include psychical states such
as desires, emotions, fear, grief, the love of pleasure, etc. Well, the heavenly mother at that
point took pity on the primordial Adam and breathed through Yaldavoth life into this psychical body,
of course due to the ignorance of the archons, which are as malevolent as they are stupid,
frankly. They didn't realize that by working together that they would create a psychical
Adam that would be more powerful than all of them individually. The psychical Adam was
constructed by all of them, therefore had all their powers with our powers combined. They
just created a being that could best all of them. Further enlightened insight was cast down,
put down, into from the spiritual realm, into the psychical body, giving human beings the ability
to recognize at least the truth of their condition, something that the archons certainly couldn't do.
Well, maybe with one exception. But realizing their mistake, the archons mixed together, earth,
air, fire, and water, they mixed together hule, matter, and cast this psychical body into a
prison of matter. This is our physical bodies and then put that physical body in a garden of
delights, a garden of pleasure, a garden of Eden meant to intoxicate the Adam, therefore basically
intoxicating him with pleasure such that he would never realize that his condition,
nor realize his power, and therefore never realized that he could in fact escape.
But all of this is crucially important for considering our condition for these Christians.
Not only is our physical body a prison, a point well made in dualistic theories like this,
but ultimately even our psychical body is a prison. What we think of as our mental and emotional life
are all created by the archons for precisely keeping us in prison shackled within delusions
and emotions, thus not only as our physical body a prison, but also the negative thoughts and emotions
which blind us to things like rage and fear and jealousy and love of pleasure. In a sense,
because we are created by the archons, our psychical and physical bodies are created by the
archons, they've left a hideous imprint of themselves in our psyches. And in a sense,
we're created like people possessed as our natural condition. We're like
marionettes controlled by the archons. It's only through our enlightened insight which came to us
from the spiritual realm and the dedication of us to our spiritual life, which Adam only recognized
by the way in the creation of Eve, or Chava, life, that we have the ability and the means to transcend
our otherwise condition of being a demonic puppet. In fact, the Apocalypse of John rejects the concept
of Eve being merely a derivative of Adam. The text in fact notes that it was not from a rib,
as Moses says, but Eve was actually made from the very image of enlightened insight that was found
within Adam. Regardless, the primary role of the archons in this element of the mythology
is to explain how our physical, and I think even more importantly, our psychical bodies,
having their origin in the contorted horrors of the archons, the demons,
set the primary condition for our entrapment in this prison cosmos.
Now, the elaborate mythologies of these texts are at face value.
They're pretty wild. I mean, Irenaeus just thought he could convince you that they're not true by
distilling you what the Gnostics believe. And further, they're very much beyond the pale
of virtually any such narrative about the human condition and antiquity. I mean,
everyone admitted the world wasn't perfect, sure, but that this was all literally created by demons
as a prison? That was a bit much, frankly. An adherence of this spirituality clearly felt the
need to defend this idea both by appealing to widely accepted Christian scriptures and by
greatly clarifying the nature of these various myths. I mean, you could just add more detail to
make it even stranger and somehow that made it more believable. And that's precisely what we
find in an important text found in the fourth tractate of the second Nagamadi codex, a text
variously known as the hypothesis of the archons or the reality of the rulers or the nature of the
archons. There's a lot of ways of translating this depending on how you want to deal with the
technical term, hupustasis in Greek. It's, well, it's technical. In this text, the author seems
to be welding together two previous documents in order to show that the archons are one, very
much real, and two, they must be vanquished. And he does this by introducing the text with a paraphrase
of the very famous quotation of Colossians 1.3, allegedly written by Paul, that the followers
of Christ do not struggle against the flesh, but against the authorities, the archons of the world,
and the spirits of wickedness. In fact, other Pauline or school of Paul texts even hint that
these beings live in the sky, Ephesians 3.10 and 6.12. And over at Colossians 2.8 and 2.20,
it even refers to them as elemental spirits of the universe, thus linking them at some level,
perhaps, with this vile materiality, at least in the minds of the Gnostics. Thus, the text is meant
to outline the reality and nature of the archons. In this text, the reality of the rulers, we learn
that the archons are androgyne. In fact, Yaldabaoth is also androgyne, and they have the faces of the
beasts, as we noted earlier, and that they literally huffed and puffed in a failed attempt to raise
the primordial, atomic body to life. All to no avail, they couldn't bring him to life. Only
when the supernal breath flowed into him could he be animated. Again, you get the sense that the
archons are pretty stupid. But not only stupid, they're hideously rapacious, and this text,
like others, the archons immediately attempt to pounce on Eve to assault her once they've created
her. However, again, their stupidity is their downfall. She outwits them, and she turns herself
into a tree, perhaps an echo of the Daphne legend in Greek mythology. But the archons being horrible
go on to assault the mere shadow that she had left behind, again, their vileness only being matched by
their idiocy. Indeed, the rapacious fervor of the archons would emerge again and again when they
attempted to assault Norea, the daughter of Adam and Eve, a crucially important character in these
mis-systems. In fact, Norea, she gets her own episode. She's really, really important. Her whole
book's dedicated to Norea. The demonic archons threaten Norea, demanding that she submit to them
sexually as Eve had done, at least as they claim Eve had done. However, Norea actually knew the
truth that Eve hadn't submitted to them. She knew that she tricked them, and having special insight,
she cried out to the upper spiritual realms, and taking pity on her, the angelic being Eleth descends,
driving away the archons, and the rest of the text takes the form of a kind of
something like an early Gnostic catechism. In fact, some scholars believe it was a literal
read out loud catechistic text with Norea interrogating Eleth about the true nature of
reality, and much of the details repeated there are actually found in others at the
end text, especially texts like the Apocryphon of John, though there is a really important,
relatively novel account concerning one archon, Sabaoth. Remember when I said that Yael the
Baoth declared that it was the only god only to be shided from a voice from above? That shiding
was actually done by the angelic power of life, Zoe, the daughter of faith wisdom, or Pistis Sophia,
who has her own very complicated book. Well, in this text, the archon Sabaoth actually sees this
moment. He's high enough up in the emanations that he sees Zoe rebuke, so Yael the Baoth, and
Zoe's breath becomes a fire in the face of Yael the Baoth, and she casts him it down into the
bottom of the abyss and to Tartarus. The archon Sabaoth realizes Yael the Baoth is a liar, he
rejects the divinity of Yael the Baoth, and rather he sends his prayers to the supernal realm,
and in reward for that is actually elevated to the highest station he can be in this cosmic prison.
He gets to go up to the eighth heaven, nearest to the divine fullness or pluroma, and he creates
for himself the Ezekiel style chariot throne we typically associate with Yael. Thus the quasi
beneficent archon Sabaoth is ultimately flanked by Zoe, or the supernal life, and is given control
over an angel of wrath, and then given rulership over this entire cosmic realm, thus lessening,
at least to some degree the more extreme dualism associated with this mythology. As for Yael the
Baoth, of course he rages in envy, Sabaoth is given all this power, and that envy gives birth
to death, and that death pollutes our entire cosmic realm. Numerous other versions of this
archontic mythology exist in various forms of ancient Christian literature. One of the more
fascinating is a partially preserved by Origen in his polemic against Celsus. Here we find details
from a sect typically referred to as the Ophites, from the word snake who apparently admired the
wisdom bequeathing snake of the Garden of Eden, who the archons sought to destroy. In their mythology
the snake really revealed to us all the wisdom, and the archons tried to get rid of him. And what
has come down to us as the Ophite diagram, we have what seems to have been a kind of esoteric
geometric representation or diagram of reality, from the supernal realms all the way down to the
infernal realms, with a series of seven archons which may have been generations of Yael the Baoth,
sort of Yael the Baoth emanating itself, though again the text isn't clear, in fact there are
two different layers of the text and it's preserved by Origen. But interestingly enough here the
archons actually include classic archangels, again with beastly heads, though one of them is clearly
a corrupt version of the Hebrew Tohu Vovohu, the primordial chaos out of which creation is drawn
there in the first creation story. Interestingly also, the entire system is actually bounded at
two levels by Leviathan and Behemoth as something like world souls for the psychical and material
realms respectively. So here Leviathan and Behemoth play a role, though exactly what that
role is isn't clear. Truth be told the exact nature of the Ophite diagram is debated, there are
lots of different representations, and this is probably just a good idea to say this will be a
future episode. Another very important text is the incredibly learned, brilliant text on the
origin of the world found just after reality of the rulers in the Nagamani library, and it also
contains a list of archons which the text refers to as the Seven Powers of the Heavens of Chaos.
Band name alert. At any rate, three of these, Yael and Aloai and Ostafaios, are actually denoted as
directly sons of Yael de Baoth. Also good band name. This wonderful text, one of my favorites
actually from the Nagamani library, details how the other archons actually went to war against the
righteous Archon Sabahoth, and in triumph he would go on to create the Seraphim, the angels that
rotate around the throne saying holy holy holy, to celebrate Sabahoth and eventually he's responsible
for creating Jesus. Sabahoth in this myth creates Jesus Christ himself, thus at least in this myth
cycle the rebel Archon Sabahoth who creates Jesus, he's empowered from above and would eventually
be sent into our realm to teach the path of redemption, thus in a very important sense.
It's actually an Archon, a redeemed Archon, but an Archon that ultimately provides the path
to salvation via the teachings of Christ. In fact salvation, it isn't clear that Sabahoth
himself even has access to. He might not be able to escape this realm, somehow making him all the
more noble. Sabahoth really is the MVP of this system. And even though it's not directly related
to this whole Archon business, if you're a fan of Thunder Perfect Mine, and if you're not a fan of
Thunder Perfect Mine, you should just unsubscribe and go somewhere else. You absolutely have to read
On the Origin of the World. There's a surprise in there related to Thunder. I won't ruin what it is,
but there's an Easter Egg, a Thunder Perfect Mine Easter Egg in On the Origins of the World.
Other texts, like the Mammoth, Pistis Sophia seem to have only five Archons, but they do
include Hecate and Typhon, interestingly enough. And later, Polymical Text also detail various
Archons as they occur in different kinds of sects of Gnosticism. The most comprehensive of those
can be found in texts like the Panarion of Epiphanius of Salamis, which is a positively fascinating
collection of anti-heresy texts. In fact, the Panarion even details a rather late surviving
sect in the fourth century that he denotes for their belief, precisely for their belief in the
Archons. He refers to them as the Archontics. It may have been the case that the belief in the
Archons had simply become scarce by the fourth century, though it seems that the text notes
that it was taught by a certain man named Peter near what is now modern-day Chavron. But we have
there an interesting story where this monk-like Gnostic character, Peter, converts a traveling
Armenian Christian named Utaktos. Epiphanius makes one of his names constantly, but Utaktos goes on
to respread belief in the Archons through the region of Armenia and Palestine, perhaps making
for a renaissance in this belief before its basic final disappearance from history, with the exception
of the Bogomils, the Cathars, and the Mandeans. This curious section of the text allegedly provides,
and again, you should trust Epiphanius as far as you can see him. In fact, some of the scriptures
that the Archontics use, we have a text called the Greater and Lesser Harmonies, the Elogenes,
which might actually survive in the Nagamadi Library, and also they seem to have employed
the ascension of Isaiah, a pretty popular text in early Christianity, and one that over time
will become later associated with the Bogomils and eventually the Cathars. If you're interested
in the Cathars, I have several episodes about them and whether or not they really existed.
Some of their teachings on the nature of the Archons, especially interesting in that they
argued that the eighth highest heaven was again headed by Sabaoth, something we've seen on the
origin of the world, and that they had a lower seven tiered heaven just below that, though in
their system, Satan is actually created by Sabaoth, who is in turn giving rulership over this world,
the physical world Satan dominates it for now. Again, this is an interesting inversion of the
begetting relationships of these Gnostic mythologies, and the other mythology Yaldabaoth generates
Sabaoth, who supplants him here for the Archontics, it's the other way around. The Archontics also
rejected sacraments, including baptism, because they were all performed in the name of the false
god Sabaoth, even though he's the highest one of this realm, he's still fake. Further, by rejecting
the sacraments in the laws of this world, their souls began to make the ascent. It's by rejecting
the sacraments of the Catholic Church, they start their ascent up, making defensive speeches before
each Archon, before finally arriving back at the mother of the Pluroma. This is perhaps Sophia,
wisdom, you get back to be with Sophia. Of course, there's a great deal more of interest in this
sect, and you can read about it in the Panarion. Whose name, by the way, Panarion means bread basket,
so this text always gave me like olive garden vibes. Regardless, this is just a must read text
for anyone interested in Gnosticism. Even if you're sympathetic Gnosticism, you can often read
these heresiological literature like Irenaeus or Hippolytus, and you get so much wonderful
information that it's very much worth reading. In fact, I've done a very long episode on Irenaeus,
one of the earliest sort of anti-Gnostic heresiologists, and you may want to check it out.
It's one of my favorite episodes I've made about Gnosticism on the channel.
Now, any reader of these texts, especially Pistis Sophia and the Apocryphon of John,
will face a significant degree of bewilderment at some of the names of the Archons, or their
attending angels, demons. So the natural question is just the origins of both the system of Archons,
and why do they have these bizarre names? Why are they named this? The origin question,
while not ever going to be definitively answered, is probably likely maybe that it was common in
the ancient world to attach angels, demons, and daimons to the various celestial regions and
antiquity, and the various celestial objects in antiquity. In fact, this would continue well
under the Middle Ages with angels basically moving planets around as their efficient causation,
and even with magical texts like the Arbital with its various system of invocation of planetary
spirits. Thus, the 12-fold division followed by a 7-fold division followed then by a 365-fold
division, which is found again on the Apocryphon of John. Well, it just nicely captures the circular
dome of the zodiac as the outermost sphere of the geocentric cosmos, in which the moon and the sun
and the five classical wandering stars, the planets, move about followed by 365 days of the
solar year. Thus, insofar as the Archons are at the origin and control the fate of the material and
psychical cosmos, including our physical and psychical bodies, they would go from the fixed
stars at the very limit to the very outer edge to the wandering stars down to the days of the year.
This all gives them power over both the physical cosmos of space,
but also the processional cosmos of time. It's basically the demonization of the
attending beings at work in the cosmos of antiquity. If you take those and just make them all evil,
well, they go from being angels and diamonds to being archons. Now, the more difficult issue
is the often bewildering names given to these beings. Now, many of them are clearly derived
from Hebrew Aramaic divine names, which are then transposed and corrupted into Greek and Comptic.
These are sometimes traditional angelic names, which simply undergo demonization. A great many
of the others, frankly, are perplexing in origin. This is especially true for names like Yaldabaoth,
although there's some guessing that this is maybe Aramaic or Hebrew for the child of chaos or the
begetter of chaos, the maternal spirit Barbello, which again has a kind of Aramaic feel to it,
and the host of archons and angel demons found especially in the names of the beings responsible
for the construction of the primordial, Adamical body in the Apocryphon of John, or the profusion
of entities that populate the treasuries of the books of you and the pistis Sophia among
a great many other Gnostic texts. But the situation here isn't totally hopeless. We're not totally
hopeless in terms of finding out where these names may have come from. Interestingly enough,
some of these obscure names are actually found not just in Gnostic literature, but they're also
found in the great archangian collection known to us as the Greek Magical Papyri. In a really
fascinating article, the classicist Howard Jackson locates numerous instances in which many of these
archontic names are also found in a wide range of magical uses, such as Incantations, Nomina
Barbara, which is very important here, and sigil-like uses in the Greek Magical Papyri.
I agree, I think, with his assessment that either the two bodies of literature of Gnostic and Magical
share a common ancestor, that is to say, perhaps they go back to something like the Indigenous
or Egyptian ritual technology, and there's clearly definitely Egyptian words in some of this,
and I think one that's slightly more likely is that the Gnostic texts are actually lifting many
of these archontic names from the Magical literature in the Egyptian context in which these texts,
the Gnostic texts, were being composed. Thus, we might very well have a kind of magic to Gnosticism
pipeline in the ancient world, and that even might give us a glimpse into the milieu of the
authors that generated these Gnostic texts. In fact, this is all more, all the more reinforced,
given the definite similarities between the rare instances of Gnostic ritual life,
especially something like the complex baptism rituals to be found in texts like The Books of
You, which I've made a whole episode about those, and the wider range of Greco-Egyptian magic.
There's just no way that those baptism rituals, which are found in books like The Gnostic Book of
You and the magical technologies found in the Greek Magical Papyri, are just not related,
simply not happening. So what I suspect occurred, and again, we'll never know, was a theological
shift very much like the one described quite wonderfully, actually, in M. David Litwas in
his book The Evil Creator, which you absolutely should read, in which the Israelite God is somehow
demonized, and then a two-step process by which the angels' daimons responsible for the movements
and processes of the cosmos in the Judeo-Hellenistic worldview of the time were themselves, in turn,
demonized in sets of 12, 7, and 365, though again, the texts aren't terribly systematic,
nor uniform, frankly, though I do think that a set of seven archons seems to have been the
standard among this literature. And finally, these archontic beings, they receive their names
largely derived from Jewish and Greco-Egyptian sources, often traditional Jewish scriptures,
but also especially the complex world of Greco-Egyptian magic. Of course, this theory does not,
by any means, eliminate all the mysteries of the origins and nature of the archons. In fact,
this would be an excellent application of something like AI, along with a database of
ancient spirit, daimons, archons, nomina, Barbara, etc., as envisioned by Dr. Kristin Switzer,
who I really hope it's a funding to make just that database. You can find out more about her
in the description. By the way, if you're interested in ancient magic, you absolutely have to check
out her channel, Dr. Switzer. It's one of the best resources out there on just that topic.
At any rate, while the evil demiurge Yael the Baoth often, well, frankly steals the show,
perhaps because of our love for anything with a flair for the Lovecraftian, I hope I've shown
that the archons also play a decisively important role, even a surprising role in this wonderfully
weird mythology. I mean, you hardly ever hear about the renegade archon responsible for recreating
Jesus, or the connections of the archons with Greco-Egyptian magic more generally.
In these ways, among many others, their role is often downplayed, it's often overshadowed because
we love talking about the evil demiurge, and I think that's a mistake if you want to really
robustly understand these mythologies. As usual, I've included a collection of resources if you
want to really dive into Gnosticism in the description. Again, also check out my playlist
on Gnosticism to really go through a bunch of these texts. But until next time, keep resisting
those archontic, psychical impulses and ascend into the subvernal realms. Of course, also thanks
for watching Esoterica, where we explore the arcane in history, philosophy and religion.
