Okay, so we're happy to have John Elias Miro, he'll tell us about bridge and positivity
and S-Metrics booster bounce and let me just make an announcement next week will be Matt
Walter making an announcement like as well.
All right, perfect.
So thanks to Aldeon Ardo and to the organizers for the invitation to give this seminar.
So the work I will talk about today is based on a paper that appears recently in archive
and someone going world and the other very and a very much boomers with a PhD here.
All right, so as many of you appreciate quantum field theory is a very universal tool.
However, due to causality and evolution, there are a bunch of constraints that apply on
all the information that you can take in quantum field theory.
And then perhaps the most famous one or one of the most classic constraints come from positivity
and it's based on this classical example where you can see a derivative decoupled scalar
that are leading quarter the amplitude starts like so with a c times s square where c is a
Wilson coefficient of the Lagrangian.
And now you can write the sum rule for the coefficient of this leading interaction
which is based on these dispersive relations because you can represent c this coefficient
as this small integral i1 and in the limit where you send this radius of the
integral to zero is exactly equal to c and then like a sheath theorem you can relate the integral
i1 with i2 and i3 and now under very general circumstances or general conditions i3 vanishes
which is this residual infinity and the internal i2 converges both in the IR and in the UV and
the internal i2 is equal to the imaginary part of the amplitude because you pick a discontinuity
along the unitary cuts on the real line and this in turn by the optical theorem
related to the cross section and you are left with this positive integral
and therefore you conclude that c this Wilson coefficient must be positive.
So these are very classic examples I just wanted to to to mention to start getting
into the same mindset. Now another important or another example if you wish is provided by
the recent results using the numerical mathematics bootstrap.
Here the top the the prototypical or one of the simplest questions that you can ask
is what is the maximal quartic of the amplitude and now I will make some clarifications of what
do I mean by this and how these approach and we'll serve as a also introduction for what I want to
say later on. So here by quartic what this meant is the value of the amplitude in the crossing
symmetric point all right so this a point in the complex Mandelstamm plane which is below all the
all the cuts that the amplitude develops because of unitary and now this becomes an optimization
problem where you want to find the maximal and minimal values of this quantity subject to the
constraints imposed by analyticity crossing symmetry and unitary. Now crossing symmetry is
here defined for the case of a singlet particle, unitary we don't know what it is and analyticity
there but I will make some clarifications in the following slides of what are the
value assumptions that go into here okay. Now this problem of finding the minimax value
of this quantity as an optimization problem can be approached through two complementary
strategies. One is called the primal which is the original one by a set of authors
that they started developing and then there have been many other follow-ups
and here in the primal approach the strategies that you construct
ansatzes for the S matrix which encode these conditions and then you usually target as a
constraint while you try to find the minimax value and the idea is that as you enrich more and more
the ansatz the space that you can explore with the primal will become larger and larger until
you reach some conversions and when this conversion is rich then you claim that you have found the
extremal amplitudes realizing these minimax values of the quantity of inputs. So it proceeds
by filling in the space of allowed amplitudes. On the other hand the dual approach proceeds
from this other complementary view where what you do is you start excluding amplitudes that
aren't feasible so these are amplitudes that will have some large value of this quantity
but fail in realizing any of these conditions and then often at least for the problems that
have been studied so far what one finds is that the duality what is called the duality guard
the difference between primal and dual becomes very small or negligible for the questions of
interest but I should say that this dual approach which was started in this context of the S matrix
in these two-dimensional papers and also in this high-dimensional paper
and also one by Kuczynski and He, these dual approaches much less developed so
I think we should pay more attention. Can I ask a question, John? Yes please.
You don't cite on this slide the classic work from the 60s and 70s which also proved some
parts. Yes, yes, yes. It's a dual approach, a primal approach, what they would do.
I didn't list it here because I'm not, well, I was just citing the
reference that are perhaps more useful if one wants to reconcile the rest of it all but it will appear,
the reference will appear here. Can you explain the difference between what was done in the old
base and the current, what is done currently in the dual approach?
Yes, I will comment, let me comment in two slides on the previous work.
All right, so let me make some comments about the primal because it's the,
so let me make one more comment because of the type of questions that have been asked so far
in this context of the S-matrix bootstrap. This is different between the dual bounds and the
amplitude funds on the primal approach because the difference is so small,
a practical attitude that I will take at least in part of the work that I will be presenting today
is to start looking for interesting physics using the primal approach
so and then we found something very interesting, then we'll go back and try to hammer down the
rigor of that question, perhaps by bracketing with a dual approach. Now, let me make some more
comments about the primal. So, as I was saying before, one solves for crossing kind of electricity
by introducing some answers for the S-matrix, so this is one of the simplest answers that one can
introduce, which works pretty well and the idea is that first you solve by electricity in the,
so here in these answers, here one is assuming pool or what is called maximal electricity
and we consider that we consider three separate planes, st and u, and only at the end we take
this slide of on-shellness and then each plane has a cut, so we go from four m squared to infinity
and otherwise it's analytic, so a way to solve for this condition is to define our amplitude
through our convergences expansion in terms of these row variables, so if you are convergent
in this analytic region, then this encodes a full analytic on the original s-plane and this
row map is defined here that maps the whole plane to the disk where four m squared is mapped to one
and a crossing is solved because these coefficients are symmetric, so it's
symmetric in s-plane. Now, unitarity is solved numerically, so what is a typically done in
this approach is that you decompose into partial waves and impose for unitarity in a grid of
points in s, a fine grid, and then you look for convergence first in the extrapolation
of the number of partial waves where you impose unitarity and then once you know you have a
unitarity amplitude, you start increasing the value of n and you do so also until you reach some
convergence in the antics in the value of n. So running this machinery for the quartic coupling,
you find this kind of result, so for the maximal coupling using the primal you find this number
which is roughly 2.66 and an interesting point is that these, so here is the result from the
from the sixties in this dashed line. This was revived recently by Berrierian, and an interesting
observation here is that what goes in into the right this dual, so what goes into the right
this primal bound is this maximal electricity and one may get worried that this is an unproved
assumption, but what is interesting is that this red exclusion band only assumes some proven
electricity which is much more restricted. It only uses fixed dispersion relations
and for a small range of physical energies only between 4 and 12.
Sorry, the red is dual and the green is primal? That's right, that's right, and here is a
assuming of this gap between the primal and the dual and now the precise question that
Eslava was asking about why the old paper was here and the new one is here, I don't know it,
maybe Berrierian is connected, he can say I don't know if it was because of they had
much numerical power or as far as I know it was very simple. If I can say like two words,
with Amit we systematized the approach so that we can even
relax in a use as DPB to solve the problem and the second thing is that we add the
TU crossing that in the original work of Lopez and Manessia they were not adding the
TU crossing that is not obvious in the fixed dispersion relations, that's why including
more constraints we can do better and also better numerics. Very nice, but your assumptions are also
weaker than maximum electricity, right? I'm talking to Andrea's assumptions.
Yes, I was saying that we basically just use an electricity until we heat the large lemon
leaks, so we are well very well used. Is it fair to say that it's still a mystery of why the
primal approach works so well? Well it's a mystery to understand for which questions it works well
and for which one we have. It seems that for these low energy questions it does a very good job.
But why is this a mystery now? Because if the free sample really exists then you should be able
to construct it also. But the assumptions are much stronger, right? There's still maximum
electricity and also it's not clear what the convert, I thought there were some questions
about what this amp that's being constructed actually converges to. It doesn't seem to converge
to the physical amp, it converges to something a little bit more awkward but you know I haven't
looked at it in any detail. I thought that people believe that for this sample the maximum
electricity is actually true, so maybe the fact that it works well is the evidence for this.
Although this is not been proven. I would still say that there's a bit of a surprise. It might
be maximally analytic but indeed as Leonardo says the primal approach does seem to converge to
something like this. Sorry but I'm not hearing you well, can you repeat?
Hello.
So I'm changing microphones, maybe better. Yeah, I am. So I was going to say that there
might be a bit of, it might still be a bit surprising that it works so well because indeed
the primal approach does converge to something that's a little bit weird in the sense that
unitarity seems to be saturated for a whole, almost all energies that you check and for all
spins that you check. And you know that such an amplitude cannot exist because of axioms,
so we don't quite know what the limit of the primal approach gives. But when you look at the
limit of the value of this coupling, then indeed it seems to approach precisely the…
Yeah, that was my impression that it converges to something strange and nevertheless appears to
saturate the bounds. Yeah, I think I agree with that. But the amplitude which saturates the dual
bounds doesn't satisfy the expected properties. I'm not sure it's easy to obtain a full amplitude
from the dual approach. So one comment. So with the dual we are able to reconstruct the
amplitude in a small region between 4 and 12, which is this region that we access. And in that
region, primal and dual, they pretty much agree. Then you may wonder that maybe the awkward things
they happen at larger energies where these low-energy observables are not sensitive.
Thank you. All right. So today I would like to present
some new S-matrix-put-sub bounds for a theory with ON symmetry. And I will explain now why
this is interesting, but just as a reminder, so in this ON theory, I'm considering the 2-2-2
scattering of the two vectors under ON. And the amplitude that composes in this way will have
an relation channel, transmission, and reflection. And in this case, crossing symmetry is encoded by
the permutation symmetry in the TU components of this amplitude. And the same amplitude appears
multiplying each of these tensile structures. Now, the starting point is that it's to,
is that we will characterize the amplitude by the series expansion
around some analytic point. And in particular, just for the finish, take a nice point, we'll take
the crossing symmetric point. All right. Now, in the special case of the singlet,
of the singlet, when we have the full crossing symmetry for STU, so the flavorless,
this expansion looks like this. We have the quartic that I was referring to at the beginning
that we're just discussing. And then we have some higher order corrections. The first one
that you can write down is this C2 coefficient, which if you want to match it into some field
theory, we correspond to this dimensionate operator. Then you can have order S-cube terms,
which is the, there is a single one that you can write down, which is this STU.
And its coefficient will call C3. Now, as we'll see later, when one runs the
primal approach and also have some partial results already with the dual,
you will find that the values that these coefficients can take lie inside this compact
shape, which touches in the origin, precisely because of the result I reviewed at the beginning,
that the C2 must be positive. And C2 equals zero is only reached by the free theory,
and in the free theory then also the other guys are zero.
Now, the filter intuition for this theory, this applies around the origin,
given by this Lagrangian. And the point is that all the, all the, the CI coefficients
match to these GIs, okay, at three level, and up to higher order corrections that are only
at either loop level or suppressed by powers of epsilon, which epsilon is simply m squared
over the, the gap. And then here there is also this level correction only because I'm expanding
around the dosing symmetric point, which affects the, is a quadratic coefficient. Now,
sorry, it's a possibly in very naive question. Yes. I'm not surprised you're able to access the
G0 coupling. Sorry. Yes, let me comment on that now. Yeah, it was the next slide.
You're asking why on earth we can put a bound on C0?
Or no, what, what is it?
It's because naively you seem that you need to do some subtraction.
Yes, yes, I will go into this now. Yeah. But you could kind of ask me the same question
on how to be fought, right, even here, because we're talking about the same constant, no?
I could have, I could have, but, but now that there are concrete formulas, it jumped more concrete.
Yeah, more concretely. So the, the point is that one can write a subtracted dispersion relation,
as, as you were, you were saying, which looks like this. Okay. This is probably known by as,
as Roy, this was by Roy, this formula. Of course, his M5 was, was different,
because he was interested only in biophysics back then. But when you see this formula,
so you should think of this formula as a sum rule. Okay.
For an amplitude that satisfies the fixed T analyticity in S, you can write down the,
you can express C0 in terms of this right hand side equation. Okay.
And then what will happen is that when you take this equation and project into the part,
into partial waves, okay, you will find that the C0 is given by, so let's project into the
spin zero partial waves. Okay. Because this is a constant, this subtraction constant here,
below the unit ID cards is real. You will get an equation that looks like this. Okay.
Plus an integral over the absorptive parts, which will involve simply a sum over the spins.
Okay. Over the imaginary part of the spins times some candle that you can compute out of,
out of this dispersion relation. And in this dispersion relation here comes only from blowing
up this simple contour. Okay. So it's a fixed T. You have this z over z minus S, let's say,
of M of S T over S square. So you are guaranteed convergence when you blow up the contour by
force or bound. And then you will get, you will get some subtraction constant. Now when you project
this into partial waves, you get this contribution from the real part of the partial wave. So what
this equation tells you is that if you want to access bounds on the quartic or operators that
are more relevant than dimension 8 operators, you should bound also the real parts of the partial
waves. Okay. This is a basic observation, but it would play an important role for the rest of the
talk. Okay. Am I answering Leonardo? Yes, I need to think about it, I get the spirit, yes.
Okay. Yeah, this is the intuition behind. Now for the full and flavorful case, the story is
completely analogous. Now we will expand here the S channel amplitude into also some quartic
plus some linear, now we have a linear correction before we then had it because of the full crossing.
But now the crossing is slightly different, so we can have a linear correction
and this corresponds to dimension 6 operator. And now the intuition is very similar. One can
write, one can take derivatives from this sum rule by Roy to access this coefficient C H.
Okay. And again, this sum rule, if you put it into partial waves, you will see that you have
real contribution. Well, it's already apparent here that there are real contributions. So if you
don't bound real parts of the entering in the unit area equation, you will have no bound for C H.
Well, if you start bounding the real parts, there's at least some hope that you will find this much.
Now the filter into it. So we'll find that when we now run this exercise for general N,
we'll find again this compact region, but now all of the boundary is only coupled.
And it doesn't touch the origin of the space. Okay. And the filter intuition comes from
an arrangement like this, even though there is no wood coupling here, if we reach wood coupling,
it will be given by an arrangement like this, where the dimension, the linear correction
that I was showing in the previous slide, this one here, okay, at three level is given by this
operator. Okay. Which is dimension to this operator. And again, here, all the coefficients are much
at the level with the Wilson coefficients, plus a higher order terms that are due to loops
or powers of mass over the cut. Okay. I'm going a bit slow, because I'm still on the motivation, but
it's okay. Now, one of the reasons one can be interested on this operator, on dimension
to this operator is because they describe the leading deviation from standard model physics.
And in particular, this operator that I was showing here, GH, is an important one,
because for N equal four, okay, this describes the so-called custodial limit of the standard
model. So it's a limit where we turn off Yukawa couplings and the Iperture coupling.
And, and well, this operator describes a universal deformation of all the couplings
of the Higgs to any particle. And, okay, because the Higgs agrees very much with the standard model,
so far, there are exclusion bounds for what is the value that this operator can take.
And in units of one TB, now it depends slightly on the assumption that you put on the feed,
but roughly the current feed tells you that this guy in units of one TB cannot be larger than one.
Okay. Now, of course, this is a crude simplification of the actual physics,
but the approach I will be taking, which is simply this O-N theory, can be easily
made more realistic by studying SUM theories or by including
getting interactions and going to interactions. It will become more clear how to generalize it
as I go on in the talk. Now, I was saying that this, yes?
You're not using the fact that in the Higgs case, it seems just spontaneously broken and here it's not?
No, not yet. Not yet. Here, I'm imagining that I'm at very large energies, so corrections of the
type that you are telling me will be suppressed by mass of the gauge bosons over the energy.
Yeah, but you do have a scattering of massive particles and you have a full
multiple of massive particles in your asthmatic setup.
Exactly. So, well, there is the multiple at large energies. There is the flow for multiple.
The, I guess, one complaint you could say earlier is that here I have a mass,
so one should be careful that the bounds one claims for this operator do not depend on this
idea of physics if I really want to claim it's a high energy bound. And this I will try to address
it later on. But sure, it's a fair point.
Now, okay, I was in the beginning. So we will find this kind of compact and convex region
that does include the origin but doesn't touch the origin, the boundary. And this is well known
already from examples that were studied on these papers where it is easy to construct
with the coupled theories that give either sign for this operator. So we know it's not a definite
sign. Okay. Now, because, so the, I think that the Woodstrap, the Esmerich Woodstrap provides
already this, to me, this nice hint. It provides this nice hint that they are saying something
about the quart, which is a much more relevant operator that the ones that are usually accessed
by positivity. So this hint, of course, it's easy to realize then that it should also be able to
say something about dimension six operators. So one of the big motivations for our work is to
try to make this more precise, to use this Esmerich technology to put the boundary dimensions
into operators. Now, when we'll find this, so the first part of the talk will be about finding
these regions on the space of CIs. And now here we will not be able to claim victory yet
because along the whole boundary of this space, the difference between the values of the CIs
and the Wilson coefficient is much larger than order one. Okay. So in other words, the dots here
are very large. Okay. Are very large. So even though this provides a bound dimension six,
is impractical. Okay. So the second step I would like to take. Let me try to understand this point.
So somehow it must be that the bound you're finding on these more relevant couplings come from the
upper unitarity bound, right, from the fact that it's not just positivity, but it's also the fact
that the partial waves are also bounded from above. Yes, it's because we are not only, so we
are not only looking at these two linear approximations to the unitarity, but because also these two
that you are saying. But then implicitly you are a strong coupling, right? Because if you are a weak
coupling, then you never access the... Perfect. And then of course you cannot match the Wilson
coefficients because it's... Yes, exactly. So that was guaranteed that you could not
match with the Wilson coefficient because you are implicitly a strong coupling.
Well, let me just... You're always asking me the question that is coming in the next slide.
So precisely I want to amend this caveat. Okay. And you will need to wait a few more slides,
but maybe I can already advance a bit that what we want to do is want to isolate
from this space, okay, a tiny subspace that has a weak coupling interpretation in the Aya.
Okay? Yeah. So for doing that, let me advance already the second part of the talk because
maybe I will not arrive, but we like to put some bounds, okay, some extra constraints. So in the
workshop, if we want to isolate more physical theories, we need to put more constraints.
And we would like to ask that the imaginary part of the orbit or the cross section has a nice
behavior in the Aya, okay, up to some big cutoff, okay. And in this way, the CH coefficient,
okay, in the Aya will be given exactly by GH, okay. And in this way, we'll be able to
interpret these new bounds here in this tiny region. This tiny region will have, sorry,
this one over here, we'll have that here, GH is a roughly CH, okay, up to tiny corrections that
are controlled by our assumption how small is the amplitude in the Aya. So only then we'll be
able to claim that this new space, so we'll isolate this space of 50 to 30 amplitudes and then we'll
be able to claim bounds on the dimensions of the Aya or even marginal cuts. That's the idea.
So I see, that's a little surprising, right? Because you're saying that even a weak coupling,
you're able to use the upper to make, to somehow get some mileage from the upper limit.
No, no, you will see that surprising because the mileage from the upper limit
will come from the fact that when you look at the specific representations of these guys,
plus the integral over the absorptive phase, okay. So some absorptive phase. You will see
this integral, even though it runs throughout all physical energies, is actually peaked only at high
energies, okay. I think I should let you go, sorry, I didn't want to delay your talk, go ahead.
Okay, all right, so that was the motivation of what I want to do. I want to first find bounds
on this space of CIs and out of it extract those amplitudes that have some non-negligible IR
cuts but are maximally strongly calibrating in the unit. That's the physical set.
All right, so let me show you already some new results. So here it's for the singlet case and
I'm showing you the space on C0, C2, all right. So before the beginning of the talk, I was showing
you the maximal quartic, which is the point A and B in this plot, okay. And now we are just
opening up some new direction on this space, which is C2, okay. To get these results, we had to
introduce a number of numerical improvements with respect to the original answers.
Let me comment, perhaps the two most important ones. First of all, the original answers, the
original primal answers I was explaining at the beginning, involves some cutoff in the
in the spin. It's important to look for conversions in this spin cutoff.
So a nice thing that one can do is because we know that the amplitude is positive
for physical energies and for T on this region because this positivity comes from the
Legendre polynomials, okay. And then what the extra constraint that we are adding is that
for those partial ways that are not constrained already by the primal unitary constraints,
we ask that this difference is positive. And this results in a very nice convergence.
And it's on the spin direction. And this is a nice constraint because in this region,
okay, the Legendre polynomials are positive. So it's a very concerning on all the partial
ways, some of positive things. And the second interesting
improvement is that instead of the row answers expansion I was showing you before,
we do an answer, we do an answer where we expand if you wish on resonances, okay,
on the position of the resonance. What we do is that the fixed point of the map that was going
from the caddis plane into the unit disk, we sum over different positions of the fixed point.
And we don't understand precisely why, but when there are some intuitive reasons why, but
the only important point to notice is that for the problems that we are exploring,
this has a much, much better convergence. I actually don't understand this formula,
what are the fixed points? So in this formula, can you read this? So this
impressionistic formula down here is supposed to be the conformal map from the caddis plane to
the unit disk, okay. And this map involves a parameter, okay, which tells us where are we
mapping say for instance the point for m squared, okay. So what we are changing is this parameter
which the map depends upon, okay. And now what we do is that this parameter which can take values
between say any value, you can take any value for an infinity, we take a grid of points for
this parameter, and then we consider these picture hands. If you wish a piece of intuition is that
if you want to expand one of these maps in terms of the other, it involves including many powers
of the usual raw expansion. Okay, how did you come up with this? This looks very different from
people who were trying before. So this looks like a big conceptual leap. So how did you get from
there to here? Well, I don't know, maybe we want to comment about this later.
Let's comment about this later, perhaps in discussion session. And I will let also Andrea
to comment on this because he played a major role in the having this idea of the way that expansion,
okay. Now let me comment on the physics that we find along the boundary of this space, okay.
Now, between C and A, it looks like lambda 540. Here it's like for negative lambda 540,
and this would be like positive lambda 540. And there are some observables that we introduced
to characterize this boundary. One is what we are calling simply like spin dominance.
We take the usual sum rule for C2. So let me just remind you, it was introduced in the very first
slide, but here for the massive case, the one that we are using looks something like this. For
infinity S minus 4 thirds, the cube of M S 4 thirds, okay. Now they compose this into partial waves,
and then what we are looking is at the relative contribution of the spin zero over the whole
value of C2, okay. And this gives you a hint of which are the kind of theories living on the
boundary, and a hint that you definitely strongly couplet if you are dominated by many large spins
because we don't know how to write these theories on the couple. So from point A, okay,
to C in this direction, most of the boundary is dominated by higher spins,
and it's only on this small section that is dominated by spin zero. And if you think in,
and just another comment, so what do you think on lambda 540, that's what you expect to live.
So lambda 540 is in the region here. Now another observable that tells you that we are exploring
here is some decoupled physics on the boundary. This improvement was already introduced in the
original mathematics bootstrap paper, which was to allow for threshold singularities,
and what we can do is to follow this threshold singularity along the whole boundary,
and what one sees is that in the upper branch, the threshold singularity, the coefficient of
the singularity is put to large values, while in the lower branch is set to G, okay,
which also makes it compatible with lambda 540 in this segment here, because
there we don't expect, if it's quickly coupled, it should not have any further singularity.
Okay, another obvious.
The physical meaning of this fact that this coefficient is a bit confused, can you comment?
Yes, so in the, in the region here,
the, the lambda, the would be lambda 540 30 intuition,
it's like maximally attractive is a history here is for, for them, for the, for the wrong
negative sign of the, of the, of the, the quarter. So, you want to fit that.
And what the third is trying to do is to put, to generate some bound state, but since we are,
we are excluding bound states below threshold, the best it can do then, the,
the best optimal solution that can find is to put it right at the threshold.
Yes, in the, in note that in the region here,
the, so in this region here, the quartic is a, sorry, in the region here, I was saying,
the quartic is negative. Okay, but it still is a good effective theory, because
you can easily stabilize the quartic, the quartic potential with a higher dimensional
operators or whatever you want to put here. Okay, you can, you can make it fully stable
and still this guy's having zero impact on the imaginary part of the app.
Now, I don't know what it is. Okay, only have 45 minutes. So, let me jump part of this. Okay.
Here are, maybe I can go through it in the discussion related to the question that,
well, let me make some comments, nevertheless.
About the dual approach. So, as we know from analytical mechanics, it's nice to formalize
optimization problems with Lagrangian. Okay. Now, in this Lagrangian, there will be some
objective, which we are shooting radially, we are taking points inside this space,
and we are, we are looking for the maximum rad, we can take something from such point.
And we need to impose some constraints due to unitarity and crossing. Okay.
Now, this piece here depends only on the imaginary parts of the amplitude
through the dispersion relation. Unitarity, well, you know, very well, if we do some
linear approximation, it will depend on imaginary and real parts, but they will
decouple. These fields are not coupled in this part of the, of the Lagrangian.
And now crossing, a nice way to treat it is through the, through this fixative dispersion
relation. This is the dispersion relation I was introducing at the, I was commenting at the
beginning of the talk. And here I'm giving you the kernel. And this is a fixative dispersion
relation incorporates automatically as you crossing symmetry. What it does not incorporate
is the ut symmetry. Okay. Now, to incorporate a ut symmetry, it was observed by Roy Long
a long time ago, is that what you can do is just take this equation, which gives you the
the ut crossing and plug in this equation. This is per se representation that is s ut symmetry.
Okay. You do so, and you the composing partial waves. Okay. And now this constraint
is what is giving you the extra crossing that wasn't missing in the dispersion relation. It's
giving you the, the t u crossing. Okay. Now, and I think that you can do in this equation. Now,
this looks more like the, the, the would stop crossing equation, because what you can now do
is to take derivatives on this equation and the model and evaluate them on the, on the crossing
symmetric point. And the more derivatives you take, the more crossing you impose.
And this way of encoding crossing that, that we're using in the work is completely equivalent to
these null constraints that were introduced in this lesson papers that exploded the full crossing.
So this is how, how we did crossing, how we did crossing in the, in the work. Okay.
Now, let me jump into the second part of the ESP results because otherwise I will not get into the,
into the main, the main point. Okay.
Now, the, the reasons on the CIs, as I was saying, as I emphasized many times,
the most of the, most of the boundary of this plot is strongly coupled. I want to carve out
from this region that we copied the, the, the region that can be interpreted in terms of
effective victory operators. Now, ideally we'll like to, to set some constraint such that in the IR
our, our ansatz or our, our numerical, our optimization problem.
In the IR, our amplitude is equal to some amplitude of choice that we're interested.
Say we're interested in biophysics or, or in QCD or in the standard model, we would like to
impose it in the IR, we reproduce the theory of interest and in the UV we allow for any crazy
physics. Okay. Now, this is a hard to impose numerically and also it's not very nice because
if we put this kind of constraint in the IR, then we'll not be studying the unitary amplitudes
because we don't have, we are messing too much with the, we are not allowing the, the real part
of Q2A. So instead what we did here is that we do this compact, compact relaxation and only impose
this constraint. Okay. Actually we'll impose an integrated version of this constraint. Okay.
Which is what I'm, I'm showing you here. This is the first method that we introduced in the, in the
award. So we'll rerun again is a mean max optimization problems on the CIs, but asking that
our amplitude in the IR is a very weak recap. Now, for the case at hand, we will be taking simply
some lambda five four theory in the IR. And then the, the fact is, the theory amplitude is simply
given by this square root. If you, if you have a question, yes. John, is it really important that
you have this less than a recall with coefficient one? I mean, we cannot expect that this is going
to be exactly with coefficient one. There's going to be some small deviation for sure.
No, it's not very important in the sense that we can, we can accommodate these
these variations in our choice of this parameter here in a way. Okay. Because
it will be in this parameter here.
Gigi, it will be an input parameter. Okay. Okay. Okay. We will take it as small, but
okay. Sounds good. Yeah. Now there's another method, which is quite cool, but I will not
be reviewing today, which will, which consists on, on imposing the constraint point wise,
instead of this integrated version. Now the intuition from expressions that we did
in two dimensions is that if you impose enough of these constraints for many ends,
this is roughly equivalent to the point wise constraint. But let me not comment more on the
point wise constraint for the moment. Now, so what do we get when we do this? When, when we do this,
now we find this region, which is well inside the plot that we're showing at the beginning
for C2 versus C0, only that now I'm normalizing the, the axis in terms of the cutoff.
Here I'm, I'm doing this exercise for some reasonable values. So some moderately, moderately
weekly calculate a quartic and some a large enough ratio for M over, over the cutoff.
I hope to get to the point where I can comment on the cutoff dependence, which will be enough
in a couple of slides. Okay. But let me mention weekly some, some of, some of the physics in,
in this plot. Okay. Now, well, first of all, let me just make some obvious comment is that the,
the, we don't expect from this game I'm showing here to find a bound on C0, because the result
that we find here for C0, because it's equal to the G0 that we put in the input. So this, if you
wish a, a basic cross check, but it's good that the obvious cross checks goes through. Okay.
So the same G0 that we input into the constraints come out roughly as the arms. Okay.
Okay. Sorry. That was, maybe that resolves my confusion. I was confused by how you could get
a week by now you're making the start that we're coupling assumption, which are
made in this, in the positivity game of exactly, exactly, exactly. And then it'll be very surprising
to be able to get a bound on C0. No, no, no, exactly. That's answering better your question
before exactly here. There is no actual bound. Okay. But there is an upper bound on C2.
And know that if we're interested, as I am in also dimension six operators, then I will be able to
claim bounds by exactly doing the same game. Okay. So I wish I would later on, but so for dimension
six, it's exactly the same logic. It's simply that it's a flavorful amplitude. And here in
the y axis dimension six is something that you could have also access from, from the standard
positivity dispersion relation. No, not quite, because it involves reflection constants.
Okay. Remember, what is the magic that allows you to do better than that? That's
the magic is precisely looking at the real parts of unitarity.
That's the magic for dimension six.
That is the dispersion relation for dimension six. Sorry, if I'm
getting this easy, but one second, the dimension six dispersion relation,
it's given by this equation here. But this is a particular dispersion, we can write down.
This is the subtract double subtracted dispersion relation that involves this subtracting constant.
This you don't have it for dimension eight in the positivity gains.
And now just project this equation into partial waves. CH is a scalar.
So are you saying that there should be a way to supplement the positivity game of Simone
et al with this additional piece? Ah, for sure. Yes, exactly. So, okay. It's very nice to recover
this as a limit of the fully non-perturbative thing, but what if I make perturbative parts
on from the get go? Then I could. Exactly. Yeah, you would reproduce all that. It's what I will
hit now. Okay. Precisely. Yeah, you are still managing to always go when it's like before.
So that's exactly what I want to say next. Okay. So let me make some comments about
this effectively theory. Okay. Now, there is a nice observable, which is a, which we call simply
R, which is the ratio between C, the contribution to the, from the UV to C2 and the full C2.
Okay. Where C2, where the two slides above, but C2, it's simply the internal over the whole physical
analysis. Okay. Now, this ratio tells you if the ratio is one, okay, it means you are fully
UV dominated. Okay. If the ratio is zero, it means that you are a IR dominated. Okay. That's the
intuition. This has nothing to do with weak or strong coupling. Okay. It just tells you the
relative contributions and you could imagine with the couple of theories where you achieve
R equal one or R equal Z. Okay. But okay. And then the, we are going to also look at the ratio of
C3 over C2, which has received the personal attention, thanks to the positivity, these
double sided bound by, and let me tell you what we find here. So first of all, you can derive a
very simple bound. It is not a big thing, but it's useful to compare with the woodstrap,
which is given by this equation here. Okay. Now C3 is given by this some rule. Okay.
Now this piece here is always positive. Okay. You can check it. It's simply the same reason as before
because the partial waves are positive in this region. And so this quantity here is more or equal
than the first piece only. Okay. And now the first piece you can divide it between UV and IR. Okay.
And then using the ratio here R, you can derive this bound for the ratio of C3 over C2. Okay.
Now what I'm putting on the left, so what I'm putting first on the left is the value of R
along the boundary. Okay. Now in the lower branch, it's a fully IR dominated. Okay. So
it's kind of a boring field theory that is just a weakly covered. In the upper branch, it's fully,
it's close to maximally being UV dominated. Okay. Now what I show on the right plot is the value
of C3 over C2 along the whole boundary again. Okay. The red part is the exclusion given by this
simple derivation as a function of R. Okay. And now the value that we found in the boundary of C3
over C2 is given by this line here. And of course, it agrees with the bound throughout. Okay.
Now, there are other things that one can do. In the IR dominated region, since we're at weak
coupling, there's of course the hope that you can reproduce it by simple perturbative physics. And
indeed, you can compute this diagram in lambda phi 4. This perhaps not the most academic computation
that we normally do, but you can still do this computation, which is to expand these
at the below the crossing symmetric point at one loop. Okay. Maybe I have a diagram later on.
I have it here. Yes. You can do this computation and compute these numbers here, C2 and C3. And
then the ratio, the value of the coupling, of course, cancel. And okay, you get this universal
number for lambda phi 4 at a seemingly low coupling. And it matches precisely with what
with the result of the of the Woodson computation. So in the IR dominated region, we understand the
field theory, this boring theory. Now, in the UV dominated region, which is this part here, sorry,
is this region over here. Okay. Now, what we can do is run the bounds that were done by
kind of what Bandung and others, which consisting completely letting the IR part.
So you complete, you unify all the cards from the cutoff to the IR. And then you can show
that positivity, only positivity, only linearized for imaginary parts imply these two-sided bounds.
Okay. The amplitude in the region where it should, okay, the region where it's completely
UV dominated, it matches with these bounds. These bounds that were derived by assuming that the
IR cuts are zero are nice because they answer this physical setup.
Well, when I ask what is the maximum value or minimal value of the ratio in a theory that it's
completely UV dominated. Okay. It's not about the level that the UV cuts can be very large.
But of course, we should not interpret them as actual bound on a theory because
high four completely overshoot this bound. But it's okay. This is still answering a question to
nice question. Is it clear what I'm saying? It's absolutely clear. The mystery that is still a
little bit unclear to me is how you can get the bound on a dimension six operator.
Okay. Let me, let me continue.
So, can I also ask a question about this last plot? So, you're saying the difference between
your curves and the Karun-Hüro-Fandong lines is due to the fact that
you're implementing some assumptions slightly differently. And so, what's the difference?
There's some different assumptions, of course. Let me try to repeat it.
The difference is small. This difference is kind of quantifies some approximation which was
implicit in their work. Exactly. You can think it in this way if you wish. So, the approach we
are taking here is also motivated by physics, which is that we want to ask what are the maximum
values of these CI coefficients for theories that have no non-negligible IR cuts. Okay.
The IR cuts might be small, but not exactly zero. In the limiting case where the IR cuts are exactly
zero, okay, corresponds to this green band here. Okay. Now, it depends on your taste of how much
you want to allow for IR physics being negligible or not. Now, it depends on the question you are
interested in. And if you wish, the construction that we are making here, since I'm already out of
time, let me comment on something related to this question, okay, which is about the cut of the
pendants. So, we are putting bounds, no, by bounding these imaginary parts of the amplitude
at low energies. Okay. So, what we are achieving, if you wish, is to bridge between the S matrix
bootstrap kind of bounds that we got here and bounds of positivity in the following sense. So,
the cut of the theory, there are two limiting cases that we can take. We can take it all the
way to threshold, okay. And in this case, this bound that we are putting on the imaginary part
disappears. So, then we allow for resonances all the way in front of your nose when you start with
physical energies. And these are these plots, okay, for the O n, O 4 in this case,
and for the singlet gates. Now, there is the other limit. When you introduce now some new
physical scale lambda, and you separate them very much, you want to take them to very large values.
And this you can do it in two different ways. You can take, you can keep m square fixed and send
lambda to infinity. And in this case, for, and then, okay, if the higher copies are moderately
with the coupled, you are left with this single scale problem of m square. And this is a lambda
5 4, and it's the region of the bottom showing here, okay. Then there is the other limit,
which is we still take this ratio very large, okay. But we are taking g 0 to 0 first, so higher
cuts to 0, and the mass to 0 as well. So, this ratio, it also flows to infinity. Now, again,
in this case, a single scale problem, but the single scale is lambda. And now you get this kind
of bounds of a current water tile, which are also some universal numbers for the, for the
maximum values of C2, but in units of the cutoff, not in units of the mass.
So, in the second limit, it wasn't strictly necessary to take m square to 0, right? The
important thing- No, no, it's not. You are right, you are right.
The important thing is that g 0 is going to 0 first at the scale of, at the cutoff lambda,
and then m square is whatever, of course, single scale, but it's a small modification
of the same setup. Yes, yes, yes. It's not key that this is going exactly to 0. The only thing
I'm saying is I'm taking the ratio large. And in fact, related to your question, this is especially
this blue curve here, okay. This blue curve here is obtained by electing the higher cuts
and moving the mass, okay, for the cut, okay. And you see there is some nice convergence into the
mass. And well, the, this, I think I only had one hour, right? So, this is bringing me to the
conclusions. Now, the approach that we are taking is bridging between these two kinds of limits,
okay. So, we want to ask questions, which I think are relevant for actual physical theories,
where we have non-negligible higher cuts, but one crazy UB physics and see how much we can
mess up this CI coefficient. What I showed you today was a detailed study for the singlet case,
okay, of how to extract in the singlet case the, the, the small EFT region inside here,
and what are some of the physics regarding the UB dominance and the agreement with the,
with Tolley and Kernwood bounds at all. What we are now working and it should appear soon
is the same construction now, but with the full flavor full case. Here, I'm showing already you
the, the Esmeralda-Wurzer bounds. And this already, I was coming at the beginning, if you wish, a bound
on a, on a CH, on a one on dimension six, but not a very useful one. And from here, we should,
by restricting the, the, the higher contribution, we should cut about a small region, which will
tell us what are the maximal values of a CH for amplitudes that have a, this behavior, okay.
And then we are able to interpret the CH as a roughly CH. So this is where we are hitting.
Sorry, just to ask this again, but if I, if I'm in the second way of taking the limit, where g
zero is going to zero first. Yes. This is the, the, the bound that you, the one that you may be
interested in more. Then are you claiming that your method allows you to still put a bound in
dimension six? Yes. I see. Okay. Yes. Thank you.
Yes. I had one hour, right? I think I'm done already over an hour. I mean, we asked many, many
questions. So if you, if you want to take a few minutes. Okay.
Well, perhaps I can show you the phase shifts in a second and make one more comment on this
slide, which I skipped before, which is that one of the nice aspects of the,
of the primal, also the dual when the gap is closed is that you can reconstruct the, the full,
the full unitarity amplitude. So, you know, we know the amplitude in the boundary. So we can
just plot it and instead, instead of it. And here I'm showing you the amplitude for various
points around the values, the significant points around the boundary. This point here,
p1, p1 in the casp and a p5 here. Okay. And, and well, the upper branch, which is the one that
is re-dominated has this nice physical behavior where, so in the IAR, it fully matches the one
loop computation of lambda 5.4 and later on, just those crazy, crazy stuff. Okay. In the, in the,
in the, in this point in the lower branch, which is IAR dominated, we find like lambda 5.4 all
throughout the physical energy that we can explore. And now some comment about naive dimension,
naive dimensional analysis is that we can plot the value of C2 in units of the, of the cut
that we introduced throughout the boundary. Okay. And this, this funny curve that I'm showing you
here. Okay. Now, for the, for the weekly coupled region. Okay. And then we also compute the,
the two loop contribution, okay, to C2. And then, okay, in the weekly coupled region, it just matches
exactly even the two loop calculation of lambda 5.4. While in the upper branch, what you see
is that they're like, it agrees with what you would expect with a naive dimensional analysis,
that they are like roughly four pi. But this kind of exercise allows you to quantify more precisely
to put the order of one numbers in these nine dimensional analysis, and also to understand
which kind of, of physics are, are giving you the same values. Okay. But let me, let me end
with this slide only that saying that that's basically the main point of what we are doing,
which is a first to get this, I would say, nice as, as matters would strap
regions, and then carving finding inside the regions, the amplitude that have EFT interpretation,
but the days, but the, with extremal values of the CIs. Okay. And then, okay, I will leave it here.
Thank you very much.
Any other questions?
I have a comment that from my, you know, HPH memory, I, I should say that I, I could really
appreciate the contribution of the guys that really, I think they, they're doing a lot surprisingly,
John and Andrea, they are very much into Fino. I think this could indeed, this starts
indeed answering the question of Higgs physics that many people were discussing
for a while, but nobody knew how to address. So it seems like you guys are on the right track.
Congratulations. Thank you.
I should say that it seems, but nevertheless, I would probably, if you really want to attack
Higgs physics, I would be really surprised if in this ongoing part of your work, which has O n,
it's true that the case of spontaneously broken theory and the massive theory are probably similar,
but I would expect that there is like order one difference in the result that you're going to
get in the two cases. So maybe if you really want to address the Higgs physics, you better
consider also the spontaneously broken case sooner or later. Yes.
I eventually would like to interpolate also with that case.
For the moment, I'm content and I will be happy if we get a very similar picture as this one.
We're going to stand precisely the masses limit of these bounds,
because then it means that we are really focusing on the high energy regime.
I also had another question. So these comments that Leonardo made about the relation to the
to this G zero going to zero limit. So in the G zero going to zero limit
papers, usually people derive some smart equations. And then in the UV part,
you just get some positive contributions.
And this leads to balance. And so this to get this positive parts requires some numerics. And
that's how people get the balance. And so you also do numerics in your own way.
So is it obvious that the numerics that you are using are related to in the G zero going to zero
limit are become equivalent to the numerics that people who are only interested in this
perturbative limit are doing? Or is it just an expectation?
Your numerics are prime and the other ones are dual.
Yes, we're also, let me make a comment. So it's a general expectation to answer the question,
but we also have already some evidence of it. So this potential here, which I didn't explain all
the details, these are done with the dual, with the dual, but it's a it's a cheap plot.
But it is still a I find it already very nice because here we are only using a spin zero
partial wave. So these are the lines that we are trying to make that we are using to to find
maximal values. And to get this red region, we're only using the first leading
crossing constraint. And in the unitarity, we're only using this
brute approximation to the circle by a square. And then for this for the C zero sum rule,
which is given by this, we are only taking the spin zero projection.
There is much more information that we could put into. But if you do already this very simple,
this is a restricted number of constraints, you already exclude all infinity. And you get this
that, okay, this still has a mass gap, but the hope is that in the next week, by just adding
more spins and more unitarity and more electricity, this will go, this will go down.
But I'm sitting more complete your question. In this approach here, the kind of assumptions
are a very similar, except that we are putting more linearity, but they are very similar
to the words that you are referring of the G zero equals zero to start with.
But can I also say something because it's something that you haven't mentioned,
but we have run the dual problem for bounding C2, including the AR cuts,
but including also this additional low energy constraints.
Sure, I want to dive into this, you are talking about the red line here, right?
Yeah, I know. I'm just saying that most of our numerics are run with the primal,
but we have already some preliminary results with the dual, where we have just exploited the two-sided
bounds on the imaginary part. And the fact the imaginary part on the AR cuts are bounded. And
that is already enough to give these bounds, which are rigorous under these assumptions,
that the AR imaginary part is small. So, I mean, what we need to do now is also to add the
constraints on the real parts. And then we will really get the full dual picture of the
bounds that John showed before.
Anything else?
Yeah, I had a comment or question also, but even in the limit where you take this coupling to zero,
the two problems are not the same, right? The positivity and the one that you're doing because
after the cutoff, in principle, in these numerics, you're not allowing imaginary part to become
greater than one. So, in principle, this setup is strictly stronger, right? You're also inputting
that after the cutoff, it can become strongly coupled, but it still has to keep the imaginary
part bounded, which in the positivity games, that part is not input, right? So, even in this
limit, right?
In the positivity bounds, they are also put both bounds,
I'm not sure in the studio question, but in the positivity games, so,
in the positivity, you are right, you will only put that, but in many of these G0 equals 0 games,
they put both, they put this whole equation. Is it answering your comment?
But it's, if G0 is strictly, I mean, the question is in order of limits, right?
Yes.
If G0 is really going to zero, then everything is going to zero, right? So, they...
No, no. Well, G0 can be zero, but then you can still have higher dimensional
operators, right?
Well, okay, maybe I'm saying that some of the physical assumptions you may want to make is
that the entire theory is weakly coupled, you know, for example, the kind of game we play with
pions, where it's large n, and one over n, there's no doubt. It's always the only constraint you
can ever impose as positive.
Yes, yes, but that's a different limit, no?
Sort of, yeah, it's just a limit in which the entire imaginary part is small.
Exactly, exactly.
Yeah.
Anything else?
Okay, thank you very much.
Okay, thanks to you guys for the feedback.
Thank you.
