The Joe Rogan experience and today's podcast today's podcast. So first of all
You can reach it now. I finally got a website which is Eric Weinstein.org and
I told you that we have to leave this planet and that
It's hard not to laugh sorry, it's just hard not to laugh
But you're serious. I'm gonna leave this planet. We have to leave this planet. Why do I have to well?
Because we can't all be this plan has the best beaches
This planet says China Russia Iran in the United States under ridiculous leadership
There's lots of reasons why we have to leave this planet. We're not good stewards
We're not wise enough to stay on this planet. We're too powerful
We went through this and by the way, you pointed out this quote, which is we are now gods
but for the wisdom and that became a meme so that was very interesting the
I
Gave these lectures
I think in 2013 at all the best quotes ever, isn't it?
Don't know and I said who who originated that quote
There was me there was you yeah, when did you say it on your program? What day?
Which one remember which one you've probably
Trying to do a clip. I'm trying to think about what it just came off my tongue and you it's one of those ones
Where I'll drive down the street and it'll pop in my head like the nice person. No, no
No, it's it's a it's a fantastic quote, but it's so right. It's like every now and then someone can get the whole thing in a sentence
We now gods but for the wisdom
So that's why we have to get off this planet diversify because there too many people have godlike powers
Like Donald Trump commands a tremendous amount of godlike power thanks to our physics community
Well his ratings see how high they are
He's so hard to stay out focused sorry, okay, okay, so be just too much godlike power right
So the best hope that I can come up with and it's a slim one is is that if we could figure out
What goes beyond Einstein's theory?
The Einsteinian speed limit might be bendable or breakable
Because we would be in a framework that was larger than Einstein's people often interpret this is what they call FTL or faster than light travel
But that's not what I mean necessarily what I mean is is that the underlying source code gives us opportunities
that we don't normally have so
Seven years ago. I tried it release. I tried giving these lectures at Oxford
Which is probably the university that is spiritually closest to what I care about because they care about geometry and physics and they end a relationship
They've kept the face with faith with that tradition through people like Roger Penrose and Michael Atiyah, and
I
released this
theory of geometric unity
Or rather I released the video of the lecture that introduces this theory. So this was the first time since
1983
1984
That I talked in public when I started this program
When I was 18 19 something like that
And I just released the video today on our YouTube channel
And it's the video of you giving this discussion. Yeah, so it's introduced by professor Marcus DeSotois who has
Richard Dawkins old job as the Simonee professor for the public understanding of science
And he just he met me in a bar and he got me a little drunk. He said, okay, what are you really working on?
And I told him and at first it sounded crazy and then he started thinking about it
And he asked me more questions and he brought me over to Oxford
He got me an appointment had me talked to their experts
and then he decided that he wanted me to give these what he called special Simonee lectures and
They are an attempt to go beyond Einstein to look for a
Unified theory of physics between the two major branches that have resisted unification now
That's usually in the modern era
confused with the idea of quantizing gravity, but the quantum the quantum gravity imperative is a
It's a political program that comes out of what would have been the quantum field theory community before it became the string theory community
Actually the idea is we have to take Einstein and make him submit to the will of Bohr
And I don't think it's exactly like that
They don't I think they got it wildly wrong and they synchronized themselves and sort of took the field off the cliff
And they weren't able to ship a product. They couldn't deliver on any of this promise
And so when I saw that they were about to go off a cliff I switched fields
as an undergraduate into mathematics and
Used mathematics as a stalking horse to study the same sort of underlying structures, but not to get swept up in the politics of physics and
And I had this theory which I can now talk about for the first time in like 37 years or whatever it is and
Like today is the first day that I'm sort of free
Because I've kept this to myself
So if you want to ask me any question about geometric unity, but why why did you keep this to yourself?
Cuz I don't trust these people
You don't trust these people in the same like I know there was some people that have written some article wasn't it?
It's not them it's an entire system that believes in peer review and it believes in force citations
You have to be at a university you have to get an endorsement to use their pre-print server
It's too few resources too many sharp elbows. Do you think that there's
There's a logic to that method
No, I think to preserve it from charlatans and yeah, you have to do that pots that are yeah
They're just want to publish stories. Yep. So this way you have to be sponsored. It makes sense, right? Yes, but it
Whatever I'm doing whatever mistakes. I'm making
So much so I'm wrong about this theory. That's just fine
I'll find out that I'm wrong giving the layman's version of the theory. All right first time ever. Yeah
Do you know that let's start off with Escher's drawing hands, mm-hmm, so do you Jamie
Do you have a picture for that the the key problem that we have in a fundamental theory that people don't think about is
Not why is there something rather than nothing? I don't think we can answer that it's why is there so much that is
That is rich out of almost nothing and so this issue shows that if you had a piece of paper
Could you will into being?
The hands holding pens using ink to draw each other right
That problem is akin to the problem that we face in a fundamental theory
if you had the canvas how would the canvas bring all of the richness that you see around you into being and
What I did was I said, okay, we have to go below Einstein
So we have four degrees of freedom, but they're not yet space and time. It's proto space time, but before and
Then I said, okay that
those four degrees of freedom are like the stands in a stadium and the stands somehow need to build the pitch and
The pitch is a 14 dimensional space. So if let's imagine that you had
Okay, we've got four objects here, right
So the four degrees of freedom correspond to the four objects then we need a ruler to measure
How much of each of these four objects we have?
So that would be four additional variables
And then you have angles because length and angles what Einstein gave us in space time
So the angles between any two objects are the same as the reverse of the angle
So then you can count it up and there's six angles to be had
So there's four degrees of freedom
plus four rulers
Plus six protractors, which is 14
So there's a 14 dimensional auxiliary space and in my estimation
You and I are in some ways potentially having this conversation in a 14 dimensional world that we perceive
back in the stands rather than on the pitch as
A four-dimensional conversation that is we are in a three-dimensional room going forward in time
So I've called this the observer's and the observer's is two spaces rather than Einstein's one space
Can I stop you right there? Sure. Why 14 dimensions?
because I'm saying that
The fields that is the stuff is dancing not mostly on
The four dimensions that we think we perceive
But it's also dancing on the rulers and the protractors
So in other words if I have x y and z I need rulers in the x direction the y direction of the z to measure things
And I need a watch which would be like a ruler in the time direct
So those four rulers are in fact in play as well
And the protractors because like a spacetime is four degrees of freedom plus rulers and protractors
I'm saying work over the space of all rulers and all protractors as part of where these particles and fields can dance
So the rulers and the protractors are part of the system
Not just a choice of particular rulers and particular protractors
So by choosing particular rulers and particular protractors
Einstein is grabbing a tiny filament of the space of all possible rulers and protractors
So in effect spacetime is recovered as the act of the observers
Contemplating itself. That's a little bit poetic
But I mean that the choice of a spacetime metric inside of the space of all metrics is a section of a
14-dimensional bundle over a four-dimensional space
now
That's the first sort of mind-bending weird thing is is that this is not happening in one place
It's happening in two places in x and in y the stands and the pitch
There are things that are happening in the stands and there are things that are happening in the pitch
So, you know what when a guy is like trying to make a free throw and everybody's waving their giant noodles trying to get him to miss
There's an interaction between what's happening in the stands and what's happening on the floor and
the observers is the bundling of two spaces and
Saying hey, you're confused as to what's going on here
Some fields are happening in the stands some fields are happening on the floor and there everything feels as if it's happening in the stands
Because that's where you're sitting in some weird way
Then you've got this really crazy stuff, which I think
One aspect of it is everybody in theoretical physics is looking to figure out whether there are three or more
Generations that is copies of matter
Everything in this room is generation one
It's all made up of up quarks down quarks and electrons so that
Up quarks and down quarks give you protons and neutrons and electrons give you these sort of interesting personality of the various chemical elements
they're also neutrinos, but they're streaming through us, so I'm not going to count them and
That's all generation one of matter
So everything in that think of that as like plastic Lego, then there's another Lego set made out of wood and
Then there's another Lego set made out of like lead
You know, and we don't see those other two Lego sets except if we're doing very energetic experiments
So there were three copies of matter and everybody was trying to figure out three or more and I thought maybe it's two or fewer
And so one of the aspects of this theory is is that the third generation of matter is an imposter
It looks like this generation of matter in terms of its particle personalities
But if you were actually to heat up the system it would unify with a bunch of particles
Nobody's ever seen before and so there are predictions for what those new particle properties would be
There's also a fourth pseudo generation of what would be called spin three halves matter
Which is not prohibited, but has never been seen as a fundamental
So it makes predictions for the particle properties of new spin half and new spin three halves particles
It attempts to say that there are sectors of matter that I think decoupled
That the universe is not in fact left-right asymmetric, which would be called chirality
And if you think about the weak force so if you have a new neutron on a table it'll decay and I think something like 17 minutes on average half-life
When it decays there's an asymmetry in that decay called beta decay and
That was found by a woman
Bring up Madame Wu from Columbia and the cobalt 60 experiment
So in the 50s this this gal Madame Wu
Who should have won a Nobel Prize?
Discovered that when cobalt 60 decays through beta decay the electrons come spin out one side and not the other meaning that the universe is like
Marilyn Monroe or Cindy Crawford having a birthmark that lets you tell the left from the right
So this is like the ultimate
Experimental badass who never got recognized fully
And she did an experiment based on work of Yang and Lee
That for the first time showed that the universe had a preference of one of its left over its right if you will
I don't believe that preference is fundamental. I believe that there's an another copy of matter
That so the analogy I give is that if you think if you look at your three fingers in the center of your hand
Your middle finger, which is my favorite is obviously symmetrical about itself your digit ratio two and four
Is pretty close but is determined by the amount of testosterone you're exposed to in utero
And then your thumb and your pinky are wildly off, but you could try to make it symmetric and say well
You know a pinky is like a lame thumb, which it isn't
If you're just looking at your hand, you're trying to figure why is my hand asymmetrical
But you don't realize that you've got another hand and it's thumb to thumb not thumb to pinky that is the symmetry
So when you
You know place your fingertips together you see that if you didn't know if you were like all over sexed out
And you could only see part of your body
You'd think about oh the world is asymmetric. Well, my belief is that in weak gravitational situations
This other matter decouples. So you only see one hand or the other and we're we're all in one handedness
So
What i'm starting to do is is that i'm terrified
Um of talking about this stuff. I don't have the right credentials. Not a physicist
I've been out of this game for forever. So I often say the wrong things and break rules and who knows what
And I haven't really talked about it. This is like really a very lone
I mean, I've been completely alone on this project
All my life, what do you think the end result of this project potentially could be?
Because you're saying we could get off this planet
What he would like what are you talking about in terms of the actual implementation of this this theory of yours?
So jamie if you could bring up
My answer to the final edge question, which is what is the last question
John Brockman asked when the final year that he conducted the annual edge question
And that is the annual edge question. Yes, he would ask like 200 people many of them physicists or biologists or mathematicians
He would ask a question and they'd write an essay and then every year he'd publish it as a book
And so I did that for 10 years
Finally got tired of it
And he said, okay. This is my final year. We've exhausted this. What is the last question?
So this is the question that I asked. So does something
Unprecedented happen when we finally learn our own source code? Now, nobody picked up on this
but that's my concern is which is
what happens
When the universe finally contemplates itself
When we are the first like we're always worried about the ai becoming self aware a la skynet
Okay, we are the ai
And we're about to become self aware if we can figure out what our own source code is
So we are a skynet. So you're talking about the source code
Of reality itself. Yep
And that our perception our limited perceptions of reality are giving us a distorted view
Of what the landscape actually is we're I'm trying to make sure
I was somewhat holding this back because I'm afraid of what it unlocks
And now that I know that we're willing to elect donald trump not storm masks
Play footsie with china
Be putans bitch all of this stuff
To hell with this we're gonna mismanage this planet into armageddon if we don't get some grown-ups into the room
And so I don't know that I'm a grown-up, but I'm willing to vie for leadership by putting something up having it
Investigated and seeing where it goes. What is your number one fear about this?
This source code being I don't know what this lack of a better term mastered. Well the last time we
Gained some serious insight into the way nuclei worked
That with a little bit of geometry from stanislaw ulem and edward teller
Uh
Gave us the the namesake of the bikini
That was a terrifying moment. We changed everything changed in 19. I think that was 54
The namesake of the bikini. Yeah bikini at all was an island in the pacific
Where we blew up a hydrogen device
Is that that
Insane those insane images where you can see the water going a mile high into the sky
Gorgeous. Yeah. Is that what that is? Yeah
But they did that a lot, right? Well, they did it for a period of time
Now and so went to your question
What if what so it's still expensive to create fusion devices?
So we don't know of any individuals who own the ability to create fusion devices if you recall at some point
Um, somebody made a functioning uh nuclear reactor out of discarded smoke detectors
And we're not got like 500 smoke detectors took out the radioactive element created a reactor. Really? I think so
Probably kid, right? Yeah
Probably a kid who couldn't get into harvard
um
So we have a situation in which we don't know
When ordinary humans will gain limitless destructive power, you know, try to imagine the columbine kids
Um weaponizing viruses or something like that
So one of the great dangers is that great power
I can't tell what the power would be if the theory is correct
It might give us the ability to escape
It might give us the escape though. Yeah, why do we have to escape? This is what what i'm i'm always so confused about
like because
Even when elon talks about going to mars. Yeah, like mars sucks mars sucks. Can't you fix here?
Wouldn't that be the best approach? Well, you and I agree on that. Yeah, what we don't agree on
I think is is that i'm convinced
That we don't have the ability to steward this place. Why?
Don't you think we're better at it now than we were a thousand years ago? No, no, no, no, no
So gingus con was doing a better job
gingus con was doing a better job because he didn't have limitless power
Just try to imagine it try to imagine a full-on nuclear interchange
And then we're having this conversation afterwards. So you you're concerned
that nuclear war
Is uh, not just possible but inevitable
It's certainly inevitable given a long enough time series
Because all these weapons simply will become cheaper
There's no counter measure that we it's too easy to destroy things relative to building them, right?
Yeah
