Medical students learn medicine from the most recent texts they can get, but there are some
diseases that we've known about for a long time.
If I forget you, O Jerusalem, my right hand shall also be forgotten, my tongue shall stick
to my palate if I do not remember you.
That's from Psalm 137, probably written about five or six hundred years before the birth
of Jesus.
It's an admonishment to keep the Holy Land close at heart, and it's also a good medical
description of something that must have been well known in antiquity, and is still a common
problem today, and it's what's happening to our first patient.
We just came on duty at the ED, and our next patient is being brought back.
He looks to be an older man, being pushed in a wheelchair.
He's with a younger woman, maybe his daughter, and she's the one doing the talking.
She gives us the chief complaint, I think my daddy is having a stroke.
Our patient's name is Ramesh, and they're hooking him up to monitors and things while
we get some basic history.
His daughter's kind of breathless and upset, but what we've learned is that Ramesh is sixty-one
years old, he's a barber, and his daughter works at his barber shop doing hair dyeing
and coloring.
She says he was working, and all of a sudden he kind of slumped to the floor, and his right
hand and arm got kind of loose, and since then he can't talk.
This happened only eight minutes ago, Ramesh's customer was actually an off-duty EMT who
grabbed Ramesh, threw him in his car, and raced to the hospital.
EMT, by the way, is emergency medical technician.
Those are the people who ride the ambulances.
If you're going to have a stroke, try to do it right in front of an EMT.
They know how to handle emergencies.
What's going on with Ramesh, it's exactly like that Bible passage I started with.
My right hand will be forgotten, and my tongue will stick to my palate.
The Bible here is describing a stroke, specifically a common kind of stroke, where there is blockage
of the left middle cerebral artery, with resulting damage to the left heart of the brain that
controls the right arm and the speech center.
It's striking how well that twenty-five hundred year old passage correctly and succinctly sums
up the symptoms of this kind of stroke.
Has Ramesh definitely had a stroke then?
It is likely, but we shouldn't assume so, not yet.
There is a differential diagnosis, a list of so-called stroke mimics.
A seizure can cause sudden neurologic symptoms, and even in the period right after a seizure,
there can be lingering effects, including what can seem to be paralysis.
Sometimes a faint can kind of seem like a stroke.
They're sudden, but of course pretty soon after someone wakes from a faint, it's clear
that they're okay.
There's no lasting neurologic or other symptoms.
Hypoglycemia can cause a loss of consciousness, and sometimes other neurologic symptoms.
One of the first things done on the ambulance or in the ED, with a potential stroke, is
to very quickly check blood sugar.
Brain tumors more typically cause slower onset symptoms, but sometimes they can cause
sudden manifestations, including seizures or stroke-like symptoms.
In migraines, we've mentioned migraines before, migraines can be very odd, and sometimes
they cause sudden neurologic symptoms that really can mimic strokes.
But think about that list of mimics.
Really the only one on the list that needs immediate diagnosis and treatment is hypoglycemia.
The rest of those things, migraines, tumors, fainting, seizures, all of that can wait.
This is the situation where it is better to immediately deal with what's most likely,
a stroke, because immediate recognition and treatment can really make a difference.
If, as things turn out, it's not really a stroke, no harm done in waiting to diagnose
something else.
One test has already been done.
Ramesh's glucose finger stick is normal.
It was actually a little high, 180.
You've been lingering at the back of the room while the nurses get their IV started, monitors
on, and a few labs drawn.
Ramesh is breathing okay.
His initial vitals look okay from across the room.
So you get a little more history from his daughter for now.
By the way, the ED staff really likes it when the doctor takes the family away for a few
minutes.
It helps them concentrate on the patient.
So we step out in the hall with the daughter.
The nurses stay with the patient to do what they need to do.
It all works out.
Ramesh's daughter, she's still trembling.
She says her dad is really healthy.
He has type 2 diabetes, but has been good about taking his medications.
His blood sugars have mostly been normal.
The history of diabetes, now that we know about it, that helps explain that high-ish
blood glucose measurement of 180.
He also has high blood pressure and takes a water pill for that.
He's been married for 39 years, used to smoke, but quit 15 years ago.
She says he never drinks or uses drugs, and that he works really hard and keeps his barbershop
open seven days.
He only takes one vacation a year to fish for a week with his buddies.
The nurse comes out of the room, and she smiles at the two of you, and she says, I think he's
going to be all right.
You head in, and sure enough, Ramesh looks much better.
He's sitting up, he's smiling, and he's holding up his right arm, and he says, I feel fine.
So this wasn't a stroke, after all.
It was the beginning of a stroke, but it stopped on its own.
What Ramesh had is sometimes incorrectly called a mini-stroke.
Its real medical name is a TIA, or transient ischemic attack.
A stroke or cerebrovascular accident occurs when there is inadequate blood flow to an
area of the brain.
Neurons or brain cells in the affected area die, resulting in permanent or near-permanent
loss of functioning.
The exact symptoms will depend on what had been the functioning of that area of the brain.
A stroke in the stripe of brain that controls motor functioning will cause weakness.
A stroke in the back of the brain, the occipital area, will affect vision, because the back
of the brain is where visual information is decoded and processed.
Strokes don't have to follow exact functional boundaries, sometimes these symptoms overlap.
Strokes can sometimes cause problems with emotional control, attention, drawing ability,
memory, speech, really anything the brain does, that functioning can be damaged by a
stroke.
In Ramesh's case, what happened was a brief temporary blockage of flow.
Long enough so the brain cells in that area were affected and stopped functioning, but
short enough so that when the blood supply resumed the cells survived and returned to
normal.
This is most typically caused by a clot in one of the arteries that supplies the brain.
These clots, if you're lucky, can dissolve or get dislodged, allowing blood flow to
quickly resume.
So what's next with Ramesh?
His daughter starts bawling, he's smiling, and he says, okay doc, I'm alright and I need
to go back to work.
You know, I kind of like this Ramesh guy.
Okay, vital signs are temperature 98.6, pulse 88, blood pressure 152 over 82, respirations
12, pulse ox 99% on room air, Ramesh looks healthy, he's of Indian descent.
A general examination is absolutely normal, but I want to highlight some specific things
we're going to look for that are important.
His pulses are all normal and strong, including the pulses in his wrists and ankles showing
good blood flow.
There's no murmur and his heart rhythm is normal.
A careful neurologic exam is normal, including tests of memory and concentration.
His vision, strength, reflexes and sensation, those are all normal too.
Blowing over his neck to the blood vessels, we hear a humming sound called a brewery.
That's something we haven't run across before.
A brewery is a noise, kind of a rushing or a blowy sort of sound that's heard over an
artery when there is some kind of occlusion or a blockage.
You can hear them occasionally over the belly if there's a blockage in the descending aorta.
And in children, we sometimes listen for them over the skull.
In this case, we're concerned about a blockage from a clot in the brain and it could have
come from a plaque that's accumulated in the carotid artery in the neck.
Now a brewery isn't a great reliable physical finding.
People can have significant blockages and there may not be a brewery.
Or sometimes a turbulent sound can be heard just from the way the artery flows without
there being any true blockage.
But hearing this brewery in Ramesh makes us more suspicious that in the carotids there's
a blockage that could have led to his symptoms.
Ramesh feels fine now.
So what other workup, if any, do we need?
Some basic blood tests were sent off including a CBC, that was normal, and chemistries, that
was normal.
And these are important.
Tests can be set off by hematologic conditions that increase clotting risk including leukemia
or multiple myeloma.
And those chemistries, those are important too to make sure the kidneys and liver are
working okay.
We also check some tests for bleeding problems, they're normal, and an EKG.
That's to make sure Ramesh doesn't have a problem with the heart rhythm that could
allow clots to form in his heart leading to stroke.
The physical exam didn't reveal an abnormal heart rate, but it's best to be sure.
All of these tests are normal.
Ramesh also had a CT scan of the head.
That's not really to evaluate for the stroke.
A CT scan won't reliably show brain damage from ischemia or lack of oxygen for at least
six to 24 hours after a stroke.
The main reason to do the CT scan is to make sure that there isn't a hemorrhage or bleed
in the brain.
Since Ramesh's symptoms are 100% resolved and he doesn't even have a headache, one
could make a case for not doing that CT, but it's also a reasonable screen for brain tumors
and will provide a baseline to compare with future CT scans if Ramesh has more problems.
In any case, the CT was done, it was normal, and now Ramesh really wants to go back to
his barbershop.
What do you think?
Do you think that's safe?
Do you think that's a good idea?
Overall, the risk of a full-blown stroke after a TIA is probably about 20% within the first
year.
That's without preventive therapy.
We'll talk about that in a minute.
The risk for a stroke within the next few days might be as high as 5% overall, but there
are some known risk factors we can assess.
The highest risk for a stroke within days of a first TIA occur in elderly patients.
Now Ramesh is 61, so he refuses to consider himself in that category.
Recurrent stroke risk is also higher in people with poorly controlled high blood pressure.
Ramesh was a little high, but not too bad.
The risk is also higher in those whose TIA lasted longer the first time.
Symptoms longer than 60 minutes are especially concerning.
Overall, Ramesh would seem to fit into the lower risk category, and with good reliable
follow-up and some initial preventive care steps in the emergency department, it is reasonable
to send Ramesh home or back to work.
Some people probably should be admitted after a TIA.
Those who are judged to have less reliable follow-up, or those unable to manage their
own initial therapy, or those without good family support.
Inpatient care means that some of the follow-up tests could be done more quickly too, but in
this case, especially because Ramesh himself seems confident and his daughter is here,
she agrees with the plan, we'll send him out after beginning some initial therapy.
First, we'll contact his physician, a family physician who has been seeing Ramesh for years.
She confirms that he's always been good about follow-up, and suggests an adjustment for
his high blood pressure meds.
It's especially important after a TIA to keep that blood pressure in a healthy range.
She had just checked blood lipids, including cholesterol, a few months ago, and that was
fine.
Again, we'd want to aggressively treat elevated cholesterol if that were a problem for Ramesh
to help prevent future clotting and vascular disease.
She also asks us to send the paperwork to Radiology to schedule a Doppler ultrasound
of the blood vessels in his neck.
We agree on a plan to start Ramesh on an aspirin a day to help prevent future clots.
His doctor will see him in her office in two days.
Ramesh snips off the hospital wristband, I don't know how, but he snuck in his barber
shears in his back pocket or something, and he leaves with his daughter.
Three days later, you happen to see the results of his neck ultrasound.
The idea of this study is to look where the source of blood clots might be, these large
vessels in the neck that supply the brain, that's where we had heard his brewery.
Ramesh does have some blockage in the 50-70% range on the left side here.
What to do about this, it's kind of controversial.
Options for therapy include endarterectomy, which is surgery to remove clotting material
blocking up the inside of the carotid arteries, or carotid artery stented, which is inserting
a hollow tube into the carotid artery to keep it open.
These are not easy procedures and they carry a significant risk of triggering a stroke
or other problems.
Clearly higher grade blockages in a patient who is continuing to have symptoms need to
be removed, at least if it's safe and possible, but for Ramesh, who has had no further symptoms
and has had what's considered a moderate blockage, it's not clear that aggressive therapy is
a good idea.
Counterbalancing this, he's only 61, he's in overall good shape and he can have many
healthy years ahead of him.
Whether to intervene is a decision we'll have to make with his own family physician
in consultation with a vascular surgeon.
Once we know that Ramesh has vascular disease in his neck, it will be a good idea for him
to have a cardiac stress test to look for potential blockages in his coronary arteries.
And of course, it will be especially important for him to control his diabetes and high blood
pressure and to stay on aspirin.
That brings us back to risk reduction.
Why did Ramesh have a TIA and can he reduce his future risk?
The risk factors for stroke and TIA are the same and they overlap with the risks for coronary
artery disease and blockages in other blood vessels.
All of these are related to age.
The risk of stroke doubles every decade of life, starting at about 55.
Men are at higher risk than women and there are inherited risk factors as well.
African Americans, Hispanics and Asians are all at higher risk than Caucasians, perhaps
because they have higher rates of hypertension.
Stroke risk is increased not only by high blood pressure, but by obesity, diabetes and
high cholesterol.
Lifestyle choices like smoking, staying sedentary and excessive alcohol consumption all increase
the risk of stroke as do some medications.
Taking oral contraceptives, especially when combined with smoking and women over 35, can
further increase stroke risk.
Ramesh had quit smoking 15 years ago.
Does that help to quit?
Yes, it does.
Within two years of quitting smoking, even long-term smokers risk of stroke starts to
decline.
By five years after quitting, their risk may be comparable to non-smokers risk.
Overall, about 50% of strokes could be prevented through better lifestyle choices, not smoking,
maintaining a healthy weight and exercising regularly.
Let's back up to one potentially confusing part of Ramesh's story, that left versus right
business.
Let me clear that up.
It turns out that your brain is wired to your body with nerve fibers that cross over from
one side to the other.
So the right side of your brain controls motor function on the left side of your body and
the left side controls the right.
Nerve fibers also cross over.
In Ramesh's case, the left-sided blockage led to right-sided weakness.
It also affected the speech area of the brain, called Broca's area, which is on the left
side, kind of the middle side area here.
The symptoms of a TIA or stroke can start out exactly the same.
In Ramesh's case, the symptoms very quickly resolved, and he did well, with follow-up
and monitoring, and if he keeps his risk factors of high blood pressure and diabetes under control,
he may never have problems like this again.
But what if Ramesh didn't seek care at all?
What if he just stayed at work and the symptoms of his TIA resolved?
That wouldn't have been a good idea.
The risk of a stroke within seven days of a TIA is doubled among those who don't seek
treatment.
Ramesh was lucky that his symptoms resolved, and this transient ischemic attack provided
some warning about his stroke risk and time for him to make lifestyle changes and other
steps to prevent a full-blown stroke.
What if his symptoms didn't improve?
Let's say we're in the ED.
Here's Ramesh again.
But this time, two hours have passed since the start of his symptoms of right arm weakness
and difficulty talking.
This time, he's not getting better.
We then have to think about the different kinds of stroke, which one Ramesh has because
the treatments aren't the same.
The most common kind of stroke is caused by a clot, most commonly a clot directly in
the arteries of the brain, a so-called cerebral thrombosis.
This is the kind of stroke that's most commonly preceded by one or more TIAs.
A stroke can also be caused by a clot when it acts as an embolus, a clot from somewhere
else that breaks off, travels through the circulation, and lodges suddenly in an artery
supplying the brain.
The most common situation leading to this is atrial fibrillation, where the upper chambers
of the heart kind of quiver instead of pumping.
The stagnant blood in a fib forms little clots.
They form in the heart itself, and they can then travel up towards the brain.
People with atrial fibrillation need to stay on clot preventing medicines to prevent strokes.
Whether the clot is directly in the brain or traveled up to the brain, clots cause the
majority of strokes.
However, a second group of strokes is caused not by clotting, but by bleeding or hemorrhage.
The bleed can be from a burst blood vessel in the brain, or from a blood vessel between
the brain and the skull.
C-bleeding can lead to damage to the brain by both increasing pressure within the skull
and by disrupting normal blood flow.
Some strokes can actually involve areas of both clot called thrombosis and bleeding.
Bleeding inside or outside of the brain can very easily be seen on a CT.
Now Ramesh's CT scan is normal, so we know there is no bleeding.
So if he had had a stroke, that is if his symptoms from his TIA didn't improve, he would
be a good candidate for what's called thrombolytic or clot busting therapy.
Most commonly, an IV medicine called TPA is used.
It has to be given within three hours of the beginning of symptoms to be effective.
By three hours, even if the clot can be broken down, the brain cells affected will not be
recoverable.
That three hour limit can be problematic for people who wake up in the morning with symptoms
of stroke.
They don't know when it occurred.
Clock starts ticking at the last time the patient was known to be normal, even if that
was the night before.
There are some other problems with TPA, though it can improve recovery and reduce long-term
disability because it's an anti-clot medicine, it can actually cause bleeding in six or seven
percent of patients, turning a thrombotic stroke, a clot stroke, into a hemorrhagic
or bleeding stroke.
It also can't be used in people with very high blood pressure because they're already
at risk for bleeding, nor in people who have bleeding disorders, aneurysms, or prior strokes.
After care of a stroke, after clot busting medicine or treatment of hemorrhages often
includes prolonged rehabilitative care and supportive care, some functioning can return
the old teaching that brain cells once dead do not recover, that's kind of an oversimplification
and it's not really true.
Immediately after a stroke, there is a few days or weeks window where there can be a
fairly rapid recovery of function, at least partially.
More functioning is more likely to return with a stroke that affected a small area of
the brain and in people who got medical care quickly.
The location of the stroke is also important.
Some areas of the brain seem to be more or less fragile than other areas.
Improvement will also depend on the overall health of the patient and whether there were
complications like a prolonged period of increased pressure in the brain, perhaps from bleeding.
This period of recovery, the recovery immediately after the stroke, occurs when cells near the
area of ischemia start to recover.
These are the cells that were damaged, but not killed by the stroke.
After this initial period, there can still be improvement in recovery, though recovery
becomes slower after the first weeks.
After that initial period, brain recovery probably isn't related to individual cells
recovering their function, but from other mechanisms.
To some extent, the brain can rewire connections around an area of damage.
If this area of brain was damaged in time, the neurons nearby can start to transmit
signals around that damaged area.
A second mechanism of improvement, again, it's a gradual one, is that completely different
areas of brain can slowly start to take over the functioning of a damaged part.
For instance, at least some patients who have Broca's aphasia, that's damaged to the
speech center on the left side of the brain, can have some improvement in speech and articulation
over several months, as other areas of the brain seem to take over some of the speech
processing that used to occur in Broca's area.
These mechanisms of slow recovery progress over about six months after a stroke, but
past that time, there is typically not a lot of further recovery possible.
The exact extent of recovery within that six month window is difficult to predict, but
it can be substantial.
A hundred percent recovery, though, that's rare.
There's quite a bit of research going on into brain recovery after a stroke, looking for
ways to maximize what's called the plasticity of the brain, this ability of the brain to
recover function.
We know that children, especially young children, have the best ability to recover after a stroke,
probably because their brains are still growing and developing.
Even a massive stroke in a young child can end up leading to minimal long-term disability.
There seem to be important genetic switches on neurons that control their growth and development,
and therefore the ability of brain tissue to recover.
A goal of research is in turning these switches back on, effectively making an adult brain
or parts of an adult brain think it's young again, so it can better grow and recover.
For the time being, though, the best stroke treatment is actually stroke prevention, control
high blood pressure, high cholesterol, control diabetes, and prevent overweight, eat a healthy
diet with plenty of fruits and vegetables, quit tobacco use, and exercise regularly.
People at high risk should consider taking anti-stroke medications, typically medicines
that prevent clotting, including aspirin or some prescription medications.
These have both benefits and risks, so their use should be discussed with the family's
doctor.
One other potential preventive strategy for stroke I wanted to mention is an omega-3 supplement.
This is a supplement of so-called healthy fats often derived from fish oil.
We know that populations that consume more fish tend to have fewer strokes, and some
studies have shown that fish oil taken as a supplement can reduce strokes.
However, other studies haven't been as persuasive, with some even showing some increased risk
of at least the hemorrhagic kind of stroke.
So routinely, use of fish oil supplements to prevent strokes really isn't supported.
It's a good example, though, of how sometimes promising ideas from initial studies sometimes
turn out to not work out as well as hoped.
There is still some evidence for other benefits from fish oil, but it's probably not the
stroke preventer that some people had been hoping for.
People who do experience early signs of stroke or TIA need to be evaluated as quickly as
possible, yet there is sometimes a delay.
Any sudden symptom of neurologic dysfunction that could be weakness or speech problems
or altered sensation, loss of consciousness, trouble seeing, trouble walking, or sometimes
things other people notice, like a droopy face or eye, or altered speech, any of these
things are potential stroke symptoms that need to be evaluated very urgently.
Sometimes an individual experiencing a stroke seems to not notice the symptoms or deny symptoms
that are really obvious to everyone else.
There's even a word for that phenomenon, A, nose agnosia, which may actually be caused
by damage to brain areas involved in self-awareness.
So it may be up to friends or loved ones to insist that people with stroke symptoms seek
care.
Remember, you've got about a three-hour window after a stroke where clot-busting medicines
can help, and the quicker the evaluation, the better.
This is not something that can be done at your doctor's office or something you would
call for an appointment about, call 911, or get to a hospital emergency department as
quickly as possible.
Next up, a case that takes some unexpected turns.
Sometimes it takes more than one visit to the doctor to get it right.
That doesn't mean the doctor did anything wrong, it just means that sometimes you don't
see the whole picture at once.
But again, an open mind and a humble willingness to go back and question your own assumptions,
that's what it takes to be a good doctor.
See you at our next Grand Rounds.
