Today's presentation isn't common that this will be a bit of a brain stretch, but we've
made it this far and you've learned a lot, so let's see how you do.
Here's your hint.
Risk factors for what's about to happen to our patient include being born in the winter
and growing up far from the equator.
We're working an ED shift tonight, which means, well, anything can happen.
It's a snowy night in Boston and we're hoping the weather keeps some of the less severe
emergencies away.
Our next patient is ready to be seen in the walk-inside, that's where those less severe
emergency patients end up, at least as judged by the triage nurse.
That's one drawback to seeking care at an ED.
It's not first come, first served, the sickest, most likely to die patients go to the front
of the line and patients judged to be less sick will have to wait longer.
Unfortunately, sometimes that means initial triage misses something important.
Anyway, here we go.
Let's take a look at the intake form.
We've got a four-month-old little African-American girl named Samantha, and the form here has
the chief complaint posed as a question written by the parents.
They've written, she's shaking, is something wrong.
We head in and there's a little girl sitting in mom's lap, kind of half propped up.
You introduce yourself, shake hands, and dad says, she seems okay now, but she's really
had us scared.
The parents tell the story.
Samantha, they call her Sammy, she's been healthy.
She's their first child and she's been nursing well and growing well.
But over the last three days, she's having periods of time when she seems to either go
stiff or kind of shake.
They thought Sammy was just startling at first.
They saw their family physician earlier today, but she didn't see an episode and thought
maybe the baby was having some reflux.
But the parents are still worried, so they came to the ED to get her checked out again.
By the way, for some clarification, a family medicine physician has done a three-year residency
and kept up specific requirements for specific board certification in family practice.
This specialty focuses on primary care of people of all ages, from birth through geriatrics.
And many family practice doctors also perform minor surgery and obstetrics.
Family practice is not the same as GP or general practice.
Those are people who typically have not completed a specific residency and do not hold any
board certification.
Okay, you take a quick look-see.
Once over at this little baby.
She's a cute little thing, she's smiling back at you, her color is good, she looks fine.
So whatever's going on, we can at least think about it for a few minutes.
What do you think about this story?
It's one of those chief complaints.
It could be nothing, or it could be something kind of big and scary.
On the one hand, Sammy may just be shaking a bit because of a startle or a shutter.
Or could there be a serious neurologic or other problem going on here?
Let's put together our brief differential.
This could be a seizure, that's the scary thing that we worry about with shaking.
Little babies are actually a high risk group for seizures because there can be brain malformations
or metabolic problems that could just be coming to light.
Babies are also the highest risk group for brain infections like meningitis.
Or maybe it's not really a seizure, there are several neurologic symptoms that can kind
of mimic seizures, at least at first.
Some examples, sleep myoclonus is the name for those few jerking movements that many
people have as they fall asleep.
Another common benign normal movement is a shuddering spell, which looks like a quick
sort of trembling movement.
Or could this be something not neurologic at all, like reflux?
Now all babies spit up, but some find it painful.
And occasionally we will see a baby with reflux from the stomach up into the throat,
who arches and stiffens, looking in many ways like a seizure.
This even has a name, it's called Sandafer syndrome.
So reflux may indeed be the culprit here.
Or maybe this will turn out to be nothing at all, or nothing that even has a name.
Babies will sometimes move in kind of weird ways.
Because odd movements, including some trembling or shaking or jerking, is just something normal
babies do.
Let's get more history than our exam.
Sammy had a routine pregnancy with no history of abnormal prenatal ultrasounds or problems.
The delivery was at term.
And there were no known problems that could have affected or damaged Sammy's brain.
She went home after an ordinary two day hospital stay, and she lives with her parents.
She's had only a few doctor visits for routine care and routine immunizations.
No medical concerns have really been raised.
Her growth, including measurements of height and weight and head circumference, have all
been normal.
You ask for a little more detail.
This shaking or funny movement she does, when does it occur?
Her parents agree.
It sort of comes out of nowhere.
It can happen at any time.
Once it was during nursing, once it was just while playing, and they think it happened
once while she was napping.
The shaking lasts maybe three, maybe four minutes, and then it stops.
I'm just going to interject here.
That history, that it happens pretty much any time, that does fit with seizures.
Funny movements that only occur at a certain time.
Let's say a baby who shakes his fist during a diaper change or turns his head only when
he's fed with a spoon, or a child who gets red in the face and trembles, only when he's
mad, maybe when he gets hurt.
Those movements are much less likely to be seizures.
Seizures really should occur just out of the blue, not under only specific circumstances.
One exception, there's always an exception, is that there are some kinds of seizures that
are more common during sleep, or more common when a baby is just falling asleep or waking
up.
Sammy's history of funny movements at random times is not particularly reassuring.
So back to the history.
Sammy is fed exclusively breastnup.
She nurses well.
Her parents are planning to add some complimentary food soon, though they haven't yet.
She takes no medicines and no vitamins or anything else.
The family and social history don't add much else.
This is a family's first baby, there are no health problems reported in the parents,
and there's no family history of epilepsy or seizures or movement disorders.
A good history on a little baby includes at least a brief developmental assessment, especially
when we're potentially thinking about a neurologic issue like a seizure.
Sammy is said to be bright and engaged.
She babbles.
She will turn to look when she hears her name.
She is just starting to roll over and grab her toys.
Overall, that sounds like a pretty normal developmental four-month-old baby, and will
make our own observations about her development and the way she interacts during the exam.
Normal brain development is very reassuring.
That makes it much less likely that there is a serious brain malformation and much less
likely that these could be frequent or severe seizures or that they've been going on a
long time.
Vital signs are normal, including temperature, pulse, respirations, and blood pressure.
Often blood pressure isn't checked in babies, but electronic devices have made this more
practical.
In an emergency department, we'd probably be able to get a measurement.
You measure her head circumference to check brain growth, and it plots normally on the
chart.
Sammy, overall, looks great.
Four-month-olds, they're really a pleasure to see as a doctor.
They're happy, they're smiling, and sometimes you can even get them to laugh or giggle.
She's an adorable girl, she's sitting in mom's lap, she's holding her head up just
fine.
Her color is good, her pulses are strong, she's moving all extremities equally.
Her soft spot, that's also called the anterior fontanelle, it's the open area on the front
of the skull that usually doesn't close until 18 months of life.
That's normal, it's flat, it's not bulging.
Again, we're concerned about a possible brain event or seizure, so our exam is going to concentrate
on clues about how her brain is doing.
A bulging fontanelle would have indicated increased pressure in the cranium, and that's not a
good thing.
Her eyes, here's another way to test her brain function.
They look normal, they follow your face as you move, and they move together.
Both pupils constrict normally with light, her neck seems to move normally in all directions.
The remainder of the exam seems to be entirely normal, except something odd starts to happen
as you're counting her toes.
Wait, quick aside here.
As a pediatrician, it is important to count up those toes when you first meet a baby,
especially in a newborn.
It doesn't matter how good a doctor you are, if you miss that sixth toe, the parents will
never trust you again.
Okay, back to Sammy.
You're examining her, counting those toes, and dad says, look, look what she's doing
with her hands.
You look up, and they're kind of trembling or jerking upwards a bit, rhythmically.
Both hands.
That's what she does, dad says.
That's the thing.
What is that?
Okay, now it's crunch time.
Here's the baby, here's the thing she's doing.
Is it a seizure or not?
First we'll reassess how she looks overall.
Her color is good, she's not having any trouble breathing.
But when we try to engage her eyes, she's not really interested in looking at us now.
Her eyes have kind of rolled up and aren't looking at anything.
Sammy, we say.
She doesn't turn to look at us.
Her attention is no longer engaged with her environment.
And that shaking itself, a good trick if you think a baby or anyone else may be having
a seizure is to gently hold or touch the extremity that's shaking.
Normal baby trembling stops with a gentle touch.
This shaking of Sammy's, it does not stop when you touch and hold her hands.
She's still jerking up, up, up.
This is a seizure.
We'll have to figure out why and what we ought to do about it.
At first it's time for first aid and stabilization.
When someone, anyone is having a seizure, first let them lie down so the head is at
the same level as the heart.
This is the same thing you would do when someone faints or collapses to maximize blood flow
to the brain.
Loosen any tight clothing.
Glance at your watch so you know how long this might go on.
We'll gently lift Sammy up onto the exam table from mom's lap.
When she's shaking some will stay very close so she can't possibly fall off the table.
With an older child or adult with big body shaking during a more dramatic seizure, it
may be best to leave the patient on the floor if you can't be sure you can prevent a fall.
Do not ever put something in someone's mouth during a seizure.
There is a myth, an old wives tale, that people might swallow their tongue during a seizure
and that somehow you need to prevent this with a spoon or with something in the mouth.
That's just false.
It doesn't even make anatomic sense.
Putting a spoon or anything in someone's mouth can cause gagging or vomiting which would
be very bad during a seizure.
Right now it doesn't look like Sammy is having trouble breathing.
Her color is good.
Now it never hurts to start oxygen if you're not sure if the patient is breathing well
during a seizure.
Sometimes there can be gasping or ineffective breathing during seizures.
When in doubt, get some extra oxygen on.
Since we're in the ED, we can call for a little extra help too.
We get some monitors on, a pulse ox, a cardiorespiratory monitor with little electrodes on the chest.
Those can count breathing and pulse.
By now a few minutes have gone by.
Sammy's still jerking her hands and now her arms are also getting involved in the movement
up to her shoulders.
Seizures can be very scary, especially in babies, so we'll keep our cool to reassure
mom and dad even while inside we're thinking, okay now, it's time for the seizure to stop.
But it doesn't stop.
It's been almost 10 minutes we've had a nurse working on getting an IV started.
Ideally with an IV we'd be able to give some seizure stopping medicine, but we don't have
that access yet.
Fortunately, studies have looked at several other options for medicine delivery, including
rectal administration.
There's a version that parents can use at home or spraying certain medicines into the
nose or into the inside of the cheeks.
That's what we do.
At nine minutes, a dose of medazolam is given inside the cheek and a few minutes later the
shaking stops.
Sammy looks well.
Her parents look frazzled.
Her IV is started so we can give more medicine if needed.
The nurse also drew some blood for tests because she's experienced and she knows we're about
to ask for those.
Let's catch our breath and think about a more focused differential.
This isn't reflux.
This isn't some normal trembling.
This was a real seizure.
Why would a baby like Sammy do that?
The brain is an electrical organ.
Each nerve cell, those are called neurons, conducts electric impulses between parts of
the brain and interconnects with hundreds or thousands of other neurons.
In babies and children, these interconnections are actually even more dense and numerous
than in adults.
Normally, the flow of signals between neurons is very tightly regulated.
So neurons fire in a synchronous or organized pattern.
A seizure is like an electrical storm.
A group of neurons just fires uncontrollably sending out signals to adjacent neurons.
Because children have more interconnections, they're actually more prone to seizures than
adults.
About 4-8% of children will experience at least one seizure during childhood.
The manifestations of seizures, the symptoms you see, depend on what area of the brain
is affected and how much of the brain is affected.
A seizure in a small area of, say, the motor part of the cortex may only cause one shaking
limb without a loss of consciousness.
A wider seizure that affects more of the brain can cause whole body shaking, a loss of consciousness
and a loss of bladder control.
Some kinds of seizures can cause only a change in sensory perception or a dramatic change
in behavior, or just a sudden drop to unconsciousness.
So what sorts of things trigger seizures?
In little babies especially, they're often caused by metabolic conditions.
Low blood sugar, low calcium, low sodium, or high sodium, these small molecules are
essential to the normal functioning of our cells, including brain cells.
Little babies may not have the metabolic reserve to pump out sugar from their liver
when blood sugar drops, and their kidneys aren't mature enough to regulate these blood
chemicals as well as an adult could.
Also any kind of brain injury or problem can cause seizures.
Prenatal factors can lead to problems with brain development, including cysts or excess
fluid in the spaces around the brain.
Even with no clear history of birth trauma, there can be periods of insufficient oxygen
to the baby's brain during or before labor, and that can lead to damage that may not be
apparent until seizures begin later in life.
There are also infections, including encephalitis and meningitis, that can cause seizures especially
in babies.
Seizures of any cause can sometimes trigger seizures in young children.
These are called febrile seizures when there is no other apparent cause, and they may affect
about 1 in 25 children, typically from 6 months to 3 years of age.
Febrile seizures are brief and harmless, though they can be quite frightening for the family.
Almost all children with febrile seizures outgrow them, often by age 3 or 4, and family
education and reassurance are really the only necessary therapy.
One other cause, a sad one, but one not to overlook is trauma.
It may be non-accidental and can lead to bleeding in the brain and seizures.
There are also a large proportion of seizures that remain unexplained, probably 25-30% in
babies.
They are probably caused by a problem with the brain that is too small to see on MRI,
but nonetheless interferes with the normal flow of electrical information.
Or perhaps they are caused by an issue with the neurotransmitters between neurons, which
we cannot easily measure.
Children or adults with recurrent seizures are said to have epilepsy, and the cause
of epilepsy is not always apparent.
So let's start our work up.
The most important diagnoses to evaluate first are metabolic problems and infection, because
with these we can intervene quickly to help.
And if we don't fix them soon, they may get worse.
We don't really have much other evidence of infection, Sammy has had no fever, and honestly
she looked great until the seizure started, but nonetheless let's get a CBC and we may
have to do an LP, that's a lumbar puncture or spinal tap to test for meningitis or infected
fluid around the brain.
We may also have to get an imaging study of the brain quickly to make sure that there
isn't some kind of bleed or other hidden trauma that's unfolding.
But first, even before these tests, the results of our first blood test came back, that those
were the ones drawn when the IV was first started.
Sammy's blood glucose is normal, as is her serum, sodium.
And her blood calcium is very, very low.
Normal would be from 9 to 11 in that range, and Sammy's is 6.5.
Can that cause seizures?
You bet.
The question now has changed.
We know why Sammy is having seizures, but why does she have such a low calcium?
We need to start thinking about that here, but first things first, we'll order some
IV calcium to bump that up, and we'll keep her on monitors, and we'll plan to repeat
the labs in a few hours to make sure we're heading in the right direction.
Just for completeness, the CBC was unremarkable, and since there's no fever and really no other
signs of infection, we'll skip the LP and CT scan for now.
We already have our explanation for the seizures.
But if things don't improve as expected, we could go back and do those other tests later.
Now the parents are asking too, why is Sammy's calcium so low?
They say she nurses well, she's been gaining weight fine, shouldn't she get plenty of calcium
from mom's milk?
Yes, in fact they're right, milk is loaded with calcium, Sammy is getting plenty, or
at least plenty is going into her digestive system.
Why isn't enough calcium in her blood?
We're not here to spend a lot of time reviewing basic physiology, but a quick calcium physiology
lesson will help you understand what's going on with Sammy.
Calcium is essential for life and for growth, and there are elaborate and interconnected
mechanisms for ensuring that the right amount of calcium is absorbed and maintained in the
body.
Ingested calcium is actively taken up by cells in the small intestine and transported within
these cells by a specific calcium binding protein.
That protein acts as a little carrier, and the more of these proteins there are in each
absorptive cell, the more calcium will make its way from the gut into the body.
The amount of these carrier proteins produced in each cell is regulated by vitamin D. Even
if there is plenty of calcium in the diet, if there is not enough activated vitamin D,
the gut will not efficiently absorb calcium.
Vitamin D itself comes from two sources.
It can be ingested as part of the diet, or the human body can essentially manufacture
it in its own skin cells when exposed to sunlight.
Now, natural sources of vitamin D are actually very, very scarce.
It can be found naturally in fish and fish liver, there's some in beef liver, there's
a small amount in eggs, some in mushrooms, that's it.
Now many foods are fortified with added vitamin D, that is, they add it.
That includes milk, commercial baby formulas, some juices, some breakfast cereals too.
Dairy products other than milk are not typically fortified with vitamin D. Babies, of course,
they don't get much liver in their diets, and Sammy was relying on mother's milk, which
like unfortified cow's milk has almost zero natural vitamin D. Can Sammy get enough vitamin
D from sunlight exposure?
In this case, I don't think so.
We know children with darker skin need longer sunlight exposures to make the same amount
of vitamin D as Caucasian children, so Sammy had all of the pieces in place to put her
at risk for low vitamin D. She has dark skin, it's winter, so there's less daylight and
less time spent outside, and she's been fed exclusively breast milk, which has no vitamin
D. She's also four months old, and by then babies have often used up their stored vitamin
D from birth.
To confirm our diagnosis, we draw a vitamin D level.
It's actually measured as a 25-hydroxy vitamin D. That's a marker for the most active form.
We expect a level of 30 to 35.
That would be sufficient.
Sammy's is three.
Over the next few days, Sammy is continued on first IV than oral calcium supplements,
plus a big oral dose of vitamin D. She has no further seizures, and she is sent home to
continue nursing with supplemental vitamin D. She was actually a little low iron in other
lab studies, so it was suggested that she start some complementary foods, including
iron-rich meats and fortified cereals.
Will Sammy suffer any long-term effects from this?
Probably not.
Her seizures were brief, and she probably only had them for a few days.
Short and infrequent seizures do not cause brain damage, though any seizures should be
investigated and prevented when possible.
Keeping Sammy on a diet with adequate vitamin D and calcium should now ensure that there
are no further seizures and her bones develop normally.
Now, just about every pediatrician recommends nursing as the best nutrition for most babies
unless there is a medical or other reason for choosing formula.
Human milk is a great source of nutrition, it's easy to digest, it's cheap, and it
provides unique immune benefits.
However, human milk isn't perfect.
We know it is not a sufficient source of vitamin D. That's why it's recommended that
exclusively nursing babies begin an oral vitamin D supplement at birth and continue it until
they're consuming vitamin D-enriched foods like milk or formula.
This recommendation is especially important for babies with the risk factors we've mentioned,
dark skin, winter time, not spending time outside, and living in cooler climates.
It's also crucial for babies born preterm because they've had less chance to store
absorbed calcium and vitamin D from mom.
Calcium is an interesting little molecule, and it's essential for many life functions.
Along with phosphorus, it makes up the mineral matrix of bones, so prolonged vitamin D deficiency
can cause rickets in children.
The symptoms of rickets can include delayed growth, bone pain, and muscle weakness along
with skeletal deformities like both legs.
Adults don't develop rickets because their bones aren't growing, but if vitamin D or
calcium deficient, adults can have decreased mineral density, which can lead to osteoporosis
and fracture.
Regular exercise, especially weight-bearing exercise or resistance training, is also required
to keep bones well mineralized.
Calcium is also essential for normal muscle functioning, clotting of the blood, normal
heart contraction and rhythms, and, as Sammy's case illustrates, normal functioning of nerve
cells in the brain.
We talked about the role of vitamin D in calcium absorption, but the control of calcium
levels is actually quite a bit more complicated than that.
Vitamin D has to be activated by metabolism in the kidney and the liver, and that step
of activation itself is regulated by hormones from the parathyroid gland.
Parathyroid hormone, along with vitamin D, and another hormone called calcitonin, regulate
the uptake of calcium from cells that both build and repair bone.
They also influence the amount of calcium excreted into the urine.
So there are multiple overlapping feedback loops here, all in place to keep calcium levels
controlled in a very narrow range.
And vitamin D itself, its role goes far beyond calcium metabolism and bone health.
Vitamin D modulates cell growth, regulates neuromuscular and immune function, and helps
control inflammation.
The exact functioning of vitamin D and optimal levels of intake for health are active areas
for current research.
This case illustrated one way that medical cases proceed.
We started with one question the chief complaint for the parents.
She's shaking.
Is something wrong?
Then we saw the shaking, and the question became, what are those funny movements?
Once we determined they were seizures, the question changed again to why is Sammy having
seizures?
Then we found our answer, the low calcium, which led to the next question.
Why is Sammy's calcium low?
Sammy's parents didn't bring her to us reporting a low calcium, but a logical chain developed
from her chief complaint step by step to a diagnosis and treatment plan.
One question correctly answered leads to another, and eventually we reached the final answer.
That's not always the way it works.
Real medical cases sometimes have blind alleys and distractions, and frankly, misleading
clues that lead to a medical journey that's more of a sideways stagger than a sprint to
the finish.
And sometimes real patients have multiple diagnoses, sometimes related, sometimes unrelated,
that contribute to their symptoms.
Again, keep an open mind, pay attention to details, and keep your eye on helping the
patient, even when the finish line doesn't seem to be getting nearer.
We'll hear more about that kind of story at our next Grand Rounds.
