The
last three lectures have been common diagnoses, breast cancer, heart disease, and depression.
Now it's time for a little more of a mental stretch.
This case strikes about 1 in 1,000 adults per year.
In a typical busy medical practice, full-time doctors probably have about 1,500 patients.
They see regularly.
So each year we're likely to see one or two cases of this.
So it's not common, but it's not so uncommon either.
And the presenting symptom, we'll get to that.
That's very common indeed.
Here's your clue.
This disease may have affected many historical figures.
Although we don't know for sure, Julius Caesar may have had it.
He was noted in various sources to have something referred to as falling sickness.
It's also suspected to have affected Martin Luther, who has scribed his symptoms to the
work of the devil.
And Charles Darwin, who among other health problems had intense sea sickness during his
years exploring the world on the Beagle.
More recently, Marilyn Monroe's hearing and balance problems are suspected to have been
caused by this disease.
So it's been around a long time.
We're in our general medicine clinic today, and our patient, Tina, is a 42-year-old woman
whose chief complaint is, quote, I'm having hypoglycemia.
Okay, well, that's a handy chief complaint.
The medical diagnosis is right there, hypoglycemia.
We can write that down on the fee ticket.
Here's the diagnosis.
It's an early day to get to the golf course, right?
No, just kidding.
What we've got here isn't uncommon.
A patient who believes she already knows what the diagnosis is and she may well be correct
and you don't want to disregard what she's saying, but at the same time, don't fall into
the mental trap of starting with a false assumption.
It may be that our patient has diagnosed with a specific medical condition like hypoglycemia
by a doctor or that she figured it out by herself, but at this point, we need more information
about what's going on and we need to keep an open mind about the diagnosis.
So let's say to Tina, I understand you're concerned about hypoglycemia.
Let's step back, though, so I understand the full picture.
What symptoms are you having?
What's going on that doesn't feel right?
So here's Tina's story.
She says that for the last few months, she gets these attacks.
That's her word, where all of a sudden she gets dizzy.
She can't stand up straight and sometimes there's a buzzy or a high-pitched sort of
noise that she hears.
She says she sort of staggers around and has to eat a candy bar.
When she has some sugar, in about a half an hour, she starts to feel better.
These episodes are getting more intense, more frequent, and are lasting longer.
Now she says sometimes she has to eat two candy bars.
Her friends have told her that she's either having hypoglycemia or she's just crazy.
Okay, time for our brief differential.
Our patient has episodic symptoms, including dizziness and a funny noise that she hears.
What could be going on?
Dizziness can be a challenging symptom because different people use that term to refer to
different things.
Dizziness can mean vertigo.
That's a sensation of spinning, as if the environment is moving around you.
It's that feeling that people experience with alcohol intoxication, or after a spinning
carnival ride, after the ride ends, and the world seems to keep spinning around.
True vertigo is usually caused by problems with the inner ear, where the sense organs
of balance are.
Dizziness, though, can also refer to a light-headed feeling, like you're going to faint.
That's a completely different problem with different physiology to think about.
Dizziness, meaning a faint or a light-headed kind of feeling, is usually caused by insufficient
blood flow to the brain.
Less frequently, a feeling of dizziness can be related to feeling unsteady or off-balance,
caused by problems with the brain, nerves, or perhaps muscle.
This might be related to a loss of nerve input to the brain.
Those are conditions where there's a loss of sensory input, so a person can't sense
essentially where their feet are.
Or this can be from a condition that affects motor function, causing weakness and unsteadyness.
These are neurologic problems, and most often present in elderly people.
Finally, dizziness can be a psychologic, or a psychophysiologic effect, when a person
feels kind of disconnected or disassociated with the world's sensory signals.
In that case, a psychological assessment can be helpful.
So one symptom, dizziness, but four potential specialists to help could be an issue with
the inner ear, so go on to the ENT, or a cardiologist, or a neurologist, or a psychologist.
Yet here we are in the general medical clinic.
It's bad form to refer a patient to four specialists.
I mean, five, really.
Remember, Tina came in with a chief complaint of hypoglycemia.
Does she need to see an endocrinologist?
It's our job to help narrow this down.
Back to the history.
Tina, Tina, you say, we need your help here.
What exactly do you mean by dizziness?
She says it's a spinning feeling, like getting dizzy, the way kids do when they spin around
a while, and then stop, and it feels like the world keeps spinning.
She says she doesn't feel faint, and she's never passed out, but she is afraid that she'll
fall down.
There's no problem with the strength in her legs.
She's not weak.
That's not the issue.
It's just that the room feels like it's spinning around and around.
So we've got true vertigo here, this sensation that the world is spinning around her.
Remember, she also mentioned that she hears a buzzy or high-pitched sound, an unexplained
noise.
So already, after three minutes of history, we're pretty sure this is an ear problem,
specifically with the inner ear, where hearing and balance sense organs are located.
That would explain the combination of vertigo, the spinning sensation, as well as a hearing
issue.
Let's look at some additional history and a review of systems.
There's been no fever, no headaches, no nausea or vomiting, and no persistent symptoms.
She gets these episodes, but in between them, she feels fine.
Could this be a brain tumor?
Probably not.
You'd expect more persistent symptoms.
An infection?
Again, probably not.
Why would an infection cause these discrete, isolated sorts of episodes?
Tina has essentially no important past medical history, no history of head trauma or concussion,
no history of hearing loss or ear problems, and she takes no medicines at all.
Don't forget to ask that last question.
Are you taking any medicines over-the-counter or prescription, or taking any herbal or other
supplements?
People often see multiple doctors, and we shouldn't assume that someone else hasn't
prescribed something we don't know about.
Patients should always be able to list all of the medicines they're taking, or better
yet, just bring them along to every doctor's appointment.
Dizziness is a common side effect of many medications, including a blood pressure medicine,
high depressants, seizure medications, medicines to help with sleep and medicines to treat
anxiety, as well as over-the-counter cold and allergy medications.
Our patient says she doesn't take any of these medicines, but it's always important
to ask.
Tina also denied alcohol consumption or recreational drug use.
Our physical exam.
Tina is a well-appearing woman with normal vital signs.
Her H-E-E-N-T exam is normal.
There's no visible middle ear disease.
By the way, when we look in the ear with an otoscope, we can easily see the external ear,
the ear canal.
We can also see at the end of the ear canal, the ear drum itself.
That's what separates the external ear from the middle ear cavity.
Beyond the middle ear, we can't see that directly.
That's where the inner ear is, and that's where hearing and balance sense takes place.
Tina's cardiovascular and lung exams are normal, and a neurologic exam shows normal
balance and normal gait.
At the moment, she has no symptoms, and her exam is entirely normal.
Let's just say, though, for the sake of this case, that we were able to do an exam actually
during an episode.
Even Tina would look fearful and unsteady, and would typically be very apprehensive
about standing and walking.
If we did make her walk, she might hold her feet widely apart and take small steps.
One other very specific finding that's seen with vertigo, her eyes would show nystagmus,
a movement where they drift in one direction, then snap back.
If you want to see nystagmus, put a child in a desk chair, the kind with wheels and
spin him around a few times, then stop the spinning, and stare at his eyes.
He'll say he's dizzy, and his eyes will show nystagmus.
Nystagmus isn't always present in vertigo.
Some patients can suppress it by staring hard at something in the distance, but it's
usually there.
You can also look for nystagmus through closed eyelids by watching the bulge of the eye flick
back and forth, slow, then fast.
So our history and physical exams support a clinical diagnosis of episodic vertigo.
Now let's develop a more detailed, specific differential diagnosis.
Before we do that, though, we need a brief review of the anatomy and physiology of one
of our senses.
This is maybe one that we don't think about much, our sense of balance.
Now we learned in kindergarten about the five senses, but this is a sixth one.
It usually operates in the background, keeping us upright and oriented in space, and we really
don't even notice it much unless something goes wrong.
The sense of balance relies on specific sense organs in the inner ears.
There are five of these organs on each side, the utricle and saccule sense translational
movement back and forth, or up and down.
The semicircular canals sense rotation.
There are three semicircular canals on each side, each oriented along the x, y, or z axis,
so we can detect rotation around any direction.
The balance organs all operate on a similar principle.
The utricle and saccule are filled with fluid, it's called the endolymph, and contain a membrane
that rests on little hair cells.
Atop that membrane are tiny, dense stones, the otolymphs.
When you move or turn, these little stones lag behind because they're denser than the
surrounding endolymph.
The hair cells detect the difference in motion between the otoliths and the fluid, and send
signals to the brain via the vestibular nerve.
The semicircular canals don't have otoliths, but use similar hair cells to detect movement
of the endolymph fluid.
The five balance sense organs together can detect changes in motion and rotation in any
plane, basically telling you in what direction your body is moving.
This information is integrated in the brain with other sensory input, including visual
cues and information from your extremities about where your arms and legs are located
in space.
All of that information, together, is used to adjust your muscles to keep you upright
and oriented.
By the way, a similar sense system using hair cells bathed in endolymph is how the cochlea
works to detect sound vibrations.
Together, the balance sense organs and the cochlea are called the labyrinth, referring
to the little canals and tunnels through which endolymph flows.
The information from the balance organs and hearing system are all transmitted to the
brain by the vestibular nerves, one on each side of the head.
We don't spend a lot of time thinking about our sense of balance, but when it goes wrong,
it's very noticeable.
The main symptom of problems along the pathways of the balance system, from the balance organs
through the nerves to the brain area that interprets the data, the main symptom is vertigo, a sensation
of movement in space when there is, in fact, no movement.
So let's get back to Tina to develop our detailed differential diagnosis.
It can be helpful, especially when thinking about neurologic symptoms, to remember the
anatomy.
Tina's symptoms could be arising anywhere along the chain, from the sense organs to
the nerve that conducts the information, to the brain that interprets the nerve input.
Where along that chain is the problem?
Let's look at some specific diagnoses, starting with ones that affect the balance sense organs.
The most common cause of vertigo is called benign paroxysmal positional vertigo, abbreviated
BPPV.
It causes brief, less than one minute episodes of vertigo triggered by a position change,
like turning over in bed or quickly looking up.
It's caused by a problem in the balance sense organs themselves, by debris in those semicircular
canals.
The symptoms and nystagmus can be recreated in the office by moving the head in the plane
of the affected canal.
Tina's vertigo attacks last much too long to be typical of BPPV.
Another thought, labyrinthitis referring to inflammation in the balance and hearing organs.
There are many causes of this, ranging from trauma to the ear, viral infections, some bacterial
infections, including infection of the middle ear or otitis media, as well as some medications
like aspirin or ibuprofen.
All of these, if they contribute to inner ear inflammation, can cause vertigo, along
with other symptoms.
The vertigo can be made worse by positional changes, and usually lasts days to weeks.
Tina's symptoms have come in recurrent isolated attacks that have come and go repeatedly.
That really doesn't fit the typical presentation of labyrinthitis.
Another problem that can occur in the sense organs of balance is called Meniere disease.
Though we don't know exactly why it occurs, it seems to be caused by excessive endolymph
fluid that interferes with the functioning of the balance organs.
Meniere's patients, in addition to having periods of intense vertigo, often also suffer
from hearing problems, because that same excessive endolymph affects the functioning
of the cochlea.
Remember, Tina complained of a buzzy sound during her vertigo.
Can something be going on with her hearing as well?
What about the nerve, the vestibular nerve, that brings information about balance from
the inner ear to the brain?
Vestibular neuritis refers to inflammation of this nerve, usually triggered by a viral
infection.
Symptoms with vestibular neuritis have vertigo plus nausea and vomiting that last several
days to weeks.
The symptoms don't come in attacks or spells, but begin all at once and then gradually fade.
Since that's not really Tina's pattern of symptoms, vestibular neuritis is unlikely.
Another nerve problem could be a tumor or a mass pressing on the nerve, though again,
you'd expect constant symptoms or symptoms that overall are getting worse over time rather
than episodes like Tina has.
Let's move up to the brain where balance information is decoded.
A stroke could cause balance problems, though you'd expect other symptoms as well.
If vertigo occurs along with any loss of function, say trouble moving a limb or difficulty speaking,
medical evaluation is warranted to quickly diagnose a potential stroke.
Older people are prone to what's called vascular insufficiency, where atherosclerotic disease
in the blood vessels supplying the brain and inner ear lead to decreased blood flow.
This can cause episodes of vertigo, usually along with nausea and vomiting.
Tina, she's too young for the typical presentation of vascular insufficiency and her symptoms
don't include nausea or vomiting.
A brain disorder that can begin at Tina's age is multiple sclerosis, though this can
cause vertigo, there are typically other symptoms and signs of neurologic dysfunction.
Another brain disorder that can cause vertigo is a migraine headache.
Usually in adults, migraine associated vertical is accompanied by a headache and nausea.
There's actually a variant of this seen in children that causes only brief attacks of
vertigo without any other symptoms.
Attacks of migraine usually subside with sleep, which is not what Tina reports.
That's her differential.
How do we confirm which diagnosis is correct?
It does sound like Meniere disease fits best.
It causes attacks of vertigo that come and go like Tina reports and also affects hearing.
Other diagnoses like a tumor or multiple sclerosis, they seem much less likely, but
after discussing these possibilities with Tina, she's decided that she'd like to pursue
a very thorough workup to make sure we don't miss something that's unlikely, but needs
to be caught early.
To definitively rule out a tumor, we need a brain scan, one that looks along the entire
pathway from the sense organs along the nerve to the brain.
A CT scan is a very good study.
It's relatively quick to get and can see pretty good detail, especially of the bones.
However, there are drawbacks.
CT scans are basically a series of plain x-rays stitched together by a computer to make a
composite image.
Like other x-rays, they rely on ionizing radiation to get an image.
Although the risk is small, any study involving radiation will expose the patient to some
risk of damage from the radiation itself, which increases the lifetime risk of cancer.
Now, I don't want patients to worry too much about this.
After all, some radiation exposure occurs constantly to all of us.
Just living on the earth exposes us to radiation from both cosmic rays and from radioactive
elements in the earth's crust.
One way to think about the added radiation from medical studies is to compare the amount
of radiation to the background radiation we're all exposed to.
For instance, a plain chest x-ray is similar to about 3 days of ordinary background radiation.
That isn't much, and patients really shouldn't be fearful of a single chest x-ray.
But CT scans are like multiple x-rays.
A brain CT scan is probably similar to a few months of background radiation.
An abdominal and pelvic CT is an even bigger study, comparable to about three years of
background radiation.
The radiation risks from studies like CT scans are additive.
The more exposures, the higher the risk.
Also, risks are higher for younger patients because they're growing and they have more
years of life expectancy.
Modern radiology equipment is designed to use digital signal processing to help minimize
radiation exposures.
In many cases, using less than a tenth of the ionizing radiation that had been necessary
to expose ordinary plane films.
Patients and doctors should minimize radiation exposure, but shouldn't be fearful of using
medical studies when they're appropriate and necessary.
In contrast, an MRI scan of the brain doesn't use any ionizing radiation.
It also has the advantage of imaging soft tissues like the brain, which are more precise
than CT scan.
Patients are also better able to get images through the dense bones at the base of the
brain where CT scans don't penetrate as well.
And with balance problems, that's exactly where we need to look at the base of the brain
where the balance and sense organs are.
The main disadvantages of MRI compared to CT are that they take much longer to do and
they're more expensive.
In Tina's case, we decided to get an MRI to rule out even a small tumor and it was
normal.
The MRI scan also showed that there were no brain lesions to suggest multiple sclerosis.
Note that depending on the story, exam patient preferences and clinical suspicion, an MRI
is not always necessary in the workup of vertigo.
Just to mention for completeness, another kind of imaging study, an ultrasound, also
doesn't use any ionizing radiation.
However, the precision of ultrasound images is inferior to CT and MRI and ultrasound cannot
be used through bones like the skull.
So ultrasound really wouldn't be useful at all for Tina's evaluation.
We also referred Tina to an ENT specialist who reviewed the clinical exam and MRI and
also did a hearing test, which did confirm some low-frequency hearing loss.
The ENT evaluation confirmed that Tina does indeed have Meniere disease.
A quick aside, a modern trend in medicine is to drop that possessive part of a disease
name.
Instead of calling it Meniere's disease, we're encouraged to drop the apostrophe S and just
call it Meniere disease.
That way, we're not implying that somehow Dr. Meniere owns the disease or even has the
disease.
So we sometimes say Down syndrome or Crone disease.
In many cases, this just hasn't really caught on, we're just used to saying for instance
Down syndrome.
One disease that keeps its apostrophe is Lou Gehrig's disease because the baseball player
Lou Gehrig had that disease.
Anyway, back to Tina and Meniere disease.
The specific cause of Meniere disease isn't completely understood.
There is increased endolim fluid as well as differences in the glycoprotein content
of the fluid.
There's also evidence for alterations in the way that the fluid flows through the canals
and is reabsorbed.
Some studies have supported an infectious agent or genetic influences or allergies or a combination
of these factors.
Whatever the cause, the main symptom is episodic attacks that last for one or more hours.
During attacks, there is vertigo, often accompanied by ringing, rushing, or a buzzing sort of
town called tinnitus.
There may also be a feeling of pressure or fullness in the ear.
Accompanying these attacks is a gradual, fluctuating level of low frequency hearing loss that can
become severe and is only reversible if caught early.
The pressure feeling in hearing loss usually affects only one ear, but it can affect both.
Meniere disease is a clinical diagnosis.
There's no one specific test that confirms it.
Tests are done sometimes to rule out other diagnoses, like the MRI Tina had in this case.
Blood tests are really of limited usefulness in the workup, though they can again rule
out other problems if there are suggestive symptoms.
During a thorough hearing evaluation is essential, and hearing will need to continue to be monitored
during treatment.
There are several treatment options for Meniere disease, though none is really ideal.
The main first therapy is dietary, restricting sodium, sometimes along with taking a diuretic
to reduce body water.
This simple treatment can reduce vertigo attacks, but may not effectively slow hearing loss.
Medications can be used during acute attacks to reduce the uncomfortable sensations of vertigo
and nausea, but again, these don't reduce hearing loss, and they are also ineffective
in preventing further attacks.
Still, conservative management and monitoring of hearing is probably good enough therapy
for many people with Meniere disease.
Another option for treatment is the use of steroids, which may reduce the pressure in
the endolym fluid.
These can be given orally or by injection, or even by injection through the eardrum
into the middle ear.
There are some serious potential side effects of steroid use, especially if they are needed
for a long course.
More aggressive therapy, especially for frequent or severe vertigo attacks, can include direct
injections of medicine into the middle ear.
An antibiotic called gentamicin is used, not because it's an antibiotic, but because it
can decrease the number of vestibular hair cells that are sending those incorrect balance
information to the brain.
Although it can effectively reduce or eliminate vertigo attacks, gentamicin can actually make
the hearing loss worse, so this therapy isn't suitable for everyone.
There are some surgical options for therapy as well.
A shunt can be placed in the inner ear to drain some of the excess fluid, though how
well this works is controversial.
This kind of surgery is non-destructive and can at least theoretically preserve hearing.
Another surgical technique is to divide and destroy part of the vestibular nerve.
This can achieve good control of vertigo in most patients, and usually hearing is preserved,
but it's irreversible.
The most aggressive approach of all is to remove the entire labyrinth on one side, permanently
stopping symptoms of vertigo and tinnitus on that one ear, but also eliminating hearing
from that side.
This may still be appropriate for patients with severe unilateral disease, especially
if hearing is already severely affected.
However, loss of the balance sense can affect gait in many patients, and about 30% of patients
with unilateral disease will later on develop maniere in the other ear.
Tina has been treated conservatively with medication for acute attacks and a low-salt
diet.
Her hearing loss is limited to one ear and so far is not severe.
She's also been cautioned against using medications that can worsen hearing loss and to protect
her hearing by avoiding loud noises and concerts and keeping her headphones set low.
Maniere disease is often characterized by fluctuating symptoms with remissions and exacerbations,
so it's difficult to predict the long-term prognosis.
In most patients, the vertigo attacks subside within 10 to 20 years, and hearing loss remains
in the moderate range.
Now, remember, Tina came in with a chief complaint of hypoglycemia.
Could that have been a possible diagnosis?
Hypoglycemia is something that often comes up as a patient concern, though the symptoms
are often misunderstood.
What is hypoglycemia, who gets it, and what symptoms does it really cause?
Hypoglycemia means low blood glucose, glucose being the main kind of sugar molecule involved
in energy metabolism in people.
True measurable hypoglycemia, meaning you measure the blood glucose and it's low, it's
very, very rare.
Hypoglycemia is most commonly seen in people with diabetes who take too high a dose of
insulin.
It's the insulin administered to treat diabetes that drives down blood sugar.
Other medicines can contribute to hypoglycemia, as can rare metabolic and endocrine disorders
and severe malnutrition.
But unless a person is taking insulin or is very ill, hypoglycemia is quite uncommon.
People having symptoms of true hypoglycemia, like confusion, difficulty thinking, seizures,
or coma will not improve until glucose is administered.
Though true measurable hypoglycemia is rare, many people do seem to have mild symptoms
related perhaps to shifts in blood sugar or to a blood sugar level that though it's normal
is decreasing.
Symptoms like irritability, lightheadedness, dizziness, or headache can occur and these
improve rapidly with a snack.
Though blood tests in these people will not show true hypoglycemia, a good diet will improve
the symptoms.
Tina's sudden severe attacks of vertigo along with buzzing in her ears are not caused by
any problems with blood sugar.
However, problems with metabolism can contribute to other, even more significant health problems.
We'll hear more about that next time.
