Today's case is an ancient illness.
Though it was, quote, discovered about 100 years ago, it's clear that this disease
has afflicted people since ancient times.
Although we will probably never know for sure, it's quite possible that this disease caused
the death of the pharaoh of Egypt, King Tutankhamun at age 19, about 1300 years before the common
era.
We're in pediatric clinic today, and our next patient is a 7 month old boy named Marcus.
His parents have brought him in for evaluation because, in their words, he looks weak.
Marcus's father is in the military, and though his parents are American, he was born overseas
at a military base in Central America.
He has just moved back to the US, and his family is now transferring routine care to
your clinic.
Now with young babies, a traditional medical history starts with pregnancy and birth.
Marcus was born after a full term, uneventful pregnancy.
It was a routine delivery, and he went home with his mom after a typical two day hospital
stay.
Since then, he has been home with his mom and an older sister, and has been in generally
good health.
He's been to routine well child visits, and has received all of his recommended vaccinations.
At his 6 month old checkup, a routine finger stick to measure blood hemoglobin was low,
and mom was told to begin an iron supplement.
She had been nursing exclusively at that time.
At that visit, the physician had also thought that Marcus's heart rate was fast, and that
he seemed kind of listless.
They were supposed to follow up for a recheck, but dad was transferred back to the United
States, and they haven't seen a doctor since that visit one month ago.
Mom has been giving the iron drop supplement as directed.
Marcus takes no other medicines, and is nursing and taking complementary foods twice a day.
His sister and parents are healthy.
His parents say that Marcus is a happy baby, but he has never been as active as his sister.
Lately, he seems more fussy at times, and isn't interested in sitting up or playing
much.
His grandmother, who hadn't seen him until he moved back to the US last month, says he
looks kind of weak and tired, and she's worried about his color.
So she encouraged his parents to bring him to us right away.
A few quick comments before our differential.
Pediatricians know to always listen to grandparents.
They may not have the specific medical knowledge to make a diagnosis, but they have a very good
sense of when something isn't right.
Do not disregard grandma's concerns.
So for now, what we've got is a little vague.
A baby who's kind of weak or tired, he's listless, and we've been told that last month
he was anemic.
What could it be?
Well, just about anything.
In a broad sense, we'll keep in mind that this could be brain or neurologic disease,
or a condition affecting the strength of his muscles, or a problem with his blood or bone
marrow, heart failure, malnutrition, chronic kidney disease are all among the possibilities
too.
We need more information to move ahead here.
On to our physical exam.
Marcus's weight and length are both a little on the small side at about the 10th percentile.
His head circumference is right at 50th percentile, which by definition is average.
Nutrition's love percentiles, because it allows us to express these growth numbers in
comparison to other children of the same age.
A height percentile of 10% means that if you line up 100 babies of the exact same age and
sex in height order, Marcus will be number 10 in line, with 90 babies longer and 9 babies
shorter.
Percentiles are especially useful to track as a child grows.
In general, after growth stabilizes by age 2 or so, most children will track upwards
along their own stable percentile.
Marcus's numbers today show that his weight and length are a little small, which itself
isn't concerning.
Though, actually when we looked back at the records from his last well check, we did find
that those percentiles had dropped some.
This kind of relatively poor weight and height gain could fit with almost any kind of chronic
disease.
The diagnostic clue from this growth chart is that whatever is going on, it's unlikely
to be something acute, but rather something that's been happening for a while.
Vital signs include a heart rate of 160, that's high for a 7 month old.
Respirations are 40, that's probably normal for this age.
Marcus also had a normal temperature and blood pressure.
He has an African American complexion and is noticeably pale.
A good trick with darker skin children is to compare the color of the palms of their
hands to that of their parents, who probably have a similar complexion.
When compared to mom and dad, Marcus's palms were definitely pale.
His eyes, the whites of his eyes, I mean, look yellow.
The remainder of the H-E-E-N-T exam was okay.
Those are clear.
He's got a heart murmur, not a loud one, and his spleen feels enlarged when we palpate
his belly.
The skin exam is normal, there's no bruising.
Neurologically, Marcus doesn't really respond very much to the exam.
He just kind of lies there and he doesn't want to sit up.
Okay, that's a lot of information.
I think we're in agreement with Grandma, something here is not right.
Let's review the most pertinent physical exam findings to focus our thoughts.
Marcus is pale, he's listless, his eyes are yellow, his heart rate is fast.
He also has a murmur and a large spleen.
We'll get all of this explained soon enough, but for the sake of thinking through the
case and putting this all together, we'll focus on his paleness or pallor.
We've already been told he was anemic one month ago and he was started on extra iron,
and we know that anemia can cause a high heart rate and when severe, it can cause low energy
or listlessness.
So this anemia can explain a lot and seems central to what's going on.
Now, why would Marcus be anemic?
Anemic means that there are fewer red blood cells than expected.
The red cells, of course, carry oxygen to body tissues, so they're essential for health
and energy.
Normally, red blood cells live for about 120 days after which they disintegrate.
The bone marrow constantly makes new red cells to replenish the supply.
So anemia could occur either if the marrow isn't working right, if it isn't making enough
new red cells to replace the old ones, or if too many red cells are being lost too early.
Those red cells could be lost in two ways, either from bleeding, say from a wound or
perhaps from oozing in the gut, or if the red cells themselves are dying in the blood
too early.
We need a quick red blood cell physiology lesson here.
These are simple cells, really.
Circulating red cells don't have a nucleus, they're really just floating little bags
of hemoglobin, that's the molecule that carries oxygen.
There are a few enzymes and other things in there, but that's about it.
When they die, they pop open, releasing the hemoglobin molecules directly into the blood.
These molecules are processed and recycled by the liver, but if there is too much hemoglobin
released, the liver can't keep up with it.
In that case, molecules related to the breakdown of the hemoglobin make their way into the
blood, including the molecule bilirubin, which is yellow in color.
Wait, yellow, yellow, where did we hear yellow before?
Marcus has yellow eyes, that's a physical finding called jaundice, meaning a yellow
color to the eyes or the skin, and in this case, with a patient who's suspected of being
anemic, it probably means that something is destroying a lot of red blood cells, releasing
their hemoglobin directly into the blood.
Okay, we're making progress.
Just from the history and physical, we're thinking that Marcus has a chronic, ongoing
anemia caused by, here's a new word, homolysis, or the destruction of red blood cells within
the blood itself.
Let's confirm our suspicions with some lab work.
First of course, a CBC, a complete blood count, we'll see just how anemic Marcus might be,
and we'll also be sure to check if the other kinds of blood cells, the white cells and
platelets, are those normal.
Marcus's CBC shows a hemoglobin of 5, normal at this age would be over 11, with a normal
white count and platelets.
By the way, if those other cell lines, the platelets and white cells, if those were also
down, it would increase the worry about some very serious problems indeed, like aplastic
anemia or cancer or overwhelming infection, but they're normal.
Only his red cells are affected.
Chemistry studies confirm a high bilirubin, which is causing Marcus's yellow eyes.
Will a hemoglobin of 5 cause listlessness and a fast heart rate?
You bet it will.
In fact, we might have expected someone with a hemoglobin that low to seem even sicker.
But Marcus's illness probably developed gradually, and in that case, people tolerate anemia better.
Someone whose hemoglobin dropped from normal to 5 after, say, sudden blood loss from a
car accident, they're going to be much, much sicker than someone whose hemoglobin
drifted down slowly, as we suspect Marcus's has.
We don't yet have a definite diagnosis, but even so, it's time to move ahead quickly.
We call the blood bank and warn them that this baby will almost certainly need one or
more transfusions, and we draw a test called a type and cross match so the blood bank can
get matched blood ready for him.
We also make arrangements to admit Marcus to the hospital for further evaluation and
management.
Then we wander over to the lab where they did that CBC.
It's just down the hall to do something kind of old fashioned, but it's critically useful
in a case like this.
Let's go look at the blood smear under a microscope.
On the way, we'll think about the causes of hemolytic anemia in a baby.
One cause is an infection, like malaria, which is a parasite transmitted by mosquitoes that's
rarely seen in the USA.
But wait, Marcus was living in Central America until just a few weeks ago.
There is plenty of malaria in Central America, in South America, Africa, the Far East.
So remember, a travel and exposure history can be very important.
Other causes of hemolytic anemia can be classified as intrinsic or extrinsic, meaning is there
something intrinsic to the red cell that shortens its life, or is there something extrinsic
outside of the cell that's destroying it?
Extrinsic causes of hemolytic anemia can include artificial heart valves that chew up the cells
or immune mechanisms that trick the body into destroying its own red blood cells.
Alternatively, intrinsic problems with the red cells themselves can be a defect in the
way the cell membrane is made, or a problem with the hemoglobin that fills up the cell.
We're at the hemacology lab, so let's look at those cells from Marcus.
On the slide, we can see a few platelets in white cells, they look okay.
We also do not see any malaria parasites.
The red cells themselves, though.
Now normal red cells are round and flat, sort of like fat pancakes with dimples on both
sides.
A collection of red cells under the microscope all pretty much look alike, but when we look
at Marcus's red cells on the blood smear, it doesn't look like that at all.
His red cells look very different from each other.
Some look normal, some look very small and bent, and many of them have an elongated crescent
shape.
Cells like this were first noted under a microscope by an intern named Ernest Irons in 1910, who
described the cells of a patient with chronic anemia as, quote, peculiar, elongated and
sickle shaped.
That's a good description, and it became the name of this disease in 1922.
Marcus has sickle cell anemia.
Sickle cell anemia, which is also called sickle cell disease, had several earlier names that
remain quite telling.
Hospitalizations for sickle cell were sometimes called muscular rheumatism, referring to the
intense pain that can occur, or bilious attacks, referring to both the pain and the jaundice,
which was also known to be caused by disorders of the bile.
One other name, Obanges, comes from Africa.
This means children who come and go because of the very high infant mortality rate that's
caused by untreated sickle cell disease.
In 1949, Linus Pauling demonstrated that sickle cell disease was caused by an abnormality
in the hemoglobin molecule.
This was actually the very first time a genetic disease was linked to abnormalities in the
production of a specific protein.
Since then, we've been able to map the exact gene, find the exact incorrect instruction,
and see how that leads to the production of a protein that doesn't work the way it should.
This really was a milestone in the field that was to become molecular biology.
The genetics of sickle cell and the way the genes affect the proteins is a wonderful lesson
to teach both medical genetics and the practical impact of evolution and health.
Each of us has two copies of each gene except men who only have one X chromosome and one
Y chromosome.
All the other chromosomes come in pairs.
One gene comes from mom and one from dad.
Each gene is a string of DNA that gives instructions for making a protein.
The normal hemoglobin in adults is called hemoglobin A, and most of us have two copies
of the gene that makes that normal hemoglobin molecule.
In sickle cell anemia, both copies of this gene are broken.
One of the base pairs of the DNA instructions is wrong.
So the cell making the hemoglobin molecule substitutes one incorrect amino acid into the
chain that makes this protein.
That one substitution, just one wrong amino acid, causes the hemoglobin to form rigid
polymers that get stuck in a sickle shape, deforming red cells and making them stiff.
Sickle cell disease is a classic so-called recessive condition.
To have the disease, you have to inherit both abnormal genes from both of your parents.
If you only inherit one abnormal gene and one normal gene, you are what's called a sickle
cell carrier, which causes minimal, if any, health effects.
In fact, carriers of sickle cell, those are people who have one abnormal gene and one
normal hemoglobin gene, they have a genetic advantage.
Their red blood cells are relatively resistant to infection with malaria.
So where are the people who are most likely to have sickle cell disease?
They're from areas of the world with the most malaria, especially Africa.
In those communities, malaria was and continues to be a huge health problem.
Malaria continues to cause about a million deaths worldwide each year.
So a genetic mutation that confers some protection from this very common infection would confer
increased survival, which allows people who carry the trait an increased chance of having
more children to pass on that gene.
As evolutionary theory predicts, a genetic mutation that confers a survival advantage
will spread and become more common in a community, which is exactly what has happened.
The mutations conferring sickle cell anemia probably arose about 100,000 years ago in
human populations in Africa and India.
Today, about one in 25 black Americans is a carrier of sickle cell trait.
When two people who are sickle cell carriers have children, each child has a 50% chance
of getting the sickle gene from mom and a 50% chance of getting the sickle gene from dad.
Multiplying those chances together, each child of these families has a 25% chance of getting
both sickle genes, meaning having sickle cell anemia.
The children also have a 50% chance of getting just one of the genes, that is, becoming a
carrier and a 25% chance of getting neither one of those genes.
How does sickle cell make people like Marcus sick?
It's the rigid, inflexible and sticky red blood cells that cause the problems.
Blood cells flowing through capillaries have to squeeze through bending and deforming at
branches and through thin capillary spaces.
In the hemoglobin sickles, it makes the red cell rigid and the cells get stuck.
That's called vaso-occlusion, cells stuck in blood vessels.
Sometimes the cells pop, getting destroyed, or sometimes they just kind of glom there,
getting stuck and preventing blood flow.
There are also other molecular factors at work that contribute to vaso-occlusion.
For example, the sickled cells kind of partially turn inside out, exposing internal red cell
proteins that themselves stick to the lining of blood vessels.
The abnormal hemoglobin of sickle cell anemia isn't sickled all the time.
It gets sticky and makes those rigid chains especially when there is less oxygen nearby.
So tissues with relatively little oxygen tend to be affected most severely by the sickling
and vaso-occlusion.
And unfortunately, once vaso-occlusion begins, it reduces local blood flow and reduces the
amount of oxygen nearby which can worsen sickling.
The clinical manifestations of sickle cell disease are caused by several overlapping
mechanisms.
There's the anemia itself, the red cells in sickle cell anemia last probably 20 or 30
days compared to the 120-day lifespan of ordinary red cells.
So patients with sickle cell are chronically anemic, and their marrow has to continuously
pump out a huge number of red cells to keep up with their shortened lifespan.
Iron deficiency isn't typical because the iron released by destroyed red cells can
be recycled.
But to continue to produce so many red cells, patients need extra amounts of a B vitamin
called folic acid.
There can also be short-term crises where a patient's baseline anemia drops much further
leading to complications.
These can be caused by infections or other stresses and sometimes require blood transfusions.
A crisis might be caused by a spike in homolysis or destruction of red cells, or a crisis might
be caused by a temporary slowdown in red cell production, that's called an aplastic crisis.
The vaso-occlusion of sickle cell leads to many problems.
There can be pain crises involving areas of bone that get insufficient blood and then
infarct, kind of like a heart attack, but of bone.
These can be very painful.
Infarction and vaso-occlusion can also happen in the lungs leading to a pneumonia-like acute
chest syndrome with pain and fever, and that can lower the oxygen absorbed through the
lungs causing more sickling.
People with sickle cell usually have damaged kidneys from vaso-occlusion, so they cannot
concentrate their urine properly.
This leads to an increased risk of dehydration, which itself can also work worse than sickling.
Finally, vaso-occlusion can lead to blockage in the blood vessels of the brain causing
strokes.
These can be large, devastating events, or can be a series of kind of mini-strokes that
slowly lead to cognitive problems.
There's more.
Vaso-occlusion in the spleen inevitably leads to permanent damage to that organ.
In babies and young children with sickle cell, the spleen is enlarged and can easily be felt
poking down into the abdomen from the left side on the physical exam.
In healthy children, the spleen is small and you cannot feel it on the exam.
Here in life, the spleen and sickle cell disease will scar down an atrophy, disappearing entirely.
This damage to the spleen interferes with the normal development of the immune system
and leaves children like Marcus vulnerable to overwhelming bacterial infections and death.
Recognition of this risk has led to several recommendations that have dramatically helped
extend lives.
These steps include teaching families to quickly seek medical care when there are signs of
infection, using daily antibiotics to prevent infection, and making sure that children with
sickle cell are fully immunized.
Now think about this.
All of these manifestations of sickle cell, all of this is caused by a single genetic
change that leads to a substitution of one amino acid in the hemoglobin molecule.
This one substitution creates a hemoglobin that can become sticky and stiff and that
one change leads to infections, strokes, pain crises, anemia, chronic jaundice, and some
other complications I didn't even list yet, like gallbladder disease, impotence, leg ulcers,
heart damage, and eye problems.
So I think we've explained all of the findings on that complex physical exam.
Marcus is jaundiced from hemolysis.
He's pale from anemia.
He has an enlarged spleen from basal occlusion.
He's listless because of the degree of severe anemia.
Marcus also has a fast heart rate.
That can be a subtle finding and it's easy to overlook on a panel of vital signs, but
they're called vital signs for a reason.
Those numbers really are important and they can tell you when a patient might be genuinely
in danger.
A fast heart rate can be caused by many things including pain, anxiety, fever, dehydration,
any condition that weakens the strength of the heart muscle, many medications.
At times when the respiratory system isn't bringing in enough oxygen or when the blood
isn't carrying enough oxygen, there's quite a list of causes of a fast heart rate.
In Marcus's case, the low red cell count means that there are fewer cells to carry oxygen
so the blood has to be pumped faster to make up the difference.
There's also a heart murmur which is a noise made by flowing blood.
In children, murmurs are often heard when the blood is being pumped quickly.
This can occur with a fever or when a child is anemic.
Many children have murmurs as a completely normal finding on their physical exams.
Okay, back to Marcus and his sickle cell anemia.
The treatment of sickle cell anemia starts, most importantly with the early identification
of affected babies.
Every state in the USA screens for sickle cell in all newborns.
This patient may have been missed because he was born at a military hospital out of
the country.
In any case, a physician did pick up on the anemia at a previous visit but assumed that
it was ordinary iron deficiency.
That's because she thought that sickle cell should have been picked up on a newborn screen.
As soon as sickle cell is diagnosed, these babies are started on an extrafolate supplement
as well as a daily antibiotic to prevent infection.
These early interventions have dramatically reduced the early mortality of the disease.
30 years ago, prior to these recommendations, fewer than half of people with sickle cell
disease lived to reach adulthood.
It's also crucial that routine vaccines are received because these can prevent at least
some bacterial infections.
Families also need to be taught how to recognize early symptoms of infection to get immediate
care and how to prevent crises and complications.
For instance, dehydration in situations with low oxygen need to be avoided.
Depending on the severity of the disease, other treatments may be needed.
Patients who are having strokes or frequent pain or chest crises can be given routine
transfusions to keep their anemia under control by diluting the sickling cells with donated
normal cells.
Basal occlusion can be at least partially prevented this way.
Frequent transfusions carry their own risks, but in certain patients, this can be lifesaving.
Pain crises need to be immediately treated with pain medication, oxygen, and fluids
to treat dehydration.
Sometimes transfusions are also needed during these and other crises.
There are also medications that can be used and more are under development to suppress
the sickle kind of hemoglobin and encourage the marrow to produce a different variety
called fetal hemoglobin that would otherwise only be produced in the marrow before birth.
The most aggressive therapy available for sickle cell disease is bone marrow transplantation,
essentially killing off a patient's entire marrow and replacing it with donor marrow
from someone else.
This is curative, but entails considerable risk and tremendous expense.
Bone marrow transplantation will prevent the development of new or further complications
of sickle cell, but will not be able to reverse the damage from previous strokes or other
pre-existing complications.
Currently, excluding bone marrow transplantation, sickle cell disease cannot be cured, but
it can be treated and managed to prevent and mitigate complications.
Our patient, Marcus, did well.
His diagnosis of sickle cell anemia was confirmed by a test called the hemoglobin electrophoresis,
which can confirm the kind of protein that makes up his hemoglobin.
It's likely that his anemia had been worsened to some degree because he had never had folate
supplements, but also because he had had a mild viral infection that suppressed his
marrow.
After stabilization with several small blood transfusions, he perked up well.
There was no evidence of any neurologic or cardiac damage.
After extensive education for the family, he was sent home on an oral folate supplement
and oral penicillin to take every single day.
He will continue follow-up with the Sickle Cell Center, a multidisciplinary clinic for
patients of all ages with sickle cell and related chronic anemias, as well as with his
pediatrician for routine care.
Blood transfusions are an important part of therapy for sickle cell and many other conditions,
and the development of modern blood banking has been a huge contributor to extending healthy
lives.
Good blood banking requires careful sterile technique for collection and transfer, plus
very specific storage systems with tightly controlled temperatures.
It's also crucial that blood for transfusion be matched or the recipient can experience
a catastrophic immune reaction to the foreign proteins on the donated red blood cells.
Even with careful matching, there is still a risk of blood transfusion reactions, and
these can be severe.
About 1 in 20 to 50,000 transfusions will cause a life-threatening reaction.
There is also a risk of transmission of disease.
Though blood banks screen donors and screen blood for many infections, there may be some
infections that we do not know how to test for yet, and no test is 100% accurate.
It is estimated that about 1 in 1.5 million transfusions will transmit HIV, and 1 in about
300,000 transfusions may transmit hepatitis B. The risk of infection or serious reactions
is acceptable only if a patient is truly in need of a transfusion.
For patients with chronic anemias, including sickle cell, fallocemias, and other conditions,
the frequent transfusions become more likely to cause either infections or reactions, and
a risk eventually develops for iron overload because each transfusion puts extra iron into
the body.
Hopefully, future therapies will replace the need for blood transfusions for these patients.
Today's case has been an especially good science lesson.
It took us from how genes encode for proteins to how a small change in structure can lead
to a huge impact in the functioning of an essential protein, then to the pathophysiology
of disease caused by that single change.
Understanding why patients with sickle cell become ill leads directly to what kinds of
therapies can be used to keep them well.
Next time, we're going to step back from the science a bit and sink our teeth into a new
medical mystery.
It's a disease we've all heard of, we've all read about it.
It's affected most or all of our lives in one way or another.
Think you can figure it out?
Join us next time.
