Have you ever noticed what a weird sense of humor medical students and doctors have?
Sometimes their professors do too.
A professor is in front of his first year class teaching a group of new medical students.
He takes out a jar of yellow liquid, holds it up in the light, this he explains, is urine.
To be a doctor you have to be observant, observe the color, the smell, the sight, and the taste.
Then he dips his finger into the jar, puts it in his mouth.
The class watches in amazement and disgust.
But being dedicated students, as the jar was passed along, one by one they each dipped their
finger into the jar and put it into their mouths to take a taste.
After the last student was done, the lecturer shakes his head, if any of you had been observant,
he says, you would have noticed that I put my second finger into the jar and my third
finger into my mouth.
That's an old joke, but there must be a kernel of truth to it.
The name of the disease we're going to discuss in depth today does come from, yes, the taste
of urine.
We're in clinic today, General Internal Medicine, and today's patient is a 46-year-old woman
named Charlene.
She's coming in for a scheduled checkup.
When asked what's on her mind today, she says, quote, I feel fine.
So that's what we've got to work with.
Our chief complaint today is a Beatles song title, I feel fine.
We take a glance down at the paperwork, the sheet with all of the little check marks for
potential symptoms that patients fill out for their yearly checkup.
The patient is checked off, no, no, no, no concerns here.
The only yes box is fatigue, but Charlene wrote in the margin, I have four kids.
What do you expect?
Typically here in our presentation, before the physical exam, we develop a brief differential
diagnosis to help keep us focused, to hopefully help us see what we need to be looking for.
Today, our brief differential diagnosis looks like this.
Charlene is either number one, perfectly healthy, or number two, has something wrong with her
that she hasn't noticed yet, or at least she hasn't told us about it yet.
Does a differential like that make you nervous?
It should.
We've got no clues as to what we're looking for, and we don't even know if there's anything
to look for.
So on to the physical exam.
Charlene is a well-appearing woman, she's 180 pounds, 5 feet, 4 inches tall.
The remainder of vital signs are normal, including a normal blood pressure of 108 over 72, normal
pulse of 78, and a normal respiratory rate at 18 per minute.
There's nothing notable on the skin exam, H-E-E-N-T exam is fine.
The belly exam is normal, G-U exam including a pap smear, that's normal, rectal exam is
normal, her gait and strength and the rest of her exam are all normal.
Everything seems fine, right?
Well, maybe not.
That weight, that 180, that corresponds to a body mass index at 5 feet 4 inches of 31,
which is in the overweight zone.
You bring that up in order to encourage improved diet and exercise habits, and Charlene responds
She says, actually Doc, that's pretty good, I think I've lost a lot of weight this past
year.
You look back at last year's physical, and sure enough, she's lost 30 pounds in one
year.
How do you do that?
You ask.
Charlene responds, I don't know, maybe I'm eating better.
You take a brief lifestyle history, then diet and exercise habits.
Charlene gets no regular exercise, though she spends a lot of time with her kids kind
of shuttling them around, doing what moms do.
Because of her children's hectic lifestyle and her husband often working late, the family
eats out a lot, four maybe five times a week, often at fast food, and often eating on the
run in the car.
If anything, it sounds like over the last year, her eating habits have gotten worse,
not better.
So why is Charlene losing weight?
A quick observation, Charlene was honest with her doctor.
She really hadn't been trying to lose weight.
If she had lied and made up some story about her new weight loss program, the entire weight
loss concern would have been dropped, which in the long run could have been disastrous
for Charlene.
The lesson, be truthful with your doctor.
Now we've got an unexplained 30 pound weight loss, that is a problem.
For those of you who've struggled with your weight, you know that losing 30 pounds takes
work.
Significant weight loss without effort means something is wrong.
Now, what could it be?
Let's go backwards, we'll get some more history, a few more questions, now that we know what
we need to ask.
There's been no belly pain, no nausea, no vomiting, no diarrhea.
Charlene says her appetite has been fine, and her energy she thinks has been okay.
Maybe she says she's tired sometimes, but not more than she thinks is normal for a mom.
She hadn't been trying to lose weight, really, but she was happy to see the weight go.
A detailed comprehensive differential diagnosis for weight loss would be huge, almost any
chronic disease will eventually lead to weight loss.
So to help organize our list, let's think of it this way.
Weight loss has to be related to energy balance.
On one side of the equation is the energy absorbed, what you eat and digest, or what
goes into your system.
On the other side of the equation is the energy you use for life's activities, staying warm,
moving around, exercising, thinking, keeping your heart beating, all of this takes energy.
If the net amount of energy you bring into your body exceeds what it needs, you will
store that extra energy and gain weight.
If the net available energy is insufficient, you will use up the body's stored energy
and you will end up losing weight.
There's no way around this simple law.
At the heart of weight control is energy balance, what goes in versus what you use up.
So for now, let's come up with a brief differential.
Looking at things that can influence either side of the energy balance equation, we'll
start with the input side.
Weight loss will occur with conditions that decrease what's eaten.
These conditions can include depression, poor food availability, dental disease, abdominal
pain, functional disabilities that prevent someone from getting to food, altered taste
or smell that might make food less appealing, social isolation, economic hardship, even
this first idea, decreased intake, can have a whole lot of potential causes.
Once food is eaten, it has to be digested.
So gut diseases that interfere with digestion can lead to weight loss.
These include conditions like cystic fibrosis where there are insufficient digestive enzymes
or lactose intolerant or a lack of a specific enzyme interferes with the digestion of milk
sugar.
After digestion, food particles have to be absorbed.
Gut conditions can interfere with the absorption of nutrients including some we've met already
like celiac disease.
Also in this category of malabsorption will be diseases of the gut wall including Crohn's
disease.
On the other side of the equation are many diseases that increase the metabolic activity
of the body.
Even if intake doesn't change, if the metabolic costs of staying alive increase, the body
will net not have enough energy.
So stored fat will be utilized leading to weight loss.
Conditions like this include chronic infections, heart disease, COPD or any other chronic lung
disease, chronic kidney or liver disease, many metabolic or endocrine diseases and cancer,
especially colon, breast, ovarian, lung or prostate cancers.
That is a long list.
There's one other category of illnesses that leads to weight loss, one that's kind of intermediate
between the two we've mentioned.
Let's say our patient Charlene is consuming and absorbing enough calories and her body
is spending the same number of calories that she's taking in.
What if she's losing calories somewhere else, maybe by losing excessive protein or other
nutrients through her gut, perhaps into her stool or maybe she's losing calories somewhere
else.
One disease we've mentioned, Crohn's disease has overlapping mechanisms of weight loss
with Crohn's disease, a patient may feel bad and have a lot of abdominal pain, decreasing
appetite.
Because of the gut inflammation that's part of Crohn's disease, nutrition may not be
absorbed efficiently.
And because of chronic inflammation that keeps the immune system churning, patients with
Crohn's disease have increased metabolic needs.
That's a triple whammy.
So far, do we have a clue about which of these three issues is affecting Charlene?
It doesn't really sound like her appetite or intake has decreased, if anything, she
seems to be eating more than normal.
How about her digestion or absorption of nutrients?
Most of the conditions like celiac that affect digestion and absorption will cause other GI
symptoms.
If food isn't being digested right, you'd expect GI pain or bloating or diarrhea.
Malabsorption syndromes like lactose intolerance cause symptoms quickly after eating.
Her gut has been fine and her stools are normal.
Malabsorption or gut disease is still possible, but doesn't seem as likely.
Maybe her metabolic demands are increased.
Let's see if she has any signs of chronic, ongoing diseases, especially ones that would
burn up calories.
She's had no fever, no night sweats, no chronic cough, no chronic aches or pains, or anything
else that she can come up with.
Changes in the metabolic rate caused by hyperthyroidism often cause diarrhea, a feeling of feeling
kind of warm a lot or thinning of the skin or hair.
Charlene denies those symptoms too.
Really going back to our initial intake forms, all she does report is some fatigue.
So we don't yet have much to hang our hat on.
There was that third category, is our patient somehow losing nutrition from somewhere.
Losing nutrition via the gut into the stool seems unlikely since there's no diarrhea.
But there's another way to lose nutrition in the urine.
Now normally urine is almost all water, plus some salts and electrolytes and a little bit
of waste product.
There should not be much protein and there should not be any sugar spilled in the urine.
But if there were, that could be a source of net energy loss that would affect energy
balance.
Labs and tests, what do we look for?
As is often the case, simple old favorites are the most useful tests.
Markers of inflammation, like a sederate or normal, and the CBC, the complete blood count,
that's also normal.
With no signs of infection or inflammation or anemia on these simple tests, whole categories
of disease have become unlikely.
There's very little chance of cancer, inflammatory bowel disease, or chronic infection.
A chemistry profile shows no liver disease and normal kidney function.
That's good.
But the blood glucose from the chem panel is high, at 210.
Though the range of normal glucose is wide and depends on when the last meal was eaten,
blood glucose level in an adult should almost always be less than 180 and is usually less
than 140.
How would a high blood glucose cause weight loss?
The hint will be in the urine.
And no, I won't ask you to taste it.
An ordinary in-office urinalysis is done using a dipstick.
It's a thin strip of plastic with little pads glued onto it.
Each pad contains chemicals that change color when they react to different things in the
urine.
One pad will turn darker if there are red blood cells, another for white cells.
One will change color if there are urine chemicals that are produced by bacteria, which could
indicate a possible urine infection.
On Charlene's urine dipstick, one pad lit up, the one for glucose, Charlene is spilling
a lot of sugar into her urine and may have been doing this all year.
Can that cause weight loss?
You bet.
The kidneys filter out glucose, so there was none in the urine at all.
But if blood sugar concentration, if those concentrations are high enough as they are
in Charlene, some of the sugar will spill out into the urine.
There are no immediate symptoms of this.
People can't feel that their blood sugar is high or that they're spilling glucose in
their urine.
But in time, that lost sugar is equivalent in a way to being on a diet, though not a
healthy diet, as we will see.
People who spill sugar in their urine may be losing the equivalent of 400 to 500 calories
every day.
As dieters know, that's a big number, and unless you consistently eat extra to make
that up, you will lose weight.
So the diagnosis, Charlene has increased blood sugar and sugar in the urine.
She has diabetes, specifically diabetes mellitus.
Diabetes comes from a Greek word referring to siphon, or something that passes a great
deal of water.
Mellitus refers to the sweet taste of the urine, as if it is sweetened with honey.
It's been known for at least 3500 years that people with diabetes have sweet tasting urine.
Early sort of proto-physicians in India, they noted that the urine of people who had diabetes
would attract ants.
In 1776, the glucose concentration of the urine of diabetic patients was first measured,
confirming the central role of so-called glucoshuria, glucose in the urine, as a defining feature
of diabetes.
Understanding diabetes means understanding glucose and carbohydrate metabolism, and how
altered glucose metabolism causes illness.
All foods contain one or more of the three so-called macronutrients, the common molecules
that we eat and absorb for energy.
These three macronutrients are carbohydrates, fat and protein.
Harbohydrates are further divided into simple sugars, those are small molecules of one or
two sugar units each, and complex sugars, also called polysaccharides, which are essentially
chains of smaller sugar units linked together.
Polysaccharides are commonly called starches, and in the gut, these long carbohydrates and
smaller two-unit carbohydrates are chopped into single, simple sugar units called monosaccharides
for absorption.
The main monosaccharide absorbed from food is glucose, and for practical purposes the
term blood glucose and blood sugar refer to the same thing.
Glucose is crucial at many levels of metabolism, it is the essential energy source for many
body tissues, and can be converted to a wide variety of forms, including the building blocks
of fat by processes in the liver.
The level of blood sugar is tightly controlled by several overlapping homeostatic mechanisms
to ensure good health and energy availability.
That word, homeostasis, we haven't mentioned it before, but it's a central way that living
organisms maintain health.
Homeostasis is an active process that regulates the internal environment, keeping essential
parameters like pH, temperature, electrolytes, and metabolic substrates all in a normal range.
Once homeostasis is disturbed, all sorts of problems ensue, which we will see.
Let's use an example of eating a meal to illustrate the tight way that blood glucose concentrations
are regulated.
You eat an apple, and the natural fruit sugars are digested and absorbed, immediately increasing
blood sugar, when that change is detected by beta cells in the pancreas, increased production
and secretion of the hormone insulin occurs.
Insulin in turn drives the blood sugar downwards by encouraging sugar uptake by body tissues,
especially muscle cells, and by increasing liver's activity to store glucose and fat
and other molecules.
So insulin net decreases blood glucose.
There are also so-called counter-regulatory hormones that can increase blood glucose by
either suppressing insulin's action or release, or by increasing the liberation of glucose
from storage tissues.
These hormones, which balance against the actions of insulin, include cortisol, growth
hormone, glucagon, and epinephrine.
All of these affect each other's action and metabolism.
Rarely, diabetes can be caused by a markedly increased level of one of these hormones,
but far more commonly, diabetes is caused by either a deficiency of insulin or the body
becoming resistant to the effects of insulin, or sometimes a combination of both.
Because of a lack of insulin effect, in diabetes, blood glucose will be high and it will spike
higher and longer than normal after a meal.
The blood glucose will be high enough so that some glucose spills into the urine, wasting
metabolic energy.
This also has the effect of increasing net urine output.
So there is excessive urination, often with increased hunger and eating, to make up for
the loss of sugar.
Despite having plenty of sugar in the blood, the lack of insulin prevents many tissues
from being able to absorb and utilize the energy of glucose, so the body has to break
down excess fat in other tissues, contributing to weight loss, like the kind seen in Charlene.
She didn't report excessive appetite or increased urination, as is often the case in adult onset
diabetes.
Disease comes in two types, type 1 diabetes used to be called juvenile diabetes, and though
it usually occurs in children, it can begin in adulthood.
In type 1 diabetes, the beta cells of the pancreas are destroyed by the body's own immune system,
eliminating the body's ability to secrete insulin.
This condition has been uniformly and rapidly fatal prior to the development of insulin injections
in the 1920s.
In contrast to type 1 diabetes, type 2 diabetes more commonly begins in adulthood, usually
in people who are overweight, like our patient today.
Though the exact mechanisms aren't completely understood, many overweight people will develop
resistance to insulin.
Even though their pancreas can produce plenty of it, the circulating insulin becomes ineffective
in driving down blood sugar.
Eventually in type 2 diabetes, there is decreased insulin secretion as well, though insulin
isn't typically completely gone as it is in type 1 diabetes.
The combination of insulin resistance and relative insulin insufficiency leads to high
blood sugar or hyperglycemia in type 2 diabetes, and it's the hyperglycemia that causes most
of the mischief.
Though they can be life-threatening, acute complications of high blood sugar are not
very common in type 2 diabetics.
The main goals of therapy are to prevent the very significant late effects of long-term
hyperglycemia.
These late effects are bad news, and they can affect almost every organ system of the
body.
Although treatment and good control of blood sugar will prevent or delay most of these
complications, even with very good therapy, patients with diabetes remain at risk.
These complications of diabetes include heart disease, including an increased risk of heart
attack and stiffening of the heart wall, leading to chronic heart failure.
There can be other arterial disease, which can cause strokes or loss of circulation in
the extremities that may lead to amputation.
In fact, diabetes is the most common cause of kidney failure in the developed world.
Neuropathy or nerve damage can lead to abnormal or decreased sensation or weakness.
Retinopathy or eye damage can cause severe vision loss or blindness.
There's also an increased risk of dementia, chronic lung disease, frequent infections,
and skin ulcers.
All of these complications develop after many years of disease, typically 10 or 20 years,
although there's quite a bit of variability.
Though better glucose control decreases the likelihood of complications, it is difficult
to predict which patients remain at high risk.
The treatment of diabetes is primarily concerned with achieving euglycemia, that is, a normal
blood sugar during, after, and between meals.
In type 2 diabetes, first-line therapy is losing weight and improving exercise habits,
and sometimes these steps alone can be sufficient to essentially cure diabetes.
Now, more typically, though, medications are necessary.
These include oral medicines, so-called oral hypoglycemics, that increase insulin sensitivity,
decrease insulin resistance, or both.
In many patients with type 2 diabetes, insulin must also be administered, typically by one
or more daily injections.
Type 1 diabetics, who lack any of their own insulin, must rely on injections.
The treatment of diabetes also requires frequent home glucose monitoring with finger sticks.
A more advanced treatment strategy, more typically used for type 1 diabetics, is an insulin pump
to administer a constant flow of insulin to the body.
Similar to the way a healthy pancreas secretes insulin, there's also technology available
to continuously monitor blood sugar, and within a few years, it is possible that an entirely
self-enclosed electronic instrument will combine these technologies, essentially creating
an artificial pancreas that can, at the same time, monitor blood glucose and adjust its
secretion of insulin into the body.
You can imagine, if this were small, that the whole thing could be implanted below the
skin.
We're not quite there yet, but such a device like this ought to be feasible soon.
Though type control, that is, using intensive therapy to keep blood sugar close to normal,
has been shown to best prevent the long-term complications of diabetes, it comes at a price.
If you try to control the sugar and keep it low, you increase the risk of occasional
episodes of hypoglycemia or too low blood glucose.
This can cause seizures or coma, so it's got to be avoided.
Deciding how tightly to control blood sugar depends on factors, including the life expectancy
of the patient, the overall health, and other risk factors, and an honest assessment of
compliance and a patient's ability to self-medicate.
This is sometimes not an easy decision, with the exception of a few patients with new onset
type 2 diabetes who successfully lose weight and improve their exercise habits.
Most patients with diabetes require lifelong active management.
Charlene, in fact, she wasn't surprised at her diagnosis.
She had struggled with her weight for years, she had never found the time to exercise regularly
or try to improve her diet.
Most of her parents actually had diabetes, so she may have known what was going on even
before her appointment.
You remember her actual chief complaint, it was, I feel fine.
She probably did feel well, at least for now, but perhaps she knew that she was headed in
the wrong direction.
Meeting with a dietitian and coming up with some weight loss goals seemed to help Charlene
at first, but as happened so often, lifestyle modification alone was not successful in attaining
normal blood glucose.
That doesn't mean people with diabetes shouldn't keep up those efforts.
Improved diet and exercise can help prevent complications by not only helping control
diabetes, but also by improving blood lipids like cholesterol and keeping blood pressure
in a healthy range.
It's often the combination of several factors like these that contribute to overall declining
health.
In fact, there's a name for this combination of interrelated health problems, now so commonly
seen in the USA and in many parts of the developed world.
This is the so-called metabolic syndrome, a combination of high blood pressure, abnormal
cholesterol and other lipids, high fasting glucose related to diabetes, and obesity,
especially central body obesity.
Together, these dramatically increase the risk of cardiovascular disease and stroke.
Charlene's evaluation did not yet show high blood pressure or an abnormal cholesterol,
but it will be very important to continue to take lifestyle steps needed to prevent these
problems.
Diabetes is a good example of a disease whose treatment requires not just taking pills and
visiting the doctor, but taking charge of your health and making changes in your life.
We can instruct and teach and prescribe, but Charlene and patients like her are the people
who make the big decisions that end up having the most impact on their health.
The genetics of diabetes, both type 1 and type 2, is complicated.
It's not related to a single gene that's transmitted either recessively or dominantly.
Instead, there are sets of genes that create varying susceptibility, probably to some other
environmental influences.
Type 1 and type 2 diabetes, though they share some similar physiology, are not carried on
the same genes, so a family history of one kind increases only the risk of that same
kind of diabetes.
If type 2 diabetes is recognized early, even before there is marked hyperglycemia, it's
sometimes referred to as pre-diabetes.
It may be that earlier medical therapy, especially when combined with lifestyle improvements,
could prevent the progression of full-blown diabetes.
Back to our patient, Charlene.
The first hint that something was wrong was her weight loss, yet I've just said that
weight loss can prevent the appearance or progression of type 2 diabetes.
It turns out that there is effective healthy weight loss, there's the weight loss that
accompanies disease, and they aren't the same thing.
Healthy weight control strategies are not methods that rely on disease mechanisms.
You can't get healthy by losing weight because you have a tapeworm or you make yourself vomit
or you've got sugar spilling into your urine.
Healthy weight control involves primarily changing the diet to consume fewer calories.
Many different styles of diet have been proposed and studied, including ones that especially
discourage carbohydrates or diets that stress consuming more foods with lower energy content.
The best predictor of success isn't which diet is followed, but whether changes in
habits can be sustained for years.
In fact, the very concept, the word diet, is probably already a losing proposition.
If you say you're going on a diet, it kind of implies that someday you will go off the
diet.
What people need isn't a diet that lasts weeks or months or years, but a change in eating
that lasts the rest of their lives.
Though exercise alone is usually ineffective in leading to weight loss, exercise combined
with dietary changes works better than diet alone.
Medications can sometimes be an additional part of a weight loss program, but none are
really ideal or particularly effective.
Objectively, the most effective therapy for weight loss for obese patients is surgery.
This is a fast growing field called bariatrics and it involves a variety of surgical options
to lower the stomach volume or bypass some of the digestive and absorptive parts of the
intestine, sometimes both.
Though the results of bariatric surgery can be impressive, surgery will not be successful
without the patient committing and following through with lifestyle changes as well.
Bariatric surgery also entails considerable risk, so it's really only offered to people
with severe obesity or who are already suffering from health consequences of their weight.
The risks can include potentially catastrophic complications from the surgery itself or later
on bowel obstruction, gallstones, malnutrition or prolonged problems with nausea, vomiting
or diarrhea.
In some ways, we've made great strides against diabetes.
We understand far more about the physiology of both type 1 and type 2 diabetes and we
have the tools to aggressively keep blood sugars normal.
We've also gotten much better at treating the complications of diabetes, using strategies
like renal transplantation or laser eye surgery to prevent blindness.
But what we really haven't been able to do is to make any strides in preventing diabetes
in the first place.
In fact, the rates of both type 1 and especially type 2 diabetes are increasing dramatically
and we're seeing even teenagers now with the early onset of what we used to think of as
an adult disease.
So though we can better identify and treat diabetes, the vastly increasing quantity of
diagnoses has dwarfed these advances.
We're not seeing an ever increasing negative impact of diabetes.
We've got insulin.
Now we need something better, a way to prevent diabetes in the first place.
Diabetes and its complications are the direct cause of about 70,000 deaths a year in the
USA.
Next time, we'll talk about a disease that causes about half that many deaths, though
unlike diabetes, it's fairly easily prevented.
What's the preventable cause of death of 35,000 Americans each year?
We'll see you in our next Grand Rounds.
