Traditional medical education starts in the classroom.
At many medical schools, the first two years are devoted to lessons in anatomy, biochemistry,
physiology and pathology.
Traditional subjects create a foundation of understanding of how the body works at times
of health and what happens during times of disease.
But even from the beginning of medical school, individual case histories are crucial and
powerful teaching tools.
Young medical students and even very experienced practicing physicians don't yet know everything
that can be learned about the science of health.
For all of us in medicine, there is always more to learn, and we learn best from our
own patients.
No matter how experienced and when well read you might be, every patient is a new learning
opportunity.
As we go through the cases in this course, I want you to keep three learning goals in
mind.
First, you'll be learning specific medical information, what symptoms mean and how we
evaluate them.
Along the way, you'll learn many specific health problems as illustrations.
Second, you're going to see how doctors think, how we approach problems and how we come up
with solutions.
The third goal and perhaps the most important is to turn that knowledge around back to yourself.
After all, we all have our own health problems and all end up on the other side of the stethoscope
as patients.
What's the best way to work with doctors to help improve our own health?
In other words, this course will teach you how to be a better patient.
Today's case is an ancient illness.
Accurate descriptions of plagues of this condition appear in histories thousands of years old,
at times causing catastrophes.
In 1529, this illness killed two-thirds of the inhabitants of Cuba.
In 1951, a single case of this illness appeared in Greenland and over the following months
of the 4,262 inhabitants of Greenland, only five did not become seriously ill with this
disease.
Our patient today is patterned very closely after a real case from the United States from
2010.
Jayden, a 10-year-old boy, is brought to the emergency department with a chief complaint
of, just look at me.
Now, I've told you that chief complaint gets to be reported whenever possible in the patient's
own words.
In pediatrics, we do sometimes get some pretty off-the-wall chief complaints and sometimes
they're about Disney princesses or new sneakers and have nothing whatsoever to do with the
actual medical concern.
Still, sometimes even a cryptic chief complaint like today's, just look at me, may actually
contain a little nugget of wisdom.
The remainder of the history of present illness was taken both from the child and his parents
and older sibling, all of whom have accompanied him to the visit.
The room was a little cramped.
Jayden had been in excellent health until about five days ago when he started to complain
of feeling hot and tired.
That night, he developed a cough and runny nose and a fever began at 102 degrees.
The next day, his family noticed his eyes had turned red so they called their family physician
and he called in prescription antibiotic eye drops.
Jayden's eyes have stayed red and he has continued to run fevers from 102 to 104 degrees.
Last night, before bed, his ears started to look red.
He woke in the middle of the night because of coughing and at that time red splotches
were seen on the back of his neck.
Today the red spots have spread to his entire body.
He says the rash doesn't really itch or bother him but still that was his chief complaint.
Just look at me, referring to his rash.
As we've been doing traditionally, we'll step back briefly after the HPI to sketch
out a mental list of possible diagnoses.
It's an important step.
It'll help us think about the things to look for in our additional history questions and
physical exam, keeping our minds open to multiple diagnostic possibilities.
The main problem here are fever and rash.
We've also got red eyes, cough and some runny nose.
Now fever we've talked about before in a previous case, it's usually caused by either
infection, autoimmune or inflammatory diseases or perhaps cancer.
In children, especially when the fever hasn't gone on very long, almost all fevers are related
to infection.
So that's where we're going to focus our investigation.
The cough, the runny nose, those go with infection too.
The next step in narrowing down the kinds of infection to suspect will have to do with
exactly what kind of rash we're dealing with.
So we'll tackle that a little later.
After we've examined the rash during the physical exam.
Before the physical, some additional history and a review of systems.
Jayden had been in good health previously.
His family travels a lot because of dad's job and Jayden and his brother attend a non-traditional
school involving a lot of internet-based classes.
There is no suggestive family history and they don't recall being around anyone else
who had been particularly ill.
Our patient has had no sore throat, no vomiting, no diarrhea, and the only medicine he has
been taking is ibuprofen to help reduce the fever.
He has an allergy to the antibiotic amoxicillin, which mom recalls caused a rash similar to
this one several years ago when prescribed for an ear infection.
But he's had no antibiotics of any kind recently.
On to the physical exam.
Jayden is an African-American young man sitting in mom's lap.
Vital signs include a temperature of 103 degrees Fahrenheit, pulse 140, respirations 40 per
minute, and blood pressure 98 over 78.
Now normal vital signs may be different for children than for adults.
For a 10-year-old, these numbers mean his respiratory rate and heart rate are both elevated
and his blood pressure is normal.
Overall, Jayden doesn't look well.
He's kind of half-slumped in mom's lap and his eyes look glassy and red.
A test of blood perfusion called a capillary refill is delayed by two seconds.
That's a quick test that's especially used in pediatrics when we quickly squeeze the
color out of a finger or toe and see how long it takes for the color to return.
A normal cap refill is instantaneous.
His refill is slow, which could mean that his blood perfusion is poor.
That's often a sign of dehydration.
Jayden's mouth is dry.
The lung exam reveals crackly, noisy sounds in the lower lung fields.
His heart exam is normal, though his heart rate is fast.
The belly exam is normal too.
He does have a widespread rash and we'll describe that further in just a few minutes.
First though, there are two concerning things on his exam that we had better deal with quickly.
Even before we focus on the diagnosis, we need to take some initial steps to address
problems that may become life-threatening if we don't act quickly.
Number one is Jayden's respiratory status.
He's breathing quickly at 40 breaths a minute and fast breathing could mean that his lungs
are not working as well as they should.
He's also got kind of an overall glassy-eyed, half-slumped appearance, which could be caused
by a lack of oxygen delivery to his brain.
We quickly check a measurement with a device called a pulse oximeter to check the oxygen
saturation in his blood.
It is low at 90%.
Before doing anything else, we should give him some extra oxygen by a special mask.
As we move along, we need to keep an eye on his respiratory status.
Over the next few minutes, his pulse oximeter measurement improves.
Number two, his heart rate is fast and his capillary refill is slow.
Along with that, his mouth is dry.
When asked, he doesn't remember the last time he urinated.
Then overall, he looks kind of glassy and warm and not terribly interactive.
These findings suggest significant dehydration or even impending shock.
That's when poor tissue perfusion starts to cause damage to vital organs.
So while we're asking more questions and working towards our diagnosis, we're not going to
delay treatment for the dehydration.
We quickly get him a small cup of juice for him to sip and refill it every few minutes
to encourage him to continue drinking.
Also, we'll ask our staff to start to make arrangements to transport our patient to the
hospital.
We don't know the diagnosis yet, but I think this child is going to need hospital level
care.
By the way, the elevated heart rate and respiratory rate could also be caused by his fever.
So later on, when the fever is reduced, we'll want to reassess his breathing and pulse.
We're addressing his oxygen needs, and we've taken steps to correct dehydration, and we're
continuing to monitor Jaden's status and vital signs.
Now, let's look closer at this rash of his.
It's flat.
It's pink red areas.
In some areas, the individual spots are so close together that they become one sort of
large red area.
We call that a confluent rash.
The doctor word for a flat rash, the kind you can see but not feel, is macular.
Other kinds of rashes are raised up off the skin or papular.
There are a lot of words that can be used to describe rashes, but what's more important
is to recognize the patterns of rashes that suggest certain diagnoses.
The more you see, the more you know, and the more likely you'll recognize what you're
seeing.
Remember the chief complaint.
Just look at me.
Our patient was right.
With this and many other rash illnesses, the diagnosis can be found by looking at the patient.
There are many illnesses characterized by rash and fever, far too many to go through individually.
For illustration, let me mention a few prototypical examples.
Could our patient have chicken pox, for example?
No, that rash looks very different.
It's raised and includes many spots that have a small bubble visible inside the spot.
That bubble becomes a little blister and later ruptures and crusts.
Unlike this patient's rash, chicken pox itches a lot.
Even from the brief description, this isn't chicken pox.
Scarlet fever is another classic fever plus rash illness.
This is usually caused by the same bacteria that causes strep throat and is usually accompanied
by a sore throat which our patient doesn't have.
Also, the classic rash of scarlet fever is sandpapery with tiny fine bumps that are accentuated
under the waistband of clothing and other pressure areas.
This isn't scarlet fever.
Hives.
Hives are a very common rash, especially in childhood, and are often triggered by infections
that can also include fever.
Also called urticaria, hives are large, raised, pink-to-red, warm areas that itch like crazy.
This isn't hives.
A very serious and worrisome rash of childhood is called fatigue.
These are small dots of red-to-purple blood trapped under the skin from broken blood vessels.
A good test to distinguish fatigue is to press over the rash with a glass tumbler.
Most rashes will fade when pressed.
This is called blanching, and the rash will return after the skin is relaxed.
However, fatigue and large areas of confluent fatigue called perpura will not blanch.
Patechia and perpura can sometimes be caused by minor viral infections, but can also be
caused by very serious infections, including meningitis and blood poisoning.
It can also occur with leukemia and other blood disorders.
So a non-blanching, purplish or red rash needs urgent evaluation.
Our patients' rash blanches easily, so it's not patechia.
Lime disease can also cause a rash and fever.
The rash is very characteristic.
It begins as a small bump at the site of a tick bite, and then it gradually expands
into one large red area, or a large red sort of bullseye shape.
Sometimes there is more than one red area.
Accompanying this rash with Lyme disease can be fevers, aches and chills.
Our patients' rash really didn't look like this, and spread much too quickly to be Lyme
disease.
There are several viral infections that cause a flat pink blanching rash.
Just to mention a few, fifth disease causes a rash on the cheeks and upper arms, but doesn't
really cause fever or other signs of significant illness.
Rosiola is a flat pink rash that occurs in young babies after a fever.
Rash is going to occur with many other infections, including mononucleosis, influenza, hand-foot
mouth disease.
There are dozens of other possibilities.
Now, not every fever plus rash is caused by infections.
For instance, Kawasaki disease is an inflammatory disorder of blood vessels, a vasculitis that
is fairly common in pediatrics.
It causes prolonged high fevers and irritability, along with several other symptoms, not all
of which have to be present.
Things like rashes, red eyes, swollen hands and feet, cracked or swollen lips, and enlarged
lymph nodes.
Our patient did have red eyes, remember, but Kawasaki is not common after age 5.
Still, it's a possibility to keep in mind.
In this case, we have the rash and fever plus some additional hints.
Our patient has pink eyes, fever, a cough, and what sounds like pneumonia with an abnormal
chest exam.
He also looks significantly ill.
Put that together, and one rash plus fever illness seems very likely, measles.
We had a few other clues, too.
The family was said to travel a lot, and it turns out they had just been in France.
Western Europe has seen a tremendous surge of measles cases in the last several years,
including 16,000 cases in France in 2012.
This has led the World Health Organization to issue travel advisories to ensure adequate
vaccination of travelers to Europe.
It also turns out that neither our patient nor his brother was ever vaccinated against
measles, because if you remember, his family didn't have them enrolled in traditional schools.
They didn't think it was needed.
Since measles seems to be a likely diagnosis, we're going to immediately take some infection
control steps.
Remember that cramped exam room I mentioned?
Maybe that wasn't a good idea.
We'll make a list of anyone who had been in the waiting room with the patient, and all
staff that interacted directly with the family.
Measles is very, very contagious, perhaps the most contagious illness known to mankind.
Infectious droplets can linger floating in the air of an exam room for hours.
When moving the patient back through the office to the ambulance, we'll have him and his family
wear masks.
For all we know, they may have measles too.
We'll make sure that any of his potential contacts in our office have been fully vaccinated.
If he came into contact with babies too young to be vaccinated, protection can be offered
with shots of immune globulin.
We'll make sure that the ambulance crew and receiving hospital know that we're dealing
with a very infectious illness so everyone can take precautions.
We'll also immediately contact the health department so they can investigate the home
and the community for other potential exposures, beginning when the child became contagious,
which was four days before the appearance of that rash.
Highly contagious and dangerous illnesses like measles are a public health call to arms.
Jaden was transported from the clinic to the ICU of the local children's hospital and placed
in a negative pressure isolation room to prevent air from his room from flowing back into the
hospital.
Strict isolation precautions were followed and his family members were monitored for
illness.
Though his parents remained well, his unvaccinated brother developed measles 10 days later.
In addition to measles, our patient was also suspected of having pneumonia.
Jaden had a high fever and severe cough and also had that abnormal crackly sound in his
lungs and was breathing quickly with a low oxygen saturation.
Pneumonia was confirmed on a chest X-ray.
Measles, the virus itself, can itself invade lung tissue and cause pneumonia.
Once there's fluid from measles infection in the lungs, frequently a secondary infection
caused by bacteria can set in.
This is sometimes called a super infection when one invader takes advantage of a first
viral or bacterial infection causing a second infection on top of the first.
Though we have no medicine to fight the measles pneumonia directly, intravenous antibiotics
were begun to treat the bacterial super infection.
Jaden required continued supplemental oxygen, IV fluids, nutritional support and IV antibiotics.
He stayed in the hospital for eight days.
He went home in good condition with instructions to get caught up on all of his vaccines as
soon as possible.
An aggressive public health effort identified 110 people, all potential contacts of Jaden,
his brother or secondary measles cases, all of the needed additional doses of vaccine
or immuno-goblin and monitoring.
Six other people developed measles from contact with Jaden, two of whom required hospitalization.
The estimated total cost of this measles outbreak to the local health department was $300,000,
not including any of the direct medical bills, that's just the cost of the investigation
and treatment of contacts.
A confirmatory blood test for measles called serology was performed, which confirmed that
he did indeed have measles.
Serology refers to blood tests on the liquid part of blood.
If you put a tube of blood in a centrifuge, spin it, you'll get a clot of heavier blood
cells in the bottom and a clear to yellowish fluid on top, that's called the serum.
In the serum are immunoglobulins, those are also called antibodies.
These are large protein molecules that help the immune system recognize and attack invading
viruses and microorganisms.
We can test for specific kinds of antibodies, in this case antibodies against the measles
virus.
Sure enough, even though he was never vaccinated, our patient had high titers of anti-measles
antibodies, that confirms that this was a measles infection.
There's no specific therapy for measles, nothing to kill the virus or make the infection
itself milder or shorter.
What we can do is provide fluids to support good blood circulation and extra oxygen or
ventilatory support for the 1 in 20 measles patients who develop pneumonia as a complication.
We also gave antibiotics which can help if the secondary pneumonia is caused by bacteria.
Another complication of measles is brain inflammation called encephalitis.
This can lead to seizures or permanent brain damage and occurs in about 1 in 1,000 measles
patients.
A much rarer complication is an untreatable long-term degenerative brain disorder called
SSPE that can start 10 years or more after natural infection, and encephalitis and SSPE
are more common in the youngest patients.
In the developed world, with access to good supportive care, the mortality rate for measles
is about 1 out of 1,000 people, but in the third world, the mortality is up to 1 in 4.
Measles, though entirely preventable with vaccines, continues to kill about 160,000 children worldwide
each year.
Now, that's down from 2.6 million deaths per year prior to the wide availability of the
vaccine in the 1980s.
That's good, but we still have a way to go.
When we started this case, Jayden was quite sick, and we had to kind of rush through some
of the initial steps to get him stabilized and safe.
Let's circle back to review what happened in more detail.
How did we know up front that our patient was very sick?
This step is called triage, assigning a degree of severity to an ill or wounded patient so
the care team knows who needs attention fast.
It's a crucial skill for all healthcare workers to develop.
What do we look for?
Reviewing the vital signs is essential.
This includes the heart rate, respiratory rate, and blood pressure.
For all of these, numbers that are either too high or too low mean trouble, and the further
from normal they are, the bigger the trouble you can expect.
In children, the normal ranges of vital signs depend on the age of the patient.
These normally have faster heart rates than children, who have faster heart rates than
adults.
Also, vital signs can be affected by factors like anxiety or pain.
The patient's temperature is considered the fourth vital sign, and fever will also drive
up both heart rates and respiratory rates.
There's also a number we mentioned earlier that's sometimes called the fifth vital sign,
the pulse oximeter reading.
These devices are inexpensive and found in almost all offices and hospitals.
They provide a quick way to check on oxygenation.
However, children can have significant problems with respiration and oxygen delivery, even
with a normal pulse ox.
So that reading has to be interpreted in the context of the overall picture.
Even more important than these numbers, intriage is the overall appearance or gestalt of the
patient.
A child who's interactive, who's smiling and talking and playing, that's a child in
good shape.
A child who's listless or hard to wake or just kind of out of it, that's the kind of
child a pediatrician worries about the most.
In our measles patient, there were several overlapping reasons why he was so ill.
One was his pneumonia, which prevented his lungs from efficiently oxygenating the blood.
But he was also dehydrated, which decreased the amount of blood available for delivery
to tissues.
Think of it this way.
If the circulatory system is like a bunch of trains running along tracks delivering fuel,
he both had less fuel on each train, that's a lack of oxygen, and also fewer trains themselves.
The treatment of severe dehydration requires intravenous fluids, but mild to moderate dehydration
can often be treated with oral liquids, at least in a child like our patient who is conscious
enough to drink and who isn't vomiting.
Jaden also had a high fever, 103 degrees.
Now, fevers themselves are not harmful.
They do not cause brain or tissue damage.
Years ago, before the availability of vaccines to prevent serious infections, high fevers
would often herald a serious infection like meningitis or a bloodstream infection.
And those infections could cause serious harm, including brain damage.
But now, among vaccinated children with good access to health care, fevers are very rarely
caused by serious or harmful infections.
Nonetheless, though fevers themselves are harmless, they do create problems.
First, fevers make a patient feel really bad.
People with fevers are achy and they're miserable.
They won't want to drink, which may contribute to dehydration.
Also, fevers make people breathe more quickly, which increases the loss of water in the breath.
Warm skin also loses more water to evaporation.
So fever contributes to dehydration in many ways, decreasing the ability of the circulatory
system to deliver nutrients and oxygen to the tissues.
More oxygenation, poor circulation, fever, dehydration, these are all interconnected
problems that if untreated could lead to more complications and serious consequences.
There was another symptom our patient, Jayden, had.
It was mentioned briefly, but then we focused on more immediate concerns.
He had red eyes.
One cause of what's commonly called pink eye or conjunctivitis.
In fact, before our patient came in so ill, the family had called the doctor to get a
prescription for this.
Ordinary pink eye is an infection of the eye, usually bacterial, that causes a pink eye
with a lot of goo and crust.
It's quite common.
And although it's contagious, it's not particularly serious.
I don't disagree with a doctor calling in eye drops for suspected pink eye over the
phone.
In this case, even over the phone, it was clear that something else was going on.
When the family called, the patient already had a substantial fever and a cough.
These are not symptoms of ordinary pink eye.
And his eyes, though pink, never had the expected gooey discharge that we see with ordinary pink
eye.
So over the phone, someone could have been suspicious that there was more to the story,
especially if someone had noticed that this child had not been vaccinated against measles.
Parents, understandably, they like to avoid a doctor visit by occasionally calling ahead.
It's the physician's responsibility, even over the phone, to ask the right questions
so nothing important is missed.
Measles is a serious illness and one that can almost always be prevented by a vaccine
that is very safe.
So why are rates of measles increasing dramatically in Europe and the United States?
The single factor that's led to a resurgence of measles is falling vaccination rates, driven
by an entirely unfounded fear of vaccines.
Sometimes rumors just come out of nowhere, but in this case, the distrust of measles
vaccination stems from a single source, a publication in 1998 in a prestigious British
medical journal, The Lancet.
The lead author, Dr. Andrew Wakefield, claimed to have found evidence of MMR vaccine genetic
material in the gut tissue of a handful of children with autism.
In press conferences afterwards, he directly linked MMR vaccines to the development of
autism and a firestorm of concern erupted.
Since then, no independent researcher has been able to replicate Dr. Wakefield's findings
and studies of millions of children have not found any evidence of an MMR autism link.
It's been revealed that Wakefield's study itself was fraudulent and it's been retracted
by the co-authors and by the Lancet.
Still, the damage was done.
We're now seeing the effects of that distrust in falling vaccine rates.
Which was essentially eradicated from the United States in the 1980s.
It's back.
Most cases have been linked to unvaccinated travelers who, like our patient, bring back
cases from overseas communities where measles has become common.
Because measles is so contagious, secondary cases then occur among their contacts when
they return home.
Though measles vaccine is very effective, like any other medical intervention, it's
not 100%.
Some vaccinated individuals do remain unprotected.
Also, some babies are too young to be vaccinated and some children and adults have immune deficiencies
or other health problems that prevent vaccinations.
These individuals, babies and those with immune problems, are the most likely to have complications
from measles.
So, it's especially important to protect the most vulnerable among us for everyone to
get vaccinated.
That protects us, our children and our communities.
Measles commonly presents with a fever, red-appearing eyes, a rash and a cough.
It is a diagnosis that many practicing physicians have never seen, but one that we had better
become familiar with.
The anti-vaccine movement has led to falling rates of immunizations and a resurgence of
measles.
In other vaccine-preventable illnesses too, like pertussis and mumps, we must stay vigilant
to recognize potential cases of measles early on and also to continue to encourage routine
vaccinations by providing good, honest information about both the risks and benefits of immunizations
and the risks of not vaccinating.
Next up, we've got a very common symptom and a quote from Lewis Carroll.
See you then.
Thank you.
