Welcome everyone to our final Grand Rounds.
Today we'll meet our last patient and then we'll sum up some of the lessons we've learned
both about being a good doctor and about being a good patient.
The ancients knew that with age comes cognitive decline.
Pythagoras, the Greek mathematician and physician of the 6th century BCE, divided the life cycle
into five stages, the last of which, he said, began at age 81.
He named this last stage the Scenium, and thought of it as an inevitable period of decline
and regression.
From the word Scenium comes Scenile, implying that age and senility are linked and perhaps
inevitable.
A Greek judge, Solon, about 50 years earlier, had incorporated this unavoidable decline
into laws regarding inheritance.
Men could direct their inheritance to any air they wished, quote, providing judgment
was not impaired by pain, violence, drugs, old age, or the persuasions of a woman.
We're in clinic today, General Medicine Clinic, and our patient is an 82-year-old gentleman
named Isaac.
He's brought in today by his son.
You've known Isaac for many years, though he's a snowbird who you see for routine care
only about six months out of the year.
He's April, and he's come back in town from his usual winter stay in Boca Raton.
You extend your hand to shake his, and you say, hello, say, what can I do for you?
Isaac, hesitantly, he takes your hand for a brief squeeze.
He's just not right, Doc, says his son.
He hasn't been right since he came back.
The Docs in Florida say he has Alzheimer's, but I wanted you to check him out.
Really?
You last saw Isaac about six months ago, and at least then he was in pretty good shape.
His wife had died about a year ago, and you had been worried then about him continuing
to live alone.
After the funeral, Isaac's son had moved back to town into an apartment he could share
with his father.
That turbulence, his wife's death and moving, had seemed to cause some confusion and a little
forgetfulness, maybe not unexpected at Isaac's age.
You had him see a neurologist and then a psychiatrist who had prescribed medication for depression.
Isaac had seemed to improve and kind of settled into his new routine.
Now it looks like, just from a first impression, Isaac has had a big step backwards in function
and cognition.
Let's get more of the story from Isaac's son.
He says they had been doing pretty well, he thinks, six months ago when they made their
usual winter move down south.
And when they got there, his dad still seemed okay.
His son works in consulting, mostly just using a computer and Skype from home with clients,
so he had already decided to just stay with his dad in Florida.
But after a few months, he thought dad was getting more withdrawn.
They had met a new doctor in Florida and went to see him, and that doctor thought the depression
was getting worse, so they adjusted his antidepressant medication.
Over the next few weeks, he noticed that Isaac was having trouble using the computer to read
emails and would have occasional periods of irritability or crying, and would sometimes
seem to be confused about how to dress himself.
At one point, he had a particularly bad day and almost seemed like he had forgotten how
to walk.
That day, he was taken to the ED and was diagnosed with a urinary tract infection.
Treatment of that infection did help.
He was able to walk, and his mind seemed to be clearer afterwards.
His doctor had started another medicine to relax his bladder to prevent further infections.
Still, Isaac seemed to continue to have some good days and some bad days, some days when
he seemed kind of out of it or confused, and he was referred to a neurologist who diagnosed
him with Alzheimer's disease.
Now, most days now, he doesn't talk and he can't really dress himself anymore, and his
son says mostly he just seems confused.
At this point, Isaac looks up at you and you almost see a familiar sparkle in his eyes.
He squints a little and he looks at you and he says, I know you, doctor.
How are you?
How are your children?
He reaches over to shake hands again, though kind of turns his palm downwards, more like
a hold than a shake.
Still, you're happy to hear his voice and you take his hand.
I'm doing fine, Isaac.
Thanks for asking.
How about yourself?
Isaac says, they say I have Alzheimer.
I don't know about that.
His son looks shocked.
It's easy to assume that someone who's not talking isn't listening or that someone who
seems out of it is unlikely to follow a conversation.
Okay, we need a brief differential diagnosis to go forward, taking our traditional moment
to organize our thoughts so we remember to ask the right questions.
What's the cause of Isaac's cognitive decline?
Let's start very broadly.
Let's look at two big categories.
Dementia and delirium.
Dementia is a progressive decline in memory and at least one other cognitive area.
It is very strongly related to age.
Dementia is rare under age 50, though it affects about 8% of those by age 65.
By 90, almost 40% of people have at least some dementia.
The common causes of dementia are almost all related to chronic and progressive brain
damage occurring most often from age-related diseases like strokes or Alzheimer or Parkinson's
disease.
Damage can also be related to chronic infections like HIV or from toxins like alcoholism.
Most causes of dementia cannot be reversed, but at least in some of the cases progression
can be slowed with therapy.
Rarely, symptoms of dementia can be caused by thyroid disease, vitamin deficiencies,
or a brain tumor.
The way that different people show symptoms of dementia can vary, but there is always
some degree of memory loss.
There will also be other evidence of problems with cognition, such as difficulty with language
and communication, or problems with carrying out learned and purposeful movements.
People with dementia, for instance, may not be able to carry out the steps needed to comb
hair or to use a coffee maker.
Sometimes there can be a decline in the ability to recognize objects or tell what they are
used for.
Some people will also have changes in their personalities and perhaps a loss of social
inhibition in their actions or speech.
One specific cause of dementia that has been mentioned is depression.
This is sometimes called pseudo-dementia in the elderly because depression can contribute
to the symptoms of dementia, and dementia itself can present with symptoms similar to
depression.
In addition to a sad mood, elderly patients with depression can have symptoms including
sleep problems, low energy, decreased appetite, and poor motivation.
Now, in contrast to dementia, which is slow and progressive, delirium is an acute disorder
of cognition that is treatable and often reversible.
It has a quicker onset, often on the scale of hours or days, and it may be accompanied
by excessive drowsiness.
The symptoms of delirium fluctuate and are often dominated by easy distractibility, in
attention, and disorganized thinking.
Some of the causes of delirium in elderly patients include infections or illness of almost
any organ.
Pneumonia, urinary tract infections, or kidney disease, for example, injuries, pain, or stress
can all cause or exacerbate delirium, especially stays in the hospital or in the ICU.
Any prescription or non-prescription drugs can contribute as can low blood sugar or dehydration.
Any big changes in life, moving, for instance, or the loss of a loved one, can trigger or
worsen delirium in elderly people at risk.
Complicating all of this is that elderly patients with dementia can also have delirium, basically
an acute and treatable decline in function on top of a chronic slow process.
There's a lot of overlap in the causes and presentation, but it's important to try to
think of these two processes separately because delirium, once diagnosed, can often be reversed.
Depression can also coexist with both delirium and dementia, further muddying the diagnostic
waters.
So what do you think, based on the first impression, does Isaac have dementia or delirium or depression?
From what we know, I think he could have all three.
His decline was more rapid than typical dementia, though sometimes the early signs of dementia
could have been subtle and overlooked, especially if they were occurring right after his wife's
death.
Some degree of delirium could certainly be going on and depression as well.
Let's see if we can clear this up with some additional history.
Isaac's appetite has been up and down, sometimes some days better than others.
He does have a history of irritable bowel syndrome, so as some thinks, sometimes abdominal
upset has caused some skipped meals, he has been giving Isaac an older medication that's
been used for years to help with those belly symptoms.
There has been no vomiting and no headaches and that goes against a brain tumor.
There's also been no history of weakness of a limb or slurred speech that would suggest
a stroke or other damage to a small specific area of brain.
By this point of the history, Isaac is answering some questions and he's participating himself.
Isaac denies any symptoms at all, no aches or pains, no cough, no fever, no urinary symptoms.
When asked about that, his son adds that he's still taking that medication to help with
his bladder.
Isaac has had no trouble with sleeping and overall Isaac says he feels pretty good.
You look back through the medical record and overall Isaac has been in great shape.
He's been taking an antidepressant since shortly after his wife's death and you see
that about four months ago the dose was increased.
Other than the history of occasional stomach upset caused by irritable bowel syndrome,
he's really had no other health concerns.
He's had the usual screening tests for his age, including cholesterol and EKGs and a
stress test and you have some labs that were done while he was out of town, including normal
thyroid tests, tests of vitamin levels and other routine blood work.
All of that looks fine.
You also have a copy of a CT scan that was done a few months ago and that does show just
some shrinking of the brain to a small degree.
That's not unexpected for Isaac's age and it really isn't diagnostic.
Still, the CT is further confirmation that there isn't a tumor or a bleeding vessel in
the brain.
Onto our physical exam.
Isaac is now sitting up.
He looks more alert.
He's a tall man, kind of wispy white hair.
He looks well groomed and dressed and not at all neglected.
His temperature and other vital signs are normal and the remainder of the general medical exam
is unrevealing.
Focusing on the neurologic exam, we find that his strength and reflexes are normal and he
has normal sensations in all of his extremities.
There are some simple tests we use to confirm this using the pointy end of a broken tongue
depressor to test if he can feel a sharp pinprick and the bottom of a tuning fork to see if
he can feel vibrations.
We ask Isaac a few questions about what's called his orientation.
He knows his own name and the city you're in, but not the year.
You'd say he's alert and oriented to name and place, but not time.
You ask him to remember three common objects, say a car and an orange and a hat.
Isaac can immediately repeat those three back to you, but five minutes later he cannot remember
any of them.
Isaac can't repeat a series of numbers backwards and can't perform a simple calculation like
100 minus 7.
He finds it difficult to follow multi-step commands and is unable to pantomime pouring
a cup of coffee.
That last finding is a test for what's called apraxia or motor planning.
You can ask anything that's culturally appropriate and something that your patient ought to be
able to do, like taking money out of a wallet or opening a can of tuna.
Isaac seems to understand the questions, but he can't seem to get his body to act out
the action.
That physical exam overall is showing neurologic problems across multiple areas of cognitive
functioning.
Isaac has memory problems, plus an inability to do simple arithmetic.
He can't seem to do ordinary motor tasks either.
There is at least some element of dementia here.
The neurologic exam does not show any specific areas of motor weakness or sensory loss, what
we would have called focal neurologic findings, making a specific isolated brain lesion from
a tumor or a stroke unlikely.
Whatever is going on, it must be a diffuse process throughout the cortex of the brain.
But is this just dementia?
You shouldn't be so sure.
You're still struck by your recollection of your last visit.
How did Isaac decline so rapidly?
That's part of the value of seeing patients for years, that gut feeling that you know
people and you know what they're like.
In this case, you're just not satisfied that this is only a case of age-related dementia.
I want to go back to the quote I used at the start of this lecture from the Greek judge
Solon, whose law in about 600 BCE allowed for people to make their own decisions about
inheritance.
Solon could make their own decisions, quote, providing judgment was not impaired by pain,
violence, drugs, old age or the persuasions of a woman.
Solon here was making a declaration about mental competence and listing things that
even 2,500 years ago were known to interfere with thinking.
First, Solon said pain, which remains a well-known and often unrecognized cause of delirium
especially in the elderly.
Although the mechanisms of how pain leads to impaired thinking aren't clearly understood,
it's well known that older people in pain from urinary tract infections or arthritis
or GI conditions like diverticulitis, they can have dramatic declines in their cognitive
ability both from the pain itself and sometimes from the medications used to treat the pain.
Pain, I think, can refer both to physical pain from illness or from injury, but also
the mental pain of depression and isolation and loneliness that so many older people experience.
Both of these kinds of pains, by the way, are transmitted and processed by the same
pathways in the brain.
Solon's list also includes violence, which could certainly cause brain injury.
Older abuse is a real phenomenon now too and can present as depression, withdrawal,
and cognitive decline.
The last item on Solon's list, the persuasions of a woman, I'm not going into that in much
more detail here, but I suppose a modern parallel would be anyone who takes advantage of the
fear and isolation that older people may feel.
One more item from Solon's list, and that's the one I want to focus on the most, drugs.
2,500 years ago, the Greeks even then knew that their drugs could interfere with clear
thinking and we've got far more drugs now that are far more powerful and more widely
used.
Isaac's medicines, let's review, it's not a huge list for an 82-year-old man, he has
a medicine for irritable bowel syndrome, an older medicine that's called an anti-spasmodic
that slows gut contractions, he had been using that for years and it was meant to be used
as needed.
By the way, for those of you still getting used to Dr. Lingo and writing prescriptions,
Latin for as the need arises is pro re nata, so drugs prescribed to be used as needed are
abbreviated PRN.
Now Isaac's well-meaning son had been giving that medicine every day thinking it would
improve his dad's appetite.
Isaac is also taking an anti-depressant, he's been on that a year or so, though the dose
remember had been increased a few months ago, and he went to the hospital for a urinary
tract infection four months ago in Florida.
A urinary tract infection that we usually abbreviate that UTI, it's definitely a cause
of delirium in elderly patients and older men are at risk for them because of urinary
retention sometimes caused by an enlarged prostate.
Because his doctor suspected some urinary retention, he was prescribed a medicine to
prevent urinary retention, a common medicine that's usually very well tolerated.
But all three of these medications have in part a similar pharmacologic action, they
all, all three of them, affect receptors of a neurotransmitter called acetylcholine,
so they're all called anticholinergics.
And there is an additive effect of using three anticholinergic medications in the same patient,
you're much more likely to see anticholinergic side effects.
Those can include a lot of different manifestations including dry mouth, increased heart rate,
and constipation, but more importantly for Isaac, impaired concentration, memory, and
attention.
Isaac and his son are told to stop these medications, just to stop all of them and make a follow
up appointment in one week.
We also make arrangements for him to see a psychiatrist with expertise working with geriatric
patients and contact a social worker to visit the home to help make sure that there are reasonable
accommodations to keep Isaac safe and prevent falls.
And one week later, Isaac is a different man, he walks into the appointment, he shakes
your hand with strength and with confidence.
Tests of memory are still not at par with those of a young man, Isaac has some trouble
repeating back reverse digits, but his apraxia, his inability to perform tasks, that has disappeared.
When asked about his wife, Isaac becomes tearful and sad and talks about being lonely
and talks about not wanting to be a burden to his son, so I think there may be an element
of depression still here and social support will still be essential.
Isaac may have a mild degree of dementia as well, will want to get him involved perhaps
in a day program or other activities to engage his mind, which can prevent or slow the progression
of age-related dementia.
Here's another quote from Solon, the Greek judge who had listed so many causes of cognitive
decline, I grow old learning something new every day.
Continuing to learn may be one of the best ways to keep an aging mind sharp.
But addressing the medical cause of delirium, in this case the medications that had been
prescribed, was the biggest and most important step in improving Isaac's life and that of
his family, drug induced cognitive impairment occurs in about 12% of elderly patients with
suspected dementia, almost any class of medications can do this, including commonly used blood
pressure medications, psychiatric medications, pain medicines, even including ordinary non-steroidal
pain medicines like aspirin or ibuprofen, medicines for allergy or GI conditions or
diabetes and even many over the counter medicines.
Some of these medicines cause their mischief directly as a side effect or some medications
affect the metabolism of other medications, so it might be a combination or interactions
between the medications that leads to cognitive problems.
One principle though is that the more medications taken, the higher the quantity of different
pills, the more likely any side effect will be, including cognitive problems.
The risk of delirium on three medications is about three times the risk on one.
If taking five medications, the risk increases ninefold.
The exact risk depends on what medicines are taken and what combinations and on what doses,
other health factors as well, so it's impossible to know the exact risk for any one patient,
but the risk is substantial and it gets higher and higher as the number of medications increases.
So the single most important step to reduce the risk of drug induced cognitive impairment
is to minimize the number of medications taken.
The minimal effective doses should always be used and medicines should be taken for
the shortest possible length of time.
The highest risk medications, especially sedatives and combinations of anticholinergics, should
be avoided when possible.
It's also crucial that every prescribing physician have a complete and accurate list
of all medicines taken and the doses, including all over the counter meds and supplements.
Patients can help by keeping a single printed up-to-date list or just by bringing every
single one of their medicine bottles to every single doctor's appointment.
Caution is especially important when new medications are prescribed or doses are changed and of
course it's important that medicines be used correctly if there's any concern about cognitive
impairment a family member or other responsible individual may be needed to take charge of
medications to make sure they're used as intended.
That being said, medications certainly have their role.
Medical problems like diabetes and arthritis need to be treated.
Pain especially needs to be recognized and addressed, though that doesn't necessarily
mean that pain has to be treated with medication.
Drug withdrawal too, it can lead to lyrium, so I don't mean to imply that patients should
stop taking medications on their own.
Tapering down a long list of medications should be done under a doctor's supervision and advice
and may need to be done in a stepwise, gradual fashion.
Today's case of course illustrated the risks of side effects of medications and especially
of what's called polypharmacy, taking multiple medications.
We also saw how important it was that our patient had his own advocate, in this case
his son, to help him at appointments and to make sure the correct history was available.
Once a patient is sick, he or she might not be in the best condition to communicate with
a doctor and follow through on plans.
That goes for mental health and cognitive problems of course, but even for any general
medical condition that's distracting and worrying, really almost any concern.
We also saw that a single doctor, who's known a patient well for years, can be a strong
ally.
ERs and urgent cares have their place, but when care is fractionated with different people
focusing on individual problems, doctors are more likely to overlook the big picture
and patients are less likely to get the care they need.
And that's what this course really has been about, how to give and get the best medical
care for yourself and your family.
We've been through some interesting cases and you've learned, I hope, some solid medical
information and some doctor lingo, but what's more important than knowing about individual
diseases is knowing how doctors think and how patients can use that information to get
better health care.
For instance, we've seen again and again that doctors rely on the patient's narrative
to reach a diagnosis.
That may have seemed like a surprising thing to say at the beginning of the series, but
now you know that even in this day of lab tests and CT scans and all sorts of equipment and
technology, most diagnoses rely on the history, the story of the illness or the story that
the patient brings to the doctor.
This is what happened, this is what happened next.
Doctors need to take the time to listen to their patients.
After all, it's the patient's story, it's not the doctor's.
A few directed questions can help focus on what's going on, but the story needs to unfold.
As the whole story isn't complete at the first encounter, it may take multiple visits
to figure out what's going on.
That doesn't necessarily mean that the doctor missed something or made a mistake.
The physical exam is a great tool, starting with the vitals and including both a good
overview and specific observations to look into concerns raised by the history.
There is no such thing as an absolutely complete physical exam.
I guess one could be done, but it would take a few hours, but the most critical organ systems
need to be evaluated along with a more in-depth exam of the most concerning areas.
Like the history, the first exam might not supply all of the answers and sometimes physical
exams have to be repeated to reveal the clues that are needed.
Tests and labs, these really are an essential part of medicine, but as we've seen, maybe
not in the way people think.
Labs and tests confirm diagnoses to rule out things that are very serious and critical,
but labs and tests can also themselves be misleading.
There's no way to, quote, test for everything, and tests have to be interpreted with caution
in that eye on the big picture.
We've seen a few times the idea of a therapeutic trial coming up with what's called a working
diagnosis, then seeing what happens when that's treated.
A response to a treatment or a non-response to a treatment, that itself is a valid test
and can help confirm or refute the working diagnosis.
That the first idea didn't work doesn't mean it was a mistake.
But sticking with the wrong plan, not making changes in the diagnosis or treatment when
a plan isn't working, that is a mistake.
A physician's most important skill doesn't involve a little hammer or a stethoscope or
a lab slip or a prescription pad.
It is actually listening, paying attention to what's said, listening for clues, sometimes
asking the right questions to get the story you need.
Doctors need to keep an open mind, stay curious, and keep reading and learning.
There is always more to learn and we need to be humble about what we don't know.
So what can patients do to help their doctors and help them get themselves the best possible
care?
Be honest, be ready to tell your story, maybe even again and again.
Keep in mind that it may take multiple visits and repeated encounters to get to the bottom
of a diagnosis.
Even with the best doctors, you won't get a clear answer at first.
In fact, not all problems even have a clear answer, but that doesn't mean they can't
be addressed.
Sometimes care has to be coordinated between specialists or between different medical facilities.
Help that process along by making sure copies of labs and reports get to everyone involved,
especially your primary physician.
Keep your follow up appointments and make sure you get the results of tests and labs
and understand them.
No news isn't necessarily good news.
If it was important to do a test, it's important for the patient to get the results.
There are some simple questions that patients should always feel comfortable asking.
Simple things like, what are you thinking doctor?
Or what do you think the problem might be?
Are there other diagnoses that we still need to worry about?
Ask the doctor, what are the next steps for tests or treatments?
Or simply, what exactly do you want me to do?
And perhaps the most important question of all, when should I expect to feel better?
And what should I do if I'm not feeling better then?
Those last questions are crucial, not only because they focus on information patients
need to know, but also because they reinforce the collaboration between the doctor and patient.
In other words, they bring the conversation away from the disease and the tests and the
medicine and back directly to the patient.
If you're a patient wanting to understand how doctors think, from this grand round series
you've learned some valuable information that will help you become a more effective part
of the doctor-patient team.
And if you are planning to become a physician yourself, watch for those clues that your
patients bring you.
The most effective encounters, the ones that really help keep patients healthy, are the
ones when patients and doctors help each other solve the mysteries.
