Hello again. Today, we're back in general medicine, the outpatient clinic, and we've
got a very old and very common disease to diagnose. It was named by Hippocrates about
400 years before the Common Era, using the Greek word for wind or tubelo. Physicians both in ancient
India and the Roman Empire found herbs that were probably effective treatments. Those herbs,
which are still in use, contain chemical compounds similar to what are used in modern
pharmaceutical products today. Plenty of the elder of Rome, in addition to herbs, also suggested,
specifically for this illness, drinking the blood of wild horses and eating millipedes
soaked in honey. Those ideas probably didn't help quite as much. Our patient is Margo,
a 49-year-old woman who's come in with her husband with a chief complaint of,
I've got this cough again. Margo says she gets a cough frequently, a bad cough,
that lingers for weeks, and she keeps seeing doctors. It gets better, and then it comes back.
She thinks this time it's her allergies because it's the fall, and she always gets this cough in
the fall. Her husband chimes in, yep, she's always coughing. You speak up to clarify the story. Margo,
do you mean you always cough every day for a long time? Or do you mean you have a cough that comes
and goes, that there are times when the cough is completely gone? Margo says, oh, it comes and goes.
I have it bad now, she says, but it goes away, and it always comes back. Margo's husband,
his name is Randall. He says, I don't know about that. You're always coughing. He says this directly
to Margo. When do I cough? She asks. You cough all the time, says Randall. You always cough at
night, and when you go outside, and especially in the morning, and well, that's what happens sometimes.
When you try to take a medical history, sometimes you ask what you think is a simple question,
and it kind of gets away from you. Margo and Randall are arguing now, so you try to settle
things down, trying to redirect the conversation. Margo, you say, let's focus on this cough now.
What's it like? How long have you had it? What other symptoms are there?
Margo says, she's had this cough for two weeks. Randall's back there. He's shaking his head,
but we're trying to ignore him for now. She says, it's worse in the morning, and it's wet.
Now Randall interrupts. He says it's a bronchitis cough. Margo kind of shushes him and says,
none of her cough medicines are working this time, so she knew she had to come see the doctor.
What medicines, you ask? Randall says, look at this doctor, as Margo upends her purse, dumping
out bottles and inhalers and sprays all over the exam table. You kind of rake through it. You're
seeing inhalers for asthma and allergy medicines, steroid pills, antibiotics, all sorts of bottles,
all sorts of dates, from all sorts of different doctors, many places, urgent cares, ERs. It looks
like every bottle has a different doctor's name. You've got all the records, you know, Margo says,
and sure enough, you can see scanned into your electronic health record copies of multiple
visits to clinics and urgent care centers across several years. There are also scattered x-ray
reports, some letters from specialists, an allergist, an ENT, there's lots of paper scanned in there.
You should go look through those, Randall says. Now, this is a style thing coming up. I've been
stressing how important a good history can be. I think it would be reasonable to step outside
of the room to reduce distractions and try to go through these old medical records, maybe,
maybe not line by line, but at least to get a feel for these visits. But personally, I've always
found that a story from the patient is more useful, at least at first, than looking at
other doctor's records. So, we want more history. But time for a pause. Let's think in broad terms
about coughing. A cough is one of the most common symptoms that drive visits to doctors. Of course,
most coughs are brief, self-limited diseases that people recover from without any specific
evaluation or therapy at all. Coughing is a normal protective reflex that clears the lungs of
secretions and mucus and inhaled dust. But of course, too much of a cough itself is distracting
and aggravating and can lead to impaired sleep for both the patient and the family, as Randall
has been quick to point out. Some of the most common causes of chronic, prolonged, or recurrent
coughing include smoking, both active smoking and passive second-hand smoke exposure. Those can
both cause cough. Long-term smokers can develop COPD or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
with permanent destructive changes in the lungs. Asthma is also very common and can cause coughing
as a main symptom, sometimes along with wheezing, noisy breathing, or shortness of breath.
Prolonged cough can also be caused by environmental or occupational pollution. Any cause of chronic
post-nasal drip, including allergies or sinusitis, can cause an ongoing cough. Reflux, meaning
gastrointestinal, gastroesophageal reflux from stomach contests coming back up, that can cause
cough, as can some medications, especially ACE inhibitors, a class of blood pressure medications.
Whooping cough, also called pertussis, is probably one of the more common infectious causes of prolonged
coughs in adults. It's also worth mentioning that frequent ordinary coughs, just from common cold
viruses, can kind of stack up one after another and seem like a chronic, ongoing cough. We see this
in children sometimes when they start daycare or in young pediatricians starting training,
or in young pediatricians starting training, or in school teachers or daycare workers.
Children or those who work around children can be victimized by very frequent viral infections.
Less commonly, prolonged coughing can be from heart disease, chronic lung infections,
or tumors or cysts in the lungs or bronchial tubes. Problems outside of the chest have to
be considered too, like perhaps something in the larynx or throat, or neurologic conditions
that lead to excessive secretions or an impaired ability to keep the airways clear.
Also, any sort of immune-compromising condition can lead to recurring or persistent coughing.
Occasionally, we can see what's called a psychogenic cough, sometimes related to stress.
So, a pretty long differential, but I think with some history clues, we can narrow things down.
More history. We can ask about the quality of the cough to try to nail down exactly what it
sounds like. There are a few specific coughs that do have very characteristic sounds.
Croof is an illness of children, young children, and babies, mostly, with a cough that sounds like
the bark of a seal or a dog, and it really does sound like that. But croof is very uncommon in
adults. Another characteristic cough is the cough of pertussis or whooping cough. Classically,
this is a staccato, one after another cough, cough, cough, cough, cough, cough, cough,
that goes on for a minute or more, followed by one big inspiration, the whoop. But many people
with whooping cough don't actually sound like that and don't make a whoop. There's also a
distinction that can be made between a wet and a dry cough. We think of a dry cough as being
caused by irritation or some condition without a lot of excessive phlegm, versus a wet,
phlegmy sort of cough, likely related to infection or inflammation, perhaps caused by
sinus disease or allergies. But there's a lot of overlap. Pneumonia can sound to some people
wet or dry, and so can asthma. And two people listening to the same cough often disagree
on whether it's wet or dry. Bottom line, I don't think cough descriptions are very reliable and
helpful, and they certainly shouldn't be something that leads you to narrow down the diagnosis
without corroborating information. In any case, Margo and Randall are still arguing about what
the cough sounds like, so we're not going to get a straight answer on that today. Let's get
some answers to some more specific questions. Margo doesn't smoke and isn't around smokers.
She doesn't take any ACE inhibitors or other medicines that can trigger cough. That already
takes out some of the categories we've reviewed. She's also had no chronic or recurrent fevers
and no weight loss, and really no other symptoms like chronic diarrhea or skin problems. Together,
all of that makes immune problems unlikely. Margo works from the home doing telephone marketing,
so she's not exposed to a whole lot of children or their infections.
What about allergies? Though cough can be caused by chronic post-nasal drip from nasal allergies,
we'd expect to have a report of other allergic symptoms. Margo denies frequent sneezing or running
noses or nasal congestion, so allergy really is unlikely. In fact, Margo denies now that she
has any congestion or running nose at all, so I don't think her cough could be caused by post-nasal
drip from an upper respiratory infection or sinusitis. How about reflux? Margo denies classic
heartburn symptoms and also denies more subtle possible symptoms of reflux like a tickling or
something stuck feeling in her throat. She also doesn't really think her cough is worse after
meals or when she's lying down, though Randall does chime in that she coughs a lot at night
when she's sleeping. Now, some red flag questions for cough. A few questions to make sure we're not
missing something scary. We had already asked about fevers and weight loss if those were present,
especially chronic or recurrent fevers. If those were present, especially chronic or recurrent
fevers, we'd have to think about tuberculosis or cancer. Another red flag for both of those
diagnoses would be coughing up blood. Now, anyone with a severe cough can occasionally cough up
just a bit of blood from broken vessels in the throat, but coughing up significant blood makes
us worry. Margo hasn't had any of that. She also denies shortness of breath, which could have been
a sign of heart disease, COPD, or rare but serious diseases of the lungs that could have caused
scarring and fibrosis. One other point, and I think it would be best to try to get a clearer
answer. Is this a recurrent cough that keeps getting better or worse or a chronic cough?
Margo and Randall kind of disagreed on that question. We flip through the prior records
and we see chief complaints in histories that include cough for three weeks or cough for 20 days
or coughing has come back. At least the impression for now looks like this is more of a recurrent
than persistent cough. That's an important distinction. Lung cancer or tuberculosis or
some kind of mass pressing on the lung really should cause more of a persistent cough. One
that's always there or one that's gradually getting worse and worse. We'll want to keep an open mind,
but for now the history suggests that Margo has some kind of intermittent problem or a diagnosis
that causes symptoms that come and go. While we're looking at those old records from other
physicians, there are some diagnoses that keep popping up. Bronchitis and sinusitis,
an upper respiratory infection, sometimes allergies, and occasionally wheezing or walking pneumonia
or reflux. All of these different diagnoses span over several years, but they're all associated
with the same chief complaint. It's always coughing. No wonder Margo and Randall are frustrated.
It's all cough and she keeps being told different things and the cough keeps coming back anyway.
You're still kind of pawing through the pile of medications. Do any of these work, you ask? Sure,
says Margo. Nass, says Randall. You say, I think I can tell which one of you is the glass half full
one. Everyone starts laughing and that starts Margo coughing. It's quite a cough, loud and
strong. That's the cough, says Randall. See, it's bronchitis. Margo's just kind of waving him away
sort of catching her breath. Okay, let's do our exam. Margo is Caucasian and when she stops coughing,
she looks like she's in good shape and feeling well. Vital signs are done, including a respiratory
rate and a quick pulse ox. They're all normal. H-E-E-N-T is normal. Margo isn't congested.
The lining of her nose isn't swollen and she's not sniffling at all. Her heart exam is normal.
When you listen to her lungs, they sound clear. When you ask her to take a deep breath,
she starts coughing again. So you try that a few more times and finally you get to hear some nice
deep breaths and you can hear a bit of a of a wheezy sound through the stethoscope when Margo
breathes out from low down on one side of her chest. That's it then, says Randall. That's bronchitis.
They always say it's bronchitis when they hear that. That wheeze you heard. What does that mean?
A wheeze is a noise from an airway that's constricted. A tight noise typically heard in
expiration when a patient breathes out. It sounds like
lung sounds can sometimes fool the examiner. A wheeze that sounds like it's a noise from the
lung down here can actually be a noise transmitted from up here. Still, from what we hear, the exam
suggests there's something going on in the lung itself. Randall's off-handed comment, when they
hear that it's bronchitis, that tells us something. That tells us that Margo has had wheezing before,
but maybe not every single time she gets a cough. Aha, clues are stacking up now. They're subtle,
but they're there. So what have we got? A healthy woman overall, but with an annoying,
severe, recurring cough, and wheezing at least sometimes on the physical exam.
A wheeze is a noise, and sometimes the word wheezing is used by people to describe any kind
of noisy breathing. But to a physician with a stethoscope, a wheeze is more specific. That specific,
almost musical whistling noise, it's classically caused by narrowing of the airways in the chest.
That can be from a one-time illness like pneumonia, where mucus in the airways causes narrowing,
or by some kind of tumor or mass that's pressing on one or more airways. But from Margo's history,
this is a recurrent common go-cough associated, we think, with a wheeze that comes and goes,
and that's very suggestive of one single common diagnosis, asthma. In fact, many of the medications
Margo's been using on and off for years are actually asthma medications. So doctors have been
thinking about asthma before, but apparently this has never been communicated this clearly to Margo.
Margo says, I don't have asthma, and Randall chimes in. They said you had that. Remember
bronchial asthma, that one doctor says, and Margo cuts him off, she says, that was
asthmatic bronchitis. That's different, and the two of them, they're arguing again. Margo starts
coughing again too. We need confirmation, though I think it might be entirely appropriate to
diagnose asthma based on the information we have so far. This has been going on for a long time,
and it would be best to confirm the diagnosis so we know exactly what kind of plan to suggest.
A first test that's part of the evaluation of any chronic or recurrent cough is a chest x-ray.
It's a simple test, it's cheap, and it allows us to see the heart and lungs and the larger tubes
of the airways. A chest film can not only tell us what the lungs look like today, but can also be
compared to prior films to see if anything spotted in the lungs is persistent, suggesting perhaps an
anatomic problem or a tumor. Today's chest x-ray looks fairly normal, but there are subtle findings
we can see. The lungs are hyperinflated, it looks like Margo is taking extra deep breaths,
and there are little areas of slightly denser lungs, suggesting a little bit of fluid here and there.
You look back at some older films that have been taken over the last two years,
and there is often that hyperinflation, and sometimes there are those little consolidated
areas in different places. These subtle lung findings can be a source of confusion and misdirection.
They can be seen with pneumonia, especially mild pneumonia that are sometimes called
walking pneumonia, but when they come and go in Margo's case, these areas are called
atolectasis, referring to small parts of under-inflated lung tissue. Atolectasis that shifts around
like this is very characteristic of asthma, though it can't be documented by one single chest x-ray.
Again, it's the pattern what's seen in the series of x-rays, along with the findings of
repeated physical exams, revealing a wheeze that comes and goes. That's what's suggestive of asthma.
So asthma is not a one-time diagnosis. The first cough or the first wheeze, that's not something
that's appropriate to diagnosis asthma, but neither is it appropriate to wait through years and years
of frequent coughing and wheezing to make the diagnosis.
One other confirmatory test is done. We use a device to measure Margo's breathing called a
spirometer, and with that we see that Margo's airways are clamped down small, especially during
exhalation. Then we give a medicine called a bronchodilator that's a very common asthma medication
used to relax and open her breathing tubes, and afterwards her spirometry testing normalizes.
We've documented a breathing obstruction that responds quickly to bronchodilators. That confirms
the diagnosis of asthma. Asthma is very common. It affects about 25 million people in the United
States, including 7 million children. It causes symptoms by two interrelated mechanisms in the
lungs. Part one is inflammation, swelling and mucus accumulation in the airways. Part two is
what's called bronchoconstriction, where muscles that wrap around the airways constrict causing
narrowing. The main symptoms of asthma when it's flaring up are coughing, shortness of breath,
and a feeling of chest tightness. Sometimes there can be chest or more rarely abdominal pain.
Symptoms can range from mild to quite severe or even life-threatening,
and they very characteristically wax and wane, getting better or worse depending on triggers.
However, many people with asthma have at least some amount of chronic inflammation and symptoms
as a baseline, though they may not complain about daily symptoms.
As we talked with Margo and her husband, it became clear that she did have chronic symptoms.
Her cough was sometimes better and sometimes worse, but as is characteristic of asthma,
it sounds like there had always been some coughing, especially at night. She had also stopped
exercising many, many years ago because she found that after exercise she'd cough and cough,
and it was embarrassing in the locker room. Again, that's characteristic of asthma,
though it's only become clear now in retrospect. Back to triggers. People with asthma can have
triggers that lead to a flare-up of symptoms, sometimes called an asthma attack. Common triggers
can be exercise, cold air, respiratory infections, including common cold viruses, tobacco smoke,
or allergies. These triggers lead to cough even in people without asthma, which can be a source
of diagnostic confusion. For instance, allergies themselves cause cough, but usually there are
other symptoms of allergies like a runny nose or congestion or itchy eyes or a common cold.
Everyone gets some cough with their colds, but someone whose colds lead to a prolonged,
severe cough that also suggests the possibility of underlying asthma.
When we talked with Margo about this, that cold viruses can trigger a prolonged asthma flare,
she and Randall finally found something to agree about. Yes, whenever a cold went through the
family, Randall would be sick for a week or so, he wouldn't even see the doctor. But when Margo
got the same cold, she'd be sick for weeks, and she'd end up with a bunch of prescriptions.
Although there is no cure for asthma, there are important steps to prevent and control
symptoms, steps that may also help prevent the overall progression of asthma to a more
life-threatening disease. Non-medical steps can include avoiding tobacco, including second-hand
exposure, and avoiding other identified triggers when possible. Also, control of allergic symptoms
with allergy medications, environmental measures, or immunotherapy can help control asthma,
at least in people with allergic triggers. Beyond that, medications can very effectively
improve the health of people with asthma when they're used correctly. There are both quick
relief medications, those are those bronchodilators I mentioned earlier, they're taken quickly
at the onset of asthma symptoms for quick relief. These are sometimes called rescue meds,
and they can also be used as a pre-treatment right before exposure to an individual's trigger,
like exercise, or visiting a family with a cat. However, there is a dark side to these rapid
rescue medications. Overuse of them, overly frequent use, makes the body less responsive
to their effects. Overlying on these quick medicines may mean that when there's a more
severe attack, these important medicines will not work. In fact, overuse of rescue meds is a
risk factor for death from asthma. And people do die from asthma about nine a day in the United
States or over 3,000 a year. The risk of death even among people with less severe disease,
like Margo. The most important steps in prevention are number one, making the right diagnosis,
and number two, teaching the family about asthma. That's avoiding triggers, controlling symptoms,
and using medications correctly, both as preventives and as rescue therapy when there are
symptoms. People with asthma need an action plan for when their symptoms occur and need to know
when to head to the hospital when symptoms are severe or not improving. Some things to look for,
both for patients and their family, that mean an attack is potentially severe, needing to use
rescue medications over and over, that is, taking more puffs than typically needed to control a
flare-up. Also, look for unremitting cough, gasping, trouble speaking complete sentences,
or any patient who's becoming upset, agitated, confused, or lethargic. These kinds of symptoms
warrant immediate communication with a doctor or a quick trip to the nearest emergency department.
For anyone with persistent asthma symptoms or symptoms that are intermittent but common or
severe, a daily controller type of medication is needed. Controllers are underused in the treatment
of asthma and are sometimes used incorrectly. They're meant for daily use, or at least daily
use for long stretches of time, say, through all of allergy season. They do not work quickly,
so they're not the first thing to grab when there is an asthma attack. But regular use prevents
flare-ups and controls daily symptoms. For instance, Margo's night cough, that's a chronic
symptom she's kind of gotten used to, and at least at first, she didn't even think it was a problem.
But it certainly disrupted her sleep, and once we got it under control, she and her husband
both started sleeping better. Many of the medicines used for both rapid relief and
long-term control of asthma are given in inhalers. These are little canisters that create a puff of
medication that's breathed in. They're great because they put the medicine exactly where
it's supposed to go, in the lungs, without many side effects, but they're often used incorrectly.
It turns out the proper technique with these things is difficult to master, and it takes
repeated teaching and practice. A plastic spacer device improves effectiveness and should always
be prescribed for use with asthma inhalers. So we went through Margo's collection of medications,
clarifying which to use now, which are meant to treat active weasling, and which are meant to be
her everyday controllers. We also treated this acute attack with an oral steroid, prednisone,
not something we want to do repeatedly, but an important step in establishing good control.
We'll also make sure that Margo's had a chance to learn about asthma,
preventing triggers, and using her medications the best way. She will stay on her controller medicine
and add in her rescue medicine at the first sign of cough. We'll have regular follow-up to ensure
that she stays in good control with no cough and feeling well, and we'll try to get her lungs in
good shape so she can resume exercising too. Looking back, why did it take Margo so long
to get the right diagnosis and a good long-term management plan? The fundamental problem was
in communication. There was fractionated care with Margo visiting a number of urgent cares,
a variety of places, that treated each illness separately rather than looking at the big picture,
and Margo had never understood exactly what the prescribed medicines were or how to use them.
Our own doctor language probably made matters worse. Some doctors had referred to quote
asthmatic bronchitis, which is kind of a euphemism for asthma without clearly explaining their thoughts.
Perhaps everyone was relying on the primary care doc to pull the threads together,
but the primary care doc until now wasn't seeing the patient regularly.
So for patients, when you leave the doctor's office, every doctor's office, or ED or urgent care,
you ought to make sure you have a clear diagnosis and that you understand what treatment you've
been prescribed. Regular follow-up with your primary care doctor is essential when a problem
is chronic or recurrent. Bring records of outside visits to your primary, including copies of x-rays
and labs, and make sure every health provider you see knows exactly what medications have been
prescribed. And for those of us who are doctors or planning to be one, we sometimes need to step
back and look at the big picture, not just the reason the patient came in today. That can take
extra time, but it can be the best way to really help your patient.
We've got one more case in our Grand Round series, one more medical mystery to work through.
The clues, I promise, will be there waiting for you as long as you listen and look. See you next time.
