Welcome back to Grand Rounds. Each Grand Rounds will focus on a single case, one sick child
or adult. You'll see that every case follows a path from the initial presentation to the
diagnosis to the treatment, but that path can be twisty and windy and often has multiple
forks and decision points. It will be difficult at first to know what to expect around the
next curve. As we go through these sessions, you'll get better at knowing where each case
is likely to lead. The key to accurate diagnosis and treatment will always be to pay attention
to details and keep an open mind. It is never a good idea to latch on to your first assumptions.
When the path seems to be leading to a dead end or seems to be straying far from what you expected,
you may need to step back, retrace and reconfirm the original story and the data. In other words,
as with any mystery, there will be surprises.
We're in the outpatient clinic again today, General Internal Medicine. Our patient is a 33-year-old
man with a chief complaint of, I can't get rid of this fever. He had been in excellent health
until about two months ago. Since then, he's run fevers almost every day, usually in the
101-102 degree Fahrenheit range. He's also developed a worsening cough and uncomfortable
ulcers or sores in his mouth. What we've presented so far is the HPI, or History of
Present Illness. The next part of a standard medical history is called a Review of Systems.
In contrast to the HPI, the ROS is a series of questions driven by the doctor. While the HPI
is a statement from the patient about what's been going on, in a way it's a story of the illness,
the review of systems is the doctor's turn to find out basically what else has been going on.
It's usually organized by organ system. You've probably completed an ROS yourself at a doctor
visit. It's often presented as a checklist of possible symptoms for you to go through one by
one and you mark off which ones you've been experiencing. In a way, it's kind of a fishing
expedition. Which of this long list of problems has the patient had? I don't want to belabor
all of the possible questions on a detailed review of systems, but in this case our patient had many
other things wrong, even beyond the prolonged fever and cough. We'll go through the most
pertinent parts of his ROS by system. Let's start with a general category. Find out that our patient
has lost weight and has had easy fatigue. Next, we ask about skin problems. He reports a number of
different rashes, though the one that bothers him the most are these sores on the inside of his mouth.
From questions about the GI system, we learn that there has been low appetite and trouble
swallowing in frequent diarrhea. We ask about joints and muscles and our patient reports a sort of
generalized achiness all over sometimes, though no swollen joints. And we can go on from there.
Other parts of the ROS could involve references to the cardiovascular system, the genitourinary
system, or psychiatric symptoms. It can really be very extensive. The point is to inquire about
any problem and see what turns up, even if the patient didn't bring it up on his own.
So what have we got here? A previously healthy man has had a prolonged fever two months, plus
coughing and mouth sores, GI problems, rashes, fatigue, weight loss, achiness, really it seems like
just about everything is going wrong with our patient. How do we even start to make a broad
differential diagnosis to help focus the rest of the evaluation? Often, it's best to keep things
simple. At first, his chief complaint was fever and that's a good place to start. Almost all
fevers are caused by one of four broad categories of illness. Infection, cancer, autoimmune disease,
and miscellaneous. Of these, infections are by far the most common, especially for relatively
brief fevers. But the longer a fever persists, the less likely it's going to be an infection,
or at least not a straightforward infection. The kinds of infections that cause prolonged
fevers are unusual ones, not ordinary pneumonia or strep throat, but things like tuberculosis,
or fungal infections, or abscesses, or smoldering low-grade infection in bone tissue.
Almost any infection, even ordinary ones, can also cause unexpected prolonged fevers
in people with a compromised or malfunctioning immune system.
Cancer can also be a cause of prolonged fevers, including cancers of the blood, for example,
leukemia, or cancers of solid organs, like the kidney. Also, cancers can themselves lead to
immune problems, so patients can have an underlying cancer that predisposes to infection.
A third category of fevers includes autoimmune diseases like lupus or rheumatoid arthritis.
Then, in the miscellaneous category, go things like drug reactions. Yes, actually, antibiotics,
for instance, can cause a so-called drug fever, plus hyperthyroidism and some genetic
recurrent fevers. And sometimes, even prolonged fevers can occur without any identifiable cause.
Now, we're ready to move on to the physical exam. Remember, we're going to keep our eye
and ears open, and we're going to be looking for clues that can lead us towards or away from our
main categories of prolonged fever, infections, cancer, or autoimmune diseases. We're also going
to pay close attention to the lungs, GI, and skin exams, since our patient has symptoms in those areas.
Our patient is a thin, young, Caucasian man. His cheeks are sunken. His temperature is 99.8
degrees Fahrenheit. Hulse 98. Respirations, 36. In his mouth, there are thick, patchy, white plaques
inside his cheeks and on his gums. He has some swollen lymph nodes in his neck. He looks like
he is having some trouble breathing. You can see his ribs individually poking out with each
inspiration, and the notch above his sternum pulls in with each breath. We call those findings
retractions, and they're a sign that he's needing to use a lot of extra muscle force
to move air in and out of his lungs. His lungs themselves sound crackly and wet, almost like
you're listening to a bowl of rice crispy cereal with milk. The medical term for that sound is
crackles, or sometimes it's called rails. That means there's fluid in the lungs. The remainder of the
exam was normal. Those findings on the physical exam, what do they mean? That the white material
in his mouth is thrush, an overgrowth of a yeast called Candida. Thrush is commonly seen in newborns
and young babies, but really should not occur in healthy young men. The appearance of thrush here
suggests that something has gone wrong with his immune system. He also has some swollen lymph
nodes, which are most commonly seen during infections, but could occur from cancer.
That crackly sound in his chest, that's fluid bubbling around with each breath. Crackles can
be caused by heart disease because a poorly functioning heart allows blood to sort of pool
behind it. It pushes out into lung tissue. But in this case, there's not much other evidence
of heart disease. We're much more suspicious of infection in the lungs creating pus. That's the
fluid that's bubbling. Our patient is quite ill. He's had fevers for two months. He has what sounds
like pneumonia, and that thrush is a hint that his immune system is not working. We'll go ahead
and see what some initial labs and tests show. One of the most common blood tests done is a CBC,
or complete blood count. This used to be done by a person looking through a microscope, counting
up the kinds of cells seen. Now a CBC is done electronically. A CBC counts the quantities
of the three basic types of blood cells, the red cells that carry oxygen, the white cells that
fight disease, and the platelets. Those help blood clot. In addition, a CBC usually includes a
differential. We usually just call that a diff, which breaks down the white cells into subtypes.
Our patient's CBC with diff shows that all three cell lines are low. He's anemic
with low red cells. Plus he has a low white count and low platelets as well. The diff
shows a striking lack of a certain kind of white cell called a lymphocyte. That typically
accounts for maybe a plus or minus 50% of the total white cells. Our patient has zero. Maybe
that's related to what we're suspecting is some kind of immune disorder here, leading to infections
that our patient is not shaking off. We've also ordered a chest x-ray. This is a very common test
and one that's used in a variety of circumstances, both as a screening test and as a confirmatory
test. It's essentially a photograph of the chest, but one taking using x-rays rather than visible
light. X-rays can pass through body tissues, but they're blocked by denser things. When x-ray film
is exposed to x-ray radiation, it turns dark. So, wider areas are where the x-rays were blocked,
and there are varying shades of gray where there has been a partial block or scattering
of the x-rays. In the human body, air blocks x-rays least, so healthy lung tissue looks
dark. Bones block x-rays well, so they look the most bright or white on a film. Fluid-filled things
are kind of grayish or in between. Now, modern x-rays are usually taken digitally,
so these white, gray, dark distinctions can be shown in different ways, but most doctors prefer
to look at x-rays with the traditional colors as if we're really reading films.
When a chest x-ray is done, we can assess several things, the health of the bones in the chest,
the condition of the lung fields, and the size and shape of the shadow made by the heart.
Ordinary x-rays don't show anything in three dimensions and can't show a whole lot of detail
when one structure is located right on top of another, but nonetheless, this remains one of the
most useful, quick, and easy tests that can be done in the emergency department or in the office.
Our patient's chest x-ray confirmed the physical exam. We see fluffy white areas superimposed
across both lung fields, where instead of air, there's excess fluid. That fluid blocks some
of the x-rays, so you get areas that look more white than air ought to look. There is some kind
of widespread problem in the lungs here. The heart and the bones, by the way, those were norm.
Now, traditionally in the hospital, when grand rounds are presented, it's a real
recent patient case. For this course, we're usually using composite cases to help protect
patient confidentiality. However, today's case is a true patient. This is the first case report
of this specific illness, to which I've added just a few details. This case was originally
published in the June 5, 1981 edition of the CDC's Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report.
I also left out a few other details, which are the last few clues. Let me give them to you now.
This 1981 report included five men. All were previously healthy, and all became very ill
with similar presentations. All of these men were homosexual, and all lived in Los Angeles,
California. After this report, hundreds of other cases were reported in California and New York.
Many were in homosexual men, which continues to comprise the highest risk group for this
illness in the United States, though worldwide heterosexual transmission has become more likely.
Other initial reported cases occurred in people with hemophilia, who were regularly treated with
pooled human blood products, and in IV drug users. Later, more cases appeared in women and in men,
who were not part of those initial high-risk groups. Let me tell you the rest of this young
man's story. He was found to have pneumonia caused by a very unusual fungus called pneumocystis
duerovetii. At the time, it had been called pneumocystis carinii, which was only seen in severely
immunocompromised people. He also had an ongoing infection with a virus called CMV,
which usually causes only mild symptoms, though it was making our patient very ill.
Despite aggressive treatment, our patient died two months after presentation, and his autopsy
showed ongoing infections and no evidence of cancer to explain his immune compromise.
This was the first case of the modern epidemic of AIDS, or acquired immune deficiency syndrome,
caused by what was later found to be HIV, the human immunodeficiency virus.
What we know now is tremendously more than what we knew in 1981. We know far more about the virus,
and we've also learned far more about the immune system, and how it functions in health and in
disease. Perhaps that's the bit of a silver lining on this horrible disease. It led to an
explosion of research into immune functioning and disorders, and made new classes of medications
to help not only those with HIV, but many other conditions as well. What we now know
is that HIV itself is a virus. It's roughly spherical and about 60 times smaller than the
human red blood cell. That's actually rather large for a virus. It's one of a kind of viruses called
retroviruses that have their own unique enzymes and proteins that can literally insert
their own genetic material into that of the infected host cells.
Viruses are, in a way, not really living organisms. They don't have any way to extract energy from
their environment, and they can't reproduce on their own. What they do is infect the cells of
living organisms and use their own genetic instructions to take over the cell's machinery,
sort of like a new boss moving into a factory and telling the workers what to do. If you're
infected by a common cold virus, for instance, the viral instructions that take control of the
cells lining your nose tell those cells to make lots of extra mucus and to use their own cellular
energy and metabolism to make more virus particles that can be spread around. HIV is even more clever
than that, taking this idea of controlling a cell one step further. As a so-called retrovirus,
HIV contains a special enzyme called reverse transcriptase that turns the virus RNA into
DNA that is directly inserted into the DNA of the host cell. It's not just a boss that shows up
and takes over giving instructions. It's a boss that literally takes over the host's DNA and
makes the host's old boss give instructions from HIV. Wait, it gets worse. HIV preferentially
infects our own immune cells. The cells that are supposed to be fighting off infections,
the host's own immune fighting apparatus, instead of defending the body against HIV,
is tricked into damaging our own cells and making more HIV to infect more cells.
Now, HIV doesn't necessarily make the host immediately ill. It can replicate and spread
in a relatively small number of cells, leaving plenty of normal immune cells to do their job.
It can take years for people with HIV infection to develop signs of serious illness.
The diagnosis of AIDS is made when a person with HIV infection has clinical manifestations
of disease either caused by the virus itself or by an opportunistic infection.
Without treatment, about 50% of people infected with HIV will develop AIDS within 10 years,
although a small number of people seem to remain healthy indefinitely. In addition to
destroying the host immune system, HIV infects cells in the brain, causing eventually a form of
dementia, and sometimes cells in the gut and other tissues. Without a functioning immune system,
serious illness can occur from out-of-control, ordinary infections, for example the thrush,
our patient example presented with. A fairly ordinary innocuous infection can be much harder to
clear or can have severe or prolonged symptoms. There are also less ordinary infections,
sometimes called opportunistic infections. These are caused by organisms that couldn't
cause any problems for a healthy individual at all. One of the typical illnesses at presentation of
AIDS is the lung infection seen in our patient, pneumocystis. This only occurs in people with
depressed immune systems. Though we can still use antibiotics, antivirals, antipyrocytic drugs,
and antifungals to some benefit in AIDS patients, none of these drugs works as well as they would
in a person with a normal immune system. Keep that lesson in mind. Drugs help our own immune
system fight infections. They don't knock out infections very well on their own.
There is another important role for immunity to protect us from cancer. We're going to talk about
cancer more in a later case, but just a brief preview. Cancer cells are in fact different from
normal, healthy body cells. They often have different proteins on the cell surface or have
other molecular features that distinguish them from our own cells. Because of that,
our immune systems can at least sometimes tell cancer cells from normal cells and attack them.
They're akin to a foreign invader. Like a bacteria or virus that's not supposed to be there,
a cancer cell is also an enemy that can be attacked. People with AIDS, like people with other
severe immune deficiencies, have a dramatically increased risk of many different kinds of cancers,
and their cancers can grow and spread much more quickly than expected. Many of the cancers,
more commonly seen in AIDS patients, are themselves triggered by viral infections,
illustrating the overlap between infection, immunity, and cancer-related diseases.
There are several different ways that HIV infections can present. There is an acute
phase occurring two to four weeks after initial infection. The symptoms here are usually fever,
aches, sore throat, swollen lymph nodes, sometimes a rash or some GI symptoms.
Those symptoms are not very specific, and many of these acute infections are not diagnosed as HIV.
One common misdiagnosis at this point is infectious mononucleosis.
Many people have no symptoms at all during this earliest phase. In retrospect, we're not sure
when our patient had contracted the HIV or when he had perhaps had symptoms like these in his
acute phase. He may never have noticed this, or his symptoms could have been so mild that they
weren't remembered. After the acute phase, there's a prolonged period of latency where the virus
slowly spreads without symptoms. Depending on the viral load, that is, how many virus
particles there are in the blood, a person at this stage can be more or less contagious.
In some cases, very, very high viral loads and infectivity can be associated with
minimal, if any, symptoms, at least for a while. During this stage, patients can be found by routine
screening of sexually active adults or others with risk factors. If symptoms are present,
they might include chronic enlarged lymph nodes, fever, fatigue, weight loss, diarrhea, or cough,
and all of these may come and go and may not overlap at the same time, which may make the
diagnosis easy to overlook. Catching people early here in the latent stage before obvious symptoms
of AIDS develop leads to a better long-term prognosis. Full-blown AIDS, which usually occurs
within ten years of exposure, includes more severe symptoms, including fevers with soaking
night sweats, cough and shortness of breath, chronic diarrhea, plaques in the mouth, rashes,
distorted vision, and persistent fatigue. Which symptoms predominate depends on which
opportunistic infections are present. Those initial five case reports, including our patient,
were all in this phase of full-blown AIDS, though that hadn't been known at the time.
The most commonly used test for HIV is a blood test for antibodies to the virus,
which usually becomes positive three to twelve weeks after infection during seroconversion.
Seroconversion is when the serologic tests, the serum tests for antibodies, become positive.
This delay in positivity means that someone with acute HIV, a new infection with symptoms,
may still have a negative HIV test. In cases of suspected acute HIV, before seroconversion,
a test for HIV genetic material in the blood, using the PCR technique, can show infection.
This same test, sometimes called a viral load, can also be used to see how heavily the blood is
infected, and thus how contagious a person might be. Another test commonly used in the
evaluation and follow-up of an HIV patient is a CD4 count, a count of the T helper lymphocytes
that are destroyed by HIV infection. A normal CD4 count is around 800 or 1200.
In advanced HIV and AIDS, this trends into the 100s or eventually down to zero.
The most effective treatment of HIV starts early. We have medicines that can prevent
even the initial transmission of HIV. This can be used during the birth of a baby to an HIV positive
mom, or after an inadvertent needle stick blood exposure for a healthcare worker,
or perhaps after an unsafe sexual encounter. When an HIV infection is diagnosed, we have about
30 different anti-HIV medicines to stop the spread of the virus. These are used in a variety of
combinations to make them more effective and also to prevent the virus from developing resistance.
Current HIV medications need to be taken every day for the rest of a patient's life.
We also have a number of medications to prevent and treat
the opportunistic infections that cause a lot of the suffering in HIV patients.
Again, these need to be taken long term. Medication regimens for AIDS and HIV patients
can be complex and very expensive and may lead to significant side effects. It's also crucial
to help people with HIV infections maintain good overall health and nutrition, and to take
steps to prevent transmission to other people. Let me step back for a moment to review a brief
timeline of the story of HIV and AIDS to illustrate the remarkable progress we've made in a very
short time. HIV, or a virus that later became HIV, probably first made its way into humans
in the early 1900s, spreading from an infection in primates in Central Africa, the first known case
of HIV related illness was in a person who died in the Congo in 1959. In about 1968, HIV probably
first arrived in the United States. In 1975, the first reports of a wasting illness with
symptoms that were likely related to HIV infection were occurring in Africa. In May of 1981,
a journalist for a local gay oriented newspaper wrote about a strange pneumonia
striking men in New York. The next month, the CDC for the first time formally reported a cluster
of cases, including our patient case presented today. By the end of 1981, 121 people had died
of this in the United States. By 1983, the virus was isolated, though it didn't acquire the name
HIV until 1986. By then, antibody screening was routinely being used to prevent transmission
by donated blood, though that was too late to save the life of Ryan White and thousands of other
people who depended on blood products, especially those with hemophilia. In 1987, the first drug
to specifically treat HIV was approved. This was AZT or Zidoveidine, and it's still use widely
today. In 1989, there were an estimated 100,000 cases of AIDS in the United States, including
many babies and children who contracted the infection during birth. By 1992, AIDS had become
the number one killer of men in the United States from age 25 to 44. And two years later, it became
the number one killer of women of that age. Remember, this is only about 10 years after the
first cases were reported. Drugs could by then prevent the transmission of HIV from mother to baby,
and soon a drug regimen was developed for prophylaxis after exposures. New drugs and new drug
strategies became widely available for prevention and treatment. Nonetheless, by 1997, an estimated
30 million adults worldwide had become infected with HIV. Most of these people were in Africa
without access to effective treatment. Today, in the developed world, most HIV infections can be
successfully managed to maintain long-term health, especially if they're caught early. Medications,
usually used in combinations, can suppress the HIV virus and treatments are available to treat
most of the opportunistic infections and other complications of HIV. Still, at this point,
there is no cure and there is no effective vaccine. In the United States, there are currently about
1.2 million people infected with HIV, and many of them don't even know it yet. The HIV epidemic
has had a huge impact on medicine. It directly pushed immunology into the front page of science
and medicine, leading to the discoveries of methods of treating opportunistic infections
in not only AIDS patients, but in patients with other immune-compromising diseases,
following organ transplants or treatment for cancer. This knowledge has allowed the development
of an entire field of bone marrow transplantation for the treatment of many deadly diseases
in children and adults. A better understanding of the science of viruses has allowed us to develop
retroviral tools for gene delivery systems and promising future treatments for perhaps
almost any genetic condition. At the same time, the surge of HIV has contributed to the return
of other infectious illnesses, most notably tuberculosis. That's an old infection that shortly
ago could have been considered rare, at least in the developed world. It has made a resurgence,
paralleling the appearance of AIDS.
HIV has also had a significant cultural and economic impact. Whole economies,
especially in Africa, have been decimated, with millions of people unable to work or care for
their kids. In the United States, the AIDS epidemic has contributed to shifting attitudes
about sex in our lives and popular culture. What started with a report of five cases about
30 years ago is now a major part of our medical and social landscape.
Today's case was a good opportunity to learn about some of the basic tools of medical diagnosis,
the history, the physical, some of the common tests and x-rays. But really, as a doctor,
you'll see that your most important tools are your senses and your brain, listening to your
patient, observing and thinking about data you've collected. Listening, that can not only help you
glean the clues that you need, but can also help develop a trusting two-way relationship with your
patient. Next up, we've got a good case. It's a bit of a mystery, and it's going to test those
crucial skills.
