We've got an old disease to confront today.
And like many old diseases, it's gone by different names in the past.
It's been called sweating sickness, and at other times it's been called epidemic
katar. That word itself, katar, means a flowing down, probably referring to a very runny nose.
This disease has been thought to be caused by astrological influences,
or at other times by cold air. Is there any truth to that? Let's find out.
A 19-year-old young man is brought to the emergency department, the ED,
where we're working tonight. His name is Christopher, and he's brought by his college
roommate. He looks reasonably comfortable there in the room. You ask, what can we do for you?
His answer is our chief complaint. Doc, I can't walk.
Christopher says that for the past two days, his legs have been hurting very badly,
and it's getting worse. The pain, he points down, is mostly in his calves. He thought he had just
pulled a muscle, but now the pain has gotten so bad that he can't bear to walk. As long as he
doesn't try to move much, it's okay, but if he stands or stretches out his legs or feet,
the pain becomes much worse. Okay, this is an unusual presenting symptom. What's going on?
A good pain differential diagnosis can start with the body part that's hurting. Think,
what is there, and why would it hurt? The pain is in the legs, the calf area. Could be bone,
could be muscle or tendons, could be perhaps the blood vessels that are running through there,
could even be the skin, and like any pain, it could be so-called referred pain. He feels it in
his legs, but remember that pinched nerves or spinal cord problems higher up in the nervous
system can create a sensation of pain further down. As always, an open mind is needed.
We do have one other comment that points us in a certain direction. This pain, he said,
it's worse when he just stretches his feet out. That doesn't sound like something that could happen
because of the spinal cord mass or problem with the nerves up high. Stretching the feet stretches
the muscles, but doesn't really affect the nerves and things up higher. Bone pain? Well, maybe,
but just stretching out the feet doesn't really affect bone. Standing, putting weight on the legs,
that would put mechanical load and some stress on bones, but he says it hurts badly even when he
doesn't do that. Is this sounding kind of muscly to you? Time for more history. He can't recall
exactly when it started, but says he noticed the pain when he awoke two days ago. He's had no recent
injury and he hasn't exercised much lately. He says he's in great shape though. He usually
exercises a lot, just not in the past two weeks. There's a good history question for pain complaints.
What were you doing when it started? Very acute pain, something like a slipped disc in the back
or a broken leg or a dislocated shoulder. That kind of thing starts suddenly, all at once,
and people remember exactly when it started and what they were doing when it started.
Christopher has what we'll call subacute pain. It's been briefed just a few days, but it wasn't
acute in onset, so it's unlikely to have been any kind of sudden biomechanical or traumatic change.
Christopher denies taking any substances, including no weight gain or muscle building
supplements or anything like that. He is on the college wrestling team and he says, quote,
I keep myself in shape. I'm a vegan. He adamantly denies any sort of recreational drug use.
There's no family history of any kind of muscle disease.
On to the physical exam. Christopher indeed looks very healthy. He's Caucasian, small and wiry,
barely a touch of that on him like a typical wrestler. He weighs 155 pounds, is 5 feet 9
inches tall, and his vital signs include a blood pressure of 130 over 88, pulse 68, temperature
99.4, and respirations 20 per minute. What do you think of those vitals? The BP is a little high,
as can happen when someone is anxious or in pain. It would be a good idea to repeat that down the
line or at a follow up visit to make sure he really doesn't have high blood pressure.
What about that temperature? 99.4. That is entirely normal. It is a myth that 98.6 is the
normal temperature. That number is not a normal temperature. It is an accepted average temperature
and measured normal temperatures will sometimes be higher or lower than 98.6. 99.4 is well within
the normal range and is not a fever. Most physicians consider a fever above 100.4 or 100.8 degrees.
The rest of the exam next. H-E-E-N-T exam is fine and his skin appears normal. He's got no
swollen lymph nodes. Thyroid exam is normal. Lungs are clear. His heart is normal. Belly is fine.
He's very apprehensive about your moving his legs. They look normal. There's no swelling.
There's no redness. But he seems very tender when you gently squeeze his calf muscles and
gentle flexion of his ankles, which stretches those calf muscles, causes intense pain on the
stretched side. The exam confirms he's got tender calf muscles and a lot of pain with stretching.
This is some kind of muscle disease here, primarily affecting his calves. Now we're focused on what
the problem is and we can better develop our differential diagnosis. A general term for muscle
inflammation is myocytus. That's myo for muscle and our old friend itis, which is used as a suffix,
meaning inflammation attached to just about anything. Appendicitis, gastritis, cholecystitis,
and now we've got myocytus. That's not a specific diagnosis, but a descriptive general term for
muscle inflammatory disease. Do we know it's inflammatory? I think so. Pain and tenderness
are inflammatory signs. There are other muscle diseases that are non-inflammatory like muscular
dystrophy. Those cause mainly weakness, but pain and especially tenderness with gentle squeezing.
That's inflammation. Now, why is there inflammation in our patient's muscles? Trauma is the most
common cause of muscle pain and inflammation, but there's no history of that. He was pretty adamant
about that. He said he's on the wrestling team, but hasn't been working out for a few weeks.
How about some kind of substance abuse? He denied it, but athletes, as we know, aren't always honest
about things like steroids that might be taken as performance enhancing drugs. These are meant to
build muscle tissue that can sometimes cause muscle damage and inflammation. Some prescription drugs,
including the statins used commonly to lower cholesterol, can also trigger muscle damage,
inflammation, and pain. Our patient is a vegan, meaning no animal products, no meat, no dairy,
no eggs. Could there be some kind of nutritional deficiency associated with veganism that can
cause muscle pain? A careful vegan diet, including supplements, can supply a healthful, complete
diet, but do we know he's getting what he needs? Myositis can also trigger muscle damage, inflammation,
and pain. Myositis can also occur as part of autoimmune disease, when the body's immune system
attacks our own tissues. Two examples are dermatomyositis, which includes both skin and muscle damage,
and polymyositis, which basically affects muscle alone.
How about infectious causes? Primary infection in muscle, that's not very common, but
it would be kind of unusual to have muscles in both legs get infected at the same time. Still,
some infections, like Lyme disease and Rocky Mountain spotted fever, do cause a lot of muscle
pain. Influenza can cause muscle aches both during and sometimes for several days after the main
symptoms of infection. He didn't say anything about other symptoms of those kinds of illnesses.
We've got a good list, but honestly, just a few thin leads this time. What do you think the leading
diagnosis ought to be? In most presentations, we'd move on to the lab evaluation now to confirm
our working diagnosis, but I don't think we have one yet. Here's a good lesson from today's case.
When in doubt, go talk to the patient some more. I think we missed something.
We asked Christopher in detail about his diet. He's been a vegan for years and his parents
are vegan, and he knows he needs to take his iron pills and vitamin B12 supplements. His parents
actually mail him organic versions of these and other supplements at college. Now, there have
been cases of supplements contaminated with substances that cause illness. Keep in mind,
in the USA supplements are not regulated by the FDA or any other authority. Could some kind of toxin
from these supplements have led to muscle damage in Christopher? There are a large range of chemicals
that could cause muscle breakdown, including tryptophan, ipecac, PCP, many pharmaceutical agents.
We'd better keep that in mind. Then we ask, Christopher, when exactly did you start hurting?
He's sure about that. It was two days ago. He woke up in pain. Again, we asked him about trauma.
There had been none, and he hadn't been exercising for a few weeks prior to the pain starting anyway.
He had been very fit, working out kind of a guy. So why hadn't he been to the gym lately?
Good question. Let's ask him. I was sick, he says. We asked for details. About 10 days ago,
he developed fever, headaches, body aches, and vomiting. The fever was very high, up to 104,
and he basically stayed in bed for five days. He thought we already knew about that, see,
because he had been seen in this very ED last week with that illness and sent home with a diagnosis
of probable influenza. He had been getting better, he says, but he hadn't yet felt up to working out.
Another lesson, this time for patients, but a reminder for doctors too, don't assume that the
doctor knows the history. This young man was seen in our same ED last week, and it was logical for
him to assume that we had those records and we had reviewed them. Logical, yes, but that's often not
the way it works. ED records go into a folder and then to the basement where they're picked apart for
billing and sometimes scanned into a computer. In fact, in many cases, the ED doc wouldn't
even know that those prior records existed. Even if you're being seen in the same practice
or in the same hospital or even by the same doctor, it's best to speak up, say something like,
I saw you three days ago, or I was here in the ED last week to ensure that someone knows to look
at those old records. The problem, of course, it's even worse when patients see multiple doctors
at different medical facilities. Should we have easy access to these records? Sure, do we? Well,
probably not. We need to reorder our differential, I think. This recent illness, that probably makes
it far less likely that a toxin has made him sick and less likely that this is some kind of
chronic autoimmune disease. Of course, it's possible that the recent illness and these new
muscle aches are unrelated, but it's logical to assume that they are related to see if one illness
can explain the whole story. If that doesn't work, we can go back to those other theories.
Christopher had a recent fever illness and he was quite ill. Remember the infectious causes of
muscle pain? One of the most common is influenza and, in fact, this case took place in February
during flu season. Now we've got a likely diagnosis that fits the history and the physical exam.
Let's confirm with a few labs. A standard chemistry panel is normal. We've seen chem
panels before, but to go over what they include, let's have a little bit more detail. A chemistry
panel includes the electrolytes, sodium, potassium, and chloride, and a measurement called bicarb
that reflects the acid-base balance of the blood. It also includes a few measurements of kidney
function, including a creatinine. That value is very, very, very sensitive. The creatinine creeps
up quickly when the kidneys are not functioning properly. There are also measurements of what
are called liver enzymes. These become elevated when liver cells or other kinds of tissue are damaged.
The exact items in a chem panel vary from lab to lab, so ordering physicians need to know if
they're getting all of the components they expect. For Christopher, the most important part of the
chem panel to check was that creatinine, which was normal. We'll see why soon.
We also checked the CBC, the complete blood count, and that was normal too. A sed rate,
our favorite marker for inflammation, was mildly elevated at 25. Typically, a chronic autoimmune
disease would give a much higher number. That 25 fits well with a recent viral illness like influenza,
as we suspect. There's one other test we did, a CPK for creatinine phosphokinase. This is a
measurement of a muscle protein, and it becomes elevated if there's muscle damage. Sure enough,
this was elevated about three times the upper limit of normal. This could be seen with either
chronic or acute muscle injuries, though with his history, we're pretty comfortable assuming this is
a new acute problem. If the CPK is very high, and especially if there's also dehydration or some kind
of pre-existing kidney disease, the high CPK proteins and other related muscle proteins can
themselves damage the kidneys. This condition is a severe form of myositis called rhabdomyolysis.
That's muscle damage and breakdown enough to cause organ damage. It can be seen after severe
burns or injuries, or very intense exercise, heat stroke, drug exposures, or other conditions
that severely damage muscles. It's very uncommon after infections like influenza that can damage
muscle and cause pain, but it would rarely lead to damage to the kidneys.
We did check a urine to be sure that the kidneys were okay. This urine looks dark,
kind of a dusky red color. That's for muscle protein. The dipstick is normal, except for one
positive for blood. It's negative, though, for red blood cells. That's a good illustration
of how labs can be misleading. The urine dipstick for blood, we call it blood, but it's really
testing for the presence of the main blood protein, the protein that's in red blood cells. That's the
hemoglobin. Under most circumstances, if there is hemoglobin in the urine, that means there's blood
in the urine, except not today. Another test on the dipstick is actually for those red blood cells,
testing for the cells themselves, and it was negative. So why is the dipstick positive for blood?
The answer is it's not blood. It turns out that muscles contain a protein called myoglobin. That's
similar enough to hemoglobin that it fools the dipstick. Christopher's dipstick positive for
blood is actually positive because of muscle protein. This is confirmed because the actual
red blood cell test on the same urine dipstick was negative. So be careful with labs. Sometimes
they'll fool you if you don't know exactly how they're done and what they mean. We also did a
quick test for influenza virus on a nasal swab, which sure enough was positive. These rapid tests
are widely available in hospitals and doctor's offices and can be done in a few minutes. The
current tests, they're very specific for influenza, meaning that a positive test is very reliable.
However, they're not very sensitive. A negative rapid influenza test may be false, missing maybe
20, 30% or more people who truly have flu. The exact accuracy depends on what kinds of flu
virus are circulating that year. Tests were also done to confirm Christopher's nutritional status.
His serum ferritin, that's a measurement of iron stores, was normal, as were his vitamin B12 and
folate levels. Vitamin B12 in particular can be difficult for vegans to get from plant sources,
and the serum measurement may not accurately reflect whether he was truly getting enough B12
in his diet. Still, he said he was taking supplements, so this is probably okay.
Now to recap, Christopher had ordinary influenza, which sounds like it hit him pretty hard.
He was sick in bed with high fevers for five days and was seen in the ED several days ago.
He was sent home, he was starting to feel better until about two days ago when calf pain began,
again caused by the same influenza virus infection. This is actually not such an unusual story.
Influenza associated myositis is common, especially in children,
and it occurs towards the end of the fever or a few days later. It most typically affects the
calf muscles, though sometimes other muscles hurt too. They'll hurt to move, the muscles will be
tender to touch. Often the urine will be dark, and if you do blood tests, you can see that high
CPK value. Urine will show the passing of muscle protein, the myoglobins, by testing positive
for blood, but negative for red blood cells. The treatment is supportive, pain medicine and
extra fluids to keep urine flowing. Rarely this can progress to severe muscle breakdown and
resulting kidney damage. Though there are anti-influenza medicines available, myositis usually
begins later, beyond the time when these medications can help. Symptoms of influenza myositis typically
last about a week or so. A few other viruses can cause a similar picture of myositis either during
or after the infection. These include coxacchi viruses, those also cause fevers and hand foot
mouth disease, HIV, hepatitis, several others. Christopher made a full recovery and resumed
wrestling a week later. Today's case was a common illness. Influenza strikes millions of Americans
each year and remains a very significant cause of death, directly killing about 35,000 in the
USA each year and probably contributing to the ill health and decline of many more, especially
elderly adults. The presentation, though, wasn't very common. Here's a little bit of wisdom.
It is more common for a common disease to present in an uncommon way, like influenza
presenting with muscle aches, than it is for an uncommon illness to present at all. Another way
of putting this, when you hear hoof beats, think of horses rather than zebras. I actually had a
mentor from South Africa who liked to quote that maxim, adding, in his home country zebras were
actually more common than you think. Again, as we said before, an open mind is more likely to
figure something out, whether uncommon or not. Influenza is of course more common in the winter,
in the cold months. This may be because people congregate indoors, passing their germs around
more efficiently, or perhaps in part because damage to the lining of the nose by cold air
makes it easier to catch influenza and other respiratory viruses as well. An older name for
this illness is an Italian phrase, influenza del freddo, meaning influence of the cold.
The typical course of influenza begins with exposure to the virus,
followed by a very brief incubation period of one to four days. People become contagious the day
before symptoms begin. Symptoms are typically sudden and include fever and aches and chills,
often with some respiratory symptoms like cough and runny nose, and sometimes
GI symptoms including nausea and vomiting. The disease typically lasts about five to seven days.
Many people mistakenly think influenza is just a bad cold, but it really is distinct. It's a
distinct different disease caused by a specific influenza virus. Once you are a loved one, has
had full-blown influenza, you'll know it's not just a cold. Influenza causes much higher
fevers plus characteristic body aches that aren't seen with ordinary colds. From my point of view,
as a practicing physician, patients coming into the office with influenza are often lying on
the table, sometimes huddled under a blanket. They look glassy-eyed and miserable.
The treatment of most cases of influenza is mostly supportive. Medicines like acetaminophen
or ibuprofen, those are widely known by their brand names, Tylenol or Advil or Motrin,
those will help reduce fevers and relieve the achy feelings. Extra fluids are also needed during
fevers to prevent dehydration. Rest, stay away from other people, stay in bed until you feel well.
There are medicines that can be used specifically to fight flu. The most widely prescribed one
is Oseltamivir, sold under the brand name Tamiflu. It can help some, but it is no wonder drug.
It works best when started very early in the infection between 24 and 48 hours. After that,
it doesn't help very much. It can modestly reduce symptoms and the duration of the infection,
but it's not overall very effective in reducing serious complications.
And it is the complications of influenza that we fear. Myositis, like Christopher experience,
can be painful or even debilitating, but with supportive care full recovery is expected.
The most serious complication of influenza, which contributes to most of the deaths, is pneumonia.
We've talked about pneumonia some before, but it's such a common condition,
both as a primary infection and as a complication of other illnesses, that we ought to cover it
more thoroughly. Pneumonia comes from the Greek, meaning inflammation of the lungs. The word is
probably related to older root words that refer to fluid or flowing in the chest. Even the ancients
knew that fluid in the lungs leading to a wet cough was not a good thing. Pneumonia is commonly
understood as a bacterial infection in the lungs, but keep in mind that it can be caused by viral
or fungal or other kinds of infections, or sometimes by non-infectious things like chemical irritants
or an immune mediated inflammatory reaction. In most circumstances though, pneumonia is caused by
infection in the lungs, infection that causes an accumulation of fluid and debris that leads to cough
and fever. Lung tissue itself is very prone to infection, because we're constantly breathing
in air and bringing in whatever we breathe. Also, the air sacs in the lungs are normally
a little bit moist, and that warm, moist mucus is a breeding ground for microorganisms.
Fortunately, we have immune systems to keep infection away. There are also little hair
cells that beat up and down to keep mucus moving around and out so it won't get infected easily,
but advancing age, lung damage from mild infections, asthma, smoking, and many other
conditions can compromise lung integrity, leading to a risk of pneumonia. Influenza,
the infection itself now, causes fever and cough, so how can we tell it's turned into pneumonia?
The time course of the symptoms is a crucial clue. Influenza usually includes about
five days of fevers that gradually decline. Increasing fevers after a few days, say a patient
starts at 103 for two days, then goes to 105 on day three, that often indicates a second
superimposed infection like pneumonia. Cough that's getting much worse is another clue.
On the physical exam, a patient with pneumonia, here I mean influenza pneumonia or any kind of
pneumonia, will often be breathing rapidly. There may be signs of increased difficulty breathing,
like pulling in the ribs with each breath, and the breath sounds themselves heard through a
stethoscope will sound crackly and abnormal. Sometimes a chest x-ray is done to confirm
an area of brightness where the x-ray beam is blocked by the accumulated infected fluid.
The bigger the area of brightness, the worse the pneumonia, though there isn't a 100%
correlation there. X-rays can also be done to monitor therapy for pneumonia to ensure improvement.
However, chest x-rays aren't perfect. The findings on the film can lag a day or so behind
what's going on with the patient, so very early pneumonia may not be seen at all.
Though pneumonia in young, healthy patients can usually be treated as an outpatient,
and older or ill people, they may require hospitalization and extra support with oxygen.
Pneumonia remains a significant cause of death in the developed world,
often contributing to illness and decline in people with other health problems,
but occasionally killing someone who was otherwise well. In the case of influenza pneumonia,
the secondary pneumonia itself can be caused by the flu virus invading the lung tissue,
or by secondary bacterial infections by bacteria that happen to be nearby.
They've taken advantage of the patient's illness to cause a second infection.
Can influenza be prevented? Yes! Most importantly, stay away from sick people during flu season,
typically in the winter from December to March, and if you're sick, especially with fever, stay home.
Influenza virus can spray in the air through coughs and sneezes,
but it usually gets into your system through your own hands.
You touch a contaminated doorknob, for instance, and now flu virus is on your hand,
but it can't make you sick through your skin. It's only a few minutes later when you offhandedly
rub your eyes or nose that the flu virus can get you. That's why hand washing is so important.
If you keep your own hands away from your face and wash or sanitize your hands frequently,
you'll keep most influenza infections away. Immunization is also crucial. The currently
available vaccines aren't perfect. The protection varies from year to year, from perhaps 40 to 80
percent protection is expected, depending on the circulating strains, but even in poorly matched
years, the vaccine provides at least some protection, and the more people get the vaccine,
the more protected all of us will be. This is the so-called herd effect,
which is so important to the way vaccines work. We know vaccines can't be effective 100 percent
of the time, but if most of our community is vaccinated, there will be reduced exposures
and transmission for everyone, even in people in whom the vaccine didn't work.
Yearly influenza vaccination is recommended for everyone over six months of age,
and the years it works best are the years when more people get the vaccine.
There are some persistent myths about flu vaccine. First of all, the vaccine cannot ever give anyone
the flu. You can get some achiness and fever. That's going to happen in one or two percent
of vaccine recipients, but that is not the flu. Some people are under the impression that they
got the flu from the vaccine either because of mild side effects or because they indeed got the
flu or some other illness right after getting the vaccine. After all, the vaccine is given
right during flu season, and it takes about three weeks to work. So if you're exposed to the flu
within a few weeks of getting the vaccine, you're probably going to get the disease,
and it's not the fault of the vaccination. Flu vaccines are safe, and though they're far from
perfect, they're one of the best ways we have to fight infection. There should be no hesitation
about getting the vaccine. One of the clues that got lost in this case was the recent medical history
that the patient who couldn't walk actually had the flu a few days earlier. Sometimes these kinds
of mistakes can really add up. Patients see multiple doctors get multiple tests, and the lack of
clear coordination of care can make a diagnosis even more difficult to pin down. We'll see a good
example of that in the next Grand Rounds case. See you then.
