I'm Luke Story, a former celebrity fashion stylist and founder of School of Style.
For the past 20 years, I've been relentlessly dedicated to my deepest passion, designing
the ultimate lifestyle based on the most powerful principles of health and spirituality.
The Lifestyles Podcast is a show dedicated to sharing my discoveries and the experts
behind them with you.
Alright I've got two questions for you.
First question is, do you like orgasms?
Obvi, the answer to that is yes.
Second question, are you going to be or can you be in Los Angeles this Friday night, January
19th?
Now if the answer was yes to one and the answer is yes to two, then I'm going to tell you
where you want to be and that is joining me at One Taste Venice for the Intuitive Holistic
Healing Event.
We're going to be talking about orgasm and consciousness.
Yes, they do meet, they do relate.
So if you're into things like meditation, exploring desire, the relationship between
masculine and feminine energy, how to balance that, healing through sex, strengthening intuition
through orgasm and pleasure and the importance of boundaries, then you want to come hang
out with me and the One Taste crew.
So to get into this event, it's very simple.
Just go to lukestory.com forward slash events and you will find it there.
This $40 prior 45 the day of, again, that's this Friday night, January 19th from 7.30
p.m. to 9.30 p.m. at One Taste Venice.
Again, to get your ticket, go to lukestory.com forward slash events.
I can't wait to meet you there.
Do you know anyone suffering from Lyme disease, autoimmune issues, heavy metal toxicity, parasites,
gut problems, inflammation, et cetera?
I bet you do.
It might just be you.
I know I qualify for a couple of those and I have found the most powerful and effective
natural solution.
It is known as the AMP coil, really, really crazy, amazing technology.
So go to ampcoil.com and you will learn all about what I'm describing.
Or you can also go back and listen to episode number 98 with the founders, but I've been
getting great results with the AMP coil for cleansing, detoxification, sports recovery.
My sleep is off the chain.
Stress reduction, mental focus, cognitive improvements, neurotransmitter, reeducation.
This is the ultimate health biohack and I happen to use it a lot when I meditate and
I'm just relaxing.
So this is a really amazing discovery.
These guys have put together five or six different technologies into one device and it's a professional
grade device, but it's for home use, which makes it really easy to use and simple and
just profoundly powerful.
I'm going to warn you though, if you get one, you're going to have a house full of people
all the time that want to use it because that's what happened to me.
So if you want to check it out, go over to ampcoil.com and they will be more than happy
to answer your questions.
Well hello, my fellow brave Homo sapiens.
I'm Luke Story and I'm here to bring to you the second episode of this 2018 Happy New
Year and this one is not going to disappoint.
My guest today is Daniel Schmockdenberger, who is a scientist, a complex systems designer
and an evolutionary philosopher.
He's also the co-founder of Neurohacker Collective and the founder of Emergence Project, a futurist
think tank.
I found Daniel through Neurohacker Collective to make my all-time favorite new tropic stat
called Kuali.
I talk about it on the show all the time.
It's by far the most potent and well thought out brain supplement I've ever taken, so
I just had to track down the guy behind it.
Now when I found Neurohacker Collective, I discovered, wow, these guys are up to a lot
and Kuali is just kind of the tip of the iceberg.
So in this interview, we really talk about his vision for the company and for the world
and I got to tell you what, he's just one of the smartest people I've ever sat down
and had a conversation with in my life.
So seriously, I'm not even exaggerating.
In 47 years, he's one of those brilliant people I've ever talked to.
It was fascinating to sit down and get to engage with him.
It's as if I would ask him a question and I thought my questions were pretty well thought
out and fairly bright, you know?
I mean, I knew I was going to be interviewing someone with a brain in their skull, so I put
some thought into it and I had a lot of stuff that I wanted to cover with him because I
knew he had a very broad body of knowledge, but I'd drop a question and he'd basically
break it down into eight parts and then proceed to just run circles around me.
It was like he was like doing donuts around my brain, just like, oh, you know, and I'm
not being self-deprecating at all.
I think I'm a fairly smart guy, but he's on another level.
But what's really cool about Daniel is, A, he's super humble and he's also got a lot
of heart.
He's someone who's been deeply into meditation and metaphysics for a long time, so he has
this really warm, friendly, spiritual vibe, but he's also highly analytical and scientific.
And the way that he approaches the woes of mankind is very fascinating because he zooms
way out and looks at everything from a system's perspective and that's kind of his whole model.
And so when he looks at the human body, our cognition, new tropics, all the stuff that
we get into, he's really looking at the whole body as a system.
And then the goal being, once you've kind of upgraded your system and you're optimized,
then what are you going to do out into the world?
And so as a result, as we sat down on his bedroom floor, essentially on some pillows
just had this great talk, I wanted to talk about health and the brain and qualia and
how they come up with all this stuff.
And dude, we ended up opening up this vortex, this sort of portal of consciousness.
And we talked about homeschooling and the difference between that and the public school
brainwashing that goes on and political correctness, cultural Marxism, postmodernism, the North
American genocide, that little thing that we don't tend to like to talk about much.
So we really went into some of the systemic issues of our society and of culture and then
went backwards and sort of reverse engineered that in this epic talk in terms of our personal,
subjective mental health and well-being and how that we can get that on track in order
to make a positive contribution to some of these larger social and cultural issues.
So this one really veers off kind of off track a bit from some of my normal shows and this
might represent a trend in 2018.
I might leave the reservation a little bit here and there and go into some of these other
areas.
I by no means want to make a political show because I'm definitely not qualified, but
I think that there's a lot to talk about when it comes to building the ultimate lifestyle
and community and our culture and society has a lot to do with that.
So that's the basic gist of it.
Some of the other things we talk about that might be of interest to you and make your ass
keep listening to the rest of this episode till the very, well, I would say bitter end,
but it's not a bitter end.
It's actually a glorious end because we really get into some deep stuff towards the end of
the conversation.
But we talk about the fact that all human beings alive today basically have some degree
of mental illness and what we can do about that.
Some alternatives to capitalism, again, zooming out, looking at some of the more broad issues
and some possibilities that aren't even part of the conversation yet.
The basis of all addictions and what to do about them.
And the folly of looking for happiness out there, the origins and the vision of neurohacker
collective.
They are up to some really cool stuff and he allowed us to be privy to some of the launches
that they've got going on in the near future and it's really, really exciting stuff.
Then we cover, of course, all of the top smart drugs and new tropics, why and how they work
and some of the risks and benefits involved in their use.
And then we get to cover one of my favorite topics briefly, which is geoengineering chemtrails
and the effect of those programmed on our brains and on our biology.
And that's something I'm going to be talking more about this year because I just, I missed
the blue sky that used to exist in the 70s when I was a kid.
It was really beautiful.
Some of you weren't there to appreciate it, but we really used to have this thing called
sky and it's been hijacked for a number of reasons, which we briefly discuss.
So this is an info, an action-packed episode.
I'd like to invite you right now to put on your little bunny suit and dive into this
massively deep rabbit hole with myself and Mr. Daniel Schmockdenberger.
All right, so here we are with Daniel Schmockdenberger.
Good to see you, dude.
Good to see you, my friend.
Thanks for having us into your home.
I look forward to this conversation.
Thanks for coming.
Yeah, dude.
We're going to go deep here, my friend.
So I'm just going to jump right in.
A couple of things that I've learned about you from reading about you and listening to
you on other shows is that you were homeschooled.
That's true.
And at the same time, you're a really bright guy who is very knowledgeable and articulate.
I would consider you, and I don't throw this term around, but I would consider you to be
someone that's highly intelligent to the point where you could be called brilliant.
And I don't call everyone brilliant, you're a really smart guy.
So why did your parents elect homeschool you?
And what impact does that have on your mental acuity?
So it was an educational experiment my parents were interested in.
And my dad particularly spent his life thinking about educational philosophy and human potential
and how do we actually actualize human potential better.
And my mom had shared interests and different skills, and so they decided to take it on together.
And the experiment was what happens if we give a kid no curriculum at all.
No fixed curriculum.
So I didn't have English and social studies and mathematics, but just exposed them to
everything possible, facilitate their interests, and see what happens.
And so that was the experiment, and having gone through the whole experiment, we could
do it much better now because there were parts that got learned along the way, but the effective
parts that I would say were a successful experiment is every kid has profound fascination
with life in their own ways.
And we usually do a good job of breaking it.
And we also usually do a good job of training them not to think well.
So little kids ask, what is that, what is that, what is that at first, right?
It's the first question.
They're getting the anatomy of universe down.
And then why, why, why?
And the depth of why run into philosophically and physically deep questions that we usually
don't know how to answer.
And so we give them, we just don't answer them or we give them shit answers.
What?
Made up answers, yeah, yeah.
Or some less conscious parents would say, because I said so.
Yeah, or because it just is or God made it that way or whatever.
So when the kid asks, why is the sky blue?
And most adults realize they don't actually know something that is that fundamental to
our experience every day, right?
And all human experience, they either say, I don't know, how do you spell cat, right?
Like they move it into the domain of the known, but they move it from something that was fundamental
about the nature of universe to something that wasn't.
And so if you really want to explain why the sky is blue, you have to understand that our
upper atmosphere is made of nitrogen and oxygen and the percentage of it and nitrogen specifically
as N2 and how molecules work and how light coming from the sun works and the speed of
light and diffraction and understanding what optics is and like there's a lot of deep things
and then, but wait, that's why it is that specific wavelength, but why do I subjectively experience
it as blue?
So now we're looking at the mind-brain interface, right?
And the relationship between consciousness and physics and kids want to know that, right?
They want to know why is fire hot, which again is a fucking deep question and they're like
every kid asks these things.
And since we don't know, we don't facilitate what they're naturally fascinated in, that
they're fascinated by and we force them to be interested in stuff that is totally not
interesting.
And in doing so, we don't teach them the interesting things.
We don't teach them the things that are foundational about life that actually lead to the ability
to understand everything else and we actually break their interest in life, which is why
then they just want to veg out and watch TV or, you know, the whole welfare person phenomena
who is actually...
That's what I was going to say, they become great taxpayers.
But see, those are broken people.
That's the key insight is that everyone is born fascinated, interested.
And if you facilitate that, then not only are you helping them learn a tremendous amount
and they're going to be fascinated about different things, some more in the direction of aesthetics
or ethics or fundamental science or athletics, but there will be a unique genius actualization
if it's followed.
And so that was the experiment and we could go on about educational philosophy, but one
of the key like insights there is that we have an educational system in the U.S. right
now and in most of the West that was built in the Industrial Revolution to make industrial
bots.
And it was the...
Thank you.
No, I love going here.
I was hoping we could get into this.
So carry on, please.
And so as we started to look at building industrial supply chains, then we wanted every assembly
line worker before we had automated that task to basically be an automata, right?
They would do the exact same thing.
And so anyone who had been trained into doing that could be replaceable.
They were fungible for anyone else.
And any MBA from a good business school was replaceable for any other MBA, any VP of marketing.
So we want to take unique humans and collapse them into fungible roles.
And so then we can just have an order chart and say, I'm looking for three of these and
four of these, totally replaceable.
In the process of doing that, when you collapse the uniqueness of a human to a fungible role,
there's of course the intrinsic motive to do that is gone, deep competition and comparison
because we're competing on being the exact same role.
So we're competing on the same metrics rather than any uniqueness.
There's no way to compare Salvador Dali and MC Escher and Da Vinci because how the fuck
would you do that, right?
You can't compare them on the same metrics.
And if Dali hadn't done what he did, some other artist wouldn't have done the same thing.
Universe would just have been less.
That was the uniqueness of that being, expressing in a totally fucking unique way, which is
why all artists for history hadn't done that thing.
And so so much of the jealousy, envy, comparison, competition also comes from being collapsed
to categories.
And there were reasons why we did this, you know, for all of human history until not that
long ago, till the beginning of what we call civilization 10,000 years ago, give or take
for eight million years of hominid history, we never got more than 150 people.
And those 150 person tribes, everyone could be pretty unique and actually get along well
because they knew everybody else and they could actually keep track of it.
And as soon as we wanted to go to start having very large numbers, we had to create some
homogeneity between everyone.
So we started making them a lot more like termites or ants, which are animals that can
do a lot of them working together, but within a class, a worker ant or a drone ant, they're
all fungible, right?
They're all replaceable for each other.
So this system is very much like that.
And education is the indoctrination into being going from a unique human to a fungible
bot.
Dude, you just described my whole in a very deeply intellectual way, my whole experience
subjectively with education.
And the whole time you're talking of thinking, this is why I have a podcast and this is why
I do what I do because I'm so curious and so fascinated by the way things work and the
questions of why, right?
And so I was always seeking truth, even as a kid, like, how does this work?
Why does it work?
But the system that I was put into and literally physically the desks I was put into were like
little torture chambers and my creativity was actually discouraged and was almost forced
to join the basketball team because I was having behavioral problems and their solution
was like, cool, make him conform to something that makes him even more insecure and feel
like even more of an outsider being the kid with the long hair and refusing to wear the
right shoes.
So I wore my vans and slid around the core and got made fun of and, you know, harassed
and picked on and stuff like that.
And it's like, once I turned the day turned 18, I quit high school.
I was marking it off on my calendar like a prisoner, you know, putting notches on the
wall as like marking the calendar to October 29th, 1988.
And that was the day of freedom.
And from that moment on, once I left school, then I became obsessed with learning.
And so it's so interesting to look from the standpoint of your perspective because it
wasn't that I didn't want to learn.
It's that I didn't want to learn that way.
Those topics.
And that way.
Yeah.
And so now it's like, you know, here I am 47 and I'm like, I'm like the most curious
childlike energy.
I think there is.
I mean, I don't know anyone that's as curious as me about the way things work.
And it's such a gift to be able to interview people and really learn about this stuff.
So, so that's how fortuitous that your parents, you know, you were so situated that your parents
got that and you had an opportunity to take a different path.
And that was because you didn't actually identify, you didn't actually succeed at school in that
way that you were able to actually do something else to the degree you succeed at it, then
you're trapped by the continuation of that curve forever.
So notice the smarter the kids are, smart, meaning good at that particular definition
of smart.
The earlier we push them into hyper-specialization, right?
We want to get them in AP classes towards their specialty young.
And then the further we push them in specialization.
So by the time they do their dissertation, 10 people in the world know what the fuck
they're talking about.
So they know so much about such a narrow area.
So they're not thinking about big picture things or the interdisciplinary things at
all.
That means that the smartest people aren't actually questioning macroeconomics and questioning
culture and questioning governance, questioning the foundational axioms of how we do academia
or science because they're, they're just doing one tiny little thing.
So we're training them to be very sharp cogs in the industrial wheel.
That's so true.
And the only people who are usually left thinking about any big picture things are people that
didn't have those types of proclivities.
And that is actually a way of taking things that could be dangerous and making them not
only not dangerous, but very good tools of the continuation of a particular system.
And so because you didn't actually do that well at it, then you were able to say, fuck
it, I want to do something totally different.
Right.
That is interesting.
And it reminds me of something I've talked about on the show and there was this, I got
to find this freaking, it was some study or evaluation or paper or something that I came
across at one point and it was talking about entrepreneurship and how the top 10 people
with the highest IQs in the world all worked for someone else.
And all the great inventors in the, you know, monumental colossal entrepreneurs in the world
dropped out of high school, didn't go to college.
I mean, it's this universal trend that the smartest people don't think outside of the
box.
And it's the theory was that the people that you're describing that are highly specialized
and that rise to the top of their class intellectually, that they're so smart that they're able to
over calculate the risks involved in a venture of creativity, whereas if you have a more
of a visionary creative type that doesn't fit within that box, but also obviously still
has a certain degree of intellectual prowess, that they're smart enough to have the idea
and creative enough to have the vision, but just dumb enough to not be able to calculate
the risk and be willing to go out and walk the plank and lose it all for the sake of.
So saying dumb enough is one way of thinking of it.
Another way of thinking of it has to do with the way they're trained in relationship to
risk aversion.
Okay.
Okay.
I like that because I think of myself as that and I tend to be self deprecating.
So I appreciate you seeing in an NLP way, seeing that word dumb enough.
So what is really happening?
Think about this, if the kid who gets a 4.0, one of the keys of getting a 4.0 is making
no mistakes, right?
Like that's how you got that is that you did everything right and everything perfect.
Now everything right means you learned what had already been figured out was the orthodox
truth and you were able to repeat it effectively, right?
And then at a certain point, once you understand that system completely enough, you can extend
it a little bit, which, you know, in the postdoc level, you take the current, whatever the
field is and extend it a tiny bit after proving that you understood it perfectly.
People who got a lot of praise and a lot of success and identity around never making any
mistakes and getting everything perfect are not oriented to do things that have a very
high risk of failure.
That's great, dude.
So when kids are praised for getting things right, you fuck them up.
Because a number of things, one, so think about this.
In general, all the praise that kids get is when they do something that the authority
wants them to do and has already designated as right and good and true, right?
So whether it's the teacher, the preacher, the parent, they get praised for doing what
someone else wanted them to do.
They almost always get punishment for doing things that made sense to them that they wanted
them to do.
So this is how you condition people to be good cogs within an authoritarian system where
we defer our own agency, our ability to assess the world in our own agency to somebody that
knows better than us.
And the teacher, the preacher, the parent, right, they all represent that and then it
becomes the boss and the, you know, macro economy, the state, the et cetera, writ large.
And so if we want people that actually can really be innovative, we can't train them
that way.
We have to train them to self-assess and self-initiate and not actually get hits of praise from getting
something right that others already figured out.
And when we do that, like oftentimes there's a kid who becomes a spelling bee champion
or a math genius because they just happen to fucking figure out like how spelling works
or how math works and they got so much praise for it and they weren't getting enough unconditional
love otherwise that they were optimizing for the extrinsic reward associated with the math
of getting the praise even though they might actually hate math or be not terribly interested
in math.
They just happen to get it.
If you didn't do that, then you might find math is all right, but they're actually fascinated
by art.
And so then they can become very good at something they have no passion for.
And it's all based on extrinsic motive that is damaging intrinsic motive.
Wow.
Wow.
Do you have kids?
I don't have kids.
I'm like, you'd be a great dad, dude.
I was picturing your kids, man, they're going to be so well-developed if and when you have
them.
I don't either.
I think partially because I'm terrified of not doing a good job of it because I still
feel like I'm doing so much work on myself, but it's interesting to think about a generation
of people close to our age that have an understanding of things in this way that can actually usher
in the next generation of human that is allowed to express their full potential without being
confined into this system.
And most of the people that have had the deepest exploration about the nature of reality either
aren't having kids because they see how much is wrong with the world and they're applying
that creative and parental energy to trying to solve problems in the world, or they don't
feel secure enough in the world with nuclear war looming again for the first time and macroeconomic
collapse and climate change, et cetera, to want to bring kids in.
So, okay, so moving on into, I mean, there's literally so much to unpack in any one of
these topics, but there's so many things I want to cover with you, but the education
thing definitely piqued my interest just learning that you're homeschooled, but you're a really
bright guy, so where's the connection and that's making sense.
See, I didn't go to college.
To me, higher education was moved to Hollywood, play in a band, deal drugs, done.
I mean, I had it figured out, so I thought, I think I went to LACC for like two weeks.
I took health and which, you know, later, I guess came to serve me.
Violin made it two weeks and I took health and classical guitar.
I was like, oh, cool.
I'll learn how to play rad guitar.
I go in and they're like, oh, we're going to learn how to read music.
I was like, no, that's math.
I'm out.
But when I look at higher education now, just from what I see in social media, there's
just where we are culturally is so interesting because this millennial generation, I read
something the other day, for example, that they surveyed a bunch of millennials and 50%
of them indicated that they would prefer communism over capitalism, you know.
And there's this whole postmodernism and Marxist ideas and all this, to me, really crazy stuff
that they seem to have seeped its way into higher education and you have this generation
of kids that are in this weird Orwellian 1984 thought police, political, correct insanity.
Like, what's the deal with that right now?
And do you know what I'm talking about?
And do you think that this has been perpetuated intentionally or is this just a natural progression
of A plus B equal C and how things have carried on?
All right.
That's like quite a few really deep topics mixed together that really need kind of unwound.
Yeah.
So postmodernism has one topic in its relationship to higher education.
The trend of higher education writ large and the other issues beyond postmodernism, looking
at macroeconomy and questioning capitalism and looking at other macroeconomic systems
and generational dynamics that millennials are expressing are all important and they're
somewhat tied, but they're also there's some different dynamics.
So in my classic interview style, I just ask six questions under one umbrella.
Well, take a stab at any part of that.
To me, I'm just, you know, I'm very zoomed out and I'm looking at things that I see
like that like, wait, kids don't understand communism doesn't work.
How did we get there?
You know, it's just, it's so bizarre to me in this whole, I don't know, the climate
of free speech being crushed unless they, people agree with you like this sensitive snowflake
weird safe space whole college thing.
Okay.
So the issue as I see it is actually quite nuanced and complex and most of the reactionary
simplistic takes on it are part of the problem.
So let's explore this nuance for a minute.
So let's take the issue of race, which is right at the heart of that topic.
We can look at race, we can look at gender, we can look at transgender LGBTQ, we can look
at any of those dynamics that are part of the identity politics part you're bringing
up.
It's related to postmodernism and it derives some of its intellectual basis from postmodernism
but it's also related to some other key things.
So if we look at race and we look at Black Lives Matter or people of color movement
or et cetera, we have not ever properly dealt with the fact that this land that we call
this country was fully inhabited by lots of nations of people that we completely slaughtered
to make this land, right?
We're getting taxation without representation in London, we don't want to be here anymore
so we're going to go somewhere else and hey look there's a whole continent that's totally
free because we have better military equipment than they do so we can kill all those people
and take that whole land.
There's a real moral fucking problem to having your moral legitimacy as the United States
of America and the beautiful Constitution Declaration of Independence being based on
genocide and we're pretty happy to acknowledge like after Germany's genocide they're fucked
up, right?
There's a whole cultural thing but our genocide was not that long before and it was more people.
It was a lot more people.
Wow, that's interesting.
And it was the genocide of the Native American people employing the slavery of the Africans
and we mean real fucking slavery like captured the people by military force, killed lots
of them, tortured and killed lots of them, lynching, et cetera and we don't want to
really acknowledge that this country was built with that.
It was built with a pretty decent amount of Chinese slavery, a lot of African slavery
and one major genocide.
Alright, so then we've got, you know, we have to fight a war to finally get rid of slavery
not that long ago, like really not that long ago where there are old people alive today
that still remember elements of slavery dynamics, right?
Like that's a big deal to get.
But then, okay so we abolished slavery without abolishing the mindset that was associated
with it so a lot of people didn't want it gone.
So then we've got Jim Crow and segregation and all that and then we kind of overturn
that, kind of, right?
But slaves actually economically work really well.
It's kind of nice to be able to have people do all this shit work and not get paid and
be able to concentrate the profit margins and as soon as you don't want to do that with
the slaves now people got to take, you know, other people have to take the shit jobs and
who wants the shit jobs and then you have to dilute the profit margin to pay minimum
wages.
So there's a lot of people that just didn't like that, right?
For legitimate understandable reasons and they could justify making another group of
people different enough that slavery was better than their own sacrifice in that zero-sum
game dynamic, right?
Or near zero-sum game dynamic.
And then we have, okay so now it's not full segregation legally but that mindset's still
there and the people who are coming out of segregation have generations of trauma and
no education and no inheritance, right?
As opposed to people who are coming from generations of education, inheritance and not the same
types of trauma.
So we have the ghetto phenomena and what that means and we know how epigenetic trauma works
now generationally, right?
We know how mimetic trauma works.
And so then we look at do we still have a system of systemic injustice?
Fuck yes.
We still have a system of systemic injustice and any white person who wouldn't just trade
to be black recognizes that the ethics of the pie slice theorem aren't in place, right?
Pie slice theorem is if it's just there's a symmetry, right, between you and I which
is all cut the slice of pie and you get a pick which side but I don't get a cut and
pick, right?
If I cut and pick there's something fucked up or you can cut and I'll pick.
But anyone who says I wouldn't want to trade positions with the other person but they should
be fine with it, there's a problem.
And that's the dynamic here.
So there is a real response to unresolved trauma that is still affecting things.
Now that said, the response is coming from a place that is largely influenced by trauma
rather than clear strategy and trauma usually perpetuates itself.
And so if a bunch of people with black lives matter saying, hey, there are real issues
where there are a lot of black people who are getting killed by police for reasons that
are totally unfounded and then not getting prosecuted in the same way, not getting attention
in the same way.
Like that's a real deal and how does anyone go about trying to go to school and feel safe
when you can be going to school doing all the right things and have that kind of dynamic
occur?
All right, so then they go shut down a freeway out of like upset and anger or whatever.
And then while that's trying to get attention for something that is real, it is strategically
problematic because then you have the alt right largely arising as a response to those
type of dynamics saying, look, our way of life that we care about is being threatened.
And look, these people are rioting and causing chaos and whatever, they're validating our
ideas about them not being strategic good thinkers, et cetera.
And because of a postmodern dynamic that in general the progressive left has, it makes
it harder for them to cohere because they want to validate everyone's perspective because
they're suffering, they're still in response to the pain of imperialism or one perspective
is imposed on everyone.
So part of the response is to say, hey, fuck, everybody actually has a perspective and the
perspective that you're saying is just true because it's science or whatever.
A lot of our social science that arose at the same time as our physical science was actually
just imperialism.
And so postmodernism emerged amongst, I'm radically simplifying here, postmodernism emerged
with a partial meaningful truth, which was to say this is just objectively true.
This is science.
We did the right epistemology is subjectively true and it's true for everybody doesn't
acknowledge that especially as we get into the social sciences, there's a shit ton of
bias.
And so we went looking for monogamy and pair bonding in the animal kingdom because of Victorian
age ideas that actually made us do zoology badly.
And so we see that kind of thing everywhere.
So postmodernism said actually different perspectives on reality, running different experiments
end up yielding different kinds of insights.
And we still know that are you healthiest on a vegan diet or a paleo diet?
I can show you just as much fucking research on both of those that look at different metrics.
And so whether I'm looking at pH or I'm looking at insulin levels or I'm looking at telomere
levels, like I'll get different answers and also which populations, but when I try and
reduce health to some finite set of metrics and there's a million fucking metrics that
we can't calculate, I can get a lot of partial answers that seem like the whole answer and
seem like complete science because I'm studying a very complex system in a very simplistic
way.
So bias is very easy when you try and set a complex system in a simple way because your
metrics look really fucking clear.
They just don't happen to be all the metrics that matter.
And so postmodernism acknowledged that and said, hey, all the perspectives actually have
to be factored.
Now there was a kind of virulent version of that.
They didn't acknowledge that all the perspectives should be acknowledged, but they're not all
going to be equally true.
Some of them can have distortion in them, so we need to be able to vet for distortion
and all the perspectives are going to be less different in simpler systems.
So in chemistry, the epistemology is more straightforward than it is in social sciences
and some of the virulent version of postmodernism just started rejecting truth writ large, right?
Like any claim of truth is an imperialist claim and nobody can claim truth and all perspectives
are equally true.
But we can see that that was a virulent version of an appropriate response to the way that
science, imperialism, capitalism, along with fucking like, you know, colonialism, right?
All kind of co-emerged and trying to untangle those was like part of the goal there.
So if you actually read Foucault or Derridaugh, there's meaningful good thinking in there.
Most of what you see happening that tries to intellectually reify itself with those
people is not actually being done very well, but that's because trauma is influencing a
lot of it.
But then on the other side, we've never actually taken responsibility to deal with that that
trauma was created.
So when I say it's nuanced, it is.
And it's a really big deal.
Because if we look at the alt, the alt right and the control left, they have moved to a
level of polarization and radicalization that is very hard to imagine how that reconciles
and with a tremendous amount of fear on both sides and trauma on both sides and associated
with that, the desire for secession from the nation, the desire for whatever that leads
to war in a world where our military technology is such that we don't get to make it through
war is the way we did in the past.
And so the idea, hey look, we fought a war with the British to come get this area and
it worked well.
Yeah, we had fucking muskets, right?
And as the military technology goes up, it becomes more and more problematic.
And when we get to the level where you have decentralized exponential technology, which
is where we're at right now, we don't get to make it through wars anymore.
And humanity has always had different dynamics that led us to polarization and radicalization
in the war.
And we have to actually learn how to fucking deal with that.
And part of it is we have to be able to understand how to take multiple perspectives.
They have partial truth, find the successful parts and figure out how to do dialectic,
how to do synthesis, and be able to find a solution that doesn't just solve for some
things while externalizing harm to something else that's affected, but actually solve for
the whole set.
So that's just the postmodernism snowflake part.
That makes perfect sense, because to me, looking from the outside, I'm like, I see the trauma
and I see that these young people that are wrapped up in that ideology, I see them as
victims.
But I didn't think about the past, I'm just like, you're victims of a perspective that
you've adopted.
And I guess because there was trauma, and I'm just like, God, I feel so bad that this
kid thinks that communism works.
I mean, it's just like, I want to address this part, when in the depression, there were
people openly in the streets discussing socialism, Marxism, laissez-faire capitalism, because
the system was failed, right?
In a failed state, people are open to like look at any possibility.
We are very near a failed state, and we're actually very near a failed civilization globally.
So when you look at climate change and the fact that we can't fucking get it right, right?
Like we can't get it right.
We keep driving ourselves towards the point of self-induced catastrophe and possibly extinction.
And despite the fact that the Club of Rome identified this overshooting limits in the
60s, right, and limits of growth in the world through model, despite the fact that it's
been called out and we're following the model, we keep progressing on the motherfucking model,
right?
The Paris Accord was not enough for us to make it.
Everything would have been fucked if we did the Paris Accord, and we couldn't even do
that, right?
And that's driven mostly by our current structure of capitalism.
Because if I over fish the ocean, if I use a mile long drift net and I take all these
fucking fish out of the ocean, that's more money for my fishing company this quarter,
and leaving them in the ocean is worth nothing to me, economically.
Now it's worth something in the future, but the other guy's going to fish them out if
I don't fish them out, so it's not like I can leave them there for the future.
So it is a competitive race for near-term wins, mortgaging the future.
So we make 13 species a day extinct on average.
We've fished out 90% of the large fish species from the ocean on a three-quarter water planet
that took 3 billion years to get all that fucking life, and in 100 years of industrialized
fishing, we've fished out 90% of the large fish species, extinct in many of them, 80%
of the old growth trees gone.
That's capitalism working really great, not working really great, right?
We're on the verge of a very realistic AI apocalypse where we should be developing the
AI very slowly.
We should be very intelligently looking at, because when Edison's working on a light bulb
and the light bulb fails, it just doesn't work.
Maybe it blows up.
No big deal.
You do it inside of a container.
You work on AI and it fails, and sometimes it doesn't work, and sometimes it kills everything.
Because it is an auto-poetic tech.
It is a self-organizing, self-authoring tech.
Light bulb isn't.
It works or it doesn't work, but it's built on the outside.
But biotech, right, where you make a new fucking life form and now it replicates and it does
its own mutation, that is a self-replicating tech where if you get it wrong, you don't
get to stop it.
And nuclear wasn't, right?
Nuclear is a reaction and then it stops.
It's really bad.
But nanotech, biotech, and AI are auto-poetic, self-replicating tech that might be, depending
upon how we do them, incommensurate with biological life as we understand it, with faster feedback
loops than us.
Now, we should develop that as slow as fucking possible because the upsides are awesome, but
we should do it in highly controlled, safe-to-fail environments, but all of the fiscal incentive
is getting to market first.
That's a capitalist incentive, who gets to market first, where we're in a race towards
the cliff.
And the arms race is the same thing.
Why do we have, when Carl Sagan showed us in the early 80s that it only took four 100
megaton bombs to kill all life on Earth with a nuclear winter, why do we have 600 times
that many?
Like, why the fuck do you keep making nukes after you have enough to kill everything
down to viruses?
Because if you have a for-profit military industrial complex where you have a source
of supply where you need to manufacture more demand to keep your supply going, it's not
like supply and demand is a real thing.
There's an initial demand, you create a supply, but now you have supply and you manufacture
artificial demand, which is why we buy all kinds of shit that doesn't make us happy,
that we think will make us happy because marketing creates artificial demand.
So capitalism is actually broken, existentially.
So there are people who learned that, okay, Marxism had some nice ideas and there were
some good ideas, it didn't actually end up working out that well, no, of course, if
we really go study it, we never implemented Marxism, just like we've never implemented
laissez-faire capitalism.
We've implemented weird models of capitalism, and by the time the USSR came around it was
nothing like Marxism.
For a bunch of reasons.
But Marxism doesn't actually work at scale.
It works, that kind of model works at 150 person tribal model, it doesn't extend beyond
it.
Capitalism did seem to work, but at the cost of radical externality.
That externality, when you get to this many people and this much tech, actually self-implodes.
So what has worked up to this point worked, worked at the, but when we say it worked up
to this point, we have been utilizing unrenovable resources moving towards the point of criticality
the whole time.
And it has required war, right?
And it has led to diseases we didn't have before because of environmental devastation
and etc.
And we have a world where today almost everyone has low grade mental illness.
Like ubiquitous addiction, ubiquitous low grade anxiety, existential angst, fairly decent
low grade depression, right?
These are not natural to the human condition.
Tribal people don't have this shit in the same way.
So we say it worked, defined worked.
This is optimizing for some metrics at the expense of others in a complex system.
So the fact that there are people questioning is there a fucking better system than this
because we're not fixing climate change in the system where it's still more profitable
to do the fucked up thing.
The perverse incentive is ubiquitous in healthcare.
Why do we do biohacking stuff?
Why doesn't healthcare prevent diseases?
Because there's no fucking money in preventing diseases.
There's a lot of money in treating them.
There's not that much in curing them, but there's a lot in treating them forever.
So what is going to get researched when the money goes in has to have ROI back out in
the capitalist system.
So the fact that people are recognizing that and questioning is a very good thing.
Now the fact that they try to find other things that didn't work as the answer is just a basically
hopelessness and a lack of knowing how to go about solving something so fucking hard.
So one of the core focuses of my life is what is the macroeconomy of the future?
What are the governance systems?
What are the civilization systems that can allow us to actually human together well without
needing to go to war and unremovable use of resource and producing ubiquitous mental and
physical illness that's unnecessary and etc.
And it's not any system that has ever happened.
So we can get into that if you want to or we can go to other directions, but also most
of the young people who say communism, what they're really saying is Denmark looks better
than here.
Like that's a social kind of dynamic where better access to medicine don't have a lot
of homeless people, masters to PhD is average level of education, largely secular because
of that.
Like the Nordic countries just look better.
They are.
They're just fucking better.
There's more socialized dynamics.
Now, are they better on every metric?
No.
Like here, we have a tremendous amount of innovation here because of certain types of
freedoms and a tremendous amount of damage.
And our bell curve is very spread out.
And so for everyone who's not winning at this system to say nobody is losing as bad in Denmark
as they are here and there's a lot less of them and they're not ruining the environment
as fast and they're actually figuring their trash problem out, maybe let's actually think
about this.
And I'm actually not proposing Denmark as a solution.
I am saying there are a lot of things that are actually evidentially better on meaningful
metrics and things that are adequate to the scope of what do we do with almost 8 billion
people and distributed exponential technology don't yet exist.
Oh, my God, that was amazing.
That is a lot to unpack.
And it's funny because I've never actually talked about any of these issues on the show.
It's always very much about meditation or mindfulness, spirituality, or just full on
health stuff.
But I know that you have a systems approach.
So kind of zooming out and looking at like, whoa, what's even beyond, hey, am I optimizing
my sleep or taking, you know, how does my blood work look this year?
I mean, this is stuff that goes way above and beyond that.
And where are we going from here?
Which is interesting.
I just think it, you know, I spurn the question because I knew that you'd be someone that
could answer it in a way that encourage more questioning.
But it's such an interesting time to be alive.
That's why sometimes it's hard for me not to deviate from my format and the basic topics
and get way off into this stuff because I'm watching things happen that have never happened
before as we all are, right?
It's just such a trippy time on earth and there's so many positive things going on.
And I feel that there's this massive awakening thanks to people like you and shows like this
and just the proliferation of information through social media and through the internet.
But at the same time, it's so dark and we are on this, you know, as you said, about to
go over the waterfall.
I mean, we are at the precipice of absolute destruction while at the same time there's
this light that's really, I think we're in this sort of spiritual evolution at the same
time.
It's just so interesting.
Let's just for a minute touch on the, are we talking about biohacking, meditation, spirituality,
individual optimization?
Are we talking about interpersonal, collective optimism?
Well, that's what I'm saying normally on the show.
It's more just subjective, each person optimize in and then that rippling out into the community
at large, right?
But we've sort of like zoomed out and are coming back in from the other direction.
So here's why we have to think about them together.
If we work on increasing our cognitive capacity and our energy and etc.
So that we can do more of what's killing the world and then we go extinct faster because
of it.
Right, right.
We're optimizing ourselves to like integrate into a system that is not working.
And that's most of it, right?
That's interesting.
We watched, as we started, you know, Neurohacker, we were looking at the amount of smart drug
sales going up and smart drugs that increased hyper-competing, increased motivation and
drive while decreasing empathy, decreasing creativity and making hyper-competing psychopaths.
Like Modafinil?
Less, like Adderall.
Oh, Adderall, okay.
But Modafinil can do things in that direction and it's different.
I just came to, I don't do Adderall, but I do Modafinil from time to time and when I'm
on Modafinil, I don't think I've become a bad person, but I definitely, I'm not interested
in interfacing with other humans at all.
I'm like very task-oriented and locked into whatever I'm doing, which has its place, but
it's definitely not like, hey man, I should go out and give some hugs right now.
It's like, get out of my way, don't interrupt me, I'm focused.
So how do we, this is the key thing is like, let's learn how to win at the game that is
killing the world.
No, let's not do that.
Let's learn how to have the capacity to create a new game.
That's really the thing that I want to emphasize here and even the people who are winning at
the current game are not living happy, meaningful lives for the most part.
When we look at hyper-normal stimuli, right, why it's so easy to get addicted to sugar
because in an evolutionary environment, we just didn't have sugar, right?
We had a little bit of fruit and the fruit was not hybridized, so there was a major
evolved dopamine reaction to get it because the caloric density offered increased ability
to survive a famine.
Now we have so much fucking sugar, but we still have the same dopamine response, that's
a dangerous phenomenon, a hyper-normal stimuli.
And then we find that of course, social media is a hyper-normal stimuli because everybody's
pictures are prettier than they actually are and everybody's liking you and you're liking
them and you don't have to face real difficulties of interaction and it can be a huge number
of people in a short amount of time.
And porn is a hyper-normal stimuli and there's a whole generation of kids becoming adults
who don't know how to relate to women, who don't know how to have sex properly, who
have issues, erectile and etc. because they have oversaturated a certain kind of stimuli
and normal stimuli are actually very insensitive to it, right?
And video games are hyper-normal stimuli.
So we've had a world that's just all hyper-normal stimuli, which is addiction, which always
corresponds with less fulfillment, right?
Because it's desensitizing you to actually getting pleasure from life and so you need
the hyper-normal stimuli to get the hit and so you need the whatever it is, however many
likes your thing gets.
And the hyper-normal stimuli proliferates in the presence of hyponormal stimuli, which
is we don't live in a fucking tribe, which is our evolutionary environment where we
actually have real authentic interactions with lots of humans regularly.
And so imagine in a tribe where you're dancing around the campfire regularly.
Most people find that when they go camping with friends they aren't checking their phone
as much.
Right after the first day or two and the addiction kind of chills, in the presence of more authentic
fulfillment there is less emptiness pushing some hit.
And so the society we've optimized for is a hyper-normal stimuli to everything meaningful
where everybody's fucking lonely and has some sense of meaninglessness and a lot of pressure
together.
And so then in that place addiction is going to run rampant.
And most people have 30 to 50 different addictive behaviors, meaning compulsive shit they know
isn't good for them, they keep doing.
Totally.
That's really interesting because in the model of the 12 steps, which has been the most effective
single thing in removing deadly addictions from my life, the model there is what I think
people from the outside of that model think is that, oh, you go there and you quit drinking
or you go there and you quit sex or overeating or whatever it is, you go to some 12 step
group and that that's what your problem is.
But that you get there subjectively, one gets there and you go, oh shit, that was actually
the symptom.
Right.
So I'm addicted to heroin.
Well, why?
Because of everything you just described.
So is this this set of principles then going to just take that addiction away?
No, what it's going to do is it's going to give me a framework to live by spiritual principles,
ineffable laws, right, that I can apply to my life to become more fulfilled.
And then the need for that thing that I was using goes away.
And it's the straight, I mean, I've experienced this again and again and again, using that
model of getting the human connection and a spiritual connection and like living by those
principles that kind of keep your mind and emotions in check, then the problem is removed.
The principles represent a pretty small percent and the human connection represents a pretty
large percent.
Like the group dynamic and the group support, I guess it's that tribe we're missing, right?
You walk into a room and there's 25 people in there that you might not know, but you
understand one another on a deep level because you've both suffered in the same way.
Think about it, how many people get the blue book read on their own, apply the principles
and quit their addiction.
Right, probably nobody.
Nobody.
That's funny.
Now, whether they join that group or they join the Christian group or they join whatever
fucking, it's mostly the fact that we are actually social primates, right, involved
in a tribal environment.
And so when in the 12 step thing, what's happening is the main thing happening in those rooms
is you have people having authentic sharing about things they don't normally get to share
about.
So they feel seen, they see other people and there's real intimacy, right?
And most of the time, again, the world praised us for certain very narrow things and we're
optimizing for a lie all the time.
Now just because this is adjacent to a topic I want to discuss, this is one of the things
that is most gruesome about social media and I'll say most gruesome about the topic of
personal branding.
And I'm using the word gruesome, you know, acknowledging what a strong word it is.
I struggle with this a lot so I'm looking forward to what you have to say.
Then someone creates a brand as a business.
But even if not, they're just social media and there's a persona, right?
But let's take the brand as a very clear example.
They're now a life coach, they're a yoga teacher, they're an Instagram model or whatever the
fuck it is, right?
Which has become radically easier.
I used to be a few people did that with based on the media tech now.
Everybody gets to do some degree of this.
Then what happens is I have a feedback, I have an analytics mechanism of how much people
like my persona, which is how many likes the thing gets and how many clicks and impressions
and purchases, whatever, you know, thing.
And so I'm going to now split test optimize my persona based on what people are responding
to and they're going to respond to hypernormal stimuli.
And so the brand is going to get based on the financial driver, based on the analytics
is going to evolve in the direction of what gets maximum engagement, it's going to get
further and further from who I actually am.
There'll be whole areas of who I am that I definitely don't share because they will
actually be anti correlated to what gets the like hit.
And the more people are liking that thing now that I feel different than the more depressed
I feel, right?
The more addictive desire I have in that depression to go get a hit and put out another fucking
thing that's going to get a few hundred likes.
And the more I feel like a fraud and a phony and that if anyone really saw me, they wouldn't
love me and I'm really unlovable and et cetera.
So in the 12 step room, the opposite of that's happening, right?
Someone is actually saying, I'm a fucking fuck up.
I just did all this dumb shit and they're like, I get it.
Me too.
Whoa.
A real human interaction just occurred, which is rare, which is really rare.
And this starts to be the basis.
It's not sufficient, right?
But it starts to be the basis of a human life that doesn't drive addiction as a way to deal
with the emptiness, right?
The emptiness and then the need to run from it goes away.
It's interesting as you were talking about the social media persona and the profile because
I've owned a company for nine years and it's a company.
It has its own identity and then myself and my partner were the drivers or the face of
that company at a certain point, but then we've sort of phased out as we've gone in
our own separate career paths and things and minds gone away from fashion.
So I really enjoy the process of building a brand and a personality and coming up with
your core values and the mission and like, it's a thing.
It's a living entity, which has been amazing.
But I really struggled when I started the podcast and decided to get out of having this
identity as a fashion stylist and a musician and all the things that I was so identified
with before that I don't just ran their course or weren't my true heart's passion.
And so I decided to do this podcast and make this brand called Luke Story, have this thing
the life stylist.
I really had a hard time with launching it.
It was about two years ago because I didn't know how real I wanted to be or that I would
have the courage to be and how forthcoming and just transparent and authentic I wanted
to be about my past and my struggles with addiction and just current struggles and everything.
And so I kind of paused for a moment before I put anything out until I really was sure
that I was willing to accept a possible rejection or other consequences of just being me.
And I've done this social experiment now for about a year and a half where I've just pushed
my own boundaries of transparency and authenticity just to see what would happen if I am in fact
disliked or rejected or abandoned or ostracized by the world at large or what we call a following
or a fan base or listeners or whatever.
And it's been so bizarre, I've been talking about this a lot.
The more goofy and real and just true I can be like treating social media and my outward
facing persona and brand like I'm in a 12 step meeting and just like, Hey, this is the
shit I'm going through.
I'm at a certain degree of, you know, prudence, I guess, you know, I don't you don't want
to be lose your tact, you know what I mean?
But I'm finding this spiritual explosion of growth and just allowing myself to finally
be seen and to really accept myself and love myself.
And what's so weird about it, and this is just this cosmic joke that I'm just constantly
giggling at is that I actually get more approval from showing these aspects of myself that I've
always hidden because I was embarrassed about or, you know, my insecurities, my struggles.
It's like, actually, people like me more for the things that I've been afraid for them
to see my whole entire life.
It's like this strange paradox, which on the other side of it, I've lived at the side
you were describing is like, Oh, I'm going to present things in a certain way so that
I'm like, I'm sure that's there to some degree, but I've kind of flipped that on its head
and just like, All right, how myself can I be?
And what point at which do people go, All right, you're too much, we're abandoning you.
We actually don't like you, which is that sort of, you know, primal, egoic fear.
And I'm just having such a great time, like using social media actually as a tool to make
myself uncomfortably vulnerable.
And then to find that it was a boogeyman.
It's like a phantom fear who gives a shit.
If they like you or not, it's like if you have that self worth, which I'm really starting
to cultivate more actively, then I don't know, even the response doesn't matter, but it's
fascinating when the response is positive to things that I would think like, Oh God,
now people are really going to think I'm an idiot or whatever, you know, just letting
that be seen on a macro more public level.
And then it's giving me the ability to do that more as you mentioned the word intimacy,
you know, just with my friends to be like, Hey, I just want to be real.
I think it's one of my goals in life is to, you know, to someday pass on.
And if anyone could say anything, just be like, at least he wasn't fucking phony.
Yeah.
You know, it's like just to be authentic and real, despite whatever false one might have.
So so in the world where we have ubiquitous loneliness and ubiquitous
depression and without talking about it, everybody knows that there is a longing
for authenticity, right?
And a longing for intimacy.
And so people will respond to that.
And so that's awesome, right?
And I love that you're having that experience with people and sharing that
experience with people and anyone who wants to share themselves where there will
be a personal brand.
That's the only way to go.
It doesn't make their life suck and actually propagate shit in the world.
Now there will still be times where there is something that is less authentic,
that sells better.
And this is where you have to say, okay, choosing between two masters,
where it's a tricky one sometimes, but it's one to just have continuous
awareness of and vigilance of.
So at a certain point, I guess you hit a threshold, perhaps where you really have
to start looking at things from scalability and from having a brand that's
sustainable.
Are you saying that at a certain point, you are faced with the decision on
editing the level of authenticity in order to our analytics, say, this particular
market will like this part of your message, but not this part.
If you gear it like this, you'll scale significantly, right, right.
And this particular hypernormal stimuli will get a lot of people to
respond because addiction actually sells.
So now come back to capitalism for a minute, again, in the problem of it.
The more addicted people are, the better capitalism works.
GDP goes up with more addiction, right?
Because this is why there are not salad bars that have the scale of McDonald's.
Is because if we make shit that is addictive as fuck, because we just exploit
the hypernormal stimuli button, people will buy it and have to keep buying it.
And we do that with cigarettes, we do it.
And, you know, with social media, this is like, you know, when Tristan Harris
left Google and started talking about this and people started waking up to
social media, Facebook, you know, or platforms of any kind, Google, they get
paid by how much time, how many eyeballs spend, how much time on site.
Because the marketers are, you know, the advertisers are going to pay for that.
So the goal is keep you, have as many people spend as much time on site as possible.
Now, what's actually good for you in your life is to get the fuck off of the
screen and go interact with people.
Right, right.
But since we're going to get paid more by more time on site, then we're going
to figure out the most addictive things to do with the newsfeed that will keep
you clicking and, you know, paying attention as much as possible.
And then justify why it's a good thing, because we have to, we have to do that.
Right.
And so then if you look at.
You just, you just described a rift in so many of my relationships, you
know, the woman classic, like, what do you have to be on Instagram?
Like all day, I'm like, Hey, this is my work.
Like, you know, that's always my excuse.
It's part of my job.
You know, it's an, it's an interesting thing because the studies keep rolling
out of the more time people spend on screens, the more depressed they are.
And for a gazillion reasons, right.
Is there, for the most part, there isn't any real intimacy, authenticity,
et cetera, in those interactions.
If so, it's the tiniest fragment of the total time spent.
And even to the degree there is the real kinesthetic feedback of intimacy
with another person is not happening.
It doesn't mean there aren't good sides.
Of course, the ability to have people talk with people in other parts of the
world and be able to have messages that are valuable be shared has value.
Those will be the parts that we solely focus on.
If we have a profit stream associated with it, cause we need to justify that.
Right.
This is where it becomes important to really look at what is meaningful.
Now, come back for a moment to the individual optimization, right?
Biohacking individual optimization.
We're interested in people optimizing as individuals so that they have more
capacity to actually do things that are meaningful.
Cause when people look at climate change and they look at species extinction
and they look at refugee issues and et cetera, they're like, fuck,
I don't know what to do with that.
Let's go back on Facebook.
Um, let's go back to work.
Let's, but for the, and again, back to education, they're waiting for
somebody to tell them what to do and do a good job at it, as opposed to be able
to self-assess in a very complex scenario, what might actually be effective.
Cause if anybody knew it'd be fucking happening, right?
To self-assess what needs to be done and then to actually start to initiate
and, and do that and self-author.
So individual optimization for that purpose is meaningful, but it's
interesting how the pursuit of happiness is core to the mission statement of our
country, right?
And the pursuit of happiness is a, is an oxymoron.
It's a misnomer.
Cause when one is pursuing happiness, they will definitely not be happy.
You're inherently dissatisfied if you're seeking yet.
They're affirming their emptiness, lack of happiness, and they're in a
fundamentally narcissistic pursuit and happiness occurs when you let the
narcissism go and actually connect meaningfully to the world.
And happiness is mostly this direction, not this direction, right?
Mostly.
You know, yeah.
And that also, that also impacts another piece of the, of addiction
recovery is once one has enough stability, I mean, kind of the whole point
of just to then go help the next person that comes along, that is struggling
in ways in which you have.
And then that's, that's where the magic happens.
Like that's when the lights turn on, when you make a difference.
Right.
Yeah.
And it's not just because now you're affirming the principles to yourself
until you want to live them.
It's that, but it's also because now your life actually has a sense of meaning
exactly where it doesn't need a hit from something else as much.
Yeah, exactly.
Yeah.
And I think, yeah, I, I figured that out pretty early on into my recovery, which
was almost 21 years ago, like the first time I was even just together enough to
have a car and give some kid a ride, you know, and just be of service.
And that was like, God, I was experiencing the helpers high and I didn't even know it.
And now to have the ability to do that on a, on a more broad scale of having a
podcast and making these videos and talking to people like you.
And, and the, and getting feedback, although it's not, you know, a true
connection, but like a direct message or a Facebook message is like, Oh my God,
I've struggled with X, Y and Z and I've been listening to your show and now I'm
getting over it.
I mean, it's like, well, okay, my life has meaning and purpose finally.
Um, and not to say that being a plumber or working construction or working at a
gas station or whatever, wouldn't as well, because you know, there's people needed
in all of these different areas, but to do the thing that I really love to do,
it's been so fulfilling and it directly helps people on a, on a really deep level.
Uh, so God, man, that's funny.
I was just going to like touch on, like just sprinkle on a couple of things that
we went into and, uh, yeah, I have a feeling weird.
I'm going to have to be coming down a lot if you'll, if you'll have me because
there's many conversations that need to, uh, the need to happen.
But I definitely want to get into, you know, neurohacker collective, uh, what
you guys are doing, uh, qualia, just getting, now that we sort of created a
framework and a reason that someone would want to optimize themselves is other
than just like, well, now I can get more stuff for myself and be happier for
myself, but to actually, you know, be, uh, a piece of biology and consciousness
that can go out into the world and have some discernment in terms of what I
want to put my energy into or not.
So how did neurohacker collective come to be?
And what are you guys all about for those that are unfamiliar?
Yeah.
So, uh, there's a few founders and they all had the interesting different
stories that kind of, uh, came together.
I'll, I'll share mine here as, um, so I was running a think tank that was working
on the types of issues we're talking about, social issues.
How do we actually have civilization self-organized well?
And so one of the things we noticed, pretty easy to notice is that all the
problems we want to solve are problems that are caused by human action.
Whether we're looking at species extinction or climate change or female
genital mutilation or war, like this are human behavior, mod topics, right?
So how do we support humans to behave in ways that are good for themselves and
good for the whole simultaneously without directly or indirectly causing harm?
So then it's, the question is, what are all the things that influence human behavior?
Obviously we talked about economics.
If a particular action is incented, it's pretty hard to prevent it.
Right.
So how do we create an economic system where the whale is not worth more
dead than it is live?
If we don't, if we want to have any whales, that's a big topic.
Right.
How do we create, you know, social systems and tech influences our behavior, our
environment influence our behavior, our psychology, our worldview, our definition
of what is fundamentally meaningful to us.
But our biology also influences our behavior.
And everybody who has ever had a pretty significant sickness or even just
had their hormones out of balance or a hangover knows that your physiology can
go into a state that affects your psychology and your cognitive capacity
and disposition significantly, where if your neurotransmitters are off or your
hormones are off or et cetera, in a particular way, accessing gratitude or
happiness or hope, it might be very, very hard and staying out of anger, frustration,
et cetera, it might be very hard.
And that's going to affect behavioral, not only their own suffering, but also
behavioral predispositions.
Same with complex thinking.
I've actually got to be able to have a decent working memory to be able to hold
multiple perspectives at once and synthesize them.
If I don't have enough working memory to hold multiple perspectives at the same
time, I'll default into a simplistic perspective.
So, right, which is why malnourished people are so easy to brainwash, right?
That is a part of it.
And, and so the, uh, you know, the thing we started looking at there is how
does physiology affect human predisposition, not just their own experience, but
how likely they are to behave violently or, um, behave charitably, psychopathy,
empathy, you know, types of dynamics, and also the ability to understand complex
things, the emotional resilience to hang in with them in difficult times.
And as we're understanding more about mind-brain interface, there's a
bi-directional interface, both influence each other.
As we're looking at the way the brain and the physiology affect the mind, right?
The, the emotion and the cognitive dimensions.
Uh, we, it's not just a genetic, like, oh, you're, you have a genetic
predisposition for psychopathy there for your psychopath.
Typically the genetic predispositions for a psychiatric thing are, are genes
that do something like process a specific nutrient, right?
Like we'll, we'll look at psychiatric issues from genes that process the
methylation of a B vitamin or the excretion of a mineral, like copper and
zinc or something.
And so if those nutrients are necessary for a specific type of brain function,
like empathy or impulse control, and they're not being processed well, then you
might not be able to have impulse control.
And what we actually can do about it is without changing your genome, just
actually say, oh, the gene that would code for the transform of this vitamin
isn't happening, we can just give the post-transformed version of the vitamin
and that mental illness is actually better.
So this is the kind of field of integrative psychiatry and psychopharmacology.
And I started seeing how many of the dynamics that address the world have a
physiologic component to them and starting to look at, could we up-regulate
the neural networks that mediate empathy?
That mediate impulse control, that mediate emotional resilience, that mediate
complex thinking, that mediate a sense of agency so that human bio-hardware was
not only predisposed to feel better, but also predisposed to have increased
capacity and behave in ways that are fundamentally more pro-social, which just
does correspond with healthier too, right?
And it's interesting because we're evolving in a social environment,
healthy people are pro-social, right?
Think about a psychopath in a tribe doesn't make it very well, right?
They're going to get killed or taken out of the tribe or they're going to get
better, but they don't actually get to be in a deep social environment
without pro-social behavior and work.
And so Neural Hacker started, for me, with a deep exploration into understanding
how we can affect human physiology in ways that decreases suffering, increases
capacity and positive disposition.
The first product we launched, Qualia, was one of many and this next year, a
bunch of the additional ones are coming out in various ways.
Oh, cool.
Oh, I'm excited.
And I want to get into the quality thing because people, I get a lot of
inquiries about it and I'm, I'm so into it, but we'll go into that.
So a little, a little of the framework, but I definitely want to cover that
because it's exciting.
So in a world where we have so much distraction from all of the things going
off from social media and on the phone and et cetera, with so much hyper
competitive pressure to try and produce, almost everyone has a pretty strong
sense of pressure to want to be able to focus better and to be able to have
more sustained attention and get you done while having a pretty significant
challenge doing that.
And not only the, you know, focus issues like from distraction, but insufficient
nutrients that are necessary, certain kinds of toxic exposure that affects the
brain, you know, et cetera.
So, so we see this ramp in energy drinks, so more and more caffeine and then smart
drug usage and, and so with smart drugs in particular, which in
contra distinction to brain nutrients or things that you would just get from a
normal healthy diet, but we probably don't get enough because of depleted
topsoil and whatever else, right?
And those are just nutrients that in our evolutionary environment were
necessary for brain function.
Now, we also didn't try to do 12 hours of productive work that was cognitive
pertain, evolutionary environment.
So we're using nutrients differently.
So we might have increased nutrient need.
We've obviously got radically decreased topsoil density.
Interesting, right.
So going out and collecting acorns for a couple of hours that day or hunting
for rabbits or whatever is quite different from sitting down and solving
the complex problems that we are in this technological age.
So, you know, deficiencies, pretty rampant, different kinds of toxicity.
Like, you know, just the volatile organic compounds in this paint and this
carpet are, you know, there's hundreds of VOCs in the air that we're
breathing, just normal stuff, right?
Let alone industrial pollution, the atmosphere and, and glyphosate and
agriculture and whatever else.
And they're almost all either carcinogens or neurotoxins or endocrine
disruptors and like, it's a significant issue.
So we've basically as, as tool builders, we've built a world that we're not
adapted for.
And so how do we deal with that?
We were looking at the cognitive issues, one of the first ones.
There are many, we looked at, you know, issues related to anxiety and
depression and pain and addiction and sleep.
And those are all things we'll talk about.
But, you know, we saw this meteoric rise of energy drinks.
So they're doing $15 billion domestically per year of, you know,
300 milligrams of caffeine at a time.
And God knows what else, man.
Anytime I see someone drinking one of those things, I'm just like, I mean,
could you, every once in a while in a seven, 11, I'll just pick something up.
Not like I'm going to buy it, but I just read the ingredients out of just morbid
curiosity and I'm like, Oh my God, it's like so toxic, man.
So, you know, the artificial flavors, sweeteners, colors are not adding to
brain health.
Dude, and just the thing when you go buy a drink is the water.
It's fluoridated tap water in most cases.
That's really the bulk of what you're getting.
And when you buy a 12 ounce, whatever drink, you're drinking a bunch of tap water.
You've got, you know, that kind of rise.
Then you see with smart drugs, obviously we have a lot of people on
prescription, Adderall, Wilbutrin, Vivance, Mdaphanel, for psychiatric
disorders, for cognitive disorders.
And there's a pretty big question about what percentage of those actual
prescription cases are good for people.
I'm stating that conservatively.
Um, but then we have all the people on off label, right?
Use, which is not even prescribed.
They're just black market, you know, universities, midterm and final Adderall
sales everywhere, right?
And even Wilbutrin, Depranel, lots of different things.
Um, and so estimate is something like $15 billion a year, also in off label
smart drug sales, something like five billion in Adderall.
And they work, right?
Like they work for a very narrow set of metrics.
So if I want to focus, get my midterm done or my tech start up or whatever it is,
the dopaminergic dynamics from the Adderall are going to make me focus
better and have more motivation and more drive.
Now, some of the interesting things that we find is because it's just
modifying dopamine and not looking at acetylcholine and how it's involved
in memory, not looking at glutamate, not looking at all of the rest of neuro
chemistry and not even looking at all of the dopamine process.
Just typically one small part that one synthetic molecule is going to override.
You get certain effects and certain side effects and certain missing effects,
right?
So we get increased focus, but we don't get increased memory.
We actually get decreased memory of certain kinds of Adderall.
Decreased creativity and then decreased empathy.
Increased anxiety, aggressiveness, sometimes depersonalization,
derealization, decreased task switching, you know, et cetera.
And these are really important things.
So, and because even insofar as we're affecting dopamine, we're just
overriding a regulatory system, providing a whole bunch of an in-chain
chemical, not actually saying, how does this system regulate its own dopamine
and how can we support it to do that?
Then we're going to create dependence and addiction.
And so these were the things that I saw was a scaling amount of dependence
and addiction and very narrow positives with a lot of the positives that were
necessary, missing and meaningful side effects.
So the question in that space, we worked with people in an integrative medical
clinical environment to when we had their genomics, we had their blood labs,
we had brain scans to customize chemistry that helped them tremendously.
So we knew we could do that.
And the question was, can we do that at scale without personalization?
Which I didn't know because personalization is a big deal and we're
working towards methods to be able to personalize.
There are some things that I just won't do widely because they have to be
personalized.
They're so different person to person.
So like we don't have any type of folate or folic acid, because whether
someone should be on a methylated or non-methylated folate makes such a
really big difference that we just don't fuck with that axis if we can't
personalize it.
But there are a lot of axes that everyone who is self-selecting into a
particular kind of thing like something for cognitive enhancement do pretty
well across the whole board.
So, you know, high success and well tolerated.
So what we wanted to do with quality was say, can we make an alternative so that
people don't have to go to just tremendous amounts of caffeine or off
label smart drugs or just suffer without the ability to focus that will
actually help them in what they're looking for with enough subjective
effect that they actually feel it.
And that will actually have a much wider host of positive effects that we're
getting focus and concentration and drive, but also emotional resilience and
task switching and creativity and analysis and synthesis.
And, you know, so we started by doing a kind of cognitive map of what are all
of the states and all of the capacities that people are looking for when
they're really wanting to do productive work and then saying, what are the
underlying physiologic pathways that mediate those that we know about from
the various neuroscientific and bioscience fields?
And then can we understand how those systems work?
So how does the body regulate dopamine?
So, you know, as you start to look at it, you say, all right, so protein
comes in dietarily, gets broken down to amino acids, phenylalanine converts into
tyrosine converts to anesthetal tyrosine converts to L-dopa, crosses the blood
brain barrier, converts to dopamine and a presynaptic neuron, transport a protein
down an axon, crosses a synapse, has to get by synaptic enzymes that will break
it down in different ways, hydroxylase and MAOB and COMT and etc.
And then goes into one of a few dopamine receptors, there's intercellular
dynamics that are involved.
So you just start to look at that and say, how does the body do this thing on
its own?
And are there deficiencies in any of those key nutrients or transform
factors or things that are oftentimes under fully supported that we can
support?
And that would be just looking at dopamine, right?
Then you do that with acetylcholine, then you look at glutamate, then you look
at functions like neurogenesis, bodies continuously developing new neurons, are
there things that actually support increased neurogenesis or neuroatophagy,
killing old neurons better so you don't have synapsic neurons?
So we looked at what are the hosts of things people are looking for that are
healthy states and capacities?
What is the underlying physiology involved?
How does that physiology naturally regulate and what might we be able to
do to support the natural regulatory systems so that people both have a more
complete positive state and that rather than create dependence, right?
They're on it for a while.
We overrode their regulatory system and now there's addiction, that it actually
is supporting the robustness of the regulatory system so that when they get
off it, there is elevation from baseline that lasts, right?
The exact opposite of side effect and the exact opposite of dependence.
So that was our goal.
And so we did hundreds of iterations, bunch of testing, you know, after doing
full literature review, database of 500 notropic chemicals and looking at the
pathways of them and then looking at positive synergies, negative synergies,
delivery mechanisms.
And we ended up getting to this formula, you know, that's there right now,
which over a large enough number of people, over a large enough amount of time,
tested well enough that we were actually really happy with it.
And so that's that first product.
And the goal there was to be able to support people having increased
productive capacity, right?
Increased cognitive clarity and the associated emotional states like
resilience and drive that was actually not bad for people and good for people.
Now, I can't claim that we know that because we haven't done long enough
term trials with enough metrics, with enough controls to claim all of it.
But, you know, we've done preclinical trials with pre and post brain scans and
biometrics and seen, you know, really meaningful statistical correlation and
change.
And we've had, I don't know, 40,000 people over three years where we're
collecting data from what their experience is.
Really?
And so we, we're very happy about that.
And that's the first product.
And, you know, what, what it kind of is, is a complex approach because
our brain is a complex system, our body is a complex system.
So rather than here's one molecule to override it, it's how does it self
regulate and can we support itself regulation across many related axes?
Now, if we were going to approach anxiety, we would do it the same way.
If we were going to approach pain rather than, you know, just some NSAID or
opiate, we would do it the same way.
How does the body naturally produce its own opiates?
How does it naturally deal with inflammation?
How does it, and can we support those dynamics?
If we were going to work with sleep, we do it the same way.
So those are the things that are coming up next.
I can't wait to see what you guys are coming up with next.
So there's a couple of things in there that I really like is that you guys
really were very thoughtful about the synergy between the different compounds.
I think there's a lot of cowboys and Indians right now in the new tropic
space, as I'm sure you're aware, where you see the same kind of
formulations on 10 different products.
And it's like one guy just looked at what the next guy is doing on the label.
Oh yeah, I hear that's good for short-term memory, focus, cognition, whatever,
blah, blah, and they just kind of throw those stacks out there without
necessarily forethought as to how those interact with one another, right?
So you have one molecule and it does one thing.
And let's just even say that that effect of that molecule is universal and
you're choosing ones that are kind of universally affecting people in the same way.
But then you combine that with other molecules and other ones and other ones.
And now you have something totally different.
You have a third party compound now, right?
And so that can go well or not based on self-experimentation.
There's been times where I've taken too many different things at the same time
and too much of them and I'm having the opposite effect where I can't focus
and I'm actually, I feel like I'm freaking nuts because I took too many smart drugs or whatever.
But I think what's cool about qualia is that you really looked at how things
relate to one another, that you're not putting anything in there that's going to
cause your body to down-regulate its own production, to the point where there's
a dependency and oh my God, now I can't make this neurotransmitter or whatever
because it's been done for me for so long.
And then also that the whole basis of it is coming from what I like about the
company itself is that it's coming from this intention that we're trying to
create people with biology that runs better so they'll be better people.
I mean to me that makes total sense.
I had the flu a couple months ago and I was in Colorado and I had to speak at two events
and they were pretty substantial for me and I was so sick dude and I could not
make myself be in a good mood.
Like I literally just couldn't be happy, you know?
I was just depressed and even though my mind was right and I wasn't fighting it,
I wasn't like caught in some sort of negative spiral.
I wasn't actually negative at all.
I just wasn't in a good mood.
I didn't feel happy like I do right now because I wasn't firing on all cylinders,
you know, so I really think that you do have to approach your own development
from all sides.
In other words, I can't be eating, you know, glyphosate and aspartame and all
this evil things that they put in food and just think I can meditate my way
into a higher consciousness while I'm destroying my biology and in the same
way I can't become obsessed with herbs and superfoods and utropics and then be
running around flipping people off in traffic caught in my trauma issues.
You know, it's like you have to kind of approach it from all angles.
So I like that you're not like, hey, you guys, let's make a cool vitamin that
makes people better at computer work.
It's like, no, we're have a larger scope of vision, which is really cool.
Now, back to the qualia, it's been interesting to observe the friends that
I've turned on to it and, you know, listeners of the show and stuff like
that is that I've, I've yet to have anyone say that they had a negative
experience as a result where with a lot of other new tropics, people say that
it's too stimulating or it made them tired, made them like this, made them like
that.
So I've had no one report back like, oh my God, I felt horrible and only a
couple people that were like, man, I didn't really notice anything.
So the majority of people that I've interacted with that have tried or like,
oh my God, this is the best thing ever.
Like, where has this been my whole life?
Like an overwhelmingly positive experience.
And that's what it's been like for me too, which is one of the reasons I
wanted to track you down.
And I found out there was so much more to your story than just being like, you
know, a guy that knows about new tropics.
Um, but for me, what's been interesting, speaking of, especially the, the down
regulation piece is that when I started, I took the full dose.
Uh, I think it was three of number one and six of number two, and I did that a
lot and it kind of just brought me up to a nice base level.
And then at a certain point that became a little too stimulating.
And now I'm like, I take one, number one, two, number two.
And I'm like, I feel great.
There's no need to even push it beyond that.
So it actually has the opposite effect of building up a tolerance say, right?
That was intended.
Yeah.
So good job on that.
Cause with most other things, you take it and you take it and you build up a
tolerance, you need more and more.
And then your body forgets how to make it.
And you end up in this imbalance.
But I think that there's just something really cool about what you've done.
I'm going to come back to the problems of capitalism for a minute.
Yeah.
Every MBA student learns one of the first principles of
business is maximize lifetime revenue of a customer.
So you guys are blowing it.
Cause now I'm like, I need to, I was on auto ship of quality because I was
pounding so much of it.
And now I'm like, actually I'm getting too many shipments.
I had to stop that and just order when I run out cause I'm going to run out.
It's so you guys, your business model is going against that theory.
So you think about it from a, say I'm a pharma company and there are MBAs that
are looking at the financial instruments and making decisions, right?
Um, I mean at the financial metrics and spreadsheets and, and saying, okay,
maximize lifetime revenue of a customer, the things that treat symptoms
forever. So we say depression is not curable.
You have a biochemical imbalance, which is like some magic term,
biochemical balance with the fuck cause of it, right?
Genetic, which is just a magic term for, we don't know, or we haven't
bothered to look at it in depth.
And so we have to symptomatically treat that forever.
Heart disease, always symptomatically treat that forever.
Cluster, we're going to treat the fucking all of them, right?
So that's very good from a lifetime revenue point of view.
And if it creates side effects that need other drugs to resolve them,
that's called a cross seller and upsell, right?
And then if to maximize lifetime value, I want to start them as
young as possible. So we make up new diseases like ADD after we put
kids in those shitty, um, desks and do they still make those desks?
Like they had in the seventies, little wooden prisons.
So we get them started as early as possible on an
nitrogenic cycle, right?
So pretty much everything that happens in medicine, we wanted to do the
opposite. If it causes addiction, we want to create long-term benefit.
If it causes side effects, we want the side effects to be
comprehensively positive. If the people have to stay on it, we want them
to be able to get off of it, right? Like that's the goal.
And so really theory of market should not apply to medicine because
people really can't choose to not participate with something that
will make them better if they're sick.
And since they really can't choose not to do that, theory of
markets is a fucked up thing just like there shouldn't be
for profit prisons, right? And so this was hard for us because
and it's why we started with supplement as opposed to bigger
things we could have done is because I didn't want to take
capital from any financial service places that would then bind us to
doing things that were unethical. So like our, our cost of goods to
make qualia is more expensive than most metropic retail.
And it's because if you want to use the right form, right, you use
the phosphorylated version of this and the methylated version of
this and etc. And with the right concentration of the dose, you
notice you take nine fucking capsules with and that's not
filler. It's because it just takes that much of those things is
just expensive. Now, and also the fact that you guys aren't using
excipients and binders and all that weird stuff, which I always
noticed right away. I'm like, I go to the end of the label and
it's something like that. Yeah, there it is, which means that
you can't work with almost any manufacturers because that's what
they need to make it work in their machines, the magnesium
stirrate and all this stuff, right? So all, all of that, like
doing the integrity thing is just a hard thing to make work
fiscally. But like you have found with your podcast, if you do,
there will be people that are attracted to that thing and it
can grow. So that's what we're trying to do.
We'll be right back after this important announcement. Hey,
check this out. I recently launched something on my site
called the master market. It's a super cool store where I've got
different categories, whether it be spirituality, mind focus,
outdoors, food, superfood, supplements, bedroom, sleep,
office, jet lag, biohacking, there's even a bookstore from
some of my favorite books and books recommended by my guest.
And what this is is like a hub where you can go find all of the
links to everything I've either used and vetted or I'm
currently using in my life to build the ultimate lifestyle. So
it's called the master market, Luke's Lifestyle List, and you
can find it at LukeStory.com forward slash store. Just go to
my site and you'll see it in the navigation. Now, what's really
cool about this is when you make a purchase through my store, I'm
not actually selling you anything. I'm just curating a
really dope place where you can go find the best stuff. So I get
a piece of commission if you make a sale through the site. The
vendor, of course, makes some cash because you buy and you get a
place where you can go and save time and money from not having
to look around for the best stuff and do all the research
yourself. But what's even cooler is most of those items come with
a custom discount code if you go through my site, which is
pretty cool. So it's a win win win triple trifecta win. Great
way to support my work and the podcast and the show as well as
the brands and your own health and well being. Check it out
LukeStory.com forward slash store. And now back to the
interview. So in terms of the other things that people
typically use, I want to just run run a couple of these by you
because I take my qualia, I guess about five days a week. And
as I said, it's been strange that my dosage has gone down. It
must be fixing me. That's the way I look at it. Like it's, it's
connecting synapses or something that were off and now
they're they're getting more in alignment. So I look at it. But
there's other things too that depending on where I'm going,
what I'm doing, I find to be useful. So today, for example,
I knew that I was going to have a very social day. I'm going to
be talking to you. I'm being interviewed on the way back home
after this. So I did a number of different things, one of them
being Fennibet, for example, which I'll maybe do once a week
or something like that. And I just find it's just a really
great social lubricant. And, and also took some paracetam, because
I find that it really helps me with speech. Some of these other
things I'll do. But I could give Joe here, paracetam, and it'll
give him anxiety. Yeah, or he won't notice anything. I give
someone else I gave a girlfriend once Fennibet and she
probably took a little bit too much, but she got deathly ill,
you know, and on what I would take for this is like a
sprinkle to me to her, she was a bit smaller and just had this
huge adverse reaction. Same thing. Medaphino is another one
that I really like. And for me, I take an eighth, a dose of
Medaphino for me is an eighth of one tablet. So it's like a 200
milligram tablet. Once I took a half, I was like, Oh my God, I
feel like I'm on crystal meth, not fun. A quarter if I'm really,
really tired, set me straight. But if I just want to have a
productive day and be relatively alert, just a tiny,
tiny little piece, which is about an eighth of a tablet does
me. I've given it to friends. I say, man, be careful. This is a
this is a drug. This is not an herb like go easy. They take a
half like I didn't feel anything. They take another half
they're like, man, I didn't notice anything. Like, oh my God,
if I took a whole Medaphino, I would be like, you know, scrubbing
the freaking bathroom floor with the toothbrush. I mean, I would
be tweaking so hard. So what's up with some of those where you
mentioned Depranil I was on like low dose Depranil for a while.
I've tried a lot of different things outside of the safe and
more plant based stuff that you guys work with in qualia. What
are some of the other ones are even micro dosing on psilocybin
like that whole other world of smart drugs and new tropics? What
do you got to say about any of that?
Sure. Let's make some categories here. So we've got
smart drugs as a category, which are pharmaceuticals that are
usually being used for an off label purpose. They're often
times psych meds like will be a trend, or Adderall, or they are
narcolepsy meds like Medaphino, or they are sometimes anti
Parkinson's meds.
Depranil. Yeah, right. I remember when I was taking that
stuff. So I was like, what is that? There's no big deals for
Parkinson's. I'm just micro dosing it.
Now, all of those are dopamine urgics, right? So for different
purposes, they don't mean urgics. You'll have some like for all
simers, don't epazelle that work with this.
Does urgics mean they raised dopamine? Okay. No wonder I like
all of those.
Yes. So you've got, you know, various types of smart drugs is
one category. Most of the time, those are going to have a pretty
strong effect, and a pretty decent chance of side effect if
used improperly. There's really nothing that is going to be all
that dangerous if used properly. But properly is the big thing,
right? Like whether we're talking, I mean, you can use
heroin, not dangerously, if you if you use it properly, but
that's like, not how people use use heroin. And specifically,
Adderall is amphetamine, right? It's a D amphetamine, you add a
methyl group to it, and you have methamphetamine.
Methamphetamine used to be a pharmaceutical. And so, like the
distinction between pharmaceuticals and illegal
drugs is where the legal categorization of the minute
happens to be based on lobbying, not based on much else. So
you've got smart drugs as a category. And in general, people
should explore there if they are well educated, if like if they
really educate themselves well about the topic, and they and
they're really paying attention in a quantified self kind of way
to the results, and they should not be looking at doing that
super regularly. Now, there are exceptions. So Depranil, for
instance, works through MAOB inhibition. So MAOB is a enzyme
in the synapse that breaks down certain neurotransmitters, like
dopamine, like other catecholamines, like phenylethylamine. So
if you inhibit the MAOB, those neurotransmitters will get
across the synapse more into the postsynaptic neuron. This can
be very dangerous, because if you take that with anything that
is also increasing monoamines, going those types of neurotransmitters
going into the synapse specifically lens, it should be
broken down by MAOB, they can get to too high a level. So one
wants to be careful with that. And what would be some things
that you with Depranil, for example, that you wouldn't want
to combine with that at all? Interesting. And that doesn't
mean nobody does it and has a good experience. What about
Medaffinil? Now, they're different. Medaffinil, we don't
know all the mechanisms of Medaffinil that well, it is the
least symptomatic dopamine orgic for the most part for most
people. It seems like it works through transporter proteins,
largely, which is going to be a little bit less tricky than many
of the other mechanisms. But if if you are flooding the synapse
with dopamine and not breaking it down, you can get to dangerously
high levels, right? And not everyone has too high MAOB
genetically, some people's MAOB is too low. They actually feel
anxious, because they have too many of those excitatory
neurotransmitters. And Devranil would make them feel terrible.
But there are a lot of people who are genetically overproducers
of MAOB, and they will have certain kinds of depression
tendencies, because their transmitters are just not getting
across the synapse that well. And if they take something that's
just increasing their level of dopamine, they might feel better,
but it's actually not doing the right part of the mechanism,
right? And the right part of the pathway that's going on for
them, if they actually break down the excessive levels of MAOB
that they're genetically producing. And there's other things
that can cause MAOB to go up other than just genetics, it's
inducible. And so as people age, MAOB goes up, dopamine goes
down, it's a part of agent, which is why Devranil is one of
the few drugs that is actually correlated to be a life extension
agent. And there are people who in their young wouldn't do well
with it when they're older, they would, because their MAOB
levels went from a healthy place where it would imbalance
them to being excessive and now balances them. So Devranil can
actually be therapeutic for some people. For other people,
it'll be an enhancement that they shouldn't do regularly. So to
the degree you're getting into stronger tools, you should have
more education, just like in any field, right? Like, playing
with the skills off, rather than the handsaw, you kind of need
to learn a little bit more because there's more consequence,
but you can also do cooler stuff with it. So for us, empowered
responsibility and self education is a really key thing
because we want people to be empowered in their own health
and not just feel like a victim and waiting for someone to tell
them what to do who has no way of knowing what their own
experiences are spending enough time, even if it's a well
educated doctor where their fiscal structure only allows them
to spend five minutes of time, like they just can't apply what
they know that well. Right. So smart drugs is one category.
Research chemicals is another category where you have a bunch
of chemicals that are not actually categorized as a drug.
They're also not categorized as a nutraceutical. They are for
research purposes only and they live in that kind of
regulatory bar. And that's most of the no tropics like the
rassetams and whatnot. The rassetams are in that category and
the ampikines. Those are the kind of two primary categories
that people get into. But then also the NSI 189, the P 21,
the cerebral lysine, the lots of the phenobot, right? They live
in that research chemical category. And some of those are
basically smart drugs that just didn't go through approval,
but and then some of them are more what we call a formal
tropic, which is something that can increase some aspect of
cognitive performance without meaningful side effect. Most
smart drugs will have some side effect unless it happens to be
one that's therapeutic for you. And then we've also got brain
nutrients, which are just the amino acids, fatty acids,
vitamins, minerals that the brain needs to function well that
are often deficient. And then you've got botanicals and you
know, plants that modulate different things and different
ones. Botanicals can be very powerful, right? You can, you
can get Ldopa from Makuna, which is a Parkinson's med in
different dose, right? It's not the same kind of dose, but you
can get very potent botanicals. So all those categories of things
to play with. And of course, as people really get into bio
hacking and neuro hacking and become well educated, you've
got different delivery mechanisms, people do them
subcutaneous or IM or IV or snort stuff, intranasal or, you
know, whatever, right? So there's a big interesting field and
some of them can also be not just cognitive enhancing for
normal well being, but very therapeutic if someone is dealing
with a post TBI situation, something that is neurogenic
that enhances development of new neurons after they had some
micro brain damage can be very helpful. There's a whole lot to
learn. So one of the things we're working on is really
competent education and, you know, community space so that
people can learn as well. Right now, it's forums on Reddit. And
you know, places like that where people can learn really up to
sort if the input is good or not.
Yeah, it's, it's, it's funny. Now too, with the algorithms
online, search results are very skewed. Oftentimes, like I was
looking for something a couple days ago, there was something
political and it was a little bit conspiratorial. I think I was
researching the number of times CNN has been busted for lying and
producing fake news. And I googled like, how much, how many
times the CNN been caught doing fake news in 2017, something
like that. And I phrased it a few different ways and nothing
came up. You know, you can't find an article if you use Google
to find that, for example, and it's the same way. When you
start looking for some of this stuff, you'll read something on
a forum, and you're like, okay, this guy says this about
midaphenyl or phenyl or whatever. And then literally, you
get to the next 10 sites, and it's the same exact copy, you
know, that some other schmo has like copy and pasted into his
blog or some other forum, or like, wait, they're all getting
the same, you know, five talking points from the same place. So
even if you are a good researcher, sometimes it's hard to
come up with original valid data, just because it doesn't exist,
you know, like you said, with some of these things that are in
that gray zone in terms of their categorization, it's, it
sometimes is difficult to even educate yourself because you
don't know what's
So let me give you a classic example, we had a scenario where
people had questions about central phenoxine safe. And
because even on some very good, no tropic sites, it says
central phenoxine might cause birth damage, birth defects. And
because central phenoxine converts to DMAE, which is a
Colleen or Jack Colleen donor. And there were some studies that
showed DMAE causing birth defects in rats. Now, people do
their research, say, well, you should avoid that, you know, in
that scenario. Now to actually get into it. If we get out of, if
we really look at the rat studies, and we say what kind of
dosage to what administration is it relevant to normal dosage?
No, the, it's nothing in a normal oral dosage range was there
at all. It was it was even close DMAE actually became
approved as a drug, without that being a concern in many
different countries. And then central phenoxine never had any
birth defect studies. And so yet that's all over the web,
central, don't do it because we're right now, we pulled every
single study ever done on central phenoxine, we could find
186 studies, most of which weren't online, we had to go to
medical libraries, find them in other countries and other
languages, right? Because they they were started the research
started in the 50s. So they just were never put online,
translate them all. And then we had a few PhDs in neuro
chemistry, neuro anatomy, etc, do a structured literature review
meta analysis of all that for us to come up to it with our
opinion on central. Damn, is not a trivial thing to do. But it
matters if you really want to know what's going on. So I like
the Wild West of the space because people are starting to
take more responsibility rather than just wait for the doctor
tell them what to do and then get mad at the doctor when it
doesn't work. Yeah, when the doctor couldn't possibly spend
enough time with them or keep up to date with all the research
happening. But I really do long for higher quality control. And
it's one of the things we're working on. And we can only work
on it as fast as we can afford without moving into fiscal
models that suck, which is the tricky part. But like neuro
tech, you know, we were talking about different devices that we
have around the house and PMF and etc. It's pretty easy to say
this seems compelling. Let's share it. Well, what we're working
to do right now is with all the types of neuro tech, whether
we're talking about low level laser therapy and transcranial
intranasal lasers, or we're talking about PMF or TMS or
you know, whatever, right? For us, it's a process of doing the
full literature review on everything that's known about
this, where what things does it affect what things does it not
affect safe, etc. And then doing full research on the actual
products and say does this product have the specifications
that the literature shows are useful, and then curate those
things. So we're building a platform to do that. It's just a
non trivial process. And the same with just curating knowledge
on no tropics is in the forum, you've got like some real gyms
and then a bunch of shit. And it's not necessarily obvious
which ones are the gyms and the shit. Same like if you look in
the bodybuilder world, and you go to the steroid forums, some of
the smartest endocrinologists anywhere are in there. And then
there's just so much dumb bro science in there. And it's like,
but if you don't know the field well, they're all sand shit,
you don't know. Right. So this is something that we're really
working to do is to have a moderation process where
everything that goes there is better.
That's cool, man. That's cool. That's that's a really valuable
resource. Because I that's the exciting, you know, another
positive thing about right now is that I think more people are
waking up to the fact that they don't actually have to rely on
the allopathic medical system. Like I have episodes and I call
them things like learning to become your own doctor. It's
like, you really can do a lot on your own. And then if you're if
you are tied into someone good in functional medicine, and
they're able to kind of, you know, be a step above you in
terms of their body and knowledge. But I like with my
relationship to medicine is I do a lot of my own research and
footwork and order my own labs and geek out and like which labs
are the best and most updated because even my functional
medicine doctor, they're still in the labs that were the best GI
test last year. I'm like, no, man, in the biohacking community,
there's new labs with, you know, new parameters and things like
that. And I really feel the sense of power and autonomy
because I'm, you know, I know my limitations in terms of my
body of knowledge and what I'm even capable of kind of
understanding or care to take the time to learn when it comes to
my biology. But I know what I know. And then I go to the
experts that are higher up the food chain in their area of
special specialization, right? So it's really cool that that
you guys are thinking that far ahead and enabling people to
help themselves.
One of the parts I'm most excited about is a integrative
medical functional medical program. So we've got a number of
doctors who are kind of the best integrative psychiatrists that
I'm aware of. And
psychiatrists or just functional medicine that does
psychoneuro pharmacology. And so, you know, we're not allowed
to provide medical information, prescribe, diagnose, treat
anything like that, right? So if people, and if someone is on
has like conditions or on psych meds, we say don't use our
stuff because this is real interactions that need to be
factored. But we don't want to just say go to your doctor if
your doctor doesn't know anything, we want to provide
better resources. So go to your doctor and here are doctors that
actually know the field really well, they can run a QG on you,
they can run neuro hormones, they can run your Walsh
metabolic labs, they can run your gut brain access, they can
look at your genomics, etc, and actually do the best of what
functional brain chemistry optimization currently looks like.
And so that's something that we'll be rolling out in this next
year. And that we've been already working with a number of
clinics on that.
That's amazing. That's amazing. Yeah, because you do need that
that middleman, you know, unless you're just a freaking
genius and you have the time and energy to devote to yourself.
But I think each one of us can only take it to a certain level.
And we need, you know, we need that help. But it's like, how do
you find a good one? I always get the question of, who's the
best functional medicine doctor? And I'm just, I just made it
easy on myself after working with a number of them
individually. And I just joined parsley health, which is like a
you know, sort of, I think of it as the Uber of functional
medicine, just a modern interface and a membership model
rather than paying per visit. And I find it to be really
effective because they can deal with my insurance and the
billing and they know how to code the labs and stuff. But it's
still very much self directed, like I could just follow their
program, probably be healthy, but I'm always digging deeper.
So I'll do, you know, three different tests for metals where
they might just order me the pre and post challenged urine test
and like, cool, that gives me a certain metric. But there's
hair analysis, there's blood, there's other ways you can dive
into that. But it's helpful to have someone you trust that'll
go along with what you're doing. Because back in the Western
medicine model, I go into the general practitioner and be
like, Hey, I have x, y and z wrong, they send me out to a
number of specialists that are their cronies. And it's like,
you get stuck in that whole thing. And I'm going in there
telling them about some new supplement or technology. And
the doctors like, What? I don't even know about that. You
know, like I was having some problems with like vertigo and
dizziness. And I, you know, went up the ladder and LA medical
system, which I think is probably a pretty good place to live if
you want some, you know, high level medical care. And I got
sent to the, you know, the world's best EMT that people
travel from all over the world. I go sit down with this guy
said, Yeah, man, I don't know, man, I have, you know, have a
little hearing loss over here. It's about 20%. I'm well aware
of that. But I have this thing where I'm getting dizzy all
the time. And I always feel carsick. And he ran some tests
for me, I came in again, he goes, Yeah, I think you probably
should just not drink coffee. I think it's the the caffeine
can do that. Like really, this is what you guys, this is the
best you guys can do is that the caffeine is making me, you
know, it was just like, Oh, my God, I could have done a much
better job of being my own doctor. And of course, I, you
know, finding finding the root of that. But it's a cool time to
be alive, or those of us that are waking up and have access to
information like you guys are providing, can really take
responsibility, and not become this dependent infant on the
teeth of Western medicine and all the inherent expenses and
things that come along with that.
And it's really important to keep the Pareto principle in
mind, which is, it does get complex quickly. And to be able
to synthesize the complexity is a really deep topic. And the
foundations are still 80% of it. And the foundations are not
that hard, right? I mean, they might be hard to do from a
disciplined point of view in a life that is conditioned
otherwise. But if someone is not sleeping enough, sleeping well
and sleeping enough, everything else they'll do is just tiny
diminishing returns and comparison sleeping enough, right?
Right. And if someone is not exercising, and if they're not
generally eating well, and if they're not doing some kinds of
stress management, and mental processes, then biohacking is
actually a way to support living shittily, right, trying to
like symptom manage the fact that their life actually sucks.
Right. And that's just not the way to go. Right. And so if
someone really just does the foundational stuff, it's amazing
how much of it that addresses. And even like, say we look at
heavy metals. So I can do a pre and post provocation test, and
I can test with DMPS or DMS or EDTA, and I'm going to get
different specific bindings. And I can look at hair labs,
which will give me a different time scale of what's being
excreted. And I can look at, you know, metal antibody stands
and then what I'm going to find is, okay, there are specific
chelation or binders that I'm going to use differentially if
it's lead versus mercury, right, or gadolinium or whatever it
is. That's a lot to figure out. It's a lot of expense. And if I
just put the person in a sauna every day, and I gave him
a little charella in the morning, that would be 80% as good.
Right. Yeah. And so it's just kind of important. Like, one of
the things we want people to know is that there are
foundational things that if they don't have the time money
proclivity will really help them be radically healthier. And
then optimization on top of that is nice.
Right. Yeah, that's that's well stated. Sometimes I'll find
myself taking a 50 pills in the morning, trying to turn my
brain on. And then I realized, maybe if I hadn't gone to bed at
2am and woken up at 730, you know, so that's, that's very
true. Some of those things are just basic lifestyle choices.
If you eat, if you think about it, if you're going to eat food
in that's measured in pounds, and that's all nutrient, right,
that's all toxin are nutrient. And then you're going to take
supplements that are measured in grams. The supplement, the word
supplement means to supplement that what you're getting from
diet, right, like getting the pounds right is a big fucking
deal. Right. And similarly with sleep, like, when you
exercise, all that torn muscle that it needs to repair is going
to be repairing during sleep, during Delta sleep in particular,
all those nutrients that need to go into new tissues are going
to do that during sleep. And so if you're not sleeping enough,
like all those such as kind of doesn't matter that much. And
so this is one of the places where I want to empower people in
the face of the complexity to know that there is a simplicity
that is most of it, which is if you live a life that is
relatively closer to an evolutionary environment,
evolutionary life, you'll just do a lot better. And then all
other stuff, if you're sick, you definitely want to go find good
functional practitioners. And if you really want to optimize,
you want to go.
Yeah, also, I love it, man. I've got about the interest of time
we're right around the two hour mark, which is I try to cap any
conversation off, no matter how much more there is to do. But I
have my notes for part two. I'd love to sit down and have another
talk with you. I mean, every time every like, every time you
have an answer to a question, 20 more questions populate, I'm
just like stifling more that have come about. So we're
definitely gonna have to talk again. But I really appreciate
your perspective.
I would love to talk again. This is fun. And
yeah, it's just fascinating. Dude, you're just you're so
full of information. I mean, you really are just the fascinating
guy was all pumping people up on Instagram on the way down.
Like, this guy's really smart, you guys. And you know, you know,
I'm not striking your ego. It's just you are.
It's the thing that you and I were talking about is that
people are actually fascinated by life without being broken,
right? Right. And they can restore that if they were
broken. And if you just spend your life following things you're
fascinated about, you will tend to learn things.
Right. I want to know what's up next with neuro hacker
collective. You mentioned the functional medicine kind of
interface thing. Can you reveal yet what your next supplement
or product is going to be?
We've got about 10 products that have already tested well in
the prototype phase of different types that will be going
through, you know, final refinement and trials and like
that. Before being released, we're actually hiring right now
for additional formulators and VP of product and etc. and
researchers to come help because as we're scaling, it needs
more work to be able to do it as at the speed we want to. So we
will not produce any product that is to treat any medical
condition. Can not do that, right? That's a medical thing.
But things that support sleep, things that support healthy
sensory process, meaning if there are sources of chronic
pain, the chronic pain is not bothering people, things that
help support natural calmness, which is not saying anti anxiety
thing, but is. Yeah, I think our audience is able to read
between the lines. All of those. I find that I dance around
terminology so much on this show in the interest of protecting
my guests that happen to produce a different product or
service. So those are things that will be coming soon. We have a
new version of qualia also that is just a single step less
total pills. Oh, wow. And right now is testing as effectively.
So we spent a year refining it coming out early this next year.
Exciting. A handful of new products in the nutraceutical
mind brain health space, then curating neurotech across those
platforms. I mean, all types of neurotech with a proper
scientific vetting curation platform. And then the doctor
program are the things that I'm really most excited about.
So when you say neurotech, are you talking about lasers and
light devices and magnetism and all this kind of stuff? Oh,
cool. That's interesting. Those of you listening that aren't
seeing the videos I walked into Daniel's home here. It's a
beautiful home. It's a gigantic house. It's a lot of big
rooms. It's lovely. But in every every where I look, I see
some biohacking tool or something. There's big amethyst
crystals everywhere. There's a semina bed right in front of me
and a bulletproof sleep induction mat and earth pulse,
essential oils in the air. I mean, it's like it's just so in
alignment with my lifestyle. What are some of the neuro
enhancing or just life enhancing technologies that you're digging
right now personally?
Some of the ones that I appreciate a lot that are like
consumer neurotech, they're not still in R&D. I'm a big fan like
everybody else's of red light. And so companies like Juve and
Violite and other ones that are working on intranasal transcranial
whole body near infrared and visible infrared. And we wouldn't
need that if we just spend enough time in the sun. Right. But
if you don't spend enough time in the sun, it is removed from
normal indoor lighting because it's the part that makes it
expensive. Yeah, it uses up more energy to make warm light,
right? So rather than do the whole house, you just do your
body with your clothes off and we photosynthesize molecules like
plants do not as many as plants. Plants are all surface area
photosynthesis. We're not that much surface area, but we it's
a meaningful part. So we know that the bluer and UV into the
spectrum helps us with vitamin D. And the way that it does
vitamin D synthesis is different than only supplementing
vitamin D. So there's meaningfulness there. But
nitric oxide is also photosynthesized from exposure to
light. And ATP specifically is upregulated mitochondrial
output of ATP is upregulated from the red end of the spectrum.
And so up regulating ATP output is kind of just good for
everything, right? This just means increased cellular energy
to do whatever the cells are doing. So that's what I like. And
I do like transcranial and infranasal applications,
especially where there is TBI or tinnitus or things there, where
you don't quite know how to address it specifically. But
interesting, because I do the V light, the 810 nanometers near
infrared, it's invisible, right? I use that one. I used to have
the one that was six something, it was very red, it lit up the
whole front of her face, which I just like that for effect. I
don't know which one does what. And then I do the juve. And I
love both of those as well, like seriously. But here's the
thing, I also get a lot of sun, my vitamin D levels are off the
chart, I still supplement with it. Here's one thing that I want
to get your opinion. And I always say, okay, it's the end of
the interview, and then it goes on for another hour. But in all
seriousness, with the spectrum of light, because I do sun
gazing, I've been doing that for years grounding, all I'm
sun gazing when the sun rises or goes down, I get full naked sun
as much as possible. So I'm getting a lot of the natural
spectrums, I limit blue light at night, like pretty hardcore in
the home when it gets dark outside, it also gets amber and
red inside, like I'm dialing that in my sleep's great circadian
rhythm. But when it comes to the spectrums of sunlight, you
know, different people might have different opinions on this,
but based on being a 47 year old guy and knowing what the sky
looks like normally with planes in it or planes not in it,
there is unequivocally some geoengineering going on on the
planet. And I think anyone that doesn't acknowledge that to some
degree, like a serious psychological issues, having
you know, looked up in the sky and not seen weird clouds and the
formations and stuff we have now, there's definitely something
going on, which is of course, a different conversation. But with
the weather manipulation, what's been going on in the sky
often wonder because it does have apparently something to do
with reflecting the sun's, you know, radiation back out into
space to cool the planet, wherever the fuck's going on. But
the temperature of the light and the spectrum of light is being
altered in an unnatural way from whatever's being done in our
skies. Do you think that that's having, you know, an effect on
our biology, just aside from whatever toxins might we might
be breathing in with just the actual nature of light itself?
Of course, very short answer to a long question. So geoengineering
is an approach to us recognizing that we're very close to
positive feedback loops on certain climate change dynamics and
people freak out. And freak out says, Well, we need to actually
get the temperature down because even before the acid is
killing the coral for motion acidification from CO2 diffusing
into the water is carbonic acid, even before the trophic
cascades are killing the coral from the large fish dying off
from overfishing. The temperature is the main thing
driving them into bleaching and hypometabolism. They can't stay
in that place very long. Most of the photosynthesis of the
world happens in the oceans and a lot of it depends on the coral
and the positive feedback loop on the albedo cycle at the
caps like so it's like, Whoa, we need to get temperature down.
So the idea of let's just reflect 20% sunlight by putting
particles in the atmosphere that will reflect 20% sunlight is
the same exact approach as our cholesterol is high use of
statin. Right? It is a it's addressing the symptom in a way
that will then have effects that are negative for other parts
of it. Because we're scared of the symptom without understanding
what caused it and addressing it at a cause level. So of course,
what we should be focused on is how do we just increase
photosynthesis for sequestration and decrease emissions and what
has to happen to be able to do that at what scale and time. But
yeah, it's very interesting. Allopathic medicine is looking
at individual metrics that we've correlated to something and
how do we exogenously override that individual metric without
looking at what brought it about to be that way. So complex
multifactorial dynamics we suck at, which is why we don't have
a single cure for any chronic illness. We can cut cancers out
radiative amount poison amount, we can't make them stop
growing and understand why they grow in terms of current
medicine, same with psychiatric illnesses, same with neuro
degenerative, same with autoimmune, because they don't
have a single cause. We're actually awesome at acute cause
issues, right? Right, right. If it's an acute injury or an
acute infection, or an acute toxicity, that's really
straightforward and we know how to treat that thing. But if it
is anything other than an acute single cause, then we kind of
suck at it right now because it requires a different approach to
science, this complexity approach, which also requires a
different fiscal model and a different IP structure and a
whole bunch of things. We approach the world the same way. Our
approach to climate change, to starvation, to whatever is to
tweak something to affect that thing here without addressing
the underlying dynamics. It made it that almost always moves
around.
So geoengineering is like allopathic medicine.
It is a statin to the environment.
Yeah, that's, that's funny, man. And definitely, it's
affecting the light going back to like your, you know, your top
devices, a lot of the stuff that's coming out now, they think
it's really effective is ways to sort of use technology to
mimic nature in a sense. And that's how I think about an
infrared sauna or cryotherapy, I mean, any of the things that I
do as quote unquote, bio hacks are grounding, you know, using
earthing technology, PMF, all this stuff. It's all really just
trying to create that homeostatic experience of being a
sentient being on planet earth in its natural state, but we're
not in a natural state, including the light spectrum
that's coming at us from the sun. Like you can't even get what
you would have gotten a hundred years ago.
It's true. Our main bio hacks are actually just putting us back
in something closer to an evolutionary environment. So our
air filter is not making special air. It's just making less
food. I saw that you have one over there too. I have them in
every room. Yeah. And our water filters are also still not as
good as spring water. Right. Do you have a pristine hydro filter?
I don't have a pristine. Okay, they're they're in Laguna Beach,
you know, not far from here. But if I've done a lot of research
on the filters, and I'm going to interview that guy, but I think
if I had to have a filter, he'd probably be the guy he vortexes
the water, he puts magnesium and bicarbonate silica back in it.
I mean, he's like, he's like making spring water out of
municipal water. It's crazy. But anyway,
but you know, whether we're changing our whether we're
pulling toxins out of the environment, or like, you know,
I was mentioning the VOC here, actually, it's not releasing
much because I use the AFM safe coat. No way. And safe coats
another biohack that I think is awesome. If you have a place
that's new carpet or new paint, or you're going to paint or
install things, the non toxic products that if makes a really
good. No way. Cool. That is going in the show notes. But yeah,
I mean, so much of it is just recreating evolutionary
environment, which is why so many people who are ill, go, like,
move to or visit some more rural natural place and they get
better. Right. And so that's a lot of it. And then there's, of
course, advanced shed that is not just doing that. Yeah. What
are the weather kind of tricks you got up your sleeve that I
haven't observed walking by tech wise? Well, QEG based
neurofeedback is awesome. And whether you're doing alpha
theta training or SMR training or delta training should be
based off your QEG and someone knows how knows how to do that
well. I don't know if you've ever went to peak brain since
you live in LA all the time. Yeah. But Andrew's good. Yeah.
Andrew is good. I interviewed him here on the show. And I was
on his show too. Yeah, brilliant guy. So that's a great
therapy. Right now. I mean, TMS is actually interesting. It's
early, but it's interesting for many things. What's TMS
transcranial magnetic stimulation. Okay. Transcranial
ultrasound is profoundly interesting in the early
studies at University of Arizona and some Japanese
universities and curing Alzheimer's through a very novel
proposed mechanism involving microtubules. But it's too
early to really know what it's doing. So there's a number of
high tech methods that are really cool. And specifically,
there's also some of the most high tech ones are are actually
still evolutionary environment ones like the cutting edge of
microbiomics right now is mostly that the vaginal flora and the
breast milk of indigenous people who were never exposed to
chlorinated water and antibiotics and glyphosate have a
whole bunch of bacteria that we just don't have in probiotics
anywhere else that are actually part of our evolutionary
environment that are the most significant factors for epigenetic
modulation or genome. So that's a very cutting edge. Right.
Understanding of epigenetics and microbiomics. Right. And it is
also saying Oh, evolution actually kind of makes sense.
Or fecal implants from clean, you know, a clean source, so to
speak. So we have a chunk of working microbiomics we're
working on right now that I'm we're not that close yet because
of what we want to do. But I'm excited about it. Cool. I will
say, obviously, we didn't get into psychedelics and entheogens.
I have a whole section on that. Yeah. And we didn't get into any
of the psycho emotional psycho spiritual worker. Right. But on
the just evolutionary environment, I will make a thought in
closing is just like a statin is optimizing for one thing, right
lower your cholesterol without looking at Hey, is the cholesterol
may be protecting the arterial system from oxidative damage.
And that's not a good idea. Or what's the whole rest of the
story going on? When we optimize for something that is
affecting a lot of other things, we're not paying attention, we
get externality, right, which is also called side effect. We
built the entire world, the human built world for a few
purposes in ways that affected a lot of other things. So we build
a house to protect us from the elements and give us a safe place
to be, and then maybe for certain aspects of aesthetics, but we
didn't pay attention to, Oh, well, there's actually chemistry
that's in the paint that is affecting us. And oh, yeah, the
fungicides that are in there that are making fungicide
resistant funguses that are why we have an issue with mold, we
never did before. That that that actually is an important
thing. Like in the drywall,
paints in the paint in the 70s started having fungicides added
to resist mold. And then the mold became super Mercer mold.
That's the reason everyone has mold issues when we lived with
mold forever, right? In an evolutionary environment is
because this is mutant mold. Oh, my God, so, but even things
like, you know, the color and angle, right, all of these end up
affecting the psyche that's filled with environmental
psych. So like, if you're in an area where there's graffiti and
trash on the ground in the walls, this kind of environmental
psych studies been done many times. If if you just paint over
the graffiti and clean up the trash, violent crime drops like
30 to 50%. Wow. And it's because you think about what the
environment's transmitting, when you're there is one, this is a
wasteland, and I'm in survival mode. And two, this is a place
where law doesn't operate. Right? Because laws have been
broken, and they're not rectified. Right. And as soon as you
fix those things, how violent human beings are is being changed
at the like 50% level by an environmental psych. Right. I've
heard David Hawkins talk about that. He called it the broken
window theory, you know, you have a building in the ghetto, and
it gets ignored, and then someone breaks a window, and then
someone comes on breaks another window, then comes the graffiti,
then the drug dealers on the corner and ever I never thought
about the kind of mechanics of it. That's very interesting. It's
I guess the it's like the level of consciousness of anything.
Could you say would you frame it in that way? I would say that's
a way of reducing the complexity of it. Right. Which is kind of my
thing. I interview people like you and go to squish that down
into a bite sized thought. But I mean, so if you go into a
cathedral, they're doing environmental psych. And so the
sound and the smell and the visual and every aspect of the
sensory process is designed to uplift and exalt. But then
specifically, that it's narrow and very high, has a certain
effect that's different than if it was wide and high, or if it
was not high, right, which is, you're very focused on up. And
so then you feel very small. And you can both have a sense of
feeling, you know, and then the priest is halfway between you
and where Jesus is up there and where God is. And so both if you
want to look at the cynical side of the, this is how you make a
good authoritarian kind of dynamic where everybody feels
small with an authority up there, but also the beautiful, the
mystical side of people feeling a sense of awe and exaltation,
right? The environmental psychology of how those
buildings are done in due state, right? Just like burning man
induces state because of the environment, even if you don't
hear us. So what we are realizing is that we have built a
world that we are not well adapted to, right? And that's
affecting us in a lot of ways that we didn't pay attention to
that are mostly not good for us. And so there is this task that
you and it's not good for the planet, right? And it's not
good for us. So there's this task of how do we rebuild the
entire physical built world in a way where the goal, the primary
goal is not, you know, it being inexpensive or fast or
aesthetically beautiful, those are all partial goals. The
primary goal is that it is enlightening the humans that are
inhabiting it. How do you create a built world that makes the
healthiest, most enlightened, most pro social human beings that
are inhabiting it? And how do we rebuild the entire world with
that in mind, and in relationship to, you know,
harmony with the ecosystem. So that's the bio hack that is most
interesting to me.
That's amazing, dude. I love that really good way to sum it up.
Alright, so closing question, who have been three teachers or
teachings that have influenced your work? I could have you
learned from that we might go up and learn from as well.
Specifically more related to individual health or just
anything, anything totally broad, could be a book, teacher
philosophy, relative, or preferably something that one
could go look up or we can put in the show notes, you know,
Buckmeister Fuller, whatever, you know,
Buckmeister Fuller would definitely be at the top of the
list. And either operating manual for spaceship or Earth or
critical path being the most approachable books on
understanding state of the world and how to think and how to
design. So that would be very high on the list. And then
ordering three is impossible for me. So I'll just say the ones
that came to mind first. Yeah, yeah, that's the idea.
Finite and Infinite Games by James Kars is a great book. It's
a book that will help you understand both the future of
economics, the future of worldview, and very deep
spiritual principles together from a game theoretic
perspective. It's a small, easy read.
Oh, cool.
Is a great one. And then the next one came to mind was Anthony
D'Amello, who's actually a Jesuit priest, but was someone who
studied all the world religions and traditions and spent most
of his time in India. A little book called The Way to Love, and
tiny little book and principles of sovereignty. What does it
mean to actually be whole and to be able to love from a place of
wholeness rather than this commodities exchange we usually
call love of what do I have to give someone to get the
security and reassurance and validation I'm looking for and
how will I punish them if they don't do what I want?
But because there is really no such thing as being able to
really love someone, which means to see them and want for them
if you need them to be something. Because you can't see
them if you need them to be something else, right? And you
can't want for them if what's in their highest good isn't
meeting your needs. So loving from a place of wholeness. It's
a great little book. And that sounds awesome. Those are three
good. All right, great. Thank you so much. Wow, fascinating.
So much more research to do now. Well, thank you so much for
joining. Where would you like to send people in terms of
websites, social media, any of that? Yeah, two things is if
people are interested to learn more about what Neurohacker is
doing easy Neurohacker.com. If people are interested more in
some of the larger social topics, the economics education,
etc. I have a blog at civilisationemerging.com and you
can go check stuff out there.
Awesome, great. We'll put those those links in the show notes
for those of you listening and you want the show notes for
every episode, please remember, you can go to lukestory.com
forward slash newsletter into your email and we'll send them
to you. So thank you so much for joining me. I look forward to
doing it again.
Yo, yo, yo listeners, near and far. What's happening? How was
that conversation? I'm quite a mindblower. If I don't say so
myself, I already look forward to part two, because as you can
see, even after two hours, we barely scratched the surface of
the dimensions that we can expand into with Daniel Schmockenburger.
What a fascinating guy. What a cool guy. I love this dude.
Right when we were done, I really was like, okay, when can we do
this again? I'm just gonna drive back to LA, get a couple nights
sleep, come back, let's roll. He lives down near San Diego. So
it's quite a drive, but I'm so glad I got to do this one in
person. And more than anything, I'm so glad that you got to join
me for the second show of 2018. I'd like to remind you that I do
this show every Tuesday, folks, and even sometimes twice a week,
but definitely Tuesday. Next week, I want you to do yourself a
huge favor and check in again. When I interview Alion Zach from
a place called the Womb Center in New York City, and we talk all
about consciousness, sound, breath, work, psychedelics, it is
a super trippy dive just like this one into the realm of
consciousness. And it is amazing. It's one I've been sitting on
for a couple months, and I'm like, I got to put this out, it's
too good. So that's going to be a two parter next week. To
ensure that you don't miss that episode, or any episodes to
follow, you can make it really easy on yourself by just clicking
subscribe on this podcast on your podcast player iTunes,
wherever you're listening to this, just subscribe, dog. It's
super easy. That's all you got to do that every week, doink,
doink, doink, Lifestyles podcast right on your device. You
don't have to think about anything. You're going to get
the goods for free Zs. Another thing that I want to let you
know is the show is also on Spotify now. Really cool thing
that happened is one of my goals in 2017 nailed it. It's on
Spotify. It's a really great interface. You can listen to the
show to your heart's content over there. Also want to invite you
to join me on Instagram. That is of course my social media of
choice. If you want to see me doing all the crazy stuff that I
talk about on this show, you definitely want to follow my
Instagram stories, my feed, you know, I don't know, it's all
right. I'm not a professional photographer. I do the best I
can. I wish it was prettier, you know, your feed could be really
nice. Mine's okay, I'd say. But I think my stories are pretty
awesome. I humbly, I humbly declare that because they go
away in 24 hours. So I don't give a shit if I look totally
spastic and mental. So I do a lot of really goofy. Yet I think
entertaining and educational things on the stories. So all the
supplements and lifestyle hacks and all this stuff. So you can
follow my adventures on Instagram stories. If you want to take
it to the next level, though, and you really want to be part of
this community, I'd love for you to join our Facebook group. I
just started a private Facebook group for the Lifestyles
podcast, our guests and our listeners. And that is where I
answer questions and do Facebook lives. I do all kinds of
exclusive, exclusive content over there. And so come hang out,
all you have to do to find us in Facebook is just go into the
search bar, put the Lifestyles podcast and you will find the
group asked to join will let you in and will keep you in as
long as you behave yourself. Alright, so thank you so so much
for listening to this show and for sharing it with friends. I
really, really appreciate your ears. And again, happy New
Year. Let's make 2018 the best ever. Don't forget to come
join me this Friday night, January 19th at one taste Venice
where we are going to be doing breathwork chakra balancing,
talking about connection, intimacy, orgasm, sex,
meditation, consciousness, and all sorts of rad stuff. So go to
Luke story.com forward slash events to get in again. That's
this Friday, January 19th at one taste Venice. Go to Luke
story.com forward slash events to get your ticket.
