Welcome back, and thanks for joining me again.
So far, we have been using colors and numbers in trying to tell apart knots and links.
We talked about three-colorability, we talked about the linking number, we even talked about
the rife.
Well, not only is our pursuit of invariance useful for biology, chemistry, and physics,
but it gives us insight into how mathematicians struggle to attack problems.
Remember, so far, our invariance has been focused mostly on numbers.
The crossing and unknotting number that we came up with were easy to define, but they
were really hard to calculate.
It took some powerful theorems beyond the scope of these lectures to actually come up
and show that certain knots have certain crossing numbers.
Similarly, linking and rife were also numbers, and were a bit harder to define than the crossing
and unknotting number, but they were quite easy to calculate.
So somehow we had to pay the price, whether it's easy to define or easy to calculate.
Well, today, you're in for a real treat.
We introduce one of the most powerful tools available to us, that of algebra.
We're going to bring in the power of algebra, which measures structures into this world
of topology, and a new algebraic knot invariant is going to be studied.
Now, this knot invariant was discovered in 1984, which shook not just the mathematics
community, but it actually shook the physics community as well.
In 1984, Von Jones, working on an unrelated area of mathematics, stumbled upon an invariant
for knots.
Now, this invariant does not assign a number to a knot, nor does it assign a yes-no value
of whether it is or isn't the recolourable or some other property, but it assigns an
entire polynomial to a knot.
Because of this discovery, Jones was awarded the Fields Medal for his work.
Remember the Fields Medal, the greatest honour that could possibly be given to a mathematician
who is younger than 40.
Now, Edward Whitten, who we talked about last time as a superstar physicist who himself
won a Fields Medal, related the work of the Jones polynomial that Von Jones came up with
to work in string theory and in three-dimensional objects.
So, you see this polynomial isn't just great for mathematics as coming up with a beautiful
invariant, but it actually pushes the frontier into science as well, especially physics.
Now, currently, there are numerous polynomial invariants.
Remember, I'm telling you something that happened in the 1980s.
Well, several have come about due to the Jones Revolution.
Generalizing the work of Von Jones and several others.
But in 1928, many, many years before Jones' discovery, Alexander actually found an invariant
which assigned a polynomial to each knot.
However, unlike the Jones polynomial, it was not related to ideas outside of mathematics,
and thus the revolution didn't really take place anywhere other than in the topological
circles.
Well, we're going to focus on the Jones polynomial rather than the Alexander ones, or rather
than future generalizations of the Jones polynomial that came up after the 80s.
We're going to focus on the Jones polynomial due to its historical significance and its
power.
Now, I'm going to give you a word of warning about today's lecture.
Now, for the previous invariants, I've simply told you how to find them.
I've told you how to compute tricolorability, color the strands and look at the crossings.
I've told you how to come up with a linking number, add plus one or minus one values depending
on the slope.
Well, today we're going to build this invariant from scratch in order to motivate a deeper
understanding.
Moreover, it's going to give us a glimpse how mathematicians think and struggle with
problems.
The way we got a glimpse of this in terms of how the right worked, when things failed,
you push through and you come up with a new way of thinking about what randomized room
one is really about.
It's like my wife's homemade blueberry pie with her special homemade crust.
It's more painful, but it's worth it.
It turns out that it's actually more painful for her and worth it for me, but that's a
separate story.
First of all, what is a polynomial?
We have seen examples of polynomials all our lives, such as 5a cubed plus 4a plus 2,
or 3a plus 5 plus a to the negative one.
Some are more comfortable with using the letter x instead of a.
For example, 5a cubed plus 4a plus 2 could be 5x cubed plus 4x plus 2.
But this is just placeholder information.
So we're going to just use a throughout these lectures.
You can think of them as x if you're more comfortable.
These polynomials, such as 5a cubed plus 4a plus 2, can actually be thought of as simply
a set of numbers.
Notice that the a isn't doing anything amazing.
It's kind of keeping a place for where that constant in front of the polynomial is.
So 5a cubed plus 4a plus 2 can be thought of as 5, 0, 4, 2.
The 5 for the amount of a cubed, the 0 for the amount of a squared, there is none.
The 4 for the amount of a, and 2 for the amount of the constant, which is no a's.
And similarly, 3a plus 5 plus a to the negative 1 can be thought of as the collection of numbers
3, 5, and 1.
Because 3 keeps track of the a, 5 keeps track of the constant, no a's, and 1 keeps track
of how many a inverses, a to the negative 1's there are.
So it doesn't matter again whether you use a's or x's, but I want us to think of polynomials
not just as numbers, but a collection of numbers.
So instead of assigning a yes, no to a not, like three-colorability, or assigning a number,
like the crossing number, the unnotting number, or the right to a not, we assign a set of
numbers, a polynomial's worth.
Now we're going to show that the construction of the Jones polynomial using a method created
by Lou Kaufman, and this is called the bracket polynomial.
So remember what our motivation is, we're going to build this from scratch, and this
way of building the polynomial from the beginning was given to us by Lou Kaufman.
Now this bracket polynomial, our motivating polynomial, is based on three rules.
Let's take a look at these rules.
Rule number one says that the bracket value of the circle equals 1.
Note that I am not talking about a particular projection of the unnot in complicated ways,
but this particular projection itself.
In other words, the bracket of the circle, which is the unnot with no crossings in this
particular projection, gets value 1.
That's the first of my three rules that I need to build this polynomial up.
If you're given the bracket polynomial of a more complicated way of drawing the unnot,
rule number one has nothing to do with it.
It says I don't know what to do.
All I know is if you give me the circle projection of the unnot, it's going to be 1.
That's great.
Rule number two says the following thing.
If I have a crossing as follows, I can replace this crossing of the bracket polynomial of
that picture by, A, some polynomial value times this particular way of splitting the
crossing vertically, plus B times this way of splitting the crossing horizontally.
What does this mean?
Let's take a look at this picture here to understand.
Imagine you're given this trefoil, and imagine we want to know what the bracket polynomial
of the trefoil is.
Rule number two does not tell us what it is.
It doesn't just give us the answer like how to compute the linking number, but it tells
us a relationship between the three polynomial values.
For example, it says the bracket polynomial of this particular trefoil projection equals
A times the bracket polynomial of the trefoil where we replace one of those crossings with
a vertical cut, plus B times the bracket polynomial if we replaced one of those crossings with
a horizontal cut.
Now it has a relationship based on this rule with how the trefoil, whatever the bracket
polynomial of the trefoil is, which we don't know, it has a relationship between the bracket
polynomial of the trefoil to A times the bracket polynomial of this not diagram, plus
B times the bracket polynomial of this link diagram.
It simply gives us a relationship.
But I want us to remember, although it doesn't tell us the answer, we are building towards
getting this answer.
Moreover, consider the middle part of this second rule example that I've given you.
Notice here that when I make this vertical cut, I actually come up with the unknot.
But this is not the unknot where the projection is just a circle.
So thus, what I have here is the bracket polynomial of the unknot of a different projection of
the unknot, not the simple one.
So again, I still don't know what that value is.
It's just a relationship between these three separate polynomials.
The moment you get one polynomial, you can multiply it by A of the other polynomial,
plus B times the third polynomial, and the equality works.
That's what the second rule is.
Now, if you go back to the second rule again, you notice that there's another way of thinking
about this exact same rule.
If I take my positive slope crossing and cut it vertically to get A times that vertical
move, plus B times a horizontal move, then if I got a negative slope crossing, well,
this is the same thing as A times a horizontal cut, plus B times a vertical cut.
So rule two says that if you have a positive slope, you cut vertically and horizontally.
If you have a negative slope, you consider a cut of horizontal first and then a vertical.
Now what does rule three say?
Let's take a look.
It's actually an elegant rule.
Rule three says the following thing.
If you take a link, no matter how complicated it is, could be a knot, if you take any picture
you have of a diagram, and along with that picture, if you just have a separate unknot
that's purely a circle next to it, then the bracket polynomial, whatever that polynomial
is, which we don't know yet, of this picture is the same as the bracket polynomial of just
the link alone.
In other words, I can take the circle and throw it away as long as I multiply this polynomial
by C, another variable.
So this is what we know about rule three.
Notice it's another relationship.
It gives a relationship between a link with an extra circle, along with the polynomial
that you would get of just the link.
Now as we start using rule two repeatedly, what happens?
Remember what rule two does?
It takes a crossing, and it cuts it vertically and horizontally.
As we, if you're given a knot or a link, as we start using rule two repeatedly, it keeps
removing all our crossings.
It makes vertical cuts and horizontal cuts.
Our crossings start disappearing.
Now we get a relationship of these other components, but they have less crossings than I started
off with.
At the end of the day, if we keep doing this, we are left with a collection of circles,
because all my crossings are gone, and I just have a collection of circles.
But what does rule three say?
Rule three says every time you have a collection with a free-floating circle, you can throw
it away as long as you have multiplication by C to the polynomial.
Rule two destroys all my crossings into circles.
Rule three keeps getting rid of my circles.
They can keep throwing it away as long as I multiply it by the C. And rule one says,
if you're left with one circle at the end, which we're going to be, the value is one.
But during this entire step, we have manipulated and changed our polynomial based on crossing
information, circle removal, and leaving it with that last circle.
So we believe that this is enough for us to actually get this polynomial.
Well, so far, this is absolute nonsense, because I'm just giving you three rules.
What does this have to do with anything?
Well, notice we want these rules to satisfy some kind of not invariant properties, which
means as we struggled with the linking number in the right last time, we want to make sure
that these three rules are enough to make sure that the Reitermeister move values don't
change as I change the projection of my not.
Note that the bracket value depends on the particular fixed projection.
We cannot simply move it around.
Remember rule number one, it only works on that particular circle.
So I want to make sure, as I'm performing Reitermeister moves, that my polynomial does
not change.
So let's see what this implies for Reitermeister move two.
Let's start with Reitermeister move two.
Look at this picture.
In Reitermeister move two, we have these two vertical strands that are crossing.
Now what can I do using my rules one, two, and three?
Well I'm going to look at the top crossing, and notice here it's a negative slope crossing,
which means I take this crossing, I cut it horizontally first, and I multiply it by A,
plus vertically first, and I multiply it by B. So I get that this bracket polynomial
of this particular not, whatever happens to be, with this crossing information of Reitermeister
move two, zoomed in, is A times this picture, plus B times this picture.
Now let's zoom in on each of these pictures and study it separately.
Now if you look at the first picture, that first diagram that's associated to the one
next to A, that polynomial, now this has an additional crossing, and I'm going to look
at this crossing, and if you look at this crossing, it's in positive crossing.
So I take this crossing, I cut it vertically, I open it up, multiply it by A, now I cut
it horizontally, and I multiply it by B, I'm doing rule two again.
Now you have these new pictures, A times this picture, plus B times this picture.
Now the A picture can simply be reduced without changing crossing, just stretching, to make
it look like these two horizontal strands.
But the second one has this extra circle.
Now I can just throw that circle away, as long as I multiply my answer by C.
So here's what I get when I look at this first part that's associated with A in the very
beginning of my Reitermeister two move.
Now what happens to the second part, the one that has associated with B in my very beginning
Reitermeister two moves?
Let's zoom in on this.
If I have this bracket, notice I can look at this crossing, it's a positive crossing,
I cut it vertically, A times this, plus I cut it horizontally, B times this.
And now notice this is simplified to A times two vertical strands, plus B times two horizontal
strands.
So I can substitute the work I've done for my first part, and the work I've done for
my second part, into my equation that talks about how the Reitermeister two works.
Let's try this.
When I do this, and I substitute, I can combine like terms, and my very first part becomes
the two strands crossing like this from my Reitermeister two equals A squared times a
horizontal cut of these two strands, plus ABC times another horizontal cut of combined
like terms from algebra before, plus AB times a vertical cut, plus B squared times a horizontal
cut by combining like terms in the second part.
Now if I simplify this by looking at all the like terms, you see that you have a bunch
of terms which have this horizontal cut, and a bunch of them that have this vertical cut.
You're combining all of them with a horizontal, you get that these two Reitermeister two strand
cuts equal A squared plus ABC plus B squared, the quantity times this horizontal cut, plus
AB times a vertical cut.
Great.
I've just done algebraic manipulation.
You might want to watch this part again to get a more detailed understanding of what
happened with these pictures, but I've simply performed rules one, two, and three so far.
If you look at this equation that we have at the end, we notice we want this to equal
two vertical strands.
Remember what Reitermeister two says, if you have these two strands that cross like this,
we want it to become two vertical strands.
I want that, but in order to make that work, the value in front of the two horizontal strands
must be a zero value.
It must completely disappear, and moreover, the value in terms of my vertical strands
must have value one, because I want this to equal this.
I want Reitermeister two to work.
So how can I do this?
Well, let's take a look.
I need the second value, AB, times the two vertical cut, to actually equal one, which
means A times B has to equal one, which means solving for B, B has to be one divided by
A. Another way of saying it is B equals A to the negative one.
But we also know from the other part that A squared plus ABC plus B squared has to equal
zero.
This was the term in front of the two horizontal cut.
When I do a Reitermeister move, and if I want the Reitermeister move to not change my polynomial
value, my horizontal cut value has to completely disappear, because I want the polynomial value
for a Reitermeister move two to become the same regardless of which way I do it.
Plus A squared plus ABC plus B squared has to equal zero, but I just found out what B
was.
I'm going to plug that in.
So this becomes A squared plus C plus A to the negative two equals zero.
Now I can solve for C, and I get C equals negative, the quantity A squared plus A to
the negative two.
Remember how we started off?
Those three rules.
And based on those three rules, we picked values of A, B, and C arbitrarily.
We didn't know they were just placeholders, and we wanted to know how far we can push
those three rules.
Well it turned out by choosing those random values of ABC for the placeholders, in order
to make my Reitermeister move to work, what do I have to do?
I have the relationship of what B has to be, A to the negative one.
And I also have to have the relationship what C has to be, negative A squared plus A to
the negative two.
Because this is forced on me if I want Reitermeister move two to work, which means I have a new
set of rules.
Let's take a look.
Under these new set of rules, rule number one hasn't changed at all, because we really
didn't use it for the calculation of Reitermeister move two.
But the rule number two, here when we have this crossing, becomes A times a vertical
cut plus A inverse times a horizontal cut.
Or another way of saying it is if you have a negative slope crossing, we get A inverse
times a vertical cut plus A times a horizontal cut.
I've just substituted anywhere I saw B, I now write A inverse.
And rule number three becomes, anytime I see a link with this extra perfect circle, I can
throw that circle out, but I need to multiply this term of negative A squared plus A to
the negative two every time I do it.
That's great.
All of this work just to try to make Reitermeister move two happy.
Now what about Reitermeister move three?
I have those three variables.
Now I only have one variable left over, because the other two are already determined by making
Reitermeister two work.
Let's try Reitermeister move three, right?
See what happens.
Let's take a look.
Here if we have Reitermeister move three, I have my crossing with my strand on one side,
and I'm going to push my strand to the other.
I need to make this also work.
Well let's try it.
Well we see that the bracket polynomial of my Reitermeister move three equals, let's
pick that central crossing where we have that positive slope, equals A times, I'm going
to cut that up vertically, plus A inverse, I'm going to cut it horizontally.
Well now look at that first picture.
The first picture I can do just a Reitermeister move two without changing the polynomial.
I worked extremely hard to make it so.
So I'm just going to simply move a Reitermeister move two straight across.
Now the second picture, I'm basically going to move the strand over.
It's just an isotopy move.
There's no crossing change.
I'm just going to push it to the other side for visual coolness.
Now let's go back to the first picture again.
Now I have three vertical strands.
I'm going to take the second and the third, and take the second and cross it over the
third.
I'm going to do another Reitermeister move two.
Since we worked so hard, we know that this move comes for free again.
We can do Reitermeister move twos without changing the polynomial.
So thus, we have this new equation of A times this particular picture, plus A inverse times
this particular picture.
But what is this?
If we look carefully, this equals just the bracket polynomial of this picture.
Why?
Because if I take that crossing right there, and if I look at it as a positive slope,
if I cross it vertically and horizontally, I get exactly what I have at this equation.
So what does this mean?
This means that if I have the bracket polynomial of my Reitermeister move three move setup,
I get the Reitermeister move three working out without conflict.
In other words, its Reitermeister move three comes for free.
Unlike Reitermeister move two where I had to work, three just comes for free.
It's fantastic.
I just need to do one thing, and my life is set.
I need to do Reitermeister move one.
If I can show that the bracket polynomial does not change because the Reitermeister
moves one, two, and three, I win.
But I've shown it works beautifully for Reitermeister move two.
I worked hard to make it so.
It works elegantly for Reitermeister move three.
It just falls out of this picture.
What about Reitermeister move one?
Let's take a look.
If I have a Reitermeister move one twist, I want the bracket polynomial of this thing
to be a vertical line.
Well, what happens?
I pick this crossing.
It's a positive crossing.
I cut it vertically.
I cut it horizontally.
I get two new pictures.
Now the first one has that not, that just elegant unknot.
I can just throw it away, but I need to multiply it by negative a squared plus a to the negative
two.
And the second one is just a straight line.
That's fantastic.
In fact, if you look at this, I have two bracket polynomials of the same thing.
So thus I can combine like terms, and when I do so, I can simplify it to get negative
a cubed minus a to the negative one plus a to the negative one.
The a to the negative one cancels out, and I end up with negative a cubed times the bracket
of the straight line.
And now my stomach starts turning.
It doesn't feel good.
Why?
Because I had the bracket of the twist equals the bracket of the vertical, the right of
my stream of one, but they're not equal because I have this negative a cubed in front of it.
In fact, if I did the other right of my stream of one twist, if I twisted it the opposite
way, you'd get this picture.
Notice here, I'm doing the exact same kind of algebraic calculations, but at the end
I get negative a to the negative three of that bracket.
Look at the previous one.
The previous one, when I did the first twist, I get negative a cubed.
Now I get negative a to the negative three.
So somehow it works for right of my stream of two and works for right of my stream of
three, but it fails for one.
So what does a mathematician do?
We say, what is it about right of my stream of one that's making it fail?
Can we somehow measure the right of my stream of one nest of this?
And then we think and we say, well, this is exactly what the right did.
The right of my stream of one moves changes the right by exactly plus or minus one.
In fact, the right was what was frustrating us before because everything worked but right
of my stream of one.
And now we see everything again works, but right of my stream of one.
Maybe we can combine both of these negative properties that right of my stream of one
keeps failing and make it work beautifully.
And it turns out this is what happens.
We define a new polynomial called the x polynomial as follows.
Here we define the x polynomial of a link to equal negative a cubed raised to the negative
the right of the link multiplied by the bracket.
In some sense, this funny term of this negative a cubed raised to the negative right is my
right of my stream of one buffer.
Notice that what this exactly does is it's supposed to take the failure of the bracket
polynomial which could not measure the right of my stream of one nest correctly and compensate
with this right term which is also measuring the right of my stream of one.
And together you multiply them and we hope it cancels out perfectly.
Now notice the right of my stream of two and the right of my stream of threes are not affected
by the right or the bracket.
We worked hard to show that the right didn't make a difference between the right of my
stream of two and three and neither did the bracket polynomial.
It was only the right of my stream of once where we got a stumbling block.
It turns out that this x polynomial is a not invariant.
Let's take a look.
Look what happens if I take the x polynomial of a right of my stream of one twist.
I get negative a cubed times negative the right of this twist times the bracket polynomial
of this twist.
But the right of the twist is exactly the right of without a twist with a plus one.
You can calculate this on your own.
So I can substitute negative instead of a right of a twist, I get negative the quantity
right of a vertical line plus one times the twist of the bracket.
Great.
But if you notice the twist of the bracket, I can actually untwist the bracket as long
as I change my crossing values and by doing so I get negative a cubed which is what we
had computed earlier when we take care of this twist.
So what do I have?
I can combine like terms again and I get it's negative a cubed times negative the right
of that vertical minus one plus one times the bracket of that vertical strand.
But I can simplify the top power exponential power and this is negative a cubed the right,
negative right of that vertical times the bracket of the vertical.
But this is exactly the definition of the x polynomial for a vertical line.
In other words, if I have the x polynomial of a twist, I actually end up with it being
the same thing as the x polynomial of that vertical strand.
The twisting does not change x.
What the bracket gives me to make it fail is exactly what the right provides to make
me succeed.
Now we don't need to worry about right of mice removes two and three because we know
they work for both the right and the bracket.
It's only one that it fails for and this shows it succeeds beautifully.
Now if you had taken an opposite twist, you would end up with exactly the same value that
it does not matter at the end of the day.
So let's close with some comments.
We have learned a lot of material here combining and actually building this invariant from
scratch.
It was hard work and I encourage you to look through this lecture again to see the small
details that might have been pushed over.
If you love algebra, this is a great lecture to go back and fill in the details.
If you don't love algebra, you can assume that what I'm saying is right.
But we have constructed this powerful knot invariant from a projection of a knot and
it turns out that it does not depend on the projection itself.
It's an honest to goodness invariant.
Officially, technically, to get the Jones polynomial, what you do is you take the x
polynomial we've been talking about and every time you see an a, you substitute one divided
by t to the one fourth power to the fourth root of t.
This is a very awkward substitution, but it turns out if you do the substitution, you
will get the Jones polynomial on the nose.
But for us, it doesn't matter.
It's basically the same thing with a little change of variables.
So instead of calling it t to some power, we're going to call it a to some power.
And this a is far more intuitive for us because we actually saw how it came about.
So we're going to ignore this technicality from now on.
Well how powerful is this polynomial?
A big open question has been, which I asked several lectures ago, can we tell any knot
from the unknot?
It turns out that any time we use the Jones polynomial, we get the value of the unknot
as one, but any time we use the Jones polynomial of any other knot, which turns out to be not
the unknot, the Jones polynomial is not one.
It seems that the Jones polynomial is able to tell every knot apart from the unknot.
This is still an open question.
This beautiful invariant that we've created turns out to be extremely powerful.
Next lecture, we're going to actually use this to perform some calculations to get our
hands a little bit dirty.
See you then.
Stay tuned.
