Welcome back, and thanks for joining me again.
So far, we have been focused on knots and links.
But now we move on to the study of braids.
Braids are one of the oldest forms of pattern making in this world.
We all know and have seen about braids, braiding somebody's hair, for example.
But it turns out that braids are also vital to physics and cryptography.
And as we will see later, they also push our understanding of knots and links even more.
So what is a mathematical braid?
What does it mean for a mathematician to approximate a real-world situation with braids?
Let's take a look.
A braid is a set of n strands attached between two horizontal bars.
So imagine you have these two bars, and you have n strands.
Now, n can be any integer you want that's not negative.
You can have seven strands, six strands.
In this particular case, we have five strands.
Now the most important thing about a braid is as these strands are attached to the top
horizontal bar, and they move down and get reattached to the bottom horizontal bar, those
strands must always be flowing down.
Imagine it like water.
The braid strands must always be flowing down.
For example, in this picture, you see that here we have a braid made out of four strands,
but this is officially not a mathematical braid because this one strand that starts at
the very first position goes and loops around, and the water now flows up as it goes down.
And this is illegal.
We always want our strands to be flowing down.
Now note that braids are not like tangles in this way.
For a tangle, we can take those four corners, the northeast, northwest, southeast, and
southwest, and we can do anything we want in the middle.
A braid has this restriction that although it feels like we can do anything we want inside,
it must be going from the top horizontal bar to the bottom horizontal bar.
And each crossing, it turns out, is not just keeping track of switching.
For example, when you have two strands coming and one crosses the other one, say the first
one crosses the second one, in our minds we can say this is a permutation.
They've permuted or switched that the first and second strands have switched position.
Each crossing is not just keeping track of switching data, but it's also keeping track
of over and under information.
As the first and second strands switch, you are forced to make a decision.
Are they switching over the other one, or is the first one switching under the other one?
Well, what is exciting about braids to me is that they appear in theoretical physics
as equations.
Let me explain what I mean by this by giving you a little historical background.
Chen Ningyang in 1968 created an equation in the world of physics with quantum field
theory.
And in this world of quantum field theory, the interest is on the forces that are acting
between quantum subatomic particles.
How these subatomic particles are pulling and pushing and creating a field based on their
attraction and repulsion.
So this scientist, Chen Ningyang, created an equation that talked about quantum field
theoretic interactions.
This was in 1968.
Well unrelatedly, Rodney Baxter in 1971 was studying statistical mechanics, another branch
of physics.
Statistical mechanics deals with a molecular level, not a subatomic level, but a much bigger
molecular level understanding of things like heat and energy and entropy.
And here, Rodney Baxter created an equation which dealt with these statistical mechanical
ideas using, mostly using ideas related to things like modeling ice, the way ice works
and the way heat and energy is transferred in a molecular setting for ice.
Now notice, one is talking about a big molecular structure, which is huge compared to a subatomic
particle structure.
And one is talking about how the model of ice along with heat and energy works.
And the second is talking about forces within the subatomic systems.
Remarkably, both of these equations turned out to be the same.
And they're called, today, the Yang-Baxter equations, honoring the two physicists who
came up with them.
And they both can be amazingly depicted by a braid relationship.
Look at this picture.
This picture shows the Yang-Baxter equation.
This visual picture represents these two physical phenomena that's going on.
On the left side, you have a three-strand braid, and on the right side, you have a three-strand
braid.
And notice, I can take this top strand that's on the left and basically use a right of my
screw three, it feels like, and just move it over the crossing to the other side.
The fact that I can do this with these strands is depicting a deep physical phenomena going
on in nature.
Well, braids are also the key to topological quantum cryptography.
It's a lot of powerful words packed in there, so let me break it down for you a little bit.
Cryptography encrypts our data on the web and in numerous places.
If you're buying something from a company on the internet, you type in your credit card
and it encrypts it.
One of the most famous encryptions is the RSA system, which scientists have now, along
with mathematicians, have come up with numerous and far better ways of doing this.
Well, currently, computer technology cannot crack these encrypted codes, thankfully, or
else everybody would have access to our special credit card and social security numbers.
Well, a topological quantum computer uses particles called anions to form braids which
form logical gates that make up the computer.
In other words, the braids themselves are keeping track of how logical network systems
move inside this computer.
The advantage of a quantum computer based on these topological braids is that it can
crack almost any encryption method we use today.
It is powerful, but so far it's only theoretical.
This machine does not exist.
It exists in the minds of mathematicians, physicists, and computer scientists.
So you see the braids somehow have a way of keeping track of these logic gates, and the
more understanding we have of braids, not only do we have a capturing of Yang Baxter,
but we have an idea of how quantum cryptography might work one day.
Now, consider the basic notion of braids.
Braids are classified based on the number of strands.
So if we want to compare two braids, the first thing we're going to do is to find out how
many strands we have to work with.
So from now on, let's pretend, given a braid, we're only fixing a certain number of strands
to work with.
We're not going to compare two braids of two different types of strands.
One can manipulate the braids between the two bars.
In other words, given those two bars, they can take those strands and move it around
as much as I want.
But remember what we did with tangles.
I cannot take these strands and move it outside the tangle circle.
Similarly, I cannot take my braid strands and move it above or below my two bars.
They have to be locked in place between those two bars.
This is similar to tangles, of course, just like not leaving that circle.
Now let's consider some examples of equivalent braids.
Let's take a look.
Here we see one braid, given by three strands on the left side, and by doing a simple right
of my two-like move, I can make it look like the central one.
Or I can take this right strand over here and just push it under all of these other
strands.
And all these three braids are equivalent.
This is very intuitive, as you can see from these pictures.
But notice I have stayed within my top horizontal bar and my bottom horizontal bar.
And there's an operation that we can do on braids, very similar to what we did with tangles.
Remember how we took our tangle and took the northeast and northwest part of the tangle
and connected them up, and the southeast and southwest and connected them up to form links
and knots.
We can do the same thing here.
We can take my braid, which has n strands.
In this particular case, we see it has four strands.
And I can take the four strands on top and basically extend them all the way around without
introducing any new crossings and come back and wrap in the bottom.
They can basically close up one another.
And we call this the closure of a braid.
Basically we're identifying the top and bottom horizontal bars.
We're making them the same thing.
And we get knots and links based on this procedure.
Now let's ask a difficult question.
Which links can be formed from braids?
We've talked about a lot of knots and links.
Well, which one of those are coming from braids?
Are there braids that are going on behind the scenes that capture the information of
the knots and links that we have worked with?
The trough oil, it turns out, is a simple two-stranded braid, and it has three twists
in it.
And if you close up this braid and then free itself of the bar restriction, we've just
made it into a simple projection of a knot.
It turns out this knot becomes the trough oil.
Now remember the figure eight was the simplest knot with four twists, with four crossings.
So what if I take this vertical bar and put four twists in it and then glue it up and
consider the closure?
It turns out when I do this, you don't get the figure eight knot.
You actually get a link because since you have an even number of twists, the first
strand gets connected to the first strand, and the second gets connected to the second,
and you have a link of two components.
So in order for me to get the figure eight, I need to do this particular braid, which
has three strands in it the way it's seen here.
If I close this up, I get the figure eight.
And I can get the unknot, for example, in this complicated way.
It looks pretty intimidating, but at the end of the day, you can show it just tangles in,
untangles into the unknot.
You can get the half link, for example, like this.
So I've shown some examples of how we can get these things, and it doesn't seem obvious.
For example, the figure eight wasn't that obvious as we constructed this.
We had to actually do some work to actually make it into this.
So which knots and links form braids?
Can every knot you can draw be made from some braid and taking its closure?
Well, a beautiful result was given by James Alexander in 1923.
Here's the result.
Every knot and link that you can possibly come up with is a closure of some braid.
In other words, all our questions of knots and links applies to braids.
If you are wondering how knots and links work, well, every one of those guys is coming from
some braid information.
So if you want to know how knots and links work, you can ask the same question to the
braids.
And if you have full understanding of braids work, it turns out you'll have a really good
understanding how knots and links work.
Well, as we create a language for rational tangles, we can also create a language for
braids.
And this language is fantastically useful for us to come up with this continued fraction
equivalent notation.
I'm going to focus on braids with three strands right now.
And here's the language I'm going to create.
First, I'm going to take my first strand and cross it over my second strand, and I'm
going to call this move the special move that switches the two strands to be sigma
1.
Now I'm going to take my second strand and switch it over my first strand.
I'm going to do exactly the opposite move I just did, and I'm going to call this sigma
1 inverse.
OK, now I've switched my first and the second strand.
Now the second kind of move I'm going to do is switching my second and third strand.
So I take my second strand and third strand, take my second and switch it over the third,
and I'm going to take my second and switch it under my third, or my third over the second.
If I switch second over third, I call that sigma 2, and if I switch second under third,
I'm going to call that sigma 2 inverse.
So these are my three stranded braids with four possible operations I've created.
Now you might say, well what if I want to switch my first and third?
What if I want to switch those guys?
Well let's try.
If you have three strands, and if you start switching your first with your third, eventually
you have to cross your second somewhere to get over there to the third side.
And thus you basically cross the second first, in other words I do a sigma 1 first, and then
I need to do this sigma 2 move, or I can switch my second strand and my third now.
So this way we see that these four patterns, sigma 1, sigma 1 inverse, sigma 2, sigma 2
inverse, keep track of my braids.
So how do I use this lettering that I've created?
You see that we've basically created four letters in an alphabet, and the way I create
braids based on my letters is to form words in my alphabet.
So I can use my 26 letters in my English alphabet to form words by putting the letters together.
Chicken, I use C, H, I, C, K, E, N.
Well what about for braids?
I take my four letters in my braid alphabet, sigma 1, sigma 1 inverse, sigma 2, sigma 2
inverse, and I put them together.
And what does it mean visually to put them together?
It means stacking one on top of the other one.
For example, take a look here.
If I have sigma 1, sigma 2 inverse, sigma 1, sigma 1, sigma 2, I'm writing with my new
alphabet using my new letters I've created, I'm writing a word.
So what word does this give me in terms of a braid visual picture?
Well first I put my sigma 1, I stack my sigma 2 inverse under it, I stack my sigma 1 under
it, I stack another sigma 1 under it, and I stack a sigma 2 under it.
I've created this beautiful braid that just comes from these letters.
Well since we know Alexander's theorem, which says every knot and link imaginable is coming
from the closure of some braid, then it seems that we can describe every knot and link as
a word, as one of these words made up of these letters.
What a remarkable idea.
Somebody calls you on your cell phone.
You answer the phone.
They ask you to describe the knot and link you've just drawn on the piece of napkin,
which is going to revolutionize life as we know it.
And as you try to explain the over and under crossings, the communication gets lost.
But using Alexander's theorem, we know that this knot or link that you've drawn can be
represented by some braid, and you call them on the phone and you say, I got it.
Sigma 3, sigma 2 inverse, sigma 1, sigma 1, sigma 3 inverse.
Perfect.
Now how beautiful that is to communicate that knot and link, much less talking about the
over crossing and the under crossing.
Well, there exists a deeper structure to braids than what we've been talking about.
And what I want to do is I want to pull back and get a bigger picture of this algebraic
structure we're talking about.
Now, we have noticed a pattern of adding in numbers, in knots, and in tangles.
And now we're going to talk about adding in braids, a form of composition, a form of
putting it together.
And this is simply stacking one word that you have under another one.
Visually, you just put one letter after the other, you get a word.
You take another letter after the other, you get another word.
And if you want to put two words together, you just stack them up under each other.
Is there a general framework to do this?
Are we talking about addition and putting things together in tangles and knots in one
way and in braids in another, or is there a bigger picture going on?
Well, this bigger picture is an algebraic structure called a group.
Now, what a group is is the most important algebraic structure that I can possibly imagine.
It is stunning, it is beautiful, and it shows up everywhere in mathematics.
So let me explain what a group is.
A group is a set of elements.
We're going to call a group G to be a set of elements and a way of combining elements
together.
So you need two things.
You need a bag.
Your group is your bag with a collection of elements in there, and you need some way
of putting two elements in the bag together to get another element in the bag.
We call this an operation that operates on these elements in my group.
And this group might must satisfy three properties.
Let's look at those three properties.
The first property is that my group must have an identity element.
In other words, in my bag of elements, there must be a special element called E, which
is the mathematical symbol for identity, called E, which acts like my zero in addition
of numbers.
In other words, I need to find an element in my bag that must exist there.
No matter if I take any other element called A in my group, A times E must equal A. In
other words, it's as if E didn't even exist in terms of this operation.
A times E must equal A, must equal E times A. Zero plus five should equal five, should
equal five plus zero.
Notice how zero was my addition operation as an identity.
Well there must always exist an identity in my group.
The second thing is my bag of elements.
The multiplication operation, the composition operation of elements, must be associative.
A times B times C must equal A times B times C. In other words, if I take three elements
in my bag, A, B, and C, and if I say put it together, well it doesn't matter how
you associate them.
Remember how we got into problems with tangles before in this thing.
Here it must be associative.
And third, every element in my bag, in my bag of elements in my group, every element I
find must have something called an inverse.
It's opposite evil twin.
Thus, when I put these two elements together, I get my identity again.
For example, for the integers, if I take the number seven, is there another integer that
I can add to it to get my zero element?
Yes, there's negative seven.
Seven plus negative seven cancel out to get my identity zero.
So given any collection of element you pick in the group, there must be its opposite element.
Given any A, there must be some B such that A times B should equal the identity E.
Now let's consider some sets that we are familiar with and see if they actually have this beautiful
group structure.
Remember, we need more than just a set.
We need more than just a bag of things.
We also need an operation that tells us how to put them together.
So let's take a look.
What about the integers under addition?
Seven, negative seven, three, four, negative 17.
These are the collection of integers I have under addition.
Is this form a group?
Well, I have a collection of elements.
I know what the operation is.
It's an atom.
What are the three things?
Do I have an identity?
Yeah, zero.
Zero is the identity and is it an integer?
It's an integer.
It's in my bag of elements.
Great.
Do I have associativity?
It's two plus three plus four.
The same thing as two plus three plus four?
Are two plus three plus four?
Of course.
Great.
Do I have inverses?
We just talked about it.
Every integer has an opposite integer that will cancel it out such that you get zero.
So integers under addition form this beautiful group structure.
What about integers under multiplication?
I have the same bag of elements, but I've changed my operation.
That's all I've done.
And integers under multiplication, let's see what we have.
Do we have an identity?
Seven times something is seven.
Yes, one.
Seven times one is seven.
Eighteen times one is 18, beautiful.
I have an identity.
Now do I have associativity?
Is seven times three times four?
It doesn't matter how I multiply these three elements, but it turns out it doesn't, so
I have associativity.
It's fantastic so far.
What about inverses?
Seven times what will give me the identity?
Remember, my identity now is one.
Seven times one seventh gives me the identity one, but one seventh isn't an integer.
It's not in my bag.
So thus, the integers under addition form a group.
They have this beautiful structure, but the integers under multiplication do not.
And tangles.
What about tangles?
We know a collection of tangles we have in our bag.
What about adding tangles together?
We know that adding tangles together has that identity, the zero-tangle we talked about
last time, and it is associative.
You can check that quite easily, but it turns out there's no inverse.
There's no tangle, such that if you pick one out, you have an opposite tangle to cancel
it out.
Remember not when you put them together to get more and more complicated.
So tangles don't have inverses under addition of tangles.
Tangles under multiplication are even worse.
They definitely don't have an inverse, nor are they associative, which we talked about
last time.
So who cares about groups?
What's the big deal?
Well, they're one of the most important mathematical structures.
They're this algebraic system that keep track of numerous things.
And they appear in several areas, not just in mathematics, but in chemistry, in symmetries
of molecules, and in theoretical physics, in quantum mechanics.
And we're going to see them in future lectures, I guarantee it.
Now it turns out that braids, given n strands, form a group.
Now this is absolutely beautiful, because nothing else has formed a group.
Nuts don't form a group.
There's no inverse of a knot that cancels a knot out to give you the unknot.
Tangles don't form a group, but braids this beautiful visual thing we have form a group.
Now we need to check the basic properties to make sure this is true.
Now I'm just going to show the example of braids with four strands.
Remember, we can only talk about braids with a certain number of strands at a time, and
I'm going to stick to braids with four strands first.
And then you can imagine how this exact set of ideas that I'm going to give you will generalize
to other collections of strands.
So let's check it out.
So we need to check three things, identity, associativity, and inverses.
And in this picture, we see that the identity is just a bar with four vertical strands coming
down.
Notice that if I take my identity element that goes straight down with no crossing,
and if I add it down here to a braid one way, you get the original braid again.
The four vertical strands simply stretch things.
They don't do anything different.
And similarly, if I take my braid and put the identity element under it, these vertical
lines, they again just stretch things in the bottom.
I can make it easily my braid.
So I have an identity element.
Well, what about associativity?
Remember, I need identity, associativity, and inverse.
I have identity.
I have an element, my four-stranded braid that does this.
Beautiful.
What about associativity?
Well, in associativity, I have braid A, four-stranded braid, complicated as you want, braid B under
it, and braid C under that.
So I have these three elements.
Now, if I take my first A and then I take my B braid and I put them together and then
put my C in the bottom, or if I take my A, B, and C, but first I put these two first
and then I put this on, you see that it doesn't even matter the way I stack.
At the end of the day, you get this big stack.
The order in which I compose my stacks doesn't matter at all.
Associativity comes for free.
Fantastic.
I just need to check one thing, inverses.
But inverses has been my stumbling block.
We even had a problem with inverses with integers and multiplication.
This is the hardest thing to do.
There's nothing called the opposite of a knot.
We couldn't take a knot and untangle it by putting another knot next to it.
It just got worse.
And we can do this for tangles, either.
But we can do it for braids.
Let's take a look.
Here I have my braid.
Remember, my braids can always be written using my language that I created.
If I have my language of sigma 1, sigma 2 inverse, sigma 3, sigma 2 inverse, here's
my four-stranded braid that I create from this language.
Now, what is the inverse of this?
Well, if I want to cancel things out so I get back to my identity braid, which is my
vertical line, that's what an inverse means.
I need to cancel it out to get an identity.
What I do is first I read things backwards.
Remember, when you stack things, the last thing you stack is the first thing you want
to cancel.
So you want to start cancelling things inside out from the very center of the braid all
the way out.
So the last thing I stack was my sigma 2 inverse.
But what cancels my sigma 2 inverse is my sigma 2.
So you see that if I put a sigma 2 next to it, it cancels it out.
It just untwists it.
And a sigma 3 inverse cancels out my sigma 3 that I had before that.
And a sigma 2 cancels out my sigma 2 inverse before that.
And finally, sigma 1 inverse cancels out a sigma 1 that I started with.
So the braid sigma 1, sigma 2 inverse, sigma 3, sigma 2 inverse is exactly the opposite
is the inverse of this other braid, sigma 2, sigma 3 inverse, sigma 2, sigma 1 inverse.
If I stack my first braid, my original one, and this new one under it, they both unravel
perfectly.
The inverses cancel out and I get this vertical line.
Remember for rational tangles, we had continued fractions, which had this notation to measure
equivalence of braids.
Can we do something for braids to measure equivalence?
Well, you have this beautiful way of creating a group structure based on braids, but can
we measure equivalence?
Well, it turns out we can, given two braids by words, we can just look at the words to
see if the braids are equivalent.
Remember for tangles, for these rational tangles, we had these continued fractions and they
were enough to encapsulate that information.
Well these words, I claim, capture everything you want to know about the braid, and we're
going to change one word into another word that are equivalent using three elegant rules.
Here's my first rule.
My first rule says sigma i, sigma i inverse equals sigma i inverse sigma i.
In other words, if I put two inverses next to each other, they just cancel out.
Now we already knew this to be true.
This is how we got my inverse braid operation in my group anyway.
But what this means is, if you have given two words, and you see sigma i, sigma i inverse
next to each other, you can actually erase it out of the equation, because it's like
a righto meister 2 move.
The sigma i, sigma i inverse says sigma i twist this way, and the sigma i inverse twist
back, and you can just pull it through to a righto meister 2 move.
That's my first operation.
My second operation that I can do in terms of these words is the following.
Sigma i, sigma i plus 1, sigma i equals sigma i plus 1, sigma i, sigma i plus 1.
What does this mean?
This means if I have three words which look like sigma i, sigma i plus 1, sigma i, I can
actually erase that and replace it with these other three words, sigma i plus 1, sigma i,
sigma i plus 1.
Similarly you have the following braid structure on the left as the first word, and the following
braid structure on the right as the second word, and notice these are equivalent because
I'm just doing a righto meister 3 move.
I can take that strand in the back and the crossing on top, and I can just push the strand
past the crossing to the other side.
And when I do it, you see that clearly sigma i, sigma i plus 1, sigma i on the left picture
is exactly sigma i plus 1, sigma i, sigma i plus 1 on the right.
So the first move that I had was basically a righto meister 2 move.
And this power that I have now is a righto meister 3 move.
This is basically the Yang-Baxter equation we talked about earlier in disguise.
Now there's one other move I need.
Now it turns out it's not righto meister move 1 because righto meister move 1, remember
that?
It had this twist that I had to untwist, but in a braid I could never go up and down.
Remember water always has to go down so it can never go up, so I'll never see a righto
meister move 1.
But I have another move, which is not easy to think of, but here's what it is.
It says that sigma i, sigma j equals sigma j, sigma i.
You can switch any two sigmas you want to any time as long as i minus j is bigger than
or equal to 2.
The absolute value of those values has to be bigger than or equal to 2.
In other words, they need to be so far apart that you can switch them.
Let's take a look at this picture.
So here I have sigma i on the left with some other space in between some other strands
and sigma j on the right.
Remember they're far enough.
They're bigger than or equal to 2 away.
And thus all this operation says is I can take that crossing of sigma i, I can take
the crossing of sigma j and just literally pull them up like this just to stretch.
And now if I read the lettering, I read the top one first and then I read the bottom.
So i and j have switched places.
In fact, let's see what we can do here.
This word, sigma 1, sigma 2, sigma 1, sigma 2 inverse, sigma 3, sigma 1 inverse, just
as a word, let's start using our three operations.
Well look at the sigma 1, sigma 2, sigma 1.
I can just replace sigma 1, 2, 1 by 2, 1, 2.
That's my second operation.
Great, I'm going to do that.
Now look, now my sigma 2 and sigma 2 inverses are next to each other.
I can cancel that out.
So let me do that.
The first move that I can do just on letters, remember, I'm not drawing a picture at all.
I'm just looking at the letters.
So they go away.
So now I'm left with sigma 2, sigma 1, sigma 3, sigma 1 inverse.
But let me look at the last two things.
You see the 3 and the 1 inverse?
The difference between 3 and 1 is 2.
That's great.
It means I can just switch them using my third rule.
So if I switch them, I see that 1 and 1 inverse now are in the middle and they're actually
next to each other.
And by my rule number 1, they cancel.
Let me cancel that and I get sigma 2, sigma 3.
Just by using those three rules and working on letters, I have changed one of my word
of a braid into another word of a braid.
And I claim that these two are equivalent.
If you draw the first word, the first long word we started with, you get this picture.
And if you draw the second last word, the sigma 2, sigma 3, I ended with, I get this
picture.
And you can simply show that these two pictures are identical.
Just by manipulating these words, I was able to get them to be the same.
In closing, we have studied an extremely important algebraic idea, that of a group.
We've entered the world of algebraic topology.
We have created this amazingly new language in which to describe knots and links, just
be simple letters.
Groups are so important, as I said before, that we will see them again, not in one dimensional
setting anymore, but in three dimensions in future lectures.
Join me then and stay tuned.
