Welcome back, and thanks for joining me again.
This lecture begins our first full adventure in the three-dimensional realm.
We have lived in mostly one dimension and two dimensions thus far, but have peaked a
bit into the three-dimensional world.
For example, a previous lecture on packings on partitions jumped between seeing the same
problem of packings and partitions, giving the honeycomb conjecture and the Kelvin conjecture
from a two-dimensional perspective and from a three-dimensional perspective.
Now although two-dimensional surfaces form everything we see, three dimensions brings
us new challenges and new abilities.
The world we are most comfortable with is 3D.
It's the world we interact with, the world we live in, and we ourselves are three-dimensional
beings.
Well this lecture starts with an ambitious goal, to use three-dimensional ideas, which
we're going to learn today and in future lectures, to understand the shape of the universe itself.
So what is the shape of the universe?
Let's pause, take a step back, and understand what the shape of the Earth is.
Now some used to think that the Earth was infinite in size, stretching in all directions,
like the plane.
Another common thought was that the Earth was finite, with some boundary where you can
fall off, like a disk.
You can come to the edge of the disk and actually fall off.
Well today it's common knowledge that the shape of the Earth is a sphere.
It is finite, but it has no boundary, no place that you can fall off.
Now we know this because of two things.
We're able to travel around the entire Earth, and indeed we can leave it through satellites
and space shuttles.
So we ask again, what is the shape of the universe?
There are two kinds of answers we can give.
The universe, or space itself, can go on forever and is infinite.
It goes on in the x-direction, the y-direction, and the z-direction.
And this is akin to the version of thinking about the Earth as a plane, where the surface
of the Earth extends in all possible ways.
Another version we can think of the universe is that the universe is finite, but has some
kind of boundary, maybe like in the inside of a ball, where we are walking around and
you are interacting with me inside the ball, but there could come a time where we can come
to the boundary of the ball and we can come to the end of the universe itself.
But this is an old way of thinking.
Remember the Earth itself, the shape of the Earth was neither infinite in area nor had
boundary.
The surface was just a perfect sphere.
So why must the universe be any different?
Why should we use our old way of thinking to think about the universe?
Well, unfortunately, we encounter stumbling blocks when talking about the universe rather
than the Earth.
Consider the following two problems.
First, what are the possible shapes of the universe?
Let's think about it.
What could there possibly be other than this infinite space or a ball of boundary?
And second, how can we possibly find out the shape of the universe?
We cannot travel it, it's 93 billion light years wide, nor can we leave it because by
definition the universe is everything there is.
Now both of these problems are deeply rooted in one fact.
We are in an extrinsic setting in two dimensions and an intrinsic setting in three dimensions.
Now although the Earth itself is a three dimensional object, the surface of the Earth
is two dimensions.
It's a perfect sphere.
And so for us to understand the Earth's surface, we can have an extrinsic perspective by leaving
the surface.
But to understand the universe, we have to have an intrinsic perspective because we
are in it and we don't have the power to leave it.
Over the next few lectures, we will try to get our minds to understand the possible shapes
of the universe.
What can it be?
How can we do it?
It's not as easy as two dimensions where we can describe the shapes or indeed draw them
where we can draw a genus four surface easily.
Three dimensions is difficult since we are stuck in the universe.
And moreover, we need different tools and ideas bringing together all we've learned
to push ourselves to new places.
So let's start with a mathematical perspective.
Whereas a two dimensional object was called the surface, a three dimensional object is
called a three manifold.
We sometimes just refer to these as manifolds for short.
So what does being a three manifold mean?
It means that every point in the manifold, we have a neighborhood, we have a region around
it, which is a three dimensional ball of freedom.
Remember what the surface version was?
At any point on a surface, we had an entire 360 degree disc of freedom, an entire two
dimensions of freedom.
And now for a three dimensional manifold, a three manifold, we must have an entire ball,
a three dimensional area of freedom.
Moreover, manifolds can be finite or infinite in volume.
Manifolds can also have boundary and there are manifolds which don't have boundary.
And manifolds may or may not be orientable.
Now let me just pause and explain what this is again.
If a manifold is not orientable, then it is possible that if we start somewhere in our
three dimensional manifold and walk far enough, we can actually come back to where we started
from and the handedness would have changed.
Which means if I was right handed and my friend was left handed, when I come back to
where I started from, I would still be right handed, but my friend would also become right
handed.
Now he didn't change his handedness, it's just the world would look like a mirror image,
a reflection of what it was in a three dimensional way and this is this non-orientability issue
that we have.
We faced a similar issue when we talked about non-orientability on surfaces when we considered
the Mobius band.
Well instead of understanding all possible manifolds, let us limit our studies to manifolds
which are possible candidate for shapes of the universe, all of which mimic the two dimensional
surface of the earth's properties.
So we consider manifolds that are finite in volume.
Thus we are not considering Euclidean space that we learned in school with XYZ directions
extend in all possible ways and we consider manifolds without boundary.
Thus we're not interested in balls where you can come to the edge and go and feel the
boundary itself.
And finally we consider only orientable manifolds.
So let me ask you this question, can we imagine any manifold satisfying these properties?
Can we think of any?
Anything that is finite in volume, that has no boundary and it's orientable?
Think of this far more difficult in 3D because we don't have the imagination to understand
this because we're in an intrinsic setting.
Well since we cannot imagine any new three dimensional manifolds we need to build them
and one way of doing this is using a tool we're very familiar with since elementary
school called multiplication.
Now everyone knows what 3 times 5 is, 3 times 5 is 15, but do we really understand what
3 times 5 is?
If I ask you what a circle times a circle is, what is the answer?
If we really understood what multiplication was about, then a circle times a circle must
be a concept we should be familiar with.
We know what a circle is and if we really know what multiplication is, we should know
what the answer is.
We have all the pieces of the puzzle in front of us.
Well the number times a number is a number, so a shape times a shape must be a shape,
but what shape is a circle times a circle?
You see in order to understand what it means to multiply pictures we need to understand
how to multiply numbers all over again.
Let's think back, how did we get 15 for 3 times 5?
The answer is easy, we memorized it.
I know that 7 times 7 is 49 because I was trained that way, not because I'm actually
multiplying in my mind, we memorized this concept and now we're just regurgitating this
idea that we learned when we were in elementary school.
So instead of thinking about it in a rote way, let's think about it in a fresh way.
Let's look again at what 3 times 5 really is, this time visually.
So here, notice that 3 times 5 at every point of 3, I'm going to give it 5 points, 1, 2,
3, 4, 5.
For this other point of 3, I'm going to give it 5 points.
For the third point of 3, I'm going to give it 5 points and when I look at the entire
collection I get 15.
So great, now I can visually see what multiplication is about.
Let's start at looking at multiplying some pictures.
Let's consider a line segment times a line segment visually, which means in this version
I need to give at every point in my line segment an entire line segment of possibilities.
At every point in 3, I gave 5 things, so at every point in this line segment, I'm going
to give it an entire line segment of possibilities.
For this one I do it, for this one I do it, for this one I do it, and a line segment times
a line segment becomes an entire square.
So now that we have some examples under our belt for what multiplication is, let's look
at a circle times a circle visually.
Well, one way to do this is we take a circle, at every point in my circle I associate another
circle.
If I do this for all of these points, in fact if I do this for every single point in my
circle, I get a thickened annulus.
I get this completely filled disc with a hole in the middle.
But it turns out this is not the right answer because we made a mistake.
Let's take a look at 3 times 5 again.
Well, when we look at 3 times 5 and multiply it this way, here's one thing we're not doing.
For this point, I'm not giving these 5 points here, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, or these 5 points here,
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, or these 5 points, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
Notice that if I do it this way, if I overlap my points, I get the value 10 rather than
the value 15.
So when I multiply a circle times a circle, I need to make sure each circle that I associate
to the point must be distinct from anything else.
It cannot overlap.
So how can we possibly do this?
We can make a circle into a line segment by taking my circle, cutting it open, and laying
it flat topologically.
But we need to remember that the right end of this line segment and the left end of this
line segment are actually the same point.
They're coming from the circle itself that's been broken up.
And when I do this, we get the following structure.
Instead of a circle times a circle, we look at a line segment times a line segment.
But what is a line segment times a line segment?
That's a square.
So thus, a circle times a circle is a square, but wait, these line segments had end points
that were the same.
Remember, this circle has this end point that we cut open to make it into two separate end
points, which we glued.
So this interval times an interval, this line segment times a line segment, the ends are
the same, and thus, for the square, the top part of the square must be the same as the
bottom part of the square.
And similarly, because this circle has these two end points of this line segment the same,
the right side of the square and the left side of the square have to be the same.
Which means I have a square with the right and the left the same and the top and bottom
the same, and when I glue this together, I get the torus.
The product structure becomes a torus.
Now this is a property of dimension to keep in mind.
When we multiply what's happening, the dimension of the new object becomes the sum of the dimensions
of the multiplied objects.
Now since each circle that we had was one dimension, then a circle times a circle becomes
two dimensions.
So if we multiply a two dimensional world times a three dimensional world, we should
get a five dimensional world.
Well why is this?
Because at any point in my two dimensions, I'm giving it an entire three dimensions
of possibility.
At every point I do this, so you have a two dimensional world of freedom, and now you
get three more dimensions of freedom, so you should get five dimensions.
Now that we understand how multiplication works in terms of dimension, we can use our
power of multiplication to actually build three manifolds.
So if a circle times a circle is two dimensional, then a circle times a circle times a circle
must be three dimensional, and this is called a three torus.
Since a torus that we are familiar with is a circle times a circle, a three torus means
it's a product of three circles.
So how do we do this?
Well we cut each circle up into an interval, we multiply all the three intervals, and
then we have to remember the gluing structure we did in order to get the original circle
from that interval.
So what happens if we take an interval times an interval times an interval?
Well we get the cube.
That's an interval times an interval times an interval.
But remember, at one interval, both sides of the endpoints are the same, which means
this side of the cube is glued to this side, and similarly this side of the cube is glued
to this side, and this is glued to this.
So when we have this complete gluing, we end up with the three torus.
Here's what it is.
Now the three torus is our first three dimensional manifold, which satisfies our conditions for
a possible shape of the universe.
It's finite in volume.
I'm holding it in my hand.
It has no boundary, because every time you come to one of the edges, you reappear on
the other side.
You can never fall off.
And furthermore, it's orientable.
Now this seems like fun.
We actually built something for multiplication, so let's try it again.
How about we multiply a circle times a two dimensional sphere?
Circle times a sphere.
Circle is one dimension.
The sphere is two dimensions, so we're going to get a three manifold from this structure.
So what does this mean?
At every point in my sphere, that's sitting in my sphere, I need to associate to it an
entire circle of possibilities.
But remember, we cannot have these circles intersect as we put it on the sphere.
So we do the same trick we did before.
We take each one of my circles, I cut it open and I make it into an interval.
But remember the identification for the two edges.
I take my sphere, I stick my intervals on there, and I do this for every point on my
sphere.
And if I do this, you get a hairy looking ball.
But if I do this for every point that you can imagine, you actually get a thickened
sphere, where the inside shell and the outside shell of this thickened sphere are identified.
Why?
Because this interval really was a circle.
These two points were identified, which means the inside shell and the outside shell are
identified, which looks something like this.
Now again, we have another three manifold.
Notice that this object is finite.
You can hold it in your hand, it's orientable, and it has no boundary.
When you come to the outer boundary, you reappear on the inside because it's coming from that
circle property.
So what are some other properties of this circle times a sphere?
Well we can take a spherical slice of this object, and when we do this, notice we have
an entire circle's worth of spherical slices.
You can slice it here spherically, or here spherically, in fact you have an entire circle
of possibilities, which makes sense, because this is a circle times a sphere.
But surprisingly, we can also slice it horizontally.
And when I do this horizontal slice, notice that you get an annulus, you get a disc with
a hole in it.
But the inside circle of the annulus and the outside circle of the annulus are the same
because they're glued from the circle-gluing property.
And when this happens, notice if I take an annulus and glue the inside and the outside,
I get a torus.
So we're actually getting a two-dimensional torus sitting inside this three-dimensional
world.
Things are far from obvious, even in this simple world.
Well what about knots in this world?
Are knot theory the idea of knots we studied in three dimensions?
Well what if you put the knots in this three-dimensional world?
It turns out that there are at least two kinds of unknots in this world.
Here's an unknot, just a plain circle that's just floating on the side.
This is what we're completely familiar with, but here's another unknot.
It goes from the bottom part of the sphere to the top part of the sphere.
Remember they're glued together.
And having two kinds of unknots feels like we'll have two kinds of knot theory.
Indeed, we can tie knots that go from the top with a knot structure inside and that
glues to the bottom, which again by the identification is a perfect circle that's knotted up.
But look at this amazing property.
If I have a crossing that's really close to the interior sphere, I can pull that strand
under that sphere and loop it all the way around so the crossing now becomes the other
side.
I've changed an over-crossing into an under-crossing.
And by doing this repeatedly for any knots, it turns out that all of these knots that
come from this top to bottom structure can be untangled.
Thus, there are different kinds of knots here.
And the knot theory in this three-manifold is not like classical knot theory at all.
It becomes far more difficult and we have to be careful about subtleties.
Three-manifolds are complicated objects.
Now let's look at one more three-manifold, the three-dimensional sphere.
Remember to draw the surface of this two-manifold, the sphere, we need the three dimensions.
So in order for us to draw the three-dimensional sphere, we will need four dimensions.
Thus to understand what the three-dimensional sphere really looks like, we need to be a
bit more creative than just trying to draw it.
So how can we build the two-dimensional sphere using two-dimensional pieces of the puzzle?
Well, we can build the two-dimensional sphere by taking two discs and gluing the boundary
of the discs together to get the two-dimensional sphere.
Similarly, we can build a three-dimensional sphere from gluing two solid balls together.
Instead of taking a disc and filling it in, excuse me, instead of taking a circle and filling
it in to get a disc, we take a sphere and fill it in to get a ball.
So we take two solid balls, if we glue the boundaries of the ball together, then we get
the three-dimensional sphere.
Indeed, a classic theorem of topology says that no matter how we glue these two solid
balls together, we will always get the three-dimensional sphere.
Again, notice we see finite volume, because it's just made up of two balls.
It has no boundary.
Anytime you come to the boundary of one ball, you reappear on the other side, and it turns
out to be orientable.
So what does it feel like if we lived here?
Well, consider how light travels.
I see a small version of myself everywhere on the event horizon.
If I'm on a two-dimensional sphere, if I'm standing there as light travels, light doesn't
travel out, light travels along the two-dimensional sphere, I see myself on the other side, except
I see a small version, because light has to travel all this way.
In fact, everywhere I look, I see myself if I'm standing on a two-dimensional sphere.
Thus, in a three-dimensional sphere, everywhere I look, I see myself filling my vision in
the event horizon.
And we're going to understand what it means to fly through these worlds in a bit more
detail later on.
Thus far, we have built some three manifolds from multiplication.
In order to understand the shape of our universe, we need to build all possible manifolds.
So can we build all three manifolds from multiplication?
This would be wonderful.
But unfortunately, this is not true.
But this is not surprising, either, if we consider the two-dimensional case.
It's clear that surfaces are not all made from multiplication.
Indeed, only the torus, the genus one surface, is made from a product of two circles.
The genus five surface is not coming from multiplication at all.
But there is one way we built all surfaces, which were a finite area, without boundary
and orientable.
We glued polygons together.
And we try to generalize this to three dimensions.
Consider an approach where we can glue polyhedra to get three manifolds.
So here are some examples.
We've already seen the three torus.
Here we have seen the three torus built from gluing sides of the cube.
So if I take a cube, my polyhedron, and glue the front to the back, the right to the left
and the top to the bottom, I get the three torus.
Well, similarly, there's another object, another three manifold, called the one-half
twist cube space.
Here we take the four sides of the cube, glued exactly the same way just like the torus.
But the other two sides, the yellow sides are glued with a 180-degree twist.
Here I glue it just normally to the opposite side.
But here, as I glue, I twist the square 180 degrees and glue it to the other side.
This is called a half-twist cube space.
Also, we can take a one-third-twist hexagonal space.
It's a new three manifold.
We glue the opposite sides of the hexagonal prism.
So here's a hexagonal prism, and here I take the opposite sides of the hexagonal prism
and I glue it together.
Here this square glues to this square, this glues to this, and this glues to this just
like normal.
But the hexagonal face on top glues to the opposite hexagonal face with a 120-degree
twist.
That's a new space called the one-third-twist hexagonal space.
There's also something called the cypher Weber space, where every face of a dodecahedron
is glued to its opposite face.
Remember, a dodecahedron has 12 pentagons, so there's this opposite face we can think
about, but it's glued to the opposite face with a three-tenths twist.
Take this object glued with a three-tenths twist for each one of the faces.
There's also the Poincaré dodecahedron space, where every face of the dodecahedron is glued
to the opposite face with a one-tenth twist.
Indeed, we have the following beautiful theorem.
Every three-manifold of finite volume comes from identifying sides of some polyhedron.
Just like every genus G-surface comes from gluing sides of some polygon, every three-manifold
comes from gluing sides of a polyhedron.
In our next lecture, we will actually prove this wonderful result.
We have seen these worlds from the idea of gluing, but what does it mean to live in these
worlds?
How are they different from standard Euclidean three-space with the XYZ coordinates?
We got a glimpse of this when we thought about the three-dimensional sphere and how it could
fill our vision.
Jeff Weeks is a mathematician who received his PhD from Princeton University under William
Thurston, a Fields Medalist who we have seen before and who we're going to see again.
Jeff has been heavily influenced in cosmology and mathematics and was awarded the MacArthur
Genius Grant in 1999.
He's created a software called Curbed Spaces, which allows us to see what these worlds look
like.
Let's take a look.
Here, we see a three-dimensional torus.
How would it feel to be inside this three-dimensional torus?
Notice that the copies of this galaxy that you see is actually the same galaxy, and as
we walk around and fly inside this three-dimensional torus, we get a sense of vastness.
But notice it's finite in size because it's the same galaxy you see over and over again.
In fact, we can actually see the gluing structure of the cubes as we repeat it over and over
again in this program called Curved Spaces.
Now, instead of looking at the three torus, let's consider something very different.
Let's look at the Poincare-Dodecahedral sphere.
Notice here a sense of finiteness.
You kind of feel claustrophobic in this world.
Again, all the galaxies you see are the same once.
It's just repeated due to the gluing structure.
Now, again, we can see in this world where the boundary is of how these dodecahedra are
glued.
Now, this third world we're going to see is the Cypher Weber world, which we talked about
earlier, gluing the dodecahedron in a different way.
Notice unlike the Poincare-Dodecahedral sphere, we see a sense of vastness in this world.
And again, we can see the gluing structure with the dodecahedra.
Well, so far, we've been looking at possible shapes of the universe.
We have seen that all three manifolds come from gluing faces of polyhedra.
Well, this answers our first question, which asks for possible shapes of the universe.
Our second question, which started this lecture, asks how we can possibly know the shape of
the universe we live in.
Remember that we cannot leave the universe, nor can we travel around the entire universe?
So how can we do this?
Well, the answer lies in cosmology, with cosmic crystallography.
Now, if we lived in a manifold from gluing faces of a polyhedron, we would see copies
of ourselves in different parts of space, as we just saw in this program-curved spaces.
And if we understand the gluing based on the copies we see, then we can understand the
manifold we live in.
But there are two problems with this, however.
First, it's extremely hard to see such patterns of our Milky Way galaxy in space, since we
will not be looking at our own galaxy head on, but from different angles.
And second, time is actually slow in terms of how light travels.
The light that is reaching us from the galaxies is billions of years old.
Thus, if we're lucky, we'll be seeing what we look like a billion years ago, far different
than what things look like now.
Imagine this.
It's like trying to identify copies of yourself in a crowd of millions of people, not only
from different angles of the way you look, but during different stages of your life,
different ages.
Now, there is a novel approach, however, coming from cosmology, and this is the study of cosmic
microwave background radiation.
With a traditional optical telescope, the space between the stars and galaxies is pitch
black.
But with a radio telescope, one that focuses on the microwave region of the radio spectrum,
a background glow can be detected throughout space.
And this radiation was discovered by astronomers Arno, Penzayas, and Robert Wilson in 1965 and
earned them the 1978 Nobel Prize.
Now, this radiation, due to the Big Bang, gives us a beautiful visual map that will help
us find glowing patterns, far easier and more powerful than cosmic crystallography.
Indeed, it bypasses the problems we encountered there.
In 2001, NASA launched the Microwave and Isotropy probe MAP for short to create a microwave background
radiation map of the sky, and we get images like this.
In May 14, 2009, the European Space Agency launched the Planck Space Observatory, designed
to give a far more accurate reading of the sky.
And time will tell what secrets we will discover, the shape of the universe.
Well, we have begun our adventures in exploring the world of three manifolds, and although
we are three-dimensional creatures, it turns out this world is far from intuitive, since
it asks us to look outside of our own framework.
In our next lecture, we will continue our studies of possible shapes of the universe
as we introduce new ways of building manifolds.
Stay tuned.
