Welcome back, and thanks for joining me again.
So far, we've been focusing on four-dimensional polytopes.
Well, with this lecture, we make a leap into higher dimensions far beyond four.
We will show how higher-dimensional work is vital to the study of things like subatomic particle motions,
robot motion planning, and even protein modeling.
And in future lectures, we continue to look at objects like the space of phylogenetic trees,
which keep track of evolutionary data, all based on an understanding of higher dimensions far beyond four.
Now, this lecture focuses on motions.
Consider an idea extremely useful in engineering and physics is this concept of robot motion planning.
Let's take a look.
Here, we can think of robot motion planning as appearing in manufacturing,
where we are worrying about planning the motion of your robots.
So imagine the robots are robotic arms in a factory that are designing and building cars.
Then how would robot motion planning play a role?
Well, one thing we want to do is we want to worry about all possible ways the robotic arms,
these robots, can move in terms of assembling and building your cars.
But we also want to make sure that the robots don't collide.
As the robots are moving from one position to another one,
we want to understand their motions to make sure they don't collide with one another,
and they're efficient in how they're actually moving in order to build the cars.
Another way robot motion planning appears is in terms of circuitry, electrical circuitry design,
like on a motherboard.
Now, you might be wondering, what does this have to do with robot motions?
Look here, the concept of robots is different.
Here, robots are electrons or pieces of information.
If you had designed the board properly, then you will control through gates how the information,
how the electron travels on the board.
So again, we see from the perspective of thinking of it as information,
we have a planning of how our robots are moving on this board.
Or take a look at this.
Here we see an artificial or synthetic heart.
Here, the robots in this position are blood.
Notice that we want to control the way blood moves in the heart.
We want it to go through certain valves.
At the same time, we don't want it to go through other ones.
We want to plan the motion of blood in this artificial heart.
Moreover, robot motion planning appears beautifully in protein folding.
In protein folding, we have the concerns of how proteins can bend and form
based on how enzymes interact with them.
And here the robots are the proteins themselves.
We want to understand the angles in which the bending happens.
The different positions these robots can take in space.
A whole planning is needed to understand and keep track of possible ways these proteins,
these robots, can move.
Now, motion planning is based on three questions.
The first question, decide if it's possible to do something.
Is it possible for my robotic arm to go from this position to this position?
Now, if the length of my arm is too short,
I cannot, with a fixed robotic arm and a factory,
take an object here and move it all the way over here.
But if I'm not restricted to length,
if this length actually moves or is able to change,
then it is possible for me to take this object all the way over here.
So the first question we need to understand in robot motion planning is,
is it possible for the robot to carry out the task I assigned it to do?
Well, the second question is,
find all possible ways this can happen.
Maybe one way in which my robot can take a box and move it somewhere else
is for it to lift the box, rotate and bring the box down
without doing anything to my pivot arm right here.
But maybe another possibility is that it uses the pivot arm a lot to pick up the object,
rotates without lifting too high this way,
and then uses my pivot arm to drop off the object.
So there are two possible ways for the object to be moved.
So find all possible ways.
First, decide if it's possible.
Second, find all possible ways.
And third, and this is most important to engineers and to computer scientists,
is to find the best possible way.
Maybe it takes a certain amount of energy to use the robotic arm in this way with my wrist.
And maybe it takes a different amount of energy to use it right here at my elbow.
So if I'm moving this object over here,
which is the best possible way for me to conserve energy in terms of carrying out that task?
Well, we as mathematicians are interested in the second question.
To find the space of all possible motions of a robot.
We're not interested in efficiency right now,
nor do we want to know whether it can possibly happen in one method, a yes or no decision,
but we want to create a space of possible ways robots can move.
Well, how can we keep track of all possible motions of a robot, much less several robots?
Well, the mathematical tool which does this is called the configuration space.
Now, to understand what this is about,
let's start with an example we are all partly familiar with, which is the game of chess.
Now, the starting position of a chess board is one possible configuration that's allowed.
If I'm looking at the space of all possible ways the chess pieces can move,
well, let's think about this.
If I move one of my pawns, notice that this is another configuration.
It's a different position than my original starting one.
Well, instead of moving my pawn first, if I move a knight instead, this is yet another configuration.
My configuration space is the set or the space of all possible placements of chess pieces on a board
that can possibly arise in a game of chess.
It's every possible configuration.
I want to keep track of all of them at once.
Now, any space that we have looked at throughout these lectures needs two things.
First, you need elements in the space, and for us those are the different configurations of the board,
but you also need a relationship between the elements of the space.
You just don't want a random scattering of elements.
You want to know how they're related to one another to create your spatial structure.
Well, the elements of my configuration space are the individual formations of the chess board.
Every snapshot of how different chess pieces move and the different positions you have there are the elements of my space.
Now, if you think about it, this configuration space has a huge number of elements.
Every possible setup of all possible pawns and knights and rooks and queens and kings.
It's huge.
Now, each chess move corresponds to a relationship between two elements of the space,
the formation before and the formation after.
Now, notice there's a relationship between the chess board and the configuration space.
So, we have what our pieces of the space are.
They are configurations of the board, and we have how they're related to one another by moves of a chess piece.
Now, the configuration space is different than the chess board.
We call the chess board the base space.
This is where all the movement takes place.
This is where the fundamental pieces are moving, but the configuration space is a meta space.
It's above this space, and it's measuring all possible ways.
For example, for the robots on the factory floor, the base space is the factory floor itself.
This is where the robotic arms move, and the configuration space is the space of all possible ways those robot arms can move.
It keeps track of our movements on the board.
Indeed, we have seen configuration spaces before in a previous lecture.
Remember the flip graph of a point set?
Let me remind you, given a collection of points on the plane, a point cloud,
the set of all possible triangulations of the points are the vertices of the flip graph.
I'm creating a superstructure called a flip graph, which keeps track of all possible triangulations.
Now, two such vertices are connected by an edge if the flip graph in the flip graph,
if one can be made into the other one by a simple flip.
So, this is the space of configurations up here, the flip graph,
and down here is your point set with all possible triangulations.
Now, this flip graph is a configuration space.
It's elements are the triangulations, and the relationships are formed by the flips.
And here, my base space is the point cloud itself, where the flipping itself takes place.
Now, in both of these examples, with chess and with triangulations,
we are talking about discrete configuration spaces.
Here, the elements come in discrete jumps, and the moves are discrete jumps.
There's no sense of smooth, continuous moves, like those of blood through the artificial heart,
or motions of a robot.
Well, now that we've taken a snapshot of a configuration space,
we are now in the position to look at more complicated situations of general configuration spaces.
Now, throughout the rest of this lecture, we will focus on the motion of particles.
And we do this since particles are a generic concept, and we can substitute whatever we want for it.
It can actually represent an atomic particle, or blood, or electrons, or whatever we choose.
Now, let's consider the space of movement of one particle in a box.
As this particle moves around the box, what is the configuration space of all possible ways this particle can move around the box?
Notice that at every snapshot, here, and here, and here, and here, is a different position, is a different configuration.
So the space of all possible ways this one robot can move in the box is the entire box.
It has a box of possible movements.
So my configuration space is the box.
Well, what about if this robot has to move in a box with obstacles like this?
Now, what is its configuration space?
Notice here, the robot can move anywhere you see in the background.
Thus, the space of all possibilities is everywhere the robot can go, except for the obstacles within the box.
But what about the following where we have three particles moving?
Take a look.
If we have three particles moving, I need to look at the configuration space of all possible ways all three can move.
Remember, the particles cannot touch each other, nor can they touch the obstacles.
But if we also step back, we realize each particle has two dimensions of freedom.
It can move in two possible directions, the x-direction and the y-direction.
And since we have three particles, my configuration space needs to keep track of all of them.
So two dimensions for each particle with three particles gives me a six-dimensional configuration space.
Now, if I wanted to keep track of 12 particles in a three-dimensional room like this,
well, each of my 12 particles has three dimensions of freedom.
That's 36 dimensions in my configuration space.
Notice how higher dimensions come at as fast in the world of configuration spaces.
Now, instead of diving in deeper, let's pull back a bit and consider some very special cases to get a better understanding.
We are going to introduce three rules for study of configuration spaces of particles.
Now, these are artificial rules I've constructed just to give us a framework
to understand these worlds of configuration spaces a little bit better.
The first rule is we are restricted to lines.
My particles have to go back and forth along lines.
The second rule is my particles can move along these lines, but they cannot collide with each other.
And my third rule is my particles cannot move past obstacles.
Now, here we see the obstacles as these black fixed points.
They can move, they cannot collide with each other, nor can they collide or move past obstacles.
So let's consider some simple examples.
What is the configuration space of one particle on an interval?
Well, if I have an interval and if I have only one particle on it and if it moves back and forth,
the space of all possible ways this particle can exist is an interval of possibilities.
So my configuration space is an interval itself.
Well, what about two particles that look like this moving in this base space?
Well, I have a green particle that's allowed to move and a red that's allowed to move,
but let me actually redraw this base space in a different way.
Let me just bend it and draw it in this position.
Now, note what happens.
As my green particle moves, I can represent it one way in terms of the line or in this bent diagram.
Now, I can have my red particle move.
Now, notice this position right here on the plane keeps track of exactly where my green is and where my red is.
That point on the plane keeps track of both of those particles at once.
It takes this global snapshot for me.
But now, if my green particle moves, I get a different point on this plane.
Notice this point on the plane keeps track of exactly where the green and the red particles are.
Indeed, as I move both points, that particle that keeps track of both of those at point in the plane
is exactly what I need to measure the position of the green and the red.
Indeed, the configuration space I get for two particles.
One on each interval is an entire box of possibilities.
A point on the box tells me exactly where my green particle is.
If you look at a point on the box, you can see just draw straight downwards where its green particle would be
and you can see by drawing it across where the red particle would be.
Thus, we see that the entire box, this square, is the space of all possibilities.
Every point in the square measures where my two particles are.
It is my configuration space, the space that keeps track of the configurations of my particle.
Now, what happens if I have two particles on an interval with no fixed particle in between?
Well, in this case, notice what happens.
I can have my green particle move, but it can only move so far.
It can move up to where my red particle is.
Now, it has to stop.
Now, indeed, I need to move my red particle first in order to move my green particle further.
Remember, they're not allowed to collide.
Thus, the space of two particles on an interval without a fixed point separating them turns out to be just this triangle.
Notice, I don't have an entire square of possibilities.
I only have a triangle of possibilities because there's a restriction that green cannot go past red to the other side.
So, it's restricted right here.
Remember, the boundary of this triangle is long diagonal is exactly where the two particles are allowed to collide and that cannot happen.
So, it's only on one side of the triangle that captures my configuration space.
Indeed, if I have three particles on an interval, we can think of the same idea.
Each particle has its own dimension of freedom, but yet there's a restriction between it.
So, if we notice, given the red and the green and the orange particle,
this point right here in three dimensions captures the configuration space of the position of these three points.
But you might think that the configuration space is the entire box itself.
Each one can do whatever it wants in its interval.
But remember the restriction.
Each particle cannot move past the other.
So, thus, this point right here in my box is not in my configuration space.
Why?
This means green is all the way to the right, orange is all the way to the right,
but it also means red is all the way to the left.
Now, red cannot be to the left of green.
So, this cannot appear in my configuration space.
So, what is the configuration space?
It is simply this tetrahedron.
This is the space of all possible ways three particles can move on an interval.
So, we ask the question, what about n particles on an interval in general?
Well, we notice that one particle on an interval gives you an interval of possibilities for my configuration space.
We notice that two particles on an interval gave me an entire triangle of possibilities,
three particles on an interval gave me an entire tetrahedron of possibilities,
and in general, we have a theorem.
A configuration space of n particles on an interval gives us an n-simplex,
the n-dimensional version of the tetrahedron.
That's what the configuration space is.
Indeed, we can in fact define the simplex this way in a new way.
Well, what about particles on different intervals?
We've been focusing on particles that are all on one particular interval.
What about if they're in different intervals?
Well, let's consider some examples.
If I have one particle on one interval and another on another independently with a fixed point in the middle,
notice we talked about this earlier.
This is a square of possibilities.
But what if I have two particles on one interval and one on a separate interval broken up by a fixed point?
Notice that the two particles on an interval give me a triangular space of possibilities,
and that one particle individually gives me an interval of possibilities.
But notice these are independent motions.
The particle that's alone on the interval can do whatever it wants to,
whereas the two particles that give me rise to a triangle never interact with this other particle on the interval.
Thus, I have multiplication.
I have a triangle times an interval, which is a prism.
A triangular prism is my configuration space.
Indeed, for three particles, one in its own interval,
I get a line segment, an interval times an interval times an interval,
which is a cube of possibilities.
And indeed, if I have a distribution like this,
two particles on one interval and two on another,
well, that's a triangle times a triangle.
We talked about this last time in terms of four polytopes.
What about this?
An interval for one particle and three particles on another interval
will give me a tetrahedron times an interval, another four polytope.
And finally, we have this configuration we could look at,
where we have a triangle of possibilities with two particles on an interval
and an interval in an interval in their own particular ones.
Now we have a triangle times a square.
Now, I'm going to give you this important remark.
Notice in this particular case where we have independent particle motions broken up
by these fixed points, something special happens.
The base space can be arranged in any combination.
Regardless of how I rearrange the base space,
here I have two particles on an interval,
one on its own interval and another on its own interval,
no matter how I rearrange it.
At the end of the day, I'm still going to get the same configuration space.
The particles are stuck between the fixed points,
so thus they cannot move past the fixed points,
and thus I can move these intervals independently
because they never see one another.
They can never interact with one another.
In fact, I'm actually changing the base space,
the world in which the particles move,
but yet the configuration space stays the same.
This somehow feels like we're not capturing the underlying base space accurately.
So in order to capture this underlying topology of the base space,
are the particles moving on lines?
Are they moving around a circle?
What's going on?
To understand and capture this correctly,
we have to change our basic rules of particle motions just a little bit.
And we now introduce particle collisions.
For this, we have three rules.
The first rule is that the objects are restricted to lines,
just like last time.
Our particles can only go back and forth along lines.
The second rule is that our particles can collide with each other.
Indeed, when they come near each other, they don't even see each other.
They go right past one another.
And the third rule is that the particles can indeed move past fixed points.
They can actually move past these obstacles as if they weren't even there,
just like the particles can move past each other as if they're not even there.
So let's consider some examples under these new rules.
Let's take a look.
In this case, notice I have two particles on the same interval.
Now, before, if these two particles were on the same interval,
the space of possibilities without collision was just this triangle.
Similarly, on the other side, I have two particles on an interval
with a fixed point in the middle.
Here, the space of all possibilities was this square.
The red was restricted between those two points,
and the green was restricted between those two points.
But now look what happens if I allow particle collisions.
Now here, my green can go all the way up to this place right before the collision happens,
but now it can go right past it.
Indeed, it doesn't even see the red particle.
There is no collision from the perspective of green.
So this space of motions is this entire square of possibilities.
The red can go wherever it wants, and the green can go wherever it wants.
Now look at this other diagram.
Here, the red and the green don't even know to see each other,
but they don't even see the fixed particle in the middle.
Thus, there's an entire square of possibilities in this situation too.
Now the most important thing for us to notice is that in the configuration space,
both of which are squares, we notice that these lines appear,
and these lines are collision lines which keep track of the collisions.
Now on the left side, notice that you have this one diagonal
which keeps track of the collisions of the green and the red.
But on the right side, we again have the same diagonal,
but we also have these vertical and horizontal lines
which not only keep track of where the red and the green point collide,
but also where those particles collide with the fixed point.
These collision lines give us the underlying topology of the base space.
They're able to keep track of these collisions in a different way,
which is going to be extremely useful for us.
Indeed, we get the following result under these collision rules.
First, since each particle is free to move anywhere in the base space,
then what happens?
There's no collision occurring and there's no fixed point.
Thus, what happens to the configuration space itself?
Well second, the configuration space becomes pure multiplication.
Since each point has an entire space is worth the freedom,
it doesn't have to worry about the other particles.
It doesn't have to worry about the fixed points.
The entire space is open to it.
So the first particle can have the entire space of freedom.
The second particle can have an entire space of freedom.
So if my space is denoted as s and if I have n particles,
then the configuration space is s times s times s.
I just multiply my spaces.
And we learned earlier how to multiply spaces.
And this new superstructure, this product of these spaces,
is my configuration space.
Moreover, notice the third observation,
that the intervals cannot be arranged in any order.
Notice here, if I have those particles all lined up on one long interval,
then my configuration space is going to be an interval times an interval
times an interval depending on how many particles I have.
On the other hand, if those intervals where the fixed points are arranged
in a circle, sort of in a triangular format,
then it's going to be a circle times a circle times a circle,
where I'm going to be living in the world of a torus,
rather than the world of intervals and cubes.
So here I'm able to capture the underlying topology.
Now let's take a look a little bit closer at another example.
Let's compare these two spaces.
Now here I have particles moving along an interval
with a fixed particle in the middle.
Great. We have already seen this space.
The configuration space is an entire square of possibilities
with these particle collision lines.
But now I can think of my particle moving along a circle.
But here I've depicted the circle, opened it up,
and identified the two endpoints to get back to the circle again.
Remember, that's a way of thinking about the circle.
We opened it up when we started multiplying circles.
So here my particle moves along this triangle,
this circle of possibilities, and it's represented this way.
In fact, if I have two particles moving along this way,
it's represented like this, and the space,
the configuration space of possibilities,
is this square with these collision lines.
But notice, this is really not a square.
It's actually taking place on a torus.
Because as the green particle goes to the right,
it reappears on the left.
The right and left sides of the square are identified.
As the red goes to the top, it reappears in the bottom.
The top and bottom of that square are identified.
Notice the collision lines.
We will come back to these collision lines in the next lecture,
where they will play an important and prominent role for us.
Well, we close our study of particle motions
and configuration spaces with one more beautiful example.
This is unlike our previous examples,
for it involves a certain amount of mathematical maturity.
Now, I compare mathematical maturity to cooking a complex dish.
All the pieces might be simple and well understood,
but putting it together is intricate, delicate,
and becomes sophisticated.
Now, our study of the fundamental group
involved a certain amount of maturity.
We needed to have a grasp of what homotopy equivalence was.
Well, that was one piece of the dish.
Then we needed to understand what three manifolds were.
That was a different piece.
And then we needed to understand what group theory was.
And group structures, that was a different piece.
And for the fundamental group, we mixed it all in an elegant way,
and the level of maturity was demanded from us.
Now, if you're struggling with these concepts,
I think that's fantastic.
And I also think it's very natural.
Any time you start talking about a complex, beautiful idea,
it is difficult to grasp easily.
We are creating a beautifully complex dish of mathematics,
and it is no easy task.
Well, we are now going to bring in mathematical maturity
by actually mixing configuration spaces
with fundamental groups.
Well, first we start with the configuration space
of five particles in the plane.
Let's think about this.
I want to talk about the configuration space
of five particles in the plane.
These particles can move in the plane any way they want,
but each particle has two dimensions of freedom.
So thus, five particles,
each with two dimensions of freedom,
have a ten-dimensional space.
Well, I want to...
I want us to consider two important points for us.
The first point is that this is not a collision space.
My particles can move,
but they are not allowed to collide with one another.
And the second point is I want to make sure
all my particles look identical.
In other words, I don't want them to be labeled with color
or labeled with numbers.
They all look the same to me.
All the particles are indistinguishable.
I want to ask you a question.
This ten-dimensional configuration space,
what is its fundamental group?
Wow, what a tough question to think about.
This is a ten-dimensional space,
and I'm asking to find the fundamental group.
Well, do I want to torture you with this painful problem?
And the answer is yes.
Torture and pain is exactly how you learn.
This is the expanding of your mind
in terms of this maturity.
Now, instead of us being just overwhelmed
with thinking about the fundamental group
and the ten-dimensional space,
let's just pull back and start with the basic definitions.
What does it take to build a fundamental group?
Remember, we need a base point,
and then we need loops.
Well, what is a base point in my configuration space?
A base point in my configuration space?
Remember, it's not a base point on the plane.
My plane is my base space.
I want a base point.
I want a point I can nail my loops to in my configuration space,
because I'm asking to find the fundamental group
in my configuration space.
Well, we can choose any point to be my base point,
which means it has to be a point in my configuration space,
which is a particular configuration of my five points.
So I can choose any configuration of my five points I want
as my base point.
So I'm going to pick a nice one.
I'm going to pick my five points all ordered up
in a straight line along some axes.
So it's nice and clean.
Now, what is a loop in this space?
It is a path that starts at the base point
and ends at the base point.
So here's what my loop does.
It starts at the base point.
It's these five points, and it ends,
but it needs to move through my configuration space.
In other words, it needs to move through
all configurations of these points.
So here, imagine five points here.
And as it's moving,
these points just move around
and they come back to my base point.
They reappear and go back again
in a continuous manner.
Remember, my points cannot collide.
They form a group.
I actually need to return to my base point.
So what have I created?
My loops turn out
to be braids of five strands.
These particles start at the base point.
They move around, and they end back
at the base point again.
And they're tracing out these strands.
Each strand comes from a time motion
of the movement of a particle.
Indeed, one can show
that the fundamental group of five particles
on the plane is the braid group
with five strands.
The fundamental group is the braid group itself.
What a beautiful result.
Well, we have done, I believe,
beautiful and wonderful things today
entering the world of configuration spaces.
Now, these mathematical ideas
are used to model blood flow,
particle motions, and robot motion planning,
just to name a few.
And we have even related configuration spaces
and fundamental groups together using braids.
But I believe most importantly,
we have seen how to enter
the world of higher dimensions
based on simple notions such as particles
moving back and forth on an interval.
Well, in our next lecture,
we venture deeper into configuration spaces
as we enter the forefront
of current research.
Stay tuned.
