Hello, welcome to our course on the mysteries and science of sleep.
I would love to be able to ask you personally why you are interested in this course.
Perhaps you experience a particular difficulty with sleep, and if so, I'm sure you'll find
lots of helpful information in these lectures.
Or perhaps you were attracted to this course out of pure curiosity.
Perhaps you are eager to learn why and how sleep exerts such a powerful influence over
so many aspects of our lives, from our mood to our cognitive abilities to the functioning
of the organs of our bodies.
Now if this is the motivation that brings you to this course, then you and I already
have something in common.
It was curiosity that first got me involved in the science of sleep.
This curiosity began about 40 years ago, back when I was a young assistant professor at
Stanford.
At the time, I was investigating how the brain regulates body temperature in mammals.
So often in science, serendipity plays a huge role in determining what we do.
Good science explores the unknown, and sometimes what we find is totally unexpected, and that
leads us down paths that we never anticipated.
One question that arose was how the properties of the thermostat differed in mammals of different
body sizes.
From the tiny pocket mouse of 5 grams to the 100 kilogram harbor seal, these were animals
that we had studied.
To fill in the body size range, we used mammals that we collected during field trips in California,
and one of these animals was a really cute kangaroo rat.
The technique we used was to put the animal in a small chamber and record its temperature
and its metabolic rate as we stimulated the brain's thermostat.
Unlike our experiments on many other mammals, the kangaroo rat experiments yielded terrible
data.
Responses were all over the place, nothing made sense.
It occurred to me that maybe we should watch the animal to gain some insight as to why
it was behaving so poorly in comparison to other species.
So we put a see-through plexiglass lid on the chamber, and we watched the animals as
we did the experiments.
The answer to the problem was immediately obvious.
When the animal was awake, the responses were high.
When the animal was asleep, the responses were lower, and sometimes during sleep the
responses disappeared altogether.
Now this problem turned out to be an opportunity.
Our kangaroo rats would not stay awake.
This intrigued me.
In fact, it intrigued me so much that I wanted to find out what changed in the kangaroo rats
when they were asleep.
I wanted to know how and why sleep could have such a dramatic physiological impact on an
animal.
And you know what?
I've been studying sleep ever since.
It is true.
Sleep is an immensely interesting thing to study.
But beyond the intrinsic fascination of the subject, there's a much more significant reason
why you should engage yourself in our course.
It could save your life.
Now that may sound like an exaggeration, but it's not.
Let me explain why.
In the absence of disease, there are three basic components of a healthy lifestyle.
Nutrition, physical fitness, and sleep.
In comparison to a lack of exercise in nutrition, however, sleep deficits lead to serious consequences
much more rapidly.
The health consequences of being a couch potato take years to develop, and a person can go
days without food.
The frail Mahatma Gandhi once fasted for 21 days in his effort to quell sectarian violence
in India.
No one has gone without sleep for 21 days.
In fact, the record is 11 days.
In contrast, the day of sleep deprivation or several days of inadequate sleep produce
consequences that can be life-threatening.
Lack of sleep has effects on mood, on cognitive performance, and on energy levels.
But the serious issue is that the sleepy person is extremely vulnerable to falling asleep
under any circumstances.
Now this is not a problem if you're in front of the TV, but if you mix sleepiness with driving
or operating machinery, the result is a very high incidence of injury, death, and disaster.
Yet college students think nothing of pulling an all-nighter, and in our 24-7 society, short
sleep is a common practice.
What is it about sleep that makes these practices so dangerous?
The main fact that you have to understand is that sleep is homeostatically regulated.
That's a big word.
We'll come back to this concept of homeostatic regulation later.
But basically what it means is that if you do not get the requisite amount of sleep, you
develop a sleep debt.
And when you develop a sleep debt, your brain works very hard to force you to pay that debt back.
Furthermore, like credit card debt, the sleep debt is cumulative.
You may cut back on sleep a little bit on certain days and think that you can handle
it.
And maybe you can with the help of a little coffee, but that little sleep debt does not
magically go away.
All sleep debts accumulate into large sleep debts that you eventually have to pay back,
whether you want to or not.
A seriously thirsty person can refuse a glass of water.
A seriously hungry person can refuse to eat.
But a sleep debt inevitably results in falling asleep regardless of the circumstances, even
exceedingly dangerous ones.
Let me give you a real-life example.
I want to read to you part of an email from a student that was sent to my colleague at
Stanford, Dr. Bill DeMent.
I will tell you much more about Bill DeMent in later lectures.
He is the father of sleep medicine in this country.
But he is also a leader in sleep education.
At Stanford, he has given a very popular course on sleep and dreams that is taken each year
by hundreds of undergraduates.
This email comes from a student who had taken that course.
Dear Dr. DeMent, in the past week, I have heard of four fatal or near-fatal car accidents
that happen to people I know or know about.
All were a result of falling asleep at the wheel.
First, my friend's next-door neighbor was killed while driving home from the Jersey
Shore at 10 p.m.
When the police arrived on the scene, she was still conscious and she told them, I only
closed my eyes for a second.
She was 20 years old.
He goes on to describe the other three cases and concludes the email.
These four incidents together make a sobering reminder that drowsy driving can be lethal.
It really woke me up and I wanted to send it along to keep us all alert.
Falling asleep at the wheel contributes to an estimated 10,000 automobile deaths a year
in the United States alone, but this is definitely an underestimate.
If you ask anyone what is the leading cause of automobile accidents, most will reply drinking
and driving, and that is where most of our public education, monitoring and enforcement
efforts are directed.
What few people recognize, however, is that there is a very strong interaction between
alcohol and sleep debt.
A modest dose of alcohol that has no measurable effect on a well-rested person will produce
significant motor and cognitive impairment in a sleep deprived person.
And the social situations associated with alcohol consumption are optimal for masking
a sleep debt, so you're unaware of the danger.
When you're sleepy, what keeps you awake?
Stimulation.
Normal stimulation that involves alcohol consumption usually occurs in the evening when sleep debt
is high, and they involve high levels of wake-promoting stimulation, noise, conversation, physical activity.
But driving home is the opposite situation.
Quiet, dark, warm, boring.
You turn up the radio, you roll down the window, you wiggle around in your seat, but the eyelids
are still heavy.
The head nods and you are in mortal danger.
In alert, the onset of sleep is inevitable, uncontrollable and unpredictable.
You need to get off the road.
Okay, hopefully I have drilled into you the first important takeaway message of this course.
The sleep debt is a very serious one, and the bill collector is unforgiving and unrelenting.
But when I talk about a sleep debt, it's important to note that the problem has a societal as
well as a personal dimension.
Your personal sleep debt can have dire consequences for you, but beyond that, our collective sleep
debt has serious consequences for our society as a whole.
That is why I'd like to turn next to a discussion of our national deficit.
Now, lest you think I have lost my way or maybe picked up someone else's notes, I am
referring to the national sleep deficit, which might actually be larger than the national
financial deficit.
And I'd certainly say that it intrudes more noticeably into our daily lives.
Sometimes I wonder if the Sturm and Drang we hear from our senators and congressmen
about our country's financial affairs is due to their sleep deprivation.
Maybe if they got a few nights of good sleep, they would be more reasonable in dealing with
each other and with the issues.
So how does one go about calculating the size of the national sleep deficit?
One approach is straightforward.
We just take the amount of sleep we need.
We subtract the amount of sleep we get and we could then multiply that difference by
the size of our population.
So how much sleep do we need?
The National Sleep Foundation, and by the way, the National Sleep Foundation provides
a lot of really good information on sleep.
You can check it out on the web, www.nationalsleepfoundation and so forth.
But the National Sleep Foundation states that children need 10 to 11 hours of sleep a night.
Children's need 8.5 to 9.5 and adults need 7 to 9 hours.
Determining how much sleep we actually get is more complicated.
In a recent National Health Interview survey by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
the CDC, 30% of adults reported getting less than 6 hours of sleep per night.
In another study, almost 70% of high school students reported getting less than 8 hours
of sleep per night.
The problem is that these numbers are probably serious underestimates.
Why?
Well, it's because many environmental conditions and sleep pathologies can compromise the quality
of sleep and therefore contribute to sleep deprivation, even though the subjects are
unaware of their problem, unaware that they're not sleeping optimally or not sleeping as
much as they actually think they are.
For example, sleep-disordered breathing, frequently indicated by snoring, may affect
5 to 25% of the U.S. population, depending on the subgroup of the population that survey.
Individuals with this disorder may be in bed a normal 8 or more hours, but their sleep
is so fragmented by breathing stoppages that its quality is reduced.
Typically, these individuals are unaware of their poor sleep, but they seek medical
help because of their excessive daytime sleepiness.
So to help us calculate the national sleep deficit, we might try to quantify daytime sleepiness
by asking, what percentage of people are unintentionally falling asleep during the day?
In a 2009 CDC survey of the adult population in 12 states, about 40% reported falling asleep
unintentionally at least once in the past month.
So as a rough back-of-the-envelope calculation, we can say that at least 40% of the population
has a personal sleep debt that is contributing to the national sleep deficit.
Now if the U.S. population is around 310 million, that means we're talking about 124
million sleep-deprived people.
Let's assume their deficit averages two hours per night.
In other words, they're getting on average two hours less sleep than they need, so we
multiply the 124 million people times two hours, and we get a deficit of 248 million
hours per night.
Multiply that by 365 nights a year, and the annual national sleep deficit is about 90
billion hours, 90 billion.
True, the U.S. financial budget deficit is much greater than this back-of-the-envelope
figure, but is an hour of sleep deficit only equal to $1?
To calculate the actual cost of our collective sleep debt, we have to take into consideration
the financial consequences of sleep loss.
Now the story becomes more complicated, and the numbers go way up.
The consequences of sleep loss fall into two categories, immediate and long-term.
Let's consider the long-term first.
These are the health consequences of chronic patterns of insufficient sleep.
These consequences are slowly cumulative, and therefore not immediately and obviously
related to sleep loss.
So how do we make the connection?
The connections between insufficient sleep and chronic illness are revealed in large-scale
epidemiological studies that look for correlations between the occurrence of a disease and specific
life factors such as smoking, diet, pollution, war, and so forth.
The interpretation of such correlations is tricky, because correlation is not the same
as causation.
For example, you could easily establish that over 90% of the people who get cancer have
eaten pickles.
That doesn't mean that pickles cause cancer.
Nevertheless, well-done epidemiological studies can reveal factors that potentially contribute
to the development of a disease.
Then if interventions that modify those factors influence the incidence or the progression
of the disease, there's a strong case for causation.
Epidemiological studies link many chronic medical conditions to poor sleep.
I will give you some examples, but I'll spare you the detailed statistics.
Suffice it to say that these examples come from studies published in professional journals
or from reports from government agencies such as the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
First, there's obesity.
Weight gain has been linked to short sleep in a number of studies.
Getting less than six hours of sleep per night correlates with excessive body mass, whereas
subjects who get eight hours of sleep per night have the lowest percent body fat.
A 2011 study has shown that calories eaten after 8pm in the evening have a greater impact
on body mass than calories eaten earlier in the day.
And since it's quite common for short sleepers to eat or snack at late hours, this might
be a contributing factor for the relationship between short sleep and weight gain.
Short sleep has also been linked to diabetes.
Diabetes is the body's inability to take up blood sugar and use it as a metabolic
fuel.
Juvenile, or type 1 diabetes, is caused by a failure of the pancreas gland to release
adequate amounts of the hormone insulin.
Type 2, or adult onset diabetes, is due to the cells of the body not being able to respond
to the hormone insulin.
Many studies have shown a strong correlation between type 2 diabetes and short or disturbed
sleep.
You're probably thinking that there's a strong association between obesity and type 2 diabetes.
That's true.
So how do we know that sleep plays a role?
There are three reasons.
First, some studies have been large enough to enable the investigators to control for
things like age, sex, and body mass.
And when they eliminate those other factors, the relationship between diabetes and insufficient
sleep remains.
Second, short term studies in which sleep is restricted result in major disturbances in
the control of blood sugar.
And third, interventions that improve sleep have been shown to mitigate the effects of
type 2 diabetes and to improve the control of blood sugar.
So the connection between poor sleep and diabetes seems to be quite strong.
In addition to diabetes and obesity, studies have also identified a correlation between
short sleep and hardening of the coronary arteries, which increases the risk of heart
attack.
It is also well established that disturbed sleep increases the risk of high blood pressure,
arrhythmia, heart attack, and stroke.
Researchers have also produced evidence that the ability to resist infectious diseases is
impaired by short sleep.
A great example is the probability of getting the common cold.
Short sleepers are three times more likely to develop colds than comparable individuals
who average eight hours of sleep.
Recent studies are even reporting associations between short sleep and various forms of cancer,
including colorectal and breast cancer.
And then there's depression.
Of course, depression can cause sleep disorders, but there is strong evidence that short sleep
can be a precipitating factor for the development of depression.
Individuals with insomnia have a 10-fold higher risk of developing depression.
Similarly, a study of depressed patients revealed that they had a 5-fold higher incidence of
sleep-disordered breathing.
More than this, the study also found that treating the sleep-disordered breathing improves
the symptoms of depression.
Finally, a grim subject, suicide.
In one large U.S. national survey, individuals with sleep problems were nine times more likely
to have planned suicide and seven and a half times more likely to have attempted suicide.
Here again, the problem is with interpreting correlations.
Could suicidal thoughts be the cause of the sleep disorders?
Well, yes.
But it's important to note that disturbed and shortened sleep have been shown to impair
mood control, which could be a precipitating factor in suicidal thoughts.
And recent studies of suicidal patients show that treating their sleep disorders leads
to healthier scores on the clinical scales that measure suicidal ideation and behaviors.
Going back to our analogy with the national financial deficit, the health care dollars
associated with major health problems we just mentioned are staggering.
So far, we've been looking at the possible long-term effects of chronic sleep deficiency.
Now let's consider the immediate or the short-term consequences of short or disrupted sleep.
As we will learn in this course, sleep loss leads rapidly to decreased vigilance and cognitive
performance.
The personal and societal costs of this fact are enormous.
The most obvious consequences of increased sleepiness are traffic and transportation
accidents.
We spoke earlier about the fatal effect that personal sleep debt can have on driving.
In 2007, it was estimated that 7% of all accidents and 18% of all fatal accidents were fatigue
related.
And yet driving while drowsy is increasingly common in our 24-7 society.
In a 2005 poll conducted by the National Sleep Foundation, 60% of adult drivers claimed
to have driven while sleepy during the previous year.
Even more frightening, 37% reported that they had actually fallen asleep at the wheel.
Keep that in mind the next time you're speeding down a busy highway.
The impact of drowsy driving in terms of accidents and fatalities has been documented in many
studies.
The numbers vary widely, but they are probably gross under estimates.
The reason is that there are no general standards for taking drowsiness into account in police
reports on traffic accidents.
The numbers are clearer for accidents involving heavy trucks, big rigs, since they are investigated
by the National Transportation Safety Board.
The NTSB conclusion is that over 50% of accidents involving heavy trucks are fatigue related.
And a big rig accident commonly takes several other vehicles with it.
The NTSB also investigates all airline crashes and here the most common conclusion is that
pilot fatigue due to long hours and irregular schedules is a dominant contributing factor.
I hope you're beginning to see that the dollar costs of drowsy driving are huge even before
we consider the resulting lawsuits.
And also before we ask the very difficult question, what value do you put on a human life?
But compromised vigilance and reduced cognitive ability affect more than the way we drive.
Performance productivity and safety in the workplace are greatly decreased by sleep-deprived
workers.
One study looked at the relationship between sleep and employee performance in four large
U.S. corporations.
In this study, 15% of the workers met the strict clinical criteria for insomnia and insufficient
sleep syndrome.
For this group alone, the annual cost of their impairment in terms of loss performance, productivity
and safety was calculated to be about $3,000 per worker.
And this is just the tip of the iceberg.
Over 40% of the workers reported sleep conditions are complaints that indicated they were at
risk for ISS, Insufficient Sleep Syndrome.
The impairment cost for this at-risk group was estimated to be about $2,300 per worker.
So let's do another back-of-the-envelope calculation.
The U.S. workforce is about $154 million.
So if 15% are suffering from insomnia and insufficient sleep syndrome and costing employers
$3,000 a year, the total cost is about $70 billion.
And if we further assume that 40% of all workers are at risk for ISS, the annual cost would
be an additional $142 billion.
That gives us a grand total, $212 billion in lost productivity, performance and safety
each year because of insufficient sleep.
Now we're beginning to talk about real money.
You can appreciate, however, that the costs of errors and lost productivity are not the
same for all professions.
We could take the same analysis into specific professions where the costs can be much higher.
For example, physicians and nurses in hospitals.
It's estimated that 50,000 to 100,000 deaths per year are due to medical errors.
Medical errors are much more likely to occur when physicians and nurses are sleep deprived.
Yet, extended duration work shifts are quite common in hospital operations.
In 2006, a study of interns having five or more extended duration shifts during a month
were seen to have a seven-fold greater increase, a seven-fold increase in errors leading to
adverse events.
Now we'll talk about, we talked about falling asleep at the wheel.
How about falling asleep at the scalpel?
Adverse events in medicine can be costly.
And once again, what is the value of a human life?
We still have to consider the really big bucks items, major disasters.
Major disasters are due to human error and are not randomly distributed around the clock.
They are concentrated in the late night early morning hours when workers are most sleepy.
Consider nuclear accidents, Chernobyl, 123 a.m., Three Mile Island, 4 a.m., Rancho Seco,
414 a.m.
And then there are the infamous industrial accidents, such as the Union Carbide accident
in Bhopal, India, which occurred at midnight, or the 1989 Exxon Valdez grounding, which
also occurred at midnight.
The case of the Exxon Valdez is particularly informative because of the precise documentation
of the actions that led to the grounding of this huge oil tanker in Prince William Sound,
Alaska.
You'll recall that up until the 2010 Deepwater Horizon disaster in the Gulf of Mexico, the
grounding of the Exxon Valdez resulted in the largest oil spill in U.S. waters.
The captain of the vessel had plotted a course to avoid ice in the shipping lane.
Then he gave command of the ship to the third mate and left the bridge.
The ship's data recorder showed that the third mate was receiving all of the necessary information
from the navigator to make his navigational decisions.
But he failed to act on them.
Now here's the important thing.
The officer, the third mate, had been on continuous duty supervising the loading of the vessel
during the previous 36 hours.
The NTSB investigation cited, and I quote, the failure of the third mate to properly maneuver
the vessel was due to fatigue and excessive workload.
The cost?
ExxonMobile has paid well over $3 billion in fine civil restitution and cleanup costs.
A lot to pay for a lost night of sleep.
But how can we put a price tag on the severe damage to the wildlife and the pristine environment
of Prince William Sound?
One thing is clear.
Both the near-term and the long-term consequences of sleep deficiency can be devastating.
I cannot claim to give you an accurate cost accounting spreadsheet for the national sleep
deficit, but I hope I have impressed you that it would be in the ballpark of the national
financial deficit and probably much greater if we factored in all of the health care costs,
the loss of life, the loss of property, and we have not even mentioned the legal costs
associated with all of these events.
So whether we're talking about your personal sleep debt or the national sleep deficit,
sleep is clearly an important topic.
Indeed, it is a serious social issue that fully deserves the time we will devote to
it in the next 23 lectures.
Before I wrap up this lecture, however, I'd like to make one more observation that relates
to the cognitive impairment we experience when we don't get enough sleep.
As we'll see, scientists can't yet provide a full explanation for why we sleep, but even
in the absence of a definitive explanation, I feel confident that the purpose of sleep
is related to certain requirements of the brain and the nervous system.
Why do I say this for two reasons?
First, an animal is most vulnerable to predators when it is asleep.
That is when predators can most easily sneak up and snatch a quick meal.
Why would evolution favor taking the brain offline and therefore giving up vigilance
unless it were absolutely necessary for the brain itself?
If the primary function of sleep were to promote good digestion or some other physiological
function of tissues and organs outside of the nervous system, why would it be necessary
to give up vigilance and even consciousness to accomplish that function?
These of all the organs and the organ systems of the body are very similar between quiet
wake and sleep, except for the brain.
As we will see in a later lecture, amazing events happen in the brain over the course
of a night's sleep.
Now, I'm not saying that sleep is not essential or beneficial for the health of a great diversity
of body systems.
As we've already seen, chronic sleep deficits are strongly implicated in all kinds of health
problems, and in future lectures we will further discuss the critical relationships between
sleep and human health.
But I think we're on the safe side in looking for the principal functions of sleep in the
brain.
For this reason, we'll take plenty of time in this course to learn in detail what happens
in our brains all the way down to the cellular level when we sleep.
We'll also look at animal studies that explore various hypotheses about sleep function, such
as its role in learning in memory.
We do want to be comprehensive, though, so in addition to looking at relationships between
sleep and the brain, we'll examine such subjects as hibernation, dreaming, and the way sleep
changes across the lifespan.
We'll learn about sleep disorders, such as insomnia, sleep apnea, narcolepsy, and nightmares.
We'll even find out how we can improve our sleep, or in other words, how we can practice
good sleep hygiene.
And these are just a few of the intriguing topics we'll explore together.
I've been studying sleep for 40 years, and I find it ever more fascinating.
I look forward to sharing with you the insights I've gained in my pursuit of knowledge and
the elusive mysteries that make sleep one of the greatest scientific challenges of our
day.
Until next time, sweet dreams.
