Welcome back. In the last lecture, I tried to impress upon you the importance of sleep
by describing the many consequences of short or disrupted sleep. But I did not even begin
to explain why loss of sleep leads to such costly outcomes. In fact, I did not even begin
to explain what sleep is. But that's what we'll be doing in this lecture. We're going
to identify and describe the basic or the defining features of sleep. This will then
give us a solid foundation for all of the topics we'll be discussing in this course.
By way of introduction, let me say that sleep is truly mysterious and bizarre. It presents
us with phenomena that have no obvious explanations, but it challenges us to ask new questions
and pursue the elusive answers. My colleague Matt Walker at Berkeley disillustrates the
bizarre phenomena of sleep in the following way. Suppose you had a new baby and your obstetrician
is telling you about the neonatal exam. He says that you have a beautiful healthy baby,
but there are a few things you should be aware of as new parents. Frequently, your baby will
go unconscious and be unresponsive to normal stimulation. The frequency of these attacks
will gradually decrease to one a day by the time she goes to school, but they will last
throughout life. Periodically when unconscious, she will be paralyzed except for spastic muscle
twitches. Her eyes will dart back and forth and her heart rate and breathing rate will
get irregular. As she gets older, she will have hallucinations during these episodes.
She will hear voices and see things that aren't there. Some of these things will be very
strange and maybe even terrifying, causing her to sit up and utter screams of fright,
but not a problem because this condition is also characterized by total amnesia. She won't
remember any of these terrifying experiences. Loss of consciousness, paralysis, spastic muscle
contractions, cardiac and respiratory arrhythmia, hallucinations, terror, amnesia, my word. You
are extremely anxious and upset, but the doctor tells you nothing to worry about. This is
all completely normal. It is sleep. All of these strange aspects of sleep will be discussed
in this course. Sleep has always been a central aspect of human existence. In fact, up until
the 20th century, humans most likely spent much more time asleep since there was no artificial
lighting technologies that could make most activities possible once the sun went down.
The problems of short sleep that we discussed in the last lecture are a fairly new phenomena
associated with the rise of the 24-hour society. Thank you, Thomas Edison. Long working hours,
miserable working conditions may have been common during the Industrial Revolution of the 1800s,
but shift work was not. As an aside, what do you think early humans did during long
nights? What would you do if you did not have artificial lighting? An easy answer. You'd
go to bed earlier. But we learned in the last lecture that adults only need eight to nine
hours of sleep per night. So when night length exceeded 10 hours, how did people spend the
extra hours? Dr. Thomas Ware at the National Institutes of Health did an experiment to
find out. He brought volunteers into a sleep laboratory and studied their sleep when night
after night they were exposed to 14 hours of darkness, just like the middle of winter
in northern Europe. He found that they averaged a bit less than eight and a half hours of
sleep a night. This sleep occurred in about two bouts with a period of wakefulness ranging
from one to three hours in the middle of the night. Now contrary to his expectations, the
subjects did not find the extended nights unpleasant. Ware concluded that perhaps this
pattern of sleep during long nights was quite normal for humans prior to electrification
and provided a time for talking and telling stories. Perhaps many of the deeply rooted
epic stories and beliefs that characterize human cultures had their origins in middle
of the night storytelling. Interestingly, many of these stories actually incorporate
the experience of sleep into their narratives. Sleep is a common subject in mythology, in
fairy tales, in literature, and in art. Going back to ancient times, think of the simple
stories you heard as a child. Sleeping Beauty, Goldilocks and the Three Bears, Rip Van
Winkle. It's a long list. We can't say the same for many other physiological processes.
How many stories have you read about digestion or breathing? Sleep, however, has not only
been a central physiological aspect of our existence, just like eating, breathing or
reproducing, but it has also captured our imagination.
Here then is an interesting question to ponder. Given this deep and long-standing interest
in sleep, why is the science of sleep so relatively new? Of course, primitive and ancient man
could not explain physiological processes such as digestion, breathing and circulation
of the blood either, but scientific knowledge of these processes goes back hundreds of years.
Some examples. Foundation for Anatomy was set down by Leonardo Da Vinci and Andreas
Vesalius in the 1500s. The circulation of the blood was described by William Harvey
in the early 1600s. The relationships between carbon dioxide, oxygen and metabolism were
developed by Joseph Priestley and Antoine Leboisier in the late 1700s. Bioelectricity
was discovered by Luigi Galvani and Alessandro Volta also in the late 1700s.
By contrast, we didn't get the first insights into the physiological mechanisms of sleep
until 1929. Why so late? Well, it was only then that the fundamental technology for the
study of physiology of sleep was introduced. Technology I'm referring to here is the
electroencephalograph, or the EEG, which gave us the ability to describe changes in the
electrical activity in the brain in freely behaving normal animals, and of course humans.
The first EEG technology was developed by a German physiologist, Hans Berger. Gradually
the value of Berger's invention was recognized and the EEG technology has been the dominant
tool in the field of sleep research ever since. Now, because our current definitions of sleep
rely heavily on EEG recordings, we need to take a few minutes to understand this technology.
EEG reveals the pattern of electrical activity in the brain. The brain consists of many billions
of neurons. Neurons process and transmit information as tiny electrical signals called
nerve impulses or action potentials. It is common practice in modern neurophysiology
to use very fine wires or other electrically conducting devices called electrodes to record
the signals from single neurons. This is not what the EEG does. The EEG records patterns
of electrical activity that are created by signals generated from large populations of
neurons. I like to describe the difference between these methods with a simple analogy
or cartoon if you will. Suppose an alien spaceship lands on the surface of the Cowboys Stadium
in Arlington, Texas and inside a football game is in progress. Mission assignment to
the aliens is to discover what's going on inside this huge structure. They divide into
two teams. One team drills tiny holes in the surface of the dome and lowers down small
microphones into the structure. The other team deploys large dish antennas onto different
regions of the surface of the dome. So what do they find? The large dish antennas reveal
periodic surges of sound, roars, recorded from all of the antennas at the same time.
The team with the small microphones record a great diversity of signals depending on
where they lower the microphones. Did you hear that Joan left Bill? That would be difficult
for the aliens to discern the rules of the game from these recordings. And that's sort
of the situation with neurobiology today. We have lots and lots of individual signals,
but we don't see how they relate to each other. The important thing to take from this analogy
is that Berger's EEG is like the big dish antennas. The EEG records patterns of activity
across large populations of neurons. To give you a better idea of what an EEG recording
is, I ask you to remember the lie detector apparatus from police movies and TV programs.
The lie detector records electrical events through time as deviations of a line above
indicating positive and below indicating negative, a neutral center line. The lie detector is
also called a polygraph. The word simply means that it can record multiple variables
at the same time. In the case of the lie detector, this could be breathing rate, heart
rate, blood pressure, and electrical conductivity of the skin, which indicates sweating. In
the case of the EEG, the multiple variables being recorded are brain waves, electrical
activity of the muscles, the eye movements, and sometimes heart and breathing rates. These
recordings used to be done by pen and ink on a moving chart paper. Today, these lines
appear on a computer screen. So what did Berger's EEG machine reveal about the brain during
wake and sleep? There were two distinct patterns of EEG activity that seemed to differentiate
wake and sleep. During sleep, the pattern was mostly slow, high-amplitude waves. And
during wake, the pattern was a fast, low-amplitude wave. Let me help you visualize this difference
with another analogy. Imagine walking into a concert hall or auditorium before the performance
begins. Everyone is chit-chatting, and there are thousands of different conversations going
on at the same time. What does this sound like to you? There's no obvious pattern to
it, just a shh, which we call white noise. Now this is similar to the EEG pattern of
wake. Then the performance starts. It happens to be Beethoven's symphony. Now you hear
distinct patterns, rhythms, repeated elements. Why? Because lots of musicians are following
the same score and they are synchronized with each other. This is similar to the EEG of
most of sleep. Thus we refer to the EEG pattern during sleep as synchronized, and we refer
to the EEG pattern during our waking state as desynchronized. The synchronized pattern
indicates that large populations of neurons are firing together in a slow, rhythmic pattern.
And the desynchronized pattern reflects the fact that the awake brain is doing many, many
unrelated things simultaneously, like the many different conversations in the concert
hall before the performance. The EEG technology today is very different from that of Hans
Berger, but the basic principle is the same. If we have two wires, or as we say, two electrodes
making contact with the scalp at two locations over the brain, we can measure the voltage
changes through time between those two electrodes. What causes these voltage changes? Remember
that the signals neurons generate are tiny electrical events. If the population of neurons
close to one of these electrodes generates more of these events than the population of
neurons close to the other electrode, there will be a voltage difference recorded between
these two electrodes. And if the neurons in that population are synchronized firing their
signals at the same time, the voltage difference will be recorded as a large, slow wave. This
is sort of like the wave traveling around a stadium. Even if there is no wave going,
if people who are supporters of one team jump up and down at one time and the people who
are supporters of the other team jump up and down at another time, you will notice that
activity. But if all of the people in an area of the stadium get up at the same time as
in the wave, then it is even more noticeable. Most EEGs recorded today use more than two
electrodes, arrays of 128 or 256 electrodes are common. This makes it possible to compare
electrical activity in and between different parts of the brain. You can think of it as
describing the topography of electrical activity in the brain. In addition, electrodes placed
elsewhere record activity from structures other than the brain. Electrodes at the corners
of the eyes record eye movements. These are called electrooculograms or EOGs. Electrodes
placed over the muscles record the electrical activity of those muscles and that corresponds
to their state of contraction and their patterns of activity. These are called electromyograms
or EMGs. Finally, electrocardiograms or ECGs can be used to record the heartbeat and strain
gauges placed on the chest can record respiratory movements. All of these electrical signals
reflect changes in sleep and wake. Now many scientists contributed to the continued development
of the EEG and its uses. One extremely interesting individual was Alfred Lee Loomis, a mathematics
major at Yale, law graduate of Harvard and a Wall Street tycoon who used his vast fortune
to support his ventures into science and technology. He played critical roles in the invention
and deployment of radar and Loran, the long range aid to navigation that prior to the
rise of GPS was the principal system used for maritime navigation. Loomis greatly enhanced
the EEG technology and in the process produced the first detailed description of changes
in EEG that occur within sleep itself. For a fascinating read about this amazing individual
look up Tuxedo Park, a Wall Street tycoon and the secret palace of science that changed
the course of World War II. In the 1940s, the EEG was helping scientists investigate
what parts of the brain were responsible for this switching between wake and sleep. It
was known largely through the treatment of soldiers who sustained injuries to the brain
during battle that if the wound was in the lower brainstem area where the spinal cord
emerges from the brain, the patient would be paralyzed but would have normal cycles
of sleep and wake. But if the wounds were in the upper part of the brainstem, the patient
would most likely be in a permanent coma. From this, scientists concluded that signals
from the brainstem area were necessary to bring the higher parts of the brain, the cerebral
cortex, into a state of wake and maintain it in that state.
Now, could these observations merely reflect the interruption of sensory pathways conveying
sensory stimulation to the cortex? After all, sensory stimulation is a very effective way
to arouse a person from sleep as the inventor of the alarm clock knew. And turned out that
it's not so simple. Two physiologists, the American Horace Magoon and the Italian Giuseppe
Maruzzi, discovered that electrical stimulation of certain regions of the brainstem was very
effective in switching the synchronized EEG pattern to a desynchronized pattern. These
areas did not correspond to any direct sensory or motor pathways responsible for communication
between the brain and the rest of the body. Maruzzi and Magoon proposed that a region
within the brainstem was responsible for maintaining the cerebral cortex in the state of wake,
and they called this region the reticular activating system.
We now know that this part of the brain contains many distinct groups of neurons called nuclei
that play important roles in controlling the various aspects of sleep and wake. We'll
return to these nuclei in subsequent lectures.
At the same time as Maruzzi and Magoon were waking up cats by electrically stimulating
their brainstems, a Swiss physiologist, Walter Hess, discovered a brain region that did the
reverse. When stimulated, it actually put cats to sleep and induced the synchronized
EEG pattern associated with sleep. This region was at the very anterior end of the brainstem
in a structure called the thalamus. The thalamus is an important way station for information
coming up the neural axis to the cortex. It's sort of like the switchboard that takes the
signals coming from the body and projects them to the appropriate regions in the cortex.
So taken together, the seminal experiments of Maruzzi and Magoon and Hess revealed that
there are dynamic control systems that orchestrate the states of arousal and sleep. How these
systems function and interact will be the subjects of our future lectures.
In the early 1950s, soon after the work of Maruzzi and Magoon and Hess, a physiologist
at the University of Chicago, Nathaniel Kleitman, was applying both EEG and EOG to study subjects
over entire nights of sleep. Remember, EOG stands for electrooculogram, which is used
to study eye movements. Kleitman and a graduate student, Eugene Acerinsky, discovered a previously
unrecognized phenomenon, rapid eye movements during sleep. Unlike the slow rolling eye
movements that were recorded by the EOG during most of sleep, periodically the Chicago team
observed stretches of time during sleep when the eye movements were fast and jerky, causing
spikes in the EOG. These episodes had a fairly regular pattern. They typically occurred
four or five times over the course of a night.
Soon thereafter, another student of Kleitman, William DeMent, pursued the fact that these
belts of rapid eye movements correlated with a return of the EEG to a desynchronized pattern.
You'll recall that desynchronized EEG is associated with the waking state. So it was quite remarkable
to find this pattern of the EEG during sleep.
The discoveries of Kleitman, Acerinsky, and DeMent led to the categorization of sleep
into two states, REM sleep for rapid eye movements and non-REM sleep for non-rapid eye movements.
Sometimes REM sleep is referred to as desynchronized sleep or active sleep. Non-REM sleep, on the
other hand, is sometimes referred to as synchronized sleep, slow wave sleep, or quiet sleep.
The Chicago group made another very important discovery during their all night EEG recordings.
If they woke the subjects when the EEG was in the synchronized or slow wave pattern and
asked them about their dreams, no subjects could not recall a dream or only had a vague
recollection that they were dreaming. In contrast, when the subjects were awakened
during the rapid eye movement episodes, they mostly reported vivid, active, and bizarre
dreams. Hence REM sleep became known as dreaming sleep. We now know that dreaming does occur
in non-REM sleep as well, but it is of a different nature, less vivid, less dramatic, less emotional.
So the extreme nature of dreams during REM sleep remains an important feature of this
state of sleep. As an aside, all of the early sleep EEG recordings
were done on males. Professor Kleitman had serious reservations about his male students
doing all night sleep recordings on female subjects. But William DeMent was able to get
around the prohibition Professor Kleitman imposed by recruiting his new wife as a subject.
So Pat DeMent is probably the first woman to have an all night EEG recording. Bill DeMent
went on to be a physician and professor of psychiatry at Stanford where he started the
very first sleep clinic. For that he is widely recognized as being the father of sleep medicine
in the United States. Now it's difficult to imagine a time when there were no sleep clinics
and no sleep physicians, but that time was not long ago. The amazing growth of sleep
research and sleep medicine as its own discipline is quite a legacy for my longtime friend and
colleague Bill DeMent. So we've seen that sleep actually consists
of two states, non-rapid eye movement sleep and rapid eye movement sleep. Non-REM sleep
is characterized by a synchronized high amplitude EEG pattern while REM sleep is characterized
by a fast low amplitude EEG pattern very similar to the desynchronized pattern that you see
during wakefulness. REM sleep is also characterized by jerky eye movements and it is associated
with vivid bizarre dreams. Fortunately when it comes to these vivid dreams we typically
experience amnesia. You can imagine the problems that we would have if we mix the content of
our dreams into our long-term memories of actual events.
There is another very important feature of REM sleep that distinguishes it both from
the waking state and from non-REM sleep and that is muscle atonia. Atonia means the loss
of muscle tone. Even when we are resting while awake our muscles create tension to maintain
posture. This tension is reduced during non-REM sleep but it's still there.
During REM sleep however muscle tone disappears. You may have observed a cat sleeping. Most
of the time it's sleeping with its paws tucked in and its eyes are closed and its head is
up but bowed. When the cat goes into REM sleep its head drops, its body is totally flaccid.
When we are in REM sleep we are essentially paralyzed. The motor neurons that go to our
muscles and cause them to contract are inhibited. They are shut down. Why? If this paralysis
did not occur we would act out our dreams. Most people have experienced the consequence
of this muscle paralysis in their dreams. Have you ever had a dream in which you had
to run? You had to get away but you just could not move or you were moving as if your feet
were mired in cement? Normally when you run your brain gets feedback from your muscles
and that feedback signals the fact that you are running but in a dream when your muscles
are paralyzed that feedback does not exist and the sensation of running is absent. Thus
we can characterize non REM sleep as a quiescent brain in a movable body and REM sleep as an
active brain in a paralyzed body. In fascinating experiments done at the University of Pennsylvania
by Adrian Morrison and Joan Hendricks the parts of the brain stem responsible for the
inhibition of motor neurons during REM sleep were destroyed in cats. This selective destruction
is called a lesion and it can be made in several ways by cutting with small blades precisely
placed in the brain by passing strong electrical currents through electrodes lowered into that
structure that is to be eliminated or by injecting chemicals into the exact location to be destroyed.
In these experiments electrical currents were used to make tiny precise lesions. The lesion
cats recovered well from the surgery and days later their sleep was studied. They went to
sleep normally they showed no differences in non REM sleep but at the transition from
non REM sleep to REM sleep their heads did not drop instead their heads perked up as
if they were paying attention to something their eyes open but the nictitating membranes
the second eyelids the cats have were partially closed the cats got up they appeared to be
watching something that was not there they batted at it even pounced on it and when they
returned to non REM sleep they again assumed the characteristic sleeping posture were these
cats acting out their dreams the problem is we can't ask the cats like we can ask human
subjects sometimes strong motor commands can break through the motor inhibition of REM sleep
have you ever watched a dog sleeping periodically you can notice that its eyes are darting back
and forth behind its eyelids this is REM sleep at the same time you may see its paws twitch
or even its legs move jerkily and it may utter little yelps perhaps it's having a vivid dream
of chasing a car or a rabbit but the important thing is that some muscle commands are breaking
through the inhibition that creates the muscle atonia during REM in a later later lecture
we will discuss human situations in which motor inhibition is relaxed during REM sleep
and also the converse when REM paralysis extends into the transition from REM to wake we will
also discuss sleep walking which occurs during non REM sleep so let's review what we've
accomplished in this lecture the goal we set for ourselves was this we said we wanted
to identify and describe the basic or the defining features of sleep by now you should
be able to do exactly that normal sleep is a daily loss of consciousness that if undisturbed
by a rousing stimuli typically lasts eight to nine hours in humans the state of unconsciousness
consists of two substates as distinguished by the EEG and other criteria REM sleep for
rapid eye movement sleep and non REM sleep during non REM sleep muscle tone is reduced
but not absent and the EEG shows a high amplitude slow wave pattern indicating that large populations
of neurons are firing in synchrony hence this state is also called synchronized sleep
five or six times a night you transition from non REM sleep to REM sleep the EEG pattern
becomes a low amplitude fat a low amplitude fast pattern not very different from the wake
EEG but muscle tone disappears and you are essentially paralyzed during REM sleep the
ocular the electrooculogram or EOG also reveals the rapid eye movements that give this state
of sleep its name since the EEG indicates that there is not synchronous activity among
large populations of neuron this state is also called desynchronized sleep vivid dreams
occur during the episodes of REM sleep measuring all of the various characteristics of sleep
that we touched upon today help us diagnose and study sleep disorders which are many also
investigations into the mechanisms underlying these characteristics of sleep lead to this
discovery of clues that can help us understand sleep mechanisms and sleep functions as a
first step in the next lecture we will take a closer look at how sleep is organized across
the night and at how sleep deprivation influences the quality and the quantity of restorative
sleep but until then sweet dreams
