In our last lecture, we learned about some of the tools used by sleep researchers, tools
such as electroencephalograms or EEGs, electrooculograms or EOGs, and electromyograms or EMGs.
In this lecture, I thought we'd put those tools to use by doing an experiment together.
Now, every experiment begins with a question, and the main question I want our experiment to address is
how is sleep organized across the night?
We've talked about different states of sleep, REM, and non-REM,
but in this lecture, we want to find out how these states relate to each other
and how they might change over the normal sleep phase of the daily cycle.
How long do individual episodes of REM and non-REM sleep last?
Does the expression of these states change across the night?
How do the sleep states relate to the duration of prior wakefulness?
So how is sleep organized across the night?
To answer this question, we first have to recruit subjects for our experiment
to make sure our experiment is not influenced by unknown factors.
We recruit subjects of a similar age who do not have known medical conditions
and who are not on medication.
Our plan is to record each subject's EEG, EMG, and EOG activity during an all-night sleep session.
But before we do the actual recording, we have our subjects
maintain a regular schedule of meal times, bed times, arousal times in the morning
over a period of two weeks.
Over the course of these two weeks, they are asked to record their activities
and sleep patterns in a sleep log.
They are also asked to refrain from alcohol and caffeine.
On the day of the recording, each subject reports to the laboratory a few hours before bedtime.
We prepare him or her for the all-night sleep recording by gluing electrodes
at different locations on the scalp to record the EEG,
by the eyes to record the EOG, and on the jaw to measure the EMG of the jaw muscles.
Now we could be measuring just about any other skeletal muscle,
but the jaw is conveniently close to the other sites we're recording from.
You might think that people couldn't possibly sleep with all of this wiring on them,
but they do. In fact, their sleep experiences in the lab are practically identical
to the ones they have at home when they crawl into their own beds.
At bedtime, the subject gets into a comfy bed, the electrodes are all plugged in for the recordings,
and the lights are turned out.
Now what about us, the researchers?
Well, we go into an adjoining room for an all-night vigil.
Among other things, we'll be looking at a computer screen that will show us
the electrical activities picked up by all of these various electrodes.
Believe me, staying up all night to do a sleep study is not easy work.
It results in serious sleep deprivation.
Hats off to the dedicated sleep technicians who work in our sleep labs and sleep clinics
to conduct the all-night sleep recordings.
They have a very impressive title, Polysomnographers,
and to achieve that title, they go through extensive training for one to two years
and pass a certification examination.
So, let's describe what we see on these computer screens during our vigil.
First, proceeding sleep, there is usually a time of relaxed wakefulness or drowsiness.
During this period, the EEG changes from the fast, desynchronized wave pattern
of alert wakefulness to a slower, more regular pattern
at a frequency of about 8 to 12 hertz.
As many of you know, hertz refers to the number of waves or cycles that occur each second.
The term is not named for the car rental company,
but for the German physicist Heinrich Hertz, who first proved the existence of electromagnetic waves.
As we discussed in the last lecture, the EEGs recorded in different arousal states
are characterized by different EEG patterns.
And a specific pattern can be dominated by brain waves of a particular frequency.
Therefore, to simplify our discussions, we use Greek letters
to designate the different frequency bands that change as arousal states change.
The slow, regular waves in the 8 to 12 hertz frequency
that characterize a relaxed drowsy state are called alpha waves.
Alpha waves are also frequently described as a component of meditation
as you probably know.
As we continue to watch our computer screen,
we notice that the subject's EEG continues to slow,
and the alpha waves disappear and a low amplitude mixed frequency pattern
with a predominance of activity in the 4 to 8 hertz range is observed.
This frequency band is referred to as theta waves.
The EOG indicates that slow eye movements are beginning to occur.
Our sleep study subject has now entered stage 1 non-REM sleep.
During the transition into stage 1, people sometimes experience occasional jerks,
almost as if they are catching themselves falling asleep.
But they are really falling asleep.
During the descent into sleep, stage 1 non-REM lasts only a few minutes.
Next, the subject goes into stage 2 non-REM sleep.
During stage 2, the frequency of the EEG waves continues to slow down,
even as the amplitude of the waves increases.
However, stage 2 non-REM sleep does feature occasional bursts
of higher frequency oscillations that are called sleep spindles.
Another component of stage 2 non-REM sleep is K-complexes.
These are high amplitude spikes.
No eye movements are occurring and dreaming generally does not occur.
A person is easily awoken from stage 2 non-REM sleep.
As our subject's sleep deepens, our EEG slows even more
and shows the high amplitude slow waves that are the hallmark of deep sleep,
or stage 3 non-REM sleep.
We used to distinguish also a stage 4 non-REM sleep
that was just sort of a deepening of stage 3,
but it's common now just to refer to stage 3 or deep sleep.
Stage 3 sleep is also sometimes referred to as slow wave sleep
because the EEG shows a dominance of slow waves in the band of 0.5 to 4.5 Hz.
Waves in this frequency band are called delta waves.
Checking our EOG measurements,
we're able to see that slow rolling eye movements occur during stage 3 sleep.
We also know that dreaming is common in this stage,
but these are not the vivid emotional dreams that occur during REM sleep.
Many sleep disorders are manifest in slow wave sleep
such as teeth grinding, periodic leg movements, night terrors, and sleep walking.
So, now we have tracked three stages of non-REM sleep.
Research has shown that we almost always enter sleep through these three stages.
The descent progresses fairly rapidly
from jousiness to deep sleep at the beginning of the night.
It is most difficult to wake someone from this first episode of deep non-REM sleep.
But we won't try to wake our subject.
We are interested in recording the characteristics of sleep across the whole night.
After about an hour of non-REM sleep, the sleep of our subject lightens
as she comes up from stage 3 to briefly pass through stage 2 and stage 1.
As the EEG amplitude declines, the waveform gets faster.
Now the EMG, which had been very quiet, falls even lower.
And the EOG that had displayed slow rolling eye movements
shows periodic spikes as the eyes dart back and forth under the closed eyelids.
Our subject's heart rate and breathing rate had been very regular during non-REM sleep,
but now they are somewhat irregular.
This is the first episode of REM sleep, and it will last about 10 to 20 minutes.
Before the rapid eye movements cease, muscle tone increases, and the EEG again begins to slow.
At this transition point, the person may return briefly to wake and change position
before returning to non-REM sleep.
So our subject has gone through one full cycle of non-REM and REM sleep.
This is called a sleep cycle.
Her second episode of non-REM sleep progresses much like the first,
going down through stages 1, 2, and 3.
The slow waves in stage 3 may not be as high as the slow waves were in the first sleep cycle,
and after about an hour, the EEG again returns rapidly through stages 2 and 1
to another episode of REM sleep.
This second REM episode lasts longer than the first, maybe 30 minutes.
Again, another brief awakening may precede the next episode of non-REM sleep.
Younger people are frequently not even aware of these brief episodes of wake
at the transitions between REM and non-REM sleep,
other than the sensation of changing position or moving the pillow.
But for men of my age, they are usually marked by a trip to the bathroom.
The third episode of non-REM sleep includes less and maybe no stage 3 non-REM sleep.
Again, after about an hour, there is a return to REM sleep.
And that third bout of REM sleep is usually even longer than the second,
maybe 45 minutes.
We've been recording our sleep study subject for almost five hours now,
as she's gone through three full cycles of non-REM and REM sleep.
And at this point, we're probably feeling rather drowsy ourselves.
But for our subject, the night of sleep continues.
She'll go through another one or two sleep cycles with the non-REM episodes being lighter,
mostly stages 1 and 2, and the REM episodes longer.
Overall, these sleep cycles, non-REM and REM sleep, average about 90 minutes.
After the last episode of REM sleep, our sleep study subject awakes.
That's typical. We almost always awake in the morning from the last episode of REM sleep.
So, what do we have from our night of sleep recording?
If we had been using a paper polygraph, which was common practice when I started doing sleep research,
it would have run at a chart speed of about 30 millimeters per second.
So we would now have a stack of chart paper that, when stretched out,
would be the length of about 10 football fields.
A computer disk is a much more convenient way to store these data,
but the analysis is still a large job.
Fortunately for routine analysis of sleep, we now have computer programs for analyzing the data.
But we still need a more compact way of representing the progression of sleep states across the night.
That method of data presentation is called a hypnogram.
The hypnogram is a graphic representation of the changes in arousal states over the sleep phase, over the night.
Time is on the horizontal axis, and arousal state is on the vertical axis.
The vertical axis is divided into five levels.
The top level is wake, the next level is REM sleep,
the third level is stage one non-REM sleep,
the fourth level is stage two,
and the last level is stage three non-REM sleep at the very bottom.
The hypnogram from our experiment clearly shows that sleep is initiated through stage one non-REM sleep
and progresses rapidly down to stage three.
The sleep cycles are clearly shown as regular progressions
from the beginning of a stage one episode through to the end of the next REM episode.
These sleep cycles, as I said, have a periodicity of about 90 minutes.
The other observations we can make from the hypnogram are that there is a deeper non-REM stage three early in the night
and more REM sleep later in the night.
As we continue our research and conduct all night sleep recordings on our other subjects and compare their hypnograms,
we do see individual differences, but overall the hypnograms are remarkably similar.
In other words, the structure or the architecture of human sleep is a regular feature of sleep.
If we look at this characteristic architecture of sleep, it suggests several questions.
Why does non-REM sleep always come first?
Why does non-REM sleep and REM cycle across the night?
Why is non-REM sleep early in the night and why is there more REM sleep later in the night?
We will come back to these questions in later lectures, but there is another feature of our sleep recordings that we will deal with next.
We have answered the basic question that we started with.
How is sleep organized across the night?
And we have shown these results graphically by constructing a hypnogram.
As hypnograms show, however, is the normative pattern of sleep.
Remember that we were careful to make sure that our subjects had established a regular pattern of bed times and awakening times
prior to the all-night sleep recording sessions.
Now I can ask a very important second question.
How does normative sleep change after long episodes of wakefulness?
I call this a very important question because it takes us in the direction of asking about the function of sleep.
It is absolutely astounding to me that we spend one-third of our lives sleeping and we don't know why.
The function of sleep qualifies as one of the great unanswered questions of science.
We have to assume that sleep is restorative, but restorative of what?
The most general answer to that question is restorative of something that is depleted during wakefulness.
So if we can identify some aspect of sleep that has a clear quantitative relationship with duration of prior wakeful activity,
understanding the mechanisms of that relationship might give us clues as to the function or functions of sleep.
Let me explain my thinking.
Essential physiological functions of the body are regulated.
That means they can be slowed down or they can be sped up to meet the demands of the body and maintain the state of the body in a fairly constant condition.
This maintenance of a constant internal condition is called homeostasis, a very key concept in physiology.
To maintain homeostasis, a regulatory system needs information.
It has to know what the optimal condition is and it also has to know how far from optimal the current situation is.
This comparison produces an error message and the regulatory system can use that error message to drive the responses that will get the body back to homeostatic balance.
For example, breathing is regulated by a center in the brain.
When the oxygen concentration in the blood falls and the carbon dioxide concentration in the blood rises,
these changes are sensed and communicated to the brain regulator of breathing.
This is the feedback information used by the regulatory center to decide to increase or decrease our rate of breathing.
Let's assume for a moment that we don't know why we breathe.
But if we make the observation that something like exercise that makes breathing increase also causes blood levels of O2 to fall and CO2 levels to rise,
we might suspect a connection between breathing and these blood gases.
Conversely, if we observe that during rest, levels of O2 and the blood rise and levels of CO2 fall at the same time breathing decreases,
we might hypothesize that the function of breathing was to regulate the O2 and the CO2 levels in the blood.
The critical evidence would be to quantify the relationship between the supposed feedback variables O2 and CO2 and the response breathing.
Of course, these observations don't tell us what O2 does in the body and why CO2 is produced,
but it tells us that O2 and CO2 must be important because the body regulates their concentrations in the blood.
The next question would be to find out what O2 and CO2 do in the body.
Similarly, if we can find some aspect of sleep that appears to be regulated in response to perturbations like prolonged wakefulness,
that aspect of sleep and the information used to regulate it should lead us to answers as to what is the function or what are the functions of sleep.
So let's return to our question. How does sleep change after long periods of wakefulness?
To answer this, we need a mathematical tool to analyze our EEG data.
Now, don't panic. I won't introduce any equations, but I will explain what this tool does.
The tool is called a Fourier analysis, and it makes it possible to describe the complex EEG quantitatively.
Now, I'm sure you know what a sine wave is, but if you don't, I can explain it very simply.
A sine wave is a very regular waveform like the undulations of a calm sea.
Another way to explain it is that it's a mathematical function that describes a smooth repetitive oscillation.
Since it is very regular, it can be characterized by the distance or the time between the crests of two waves.
The distance is called the wavelength, the time is called the wave frequency.
We can also measure the wave height or amplitude.
Now, consider the complex waveform of the EEG. How could you describe its wavelength, frequency, or amplitude?
The Fourier analysis makes that possible.
Any complex waveform can be broken down into a mixture of composite sine waves that have different amplitudes and different frequencies.
If we consider just one of those properties, the frequency, the Fourier analysis enables us to determine how much sine waves of each frequency contribute to the complex waveform.
This contribution is defined as power. Thus, any complex waveform such as Stage 3 non-rim sleep, for example, can be represented by a graph that shows the power in each frequency band.
Maybe another example will help you understand this type of analysis.
Think of a quartet consisting of a bass, a tenor, an alto, and a soprano.
And each is singing a pure single note.
We hear these notes differently because each one creates a vibration in the air that our ear detects as a sound.
These vibrations are sine waves in the air. The wavelength of the soprano's note is very short.
The wavelength of the bass's note is very long, and the tenor and the alto are in between.
The louder each sings, the greater the amplitude of their sound waves.
Now, if they all sing their notes together, the resulting sound waves reaching our ears are complex.
What the Fourier analysis would enable us to do is to analyze that complex waveform to determine what note frequency and how loud amplitude each member of the quartet is singing.
Switching back to the EEG complex waveform, as you might expect, the EEG of Stage 3 non-rim sleep has most of its power in the slow frequencies.
And the EEG of REM sleep has more of its power in the faster frequencies.
Using Fourier analysis, we can ask, how does the power structure of the EEG change across the night?
If we compare the first bout of non-rem sleep with subsequent bouts of non-rem sleep, we find that there is a progressive decline in the power in the slow frequencies.
This was an incredibly exciting discovery because it seemed to indicate a process that reflected a high need at the beginning of sleep and gradually declined as sleep continued across the night.
If we look at the EEG characteristics of bouts of REM sleep across the night, we see that REM sleep is characterized by high power in a certain frequency range, 7 to 11 hertz.
But the power in that frequency range does not change across the night.
We give names to different EEG frequency bands.
The slow wave band that is so dominant during non-rem sleep is called the delta band, and the bump that is seen in REM sleep is called the theta band.
Once again, the important result from these experiments is that the slow wave or delta activity is high at the onset of sleep and steadily declines across subsequent non-rem episodes.
If this is true, then we should be able to manipulate the magnitude of the delta power by controlling the duration of prior wakefulness, the amount of wakefulness before the subject is allowed to sleep.
That hypothesis led to experiments that produced a very strong indication that delta power is linked to some sleep restorative process.
Of course, our common experience is that we sleep more after an extended time of being awake.
A whole week of short sleep, maybe five or six hours per night, is usually followed by catch-up sleep on the weekend, sleeping in.
However, the minutes do not add up.
Let's say you normally go to bed at midnight and get up for work at 6 a.m. each day.
Assume that optimal sleep is 8.5 hours per night, that means that you have a sleep deficit of 2.5 hours per night, which adds up to a total deficit of 12.5 hours at the end of the work week.
Assuming you also go to bed at midnight on Friday and Saturday, how likely is it that you will sleep until noon on Saturday and Sunday?
That's what it would take to make up for the deficit.
But usually, for most of us, our payback sleep does not totally match our accumulated sleep deficit.
However, a quantitative analysis of the EEG reveals an additional mode of payback, sleep intensity.
We saw in our experiment that there was more stage three early in the night, the time of deepest sleep.
We also quantified this as greater delta power or slow wave activity early in the night.
Thus, we reached the tentative hypothesis that delta power reflects sleep intensity.
What happens to delta power when we have been awake for a longer time?
When we have been sleep deprived, it gets greater.
Delta power gets greater the longer we have been awake.
This is a very clear relationship between the duration of prior wake and the slow wave activity or delta power during subsequent sleep.
In all cases, the delta power declines over the night, but after sleep deprivation, it starts at a higher level early in the night.
Thus, we pay back a sleep deficit in sleep intensity as well as in sleep amount.
In a very well-designed experiment, subjects were kept awake for varying amounts of time and then released to sleep.
The interesting result was that the level of delta power at sleep onset was a function of how long the subject had been awake.
The decline in delta power had about the same rate constant in all subjects.
We can see this relationship also in the effects of naps on subsequent nighttime sleep.
If you take a nap during the day, you discharge a certain amount of accumulated sleep need.
As a consequence of this, the delta power at the beginning of subsequent night sleep is lower.
These and many other experiments have led to the concept of process S.
Process S is thought to build up during wake and be discharged during sleep.
If we could identify the physical factor responsible for process S, we could possibly gain insight as to the actual function of non-REM sleep.
Think back on our breathing example. Let's call breathing process B.
Once we identified O2 or CO2 as the variables responsible for process B,
it indicated that O2 and CO2 bore some relationship to the ultimate function of breathing.
So increases in delta power or slow wave activity seem to be an important mechanism for making up lost non-REM sleep.
But what about lost REM sleep when you are functioning on short sleep and you acquire a sleep deficit?
There are not clear changes in the EEG characteristic of REM sleep as there are for non-REM sleep across the night.
Nor are there changes in the power spectrum of REM sleep after prolonged wake.
The main change that is seen in REM sleep in response to sleep deprivation is an increase in the time spent in REM sleep.
Thus, the sleep following an extended bout of wakefulness is characterized by longer REM sleep bouts.
The increased time spent in REM following sleep deprivation can actually push off the non-REM recovery.
And this total sleep recovery may take more than one or two nights of extended sleep.
The relationships between sleep deprivation and the nature of recovery sleep are important because they provide clues that we can pursue in our search for the function of sleep.
It is reasonable to hypothesize that whatever the function of sleep is, it is at the cellular level.
After all, all energetic processes or all biosynthetic processes or all bioelectrical processes are carried out by cells.
So what cellular processes are responsible for the generation of slow waves in the EEG?
In a later lecture, we will explore this lead as a possible way of discovering a function of sleep.
For our next lecture, however, we will stay with describing the characteristics of sleep and the structure of sleep across the night.
And we will ask how these aspects of sleep change across the life cycle from the newborn to the aged.
Why do we say sleep like a baby?
Why do adolescents find it so hard to get up for school?
Why does grandad sleep in his chair during the day and complain of being unable to sleep at night?
These are the kinds of questions that we'll examine.
But until next time, sweet dreams.
