In the last lecture, we did a virtual experiment in which we profiled normal sleep in young
adults.
We did this by doing all night EEG recordings and then we reduced the resulting ginormous
amounts of data into hypnograms.
The common features of those hypnograms characterize the sleep of healthy young adults.
We saw that undisturbed sleep lasted about 8 hours.
Sleep began with a rapid progression through non-REM stages 1 and 2 to non-REM stage 3,
the deep slow wave sleep.
The first bout of non-REM sleep lasted over an hour, non-REM sleep then lightened through
stage 2 and maybe even to stage 1 before transitioning into the first bout of REM sleep.
This first bout of REM sleep lasted only about 15 to 20 minutes.
This cycle between non-REM and REM sleep continued 4 more times through the night with a periodicity
of about 90 minutes.
Most of the stage 3 non-REM sleep was in the first 2 cycles and most of the REM sleep was
in the last 3 cycles.
The total amount of REM sleep was about 20 to 25% of the total sleep time.
Sleep awakenings occurred occasionally in the second half of the night but they don't
last long.
These results give us a place to start in asking how sleep changes across the lifespan.
We all know that babies sleep a lot, we know that young children nap, we know that older
children seem to have a sleep wake switch that's either on or off.
They go at a high energy level all day long and then they sleep soundly all night long
until they spring out of bed in the morning.
In contrast, it practically takes a tow truck to get many adolescents out of bed in the
morning.
And then we have granddad or grandmom dozing in a recliner chair while trying to read or
watch daytime TV.
They go to bed early but in the morning we hear complaints that they just can't get
a good night's sleep.
So clearly there are major changes in sleep across the lifespan.
Are there biological bases for these changes?
And what are their consequences?
The most general description of sleep across the lifespan is the amount of sleep a healthy
person gets at different ages.
In the first weeks of life, the newborn sleeps on the average about 16 hours a day.
And that sleep seems to be about equally divided between REM and non-REM sleep.
The daily amount of non-REM sleep stays about the same up until adolescence, well maybe
it increases a little bit in children between one and three years of age, but the amount
of REM sleep steadily declines.
So by the time of puberty REM sleep makes up 25 to 30% of total sleep time.
In the young adult it is down to 20 to 25% of total sleep time.
Now throughout adulthood and into old age the total daily sleep time gradually decreases
but the percent of REM and non-REM stays about the same.
Six hours of sleep per night is common for the elderly.
There are more changes in sleep across the lifespan than are reflected in total sleep
amounts so let's begin with sleep in infants and very young children up to about five years
of age.
First, the timing of sleep.
Sleep in the newborn is distributed around the clock creating some serious sleep disruption
and deprivation for the parents.
By about two to four months of age the infant shows a tendency to sleep more at night than
during the day and will occasionally sleep for a continuous five or six hours.
A hallmark of development that's a huge relief for parents is the first time the infant sleeps
through the night.
About 60% of six month old babies sleep through the night and by nine months of age it's 80%.
Of course infants continue to have sleep bouts during the day.
By six months of age this is usually down to two daytime naps.
By the time they're a year to a year and a half old naps are down to one a day.
Pattern of a daily nap usually continues until about five years of age when they go to kindergarten.
After that the common human pattern of one consolidated sleep phase per day predominates
throughout life, of course with the exception of cultures where siestas are the norm.
Now there are a few common sleep problems that parents of young children encounter but
they're not serious.
Probably the most common is bedtime battles.
Children are generally very active during the day and may find it difficult to wind
down in the evening.
A regular bedtime schedule along with calming activities such as a bath, storytelling, reading
usually solves this problem.
Another common behavior that's not really a problem is when a one to two year old figures
out how to get out of the crib and then insists on crawling into bed with mommy and daddy.
Well, this can be a difficult habit to break once it gets started.
Two to five year olds can have problems with nightmares and sleepwalking and these are
things that we'll discuss later in the course.
Probably the most critical change in the timing of sleep occurs at puberty.
There is a strong tendency for adolescents to move towards a later bedtime.
Undoubtedly psychosocial factors are at play here, the assertion of maturity, the assertion
of independence.
And this is all exacerbated by increased access to social media, telephone, texting, email.
And then of course there's the increased availability of wake promoting activities such as TV, computer
games and social events and maybe sometimes, maybe sometimes school work.
What has only recently been established experimentally is a biological cause of the delayed sleep
time that occurs at the time of puberty.
To explain this I have to build a little background.
Beginning in the first lecture I made the case that sleep need accumulates during wakefulness
and this sleep need is discharged during sleep.
The accumulation of sleep need results in sleepiness or a drive to go to sleep that
becomes overwhelming and it becomes irresistible.
In the last lecture I explained the concept of homeostasis and how sleep is really a homeostatically
regulated process.
We even showed how a characteristic of EEG, slow wave activity, has a homeostatic relationship
with a duration of prior wake.
So we would expect that if we had a simple test of sleepiness it would show that sleepiness
increases linearly throughout the day.
Sound reasonable?
Sure does, but it's not the case.
We do have a relatively simple way of assessing sleepiness, it is called the Multiple Sleep
Latency Test or the MSLT.
The MSLT is very commonly used in sleep clinics to evaluate sleep problems.
Here is how an MSLT is done.
Person reports to the sleep clinic or the laboratory in the morning, let's say around
8am.
He is outfitted with EEG electrodes, then at regular intervals throughout the day, for
example 10am, noon, 2pm, 4pm, 6pm, and 8pm, he is taken into a quiet dark bedroom and
put into a comfy bed.
The question is how long will it take him to fall asleep?
How long it takes to fall asleep is sleep latency, hence multiple sleep latency tests.
As soon as he falls asleep he is woken up, taken out of the bedroom, and engaged in quiet
wakeful activities until the next test time.
The assumption is that the sleep latency is determined by his accumulated sleep need.
The greater the sleep need, the shorter the sleep latency.
Now for a person who had a good night's sleep the night before, her sleep latency in the
first test at 10am will be about 20 minutes.
This sleep latency will gradually decrease through to the 2pm test when it might be only
10 minutes.
The surprise is that the sleep latency at the 6pm and 8pm tests is almost as high as
it was at 10am.
So the test tells us that the individual is less sleepy in the early evening after being
awake for 12 hours than she was at noon or at 2pm when she had only been awake for 6
or 8 hours.
So what can explain this paradoxical result?
One commonly held idea about the midday slump is that it's due to eating and digesting
lunch.
This is not the case.
The MSLT is the same whether you eat lunch or not.
The typical protocol for an MSLT is to give small snacks of equal caloric value at regular
intervals throughout the day.
What the MSLT is really showing is a mechanism or a process in the brain that opposes sleepiness.
This process involves the ability of our brains to generate internally a biological rhythm
called a circadian rhythm.
Circadian rhythms are common to virtually all organisms on earth and they are characterized
by the fact that even under absolutely constant environmental conditions they have a period
that is about a day.
Hence the term circadian, circa for about and dia for day.
Our circadian rhythms modulate all sorts of biochemical, physiological, and behavioral
activities of our bodies including sleep and wake and we're going to go into considerable
detail about circadian rhythms a few lectures from now.
But suffice it to say here that one function of our circadian rhythms is clock dependent
alerting.
The circadian rhythm generates an opponent process that resists the effects of sleep
need that build up during wakefulness and cause sleepiness.
So in the evening when we have accumulated the most sleep need clock dependent alerting
pushes back on the need to sleep and sustains alertness.
When this clock dependent alerting fades sleep need takes over and it becomes very difficult
to stay awake. This happens at about 10.30 or 11 for me and probably you can pinpoint
the time in the evening when your clock dependent alerting goes offline.
So what does all of this have to do with the rebellious contrary stubborn adolescent who
won't go to bed at a reasonable hour and who has to be pulled out of bed in the morning
to get the school before the late bell rings?
Some sleep studies led by Dr. Mary Karsgaden at Brown University have shown that at the
time of puberty the phase relationships between the two opponent processes sleep need and
clock dependent alerting change.
You are surely familiar with people who are larks early to bed early to rise and with
people who are owls late to bed late to rise.
The change in the phase relationships between the opponent processes essentially turned
pre-pubatal larks into adolescent owls.
As a result they cannot fall asleep easily in what used to be their customary bedtime
and they cannot wake up fully alert at the early morning hour necessary to get washed,
get dressed, eat breakfast and not to miss the school bus.
Because of this change in phase relationships of the opponent processes many adolescents
accumulate considerable sleep debt and such sleep debt has strong negative consequences
for mood, cognitive performance and health.
In light of these new facts it would seem wise to rethink what is almost a universal
organizational pattern in our schools.
Given limited transportation facilities it's common practice to bust the junior and senior
high school students early in the morning and the elementary grade kids later.
Shouldn't it be the other way around?
Ok, now that we have discussed the timing of sleep across the lifespan we can move on
to another aspect of sleep and that's development.
The EEG correlates of sleep states and sleep regulation can be studied at different stages
in the life cycle to see how sleep develops.
Developmental insights come from looking beyond humans to include other species and
when we do so we have to divide up mammals into two developmental types.
There are precocial mammals and there are altricial mammals.
Precocial means that the newborn is in a rather advanced stage of development.
When the precocial lamb or calf is born it gets up almost immediately on tottering legs
and within a very short period of time it's running around.
In contrast when the altricial rat is born it is naked, blind and incapable of much in
the way of coordinated movements.
So what are we humans precocial or altricial?
Certainly in terms of behavior the human infant is altricial.
It is many months before it can walk or have fine motor skills.
It is totally dependent on its mother.
The EEG of the full term infant is very different from that of the older child or adult but
there are still coordinated suites of characteristics that appear to be the developmental precursors
of non-REM and REM sleep.
Since the brain is undergoing major developmental changes at this time it's not surprising
that the usual electrophysiological correlates of adult brain function are not present.
Scientists and physicians have worked around this little inconvenience by describing newborn
sleep in different terms.
They use the terms quiet sleep, active sleep and indeterminate sleep.
These definitions invoke characteristics of sleep other than the EEG.
Quiet sleep as you might expect is characterized by overall quiescence, regular breathing and
regular heart rate.
Active sleep is characterized by body movements, eye movements and irregularities in breathing
and heart rate.
Active sleep is such a mixture of characteristics that it is indeterminate.
Quiet sleep develops into non-REM sleep and active sleep develops into REM sleep as the
EEG matures.
The development of sleep in other altricial species is even less advanced at birth than
in a human.
Studies of EEG and behavior in these animals might give us some additional insights into
the development of sleep processes.
The earliest that EEG recordings have been made on neonatal rats is around 9-10 days
of age.
At this time the EEG is continuous, fast and low amplitude with none of the patterns
that are seen in adult sleep.
However, these very young rats occasionally show bodily jerks and twitches.
Some researchers took these jerks and twitches as indications of active sleep and in their
absence as indications of quiet sleep.
However, several lines of evidence lead to the conclusion that the jerks have no relationship
to any brain state.
These jerks are occurring before descending neural connections from the brain to the spinal
cord are made.
And if the spinal cords of neonatal rats are severed, the jerks are not affected.
Similarly, disruption of the neurochemical systems that control REM sleep have no effect
on what is called active sleep in the neonatal rats.
So the conclusion is that jerks are non-specific reflex muscle activity and that the EEG activity
at this time does not reflect any sleep-related organization.
Slow waves first appear in the EEG of the neonatal rat at 11 days of age and when they
appear they are just as likely to be present in what is behaviorally identified as active
sleep or as quiet sleep.
By postnatal day 16, the slow waves are mostly occurring in behavioral quiet sleep and by
postnatal day 20, the slow wave activity is higher than that seen in the adult rat.
In contrast, another EEG wave form called theta activity, which is a characteristic of
REM sleep, is very low until about postnatal day 20.
So the tentative conclusion from these studies is that EEG-defined non-REM sleep emerges
from undifferentiated brain activity earlier than does EEG-defined REM sleep.
Such a conclusion has evolutionary implications as to which sleep state is more primitive
and it could also have implications about sleep function.
So how do these two states of sleep relate to each other?
One idea we will discuss later is that wakefulness generates the need for non-REM sleep and the
expression of non-REM sleep generates the need for REM sleep.
If that idea is correct, it would make no sense for REM sleep to develop in the neonate
before non-REM sleep.
What about the regulation of sleep?
Earlier we discussed the interesting relationship between duration of wake and the subsequent
expression of EEG slow wave activity during sleep.
When does this relationship appear during development?
At what age does wake produce a need for sleep?
And when does sleep serve a restorative function necessary for maintenance of wake?
Normal rats cannot stay awake for very long.
At 12 days of age, a short period of sleep deprivation by gentle handling induces a very
strong sleep response.
But that response is in the duration of quiet or non-REM sleep with no change in slow wave
activity.
Suddenly, on the 23rd day after birth, the nature of the response to sleep deprivation
changes from an increase in duration of sleep to an increase in slow wave activity or delta
power.
A two hour sleep deprivation of a P23 rat, that's 23 days after birth, has no effect
on the subsequent duration of quiet or non-REM sleep, but it induces a huge increase in slow
wave activity that requires about four hours to come back to levels seen in the non-sleep
deprived controls.
So this experiment tells us two important things.
One, if we wanted to look for some process related to the homeostatic regulation of non-REM
sleep, we should compare differences between the 22 day old and the 23 day old rats.
And second, the ability of the neonatal rat to resist the sleep debt and to recover from
that debt is quite minimal at P23.
Could this be part of the reason for the large amount of sleep in newborns?
Now there's much to be learned about the development of sleep and through studies of development
we could gain new insights as the sleep function.
But let's now turn to the other end of the lifespan, the effects of aging on sleep.
We already noted the steady decline in total amount of sleep from adolescence to old age,
but whereas about 20% of total sleep time is deep stage 3 non-REM sleep in the 25 year
old, it is declined to only about 3% in mid-life around age 50.
There's a little further decrease in stage 3 non-REM sleep as individuals reach advanced
stages, but the total duration of sleep decreases by about 28 minutes per decade.
Also sleep structure changes, it becomes much more fragmented as individuals get older.
Even without specific sleep disorders, the ability to sustain continuous sleep is lost
as we get older.
In men the need for frequent urination usually marks the sleep cycle with about a wakefulness
that involves a trip to the bathroom.
In women, sleep disturbances are frequently associated with menstrual cycles up until
menopause and then hot flashes of menopause can be very disturbing to sleep.
Of course psychological stress is also a major cause of compromised sleep for many individuals
throughout adult life.
Sleep problems in older adults frequently go undiagnosed and untreated because the assumption
is that worsened sleep is a normal aspect of aging.
To a certain degree this is true, but treatment for any medical disorder that compromises
sleep such as arthritis or gastroesophageal reflux and treatment for any specific sleep
disorder can improve sleep and the quality of life significantly.
Now getting back to the image I introduced at the beginning of this lecture, the elderly
person snoozing during the day and finding it difficult to sleep at night, a very significant
factor is lack of physical exercise.
It is important for the elderly to maintain a regular pattern of physical activity to
the extent possible.
Increased activity during the day consolidates wakefulness and promotes better sleep at night.
This result is even seen in elderly rats.
Allowed to become couch potatoes, the elderly rats showed a reduced level of activity and
a flattening of the pattern of activity across the day.
Their sleep became more fragmented and also more evenly distributed across the day.
When however they were given access to activity wheels, their daily rhythms of sleep and activity
improved as did the quality of their sleep.
When their wheels were clamped so they could not rotate, the rats returned to the elderly
pattern of sleep and activity.
I should mention here some of the most common sleep disorders that are age related.
We will spend more time on these topics later but it is important to be able to recognize
these problems as they develop with age and to seek appropriate therapies.
The most common sleep disorder that can impair the restorative quality of sleep is sleep apnea.
Sleep apnea is mostly due to collapse of the airways during sleep, cutting off air flow
to the lungs.
Snoring is a frequent concomitant to sleep apnea as the individual forces air through
the constricted airways.
Apnea causes a rapid change in blood gases, O2 and CO2, which in turn stimulates a return
to wakefulness that reestablishes the air flow.
These very brief arousals may be extremely frequent, 200 to 300 a night, but extremely
short and the person may be totally unaware of them.
In the morning, he or she may think that they had a full eight or nine hours of sleep but
they do not feel refreshed and experience daytime sleepiness during the following day.
In fact, the most common reason for a person with sleep apnea to seek medical help is the
daytime sleepiness that can be incapacitating and it can certainly be dangerous for driving
or operating heavy equipment.
Now, a common cause of sleep apnea is obesity.
Airway tissues get fatty too and they get floppy.
Obviously significant weight loss reduces the severity of sleep apnea.
Apart from obesity, the structure of an individual's mouth, jaw and throat may be the problem.
Dental appliances or surgery can help.
And for all cases of sleep apnea, appliances that deliver positive airway pressure during
sleep can be used.
These are called CPAP devices.
Sleep apnea is a serious health issue not only because of the sleep deprivation but
also because of the effects of the frequent O2 desaturation of the blood.
Person with sleep apnea should seek help.
Another sleep disorder that disrupts sleep of the individual and the sleep of any bed
partner is restless legs and periodic limb movements.
Restless legs is the uncomfortable urge to move legs while falling off to sleep or during
awakenings at night.
Limb movements are uncontrollable jerking of feet, legs or sometimes arms during sleep.
The incidence of periodic leg movements is about 5% in adults and up to about age 50.
But the incidence increases to over 40% in individuals over 65.
These conditions aren't generally serious but they can lead to insomnia and fragmented
sleep and result in sleep debt and of course daytime sleepiness.
There are many medical conditions associated with age that are not directly related to
sleep mechanisms but compromised sleep.
Heart conditions, kidney disease, asthma, Parkinson's, Alzheimer's and psychiatric conditions
are some examples.
In all cases treatments for the specific medical condition can improve sleep and in many cases
sleep can be improved even if the medical condition persists.
The relationships between sleep and disease go both ways which makes it difficult to sort
out causes and effects.
Thinking about the involvement of sleep in so many aspects of health and disease raises
the ultimate question of whether there is a relationship between sleep and mortality.
This question frequently comes up in the context of aging.
As we discussed at the beginning of this lecture the average total daily sleep amounts in the
population goes down steadily from early adulthood into old age.
The average daily sleep amount in those over 65 or 70 is less than 6 hours.
The common knowledge is that 8 hours of sleep per night is optimal and less than that results
in sleep debt with its many consequences.
Hence, many older individuals worry about their short sleep and wonder if it compromises
their health.
There are also many individuals who are described as long sleepers.
They supposedly get more than 9 hours of sleep per night and this raises the question of
whether one can get too much sleep and whether that contributes to poor health.
Many studies have been done to investigate the relationships between sleep duration and
longevity.
These are mostly large population epidemiological studies over long periods of time.
Efforts are made to sort out the many interacting variables that can affect sleep time and can
also contribute to the risk of dying from any particular cause or from all possible
causes.
As you can imagine, it's not possible to definitively sort out cause and effect from
such studies, but any associations that are uncovered can lead to further work to test
hypotheses about causation.
Another problem with these large epidemiological studies is that they depend on information
derived from questionnaires.
In other words, information volunteered by the participants and some of it may be inaccurate
or subjective.
For example, the variable we are interested in is the daily amount of sleep.
This is obviously different from the time spent in bed, yet people are likely to give
answers that are closer to time in bed than time asleep.
So subjective reporting of sleep is frequently an overestimate.
Despite all of the problems with large epidemiological studies based on survey questionnaires, some
very interesting results come out of a diversity of studies.
Keep in mind that the populations in these studies are mostly elderly because the investigators
want to make connections between the information they gather and the eventual mortality statistics
of the participants and they don't want to wait 30 or 40 years to get their results.
The surprising finding is that higher risks of mortality are associated with both short
sleep and with long sleep.
The lowest risks of mortality are associated with subjective sleep times around six and
a half to seven and a half hours.
Given the fact that subjective estimates of sleep are generally high, that means that
the sleep duration associated with lowest risk of mortality is considerably lower than
eight hours, which is generally considered to be optimal.
One recent study from UCSD, led by Dr. Dan Kripke, eliminated the subjectivity of estimating
sleep time by using wrist actometry to measure sleep time objectively.
wrist actometry is sort of like putting a pedometer on your wrist, it is a very reliable
way of obtaining data on sleep without doing overnight EEG, EMG measurements.
Kripke and colleagues reported the surprising result that the minimal mortality risk category
was individuals who sleep between five and six and a half hours a night.
Higher mortality was seen in those who slept less than five hours and more than seven hours
per night.
Now, if you are middle aged or older and are worrying about your decreasing sleep time,
you can take comfort from these results.
First, decreasing sleep time with age is normal and second, it's not compromising your health.
Of course, if you are falling into the really short sleep category or the long sleep category,
you might seek some medical advice.
We have said quite a bit already about some of the health issues associated with short
sleep.
Long sleep is another issue.
What about long sleep could increase your risk of mortality?
There are a number of possibilities, but there is no clear answer.
First, some existing disease conditions could be increasing your sleep time.
Second, depression could be contributing to increased sleep time in bed.
And also contributing to the development of other health problems.
Third, your sleep may be compromised from anything that causes sleep fragmentation.
So the increase in daytime sleepiness could result in more time in bed at night.
There are many possible causes for the link between long sleep and greater risk for mortality,
so getting medical advice is important.
Sleep home lesson?
Expect changes in your sleep with age.
Make an effort to maintain good sleep hygiene.
Be informed about what for your age are normal parameters for sleep amounts and sleep quality.
Sleep times less than five hours or greater than nine hours may indicate the existence
of problems that could and should be treated.
We will have much more to say about specific sleep problems throughout the rest of this
course, but next time we will turn back to studies of animal sleep by asking who in the
world sleeps?
Until then, sweet dreams.
