Maybe on occasion you have complained about not getting enough sleep.
But imagine the extreme opposite.
What if you absolutely could not stay awake for five months without drinking or eating
and the opposite without urinating and defecating, you slept in a dark cold bedroom for five months.
That is what a black bear does every year.
We call it hibernation.
Hibernation is an adaptation of some warm-blooded animals that enables them to turn down their
thermostats, essentially giving up a normal high and constant body temperature for spans
of time ranging from hours to months.
The benefit?
Saving energy.
Being able to survive periods when food is scarce, temperatures are cold, or the environment
is dry.
Some birds and mammals lower their body temperatures on a daily or nightly basis to save energy.
This is called daily torpor or shallow torpor.
Many species of small birds and mammals enter shallow torpor.
For example, hummingbirds, bats, and many small rodents.
We'll take a look at some of these examples in more detail.
Hibernation is a multi-day bout of torpor, and in many cases involves a much lower body
temperature than is seen in daily torpor.
There's only one species of bird known to hibernate, and that is the whipper-will or
nightjar.
So hibernation is mostly a mammalian phenomenon, and what a phenomenon it is.
Hibernation involves the most extreme variations in physiological systems that exist in mammals.
I became interested in hibernation when I was a graduate student.
My PhD thesis research took me to the Sierra Nevada of California to study the many species
of chipmunks and ground squirrels that live there.
It was remarkable to me that these animals that acted like all other mammals for the
summer months when I was among them in the fall would retire to dens and mostly sleep
for the next five months.
During this time, their body temperatures would be about the same as that of their environments
which dropped to freezing when many feet of snow covered the ground above them.
I brought these animals back with me into the lab, and I was able to give them nests
in cold chambers and observe their hibernation.
And I've studied hibernation as part of my research efforts ever since.
Let me describe a single bout of hibernation in a ground squirrel.
My favorite species for hibernation research is the golden mantled ground squirrel of western
United States.
These are beautiful animals with mostly gray-brown fur, except for the black and white stripes
down their backs, and a nice rough of golden fur around their necks, which gives them their
names.
Sometimes you may hear people calling them chipmunks, but they are not chipmunks.
Chipmunks, which also hibernate, are smaller and have many more stripes.
In the lab, a golden mantled ground squirrel will have a normal mammalian body temperature
between 36 and 37 degrees centigrade all summer long.
But also between bouts of torpor or hibernation during the winter.
I forgot to mention that for the ground squirrel, the hibernation season is divided into sequential
bouts of torpor.
Each bout might last for six or seven days.
The animals come back up to normal mammalian body temperature, and that requires a huge
metabolic effort between these bouts of torpor.
After maybe 12 to 24 hours, it will enter its next bout of torpor.
At the time it begins to enter a bout of torpor, it's in its comfie nest in a sleeping posture.
An EEG recording shows that it is mostly in non-rem sleep.
As it's in a cold environment, its rate of metabolic heat production measured by oxygen
consumption or CO2 production will be a little elevated.
The entrance into a bout of torpor is marked by a drop in metabolic rate to its basal level.
Basal metabolic rate means the level of energy expenditure in an animal that is resting and
not using any extra energy to maintain its body temperature.
Basal metabolic rate is the level of energy expenditure necessary for all of the housekeeping
functions of the body, breathing, circulating the blood, maintaining muscle tone, etc.
Remember, that this squirrel is in a cold environment, either in its burrow in nature
or in its nest box in the laboratory cold room.
So once its metabolic rate falls to basal, it's losing more heat to the environment
than it is producing by its metabolism.
Therefore, its body temperature begins to fall.
This fall in body temperature in a non-hybronating mammal or in the squirrel in the summer would
be prevented by the thermostat in the brain, the hypothalamus, the same area of the brain
we just discussed with respect to the location of the circadian clock, the SCN.
During the entrance to hibernation, the thermostat must either be turned off or its set point
must be lowered.
We'll come back to this issue a little later.
Now I just want to focus on the falling body temperature.
Just about all biological processes are temperature sensitive.
They go faster at higher temperatures and slower at lower temperatures.
This applies to all of the molecular, cellular, physiological processes in the body that require
energy.
If the heart beats slower, it requires less energy.
Once as the body temperature of the squirrel falls, so does its metabolic rate.
You can see where this is leading.
With lower metabolic rate, there is less metabolic heat production and the temperature
continues to fall.
Now three things can happen.
One, the squirrel comes into temperature equilibrium with its environment, two, the thermostat starts
regulating at a new temperature and metabolic rate comes up to prevent further drop in temperature,
or three, the thermostat returns to its normal mammalian setting and body temperature comes
back to the usual 36 to 37 degrees centigrade.
Actually, as we will see, all three of these possibilities occur.
When our golden mantle ground squirrel goes into a multi-day bout of deep hibernation,
its body temperature comes into thermal equilibrium with the environment, and that can be close
to zero degrees centigrade, the freezing point of water.
Some other species of ground squirrels that enter daily torpor maintain their body temperatures
considerably above environmental temperature, but much lower than the normal mammalian 36
to 37 degrees centigrade.
As we will see in the case of the continuous all winter hibernation of the bear, it maintains
its body temperature only a few degrees below normal.
And finally, the return to normal mammalian body temperature which we call normothermia
occurs in the golden mantle ground squirrel every three to seven days during the hibernation
season, dividing hibernation into these repeated bouts of torpor punctuated by returns to normothermia
that might last 12 to 24 hours.
Now what is the consequence of the low body temperature of the golden mantle ground squirrel
during a bout of hibernation?
Its heart rate and metabolic rate drop to a small fraction of what they were in normothermia.
Its EEG essentially flat lines, and by this criterion alone it is clinically dead.
Its kidneys stop producing urine, it is relatively insensitive to environmental stimuli, and
when stimulated it can only move very, very slowly.
It can be aroused however by stimulation, and once an arousal starts it generally goes
to completion and requires maybe an hour for the squirrel to reach normothermia again.
So what does all of this have to do with sleep?
We're getting there.
The first question I asked about hibernation was whether it was an advanced or a primitive
trait.
Obviously reptiles have low body temperature in the winter because they don't have the
physiological ability to generate heat to prevent them from cooling off.
Reptiles do have a brain thermostat and it controls their normal behavioral responses
to regulate their body temperatures, basking, moving into the shade, crawling under a rock,
etc.
But when they do not have those behavioral options they retire to a safe place and give
up trying.
So when the going gets rough for the hibernator, does it just revert to a more primitive reptilian
mode and shut off its thermostat, or does the hibernator have a more sophisticated thermostat
than other mammals?
A thermostat whose set point can be adjusted over a very wide range of temperatures.
To make a long story short, we were able to show that the brain thermostat of the hibernator
did not turn off.
It was continuously active and it had a broadly adjustable set point.
Therefore, it's a rather sophisticated adaptation in comparison to the capabilities of other
mammals.
Next question, how did this broadband adjustable thermostat evolve?
What pre-existing mammalian condition could have been shaped by natural selection to result
in the ability to hibernate?
A possible answer came from the study on the kangaroo rat I told you about in the first
lecture.
When the kangaroo rats went into non-rem sleep, the set point on their thermostats and the
sensitivity of the thermostats went to a lower level and body temperature fell slightly.
When they went into rem sleep, their thermostats were completely insensitive to temperature.
They were shut off.
These results have been confirmed in other species including other hibernators, the golden
mantle ground squirrel and the much bigger marmot.
The hypothesis was clear.
Hibernation is an evolutionary extension of sleep.
An ancestral species that lived in seasonal environments, those who slept more and lowered
their body temperatures more during sleep were more likely to survive when temperatures
were low and food was scarce.
Next step, record EEG during entire bouts of hibernation.
When we did this, it was clear that prior to hibernation, the golden mantle ground squirrels
had a normal mammalian distribution of sleep and wake.
But once they started entering a bout of hibernation, they were mostly asleep.
And as their temperatures declined, that sleep consisted more and more of non-rem sleep.
Rem sleep became less and less and ceased to occur at brain temperatures somewhat above
25 degrees centigrade.
Similar results were obtained from a species of ground squirrel that does not hibernate
but enters daily bouts of shallow torpor when food is scarce.
This cute little animal is the round-tailed ground squirrel that lives in southwestern
United States.
During days that this species did not go into torpor, it showed a normal day-night distribution
of wakefulness, non-rem and rem sleep.
But on nights that it did go into torpor, the amount of non-rem sleep increased and
the amount of rem sleep and wakefulness decreased dramatically.
So it looks like both hibernation and daily torpor evolved as an extension of the downward
resetting of the mammalian thermostat during non-rem sleep.
How do we explain the difference between the multi-day bouts of torpor in the hibernating
golden mantle ground squirrel and the daily bouts of torpor in the round-tailed ground
squirrel?
How about clock-dependent alerting?
Continuous records of activity and body temperature in golden mantle ground squirrels held under
absolutely constant conditions showed that they had beautiful free-running circadian rhythms
up until a few weeks before they entered their first bout of hibernation.
Clear circadian rhythms reemerged after the last bout of hibernation in the spring.
Analysis of the bouts of hibernation themselves revealed no circadian component to their periodicity.
It appeared as if the clock-dependent alerting function of the circadian system had to be
shut off to permit multi-day bouts of torpor.
The daily alarm clock had to be silenced.
Further analysis, however, revealed a possible role for the circadian clock during the hibernation
season.
We had continuous recordings of brain temperature throughout the entire hibernation season,
and when we greatly amplified these recordings, we could see very low amplitude cycles of
brain temperature during the bouts of hibernation.
These cycles had periodicities within the circadian range, but from bout to bout of
hibernation even in the same animal, these periodicities varied.
And this is why the entrances into or the arousals from hibernation across the whole
season had no obvious circadian organization.
However, and here is an amazing result, when we measured the length in hours of each bout
of torpor, and we divided that by the circadian period of brain temperature during that bout,
we always got a whole number.
Now think about that.
Each bout of hibernation was a clear multiple of the period of the circadian clock during
that bout.
A further inspection of the recording showed that the animals aroused from hibernation
always on the rising phase of one of the low level cycles of brain temperature.
The conclusion, the arousing influence of the circadian clock has to be dampened to permit
multi-day bouts of torpor, but the clock is not turned off, and at times the periodic
arousals from torpor that occur throughout the hibernation season.
Now I would like to turn back to the continuous EEG recordings during the hibernation season.
These experiments were done originally to characterize the states of the animals as
they entered hibernation.
Frequently, however, an experiment reveals something that you were not expecting or even
thinking about, and that was the case with these EEG recordings.
The surprising observation was that just following arousal from a bout of torpor, the squirrels
had the deepest non-rem sleep that was ever seen in these animals.
What do I mean by deep?
After our discussion of slow wave activity, delta power, the need for sleep that is generated
by prior wakefulness is directly reflected in the slow wave activity recorded during
subsequent sleep.
If wakefulness is prolonged, that slow wave activity is increased, and if some sleep need
is dissipated by a nap, subsequent slow wave activity is decreased.
So if a multi-day bout of torpor is a multi-day bout of sleep and particularly non-rem sleep,
why should the squirrels appear so incredibly sleep deprived when they arouse from a bout
of hibernation?
This led us to speculate that the lower body temperature of hibernation definitely served
the need of energy conservation, but perhaps the brain recovery functions of sleep, whatever
they might be, were inhibited by these low temperatures.
Well this concept got popularized with a catchy statement, hibernators wake up to sleep, but
unfortunately that idea proved to be wrong.
So what does explain this curious observation of excessive slow wave activity during the
three to four hours following a bout of hibernation?
It turns out that it is low brain temperature.
The lower the brain temperature, during a bout of hibernation, the greater is the slow
wave activity immediately following the arousal.
If the animals were held at room temperature, they would still go into bouts of hibernation,
but their brain temperatures would not fall much below 25 degrees centigrade.
For these conditions, there was no increase in slow wave activity following a bout of
torpor.
The duration of the bout of torpor had no influence on the slow wave activity.
It did not matter if the bout lasted three days or seven days, the slow wave activity
was a function of the brain temperature.
Therefore, sleep was not, sleep need, I should say, was not accumulating during the time
in torpor.
The most amazing result from these experiments, however, was that this big increase in slow
wave activity following a bout of hibernation did not require sleep to be discharged.
If the squirrels were prevented from sleeping for the four hours following arousal, the
slow wave activity surge was eliminated and it did not come back when the animals were
finally allowed to sleep.
Let me explain that in a different way.
If you or a non-hybernating squirrel is kept awake for a period of time, you will see the
increase in slow wave activity when you or the squirrel are allowed to sleep.
If instead of allowing sleep, we keep you or the squirrel awake longer, the increase in
slow wave activity will be even bigger when sleep is allowed.
Got it?
Sleep deprivation increases subsequent slow wave activity.
It does not eliminate it.
But for the animal that just aroused from hibernation, if it is sleep deprived, the
expected slow wave activity is eliminated.
No matter how long you wait for recovery sleep, that slow wave activity does not get expressed.
Yet if you take that same squirrel in the middle of its interbout normal thermic interval
and sleep deprived it for just a couple of hours, you will see a clear increase in its
slow wave activity when it is released to sleep.
So sleep homeostasis is normal in the hibernator, but the slow wave activity following the arousal
is not homeostatically regulated.
There has to be another explanation other than sleep need for these enormous surges in
slow wave activity.
So another hypothesis.
Scientists are never short on hypotheses.
This hypothesis was based on what we know about the electrophysiology underlying slow
wave activity.
We will cover this topic in detail in a later lecture, but a short preview will suffice here.
For slow wave activity to occur, there has to be a reduction in the excitatory input
to the cerebral cortex.
This is why sensory stimulation can stave off sleepiness even when you are sleep deprived.
During normal transitions to sleep, the excitability of the neurons in the cortex is dampened
because a number of neurotransmitter systems that serve to promote wakefulness decrease
their activity.
Again, this is a topic for a future lecture, but you can see that if you decrease the excitatory
inputs to the cortex, you would promote sleep.
This is actually how sleeping pills work, another future topic.
So what if the excitatory inputs to the cortex were physically withdrawn?
The billions and billions of connections between neurons in the brain are quite dynamic.
Maintaining them requires a lot of housekeeping and a lot of energy.
The membranes and the molecular components of the neurons are constantly turning over,
being degraded and being renewed.
Maybe all or some of that maintenance cannot be done at low brain temperatures.
Maybe connections are lost during a bout of hibernation.
Until they are re-established, there would be a lack of excitatory input to the cortex.
How could we test this?
A graduate student, Kristina von der O, took on the task, and it was a huge task.
What Kristina did was to use very fine micropipettes, essentially tiny needles, to penetrate individual
neurons in the brains of the hibernating squirrels and fill them with dye.
The dye would diffuse throughout all the regions of the neurons.
She did this in four specific brain regions of squirrels that were hibernating at two different
temperatures, 5 degrees and 15 degrees centigrade.
And she did these injections at different times in bouts of hibernation, before an entrance,
one day in, three days in, six days in, and several hours following an arousal.
She then used very fine and precise microscopy methods to reconstruct the filled cells.
Her findings were remarkable.
Think of the structure of a neuron.
It has a cell body that contains the nucleus and other organelles.
It has one long process for sending nerve impulses out.
This is called the axon, and it has a bunch of bushy processes called dendrites that collect
the information that's coming in.
The axons can be very long, so Kristina was not able to reconstruct them in the tissues
she studied, but she was able to reconstruct the cell bodies and the bushy dendrites.
What she found was when the squirrels entered hibernation at 5 degrees centigrade, they
lost about 25% of this neuronal structure.
In other words, they lost 25% of the structures that bring information into the cells and process
information.
Wow, that was amazing.
But what was even more amazing is that all of this structure grew back during the several
hours following a rousal from a bout of torpor.
You can imagine the complexity of all of these connections, we call synapses, between the
nerve endings coming in and the dendrites of the neurons they communicate with.
Imagine what it means to lose 25% of this and then grow it back again in hours.
These results truly represent the most dramatic changes that have ever been seen in mammalian
brains and the rate of change is incredible.
I mentioned that the regrowth occurs in a few hours and the loss occurs mostly in the
first day of a bout of hibernation.
It is almost as if the loss is an active process to prevent accumulation of damage during
the period of time when temperature is low and inhibiting the processes necessary to
maintain the complex synaptic structure of the brain.
The temperature effect, as expected, there was less loss of brain structure in the animals
hibernating at the higher temperature.
Christina took her study one step further.
What happened to all of the synapses in these regions of the brain?
There are specific proteins that are part of the synapses on the presynaptic side and
others on the postsynaptic side.
She showed that both of these types of proteins had the same degree of loss as the gross dendritic
structure.
Thus synapses, the essence of information processing in the brain, were lost.
Furthermore, when she stained the tissues for the presynaptic and the postsynaptic proteins
together, she could visualize the synapses in the normothermic squirrels.
Therefore and after the bout of hibernation, she could compare the structure of the synapses.
What she was able to show is that the synapses actually come apart and they are lost during
a bout of hibernation.
You might think that this is a very costly and inefficient process to destroy and rebuild
all of these synapses with each bout of hibernation, but we were also able to show that the proteins
are not totally destroyed.
They are simply put back into a cytoplasmic pool in the neuron so they can be remobilized
to rebuild the synapses after arousal.
Thus the proteins do not have to be re-synthesized from scratch each time the animal comes out
of hibernation.
All of this cellular work supports the idea that the explanation for the huge slow wave
activity following a bout of hibernation is due to the loss of excitatory input to the
cortical neurons.
As those synapses are re-established, the neurons of the cortex become more excitable
and the slow wave activity decreases.
The conclusion is that the EEG slow wave activity increases following a bout of hibernation
are not the same as the EEG slow wave activity following a prolonged bout of wakefulness.
Now, let's turn to the iconic image of the hibernator, the bear.
Some years back, my scientific partner of many years, Dennis Gron and I were having
a beer with our old friend from the University of Alaska, Brian Barnes, and we were speculating
on how bear hibernation might compare with the hibernation of animals we were studying,
the golden mental ground squirrel for Dennis and me and the Arctic ground squirrel for
Brian.
We decided that it was fun to speculate, but why not just find out?
Ask the bears.
A long-term collaboration was initiated.
At the University of Alaska in Fairbanks, we built outdoor enclosures that could contain
bears.
Next we built boxes that would provide the same sort of environment that the bears created
for their hibernation in nature.
But these nest boxes contained antennas that could receive information from transmitters
we would place in the bears to communicate their EEG, EMG, EKG, and temperatures.
Furthermore, we could control the air flow through the nest, enabling us to measure their
metabolism.
We even put in video cameras to spy on the bears.
The next step was to get bears.
Now Alaska Fish and Game frequently has to deal with problem bears.
These are bears that come into populated areas and forage in garbage cans.
They capture these wayward bears and take them way out into the wilderness, there's lots
of that around Fairbanks, and they release them.
But before they release them, they put a radio tracking collar on them.
If the same bear has a habit of coming back, unfortunately they euthanize it.
So we made an agreement with Alaska Fish and Game.
Each fall they would allow us to have two of the bears that they would otherwise destroy.
However, we were not authorized to hold non-hybernating bears, so we had to wait until the first
snow when the bears would go into their winter dens and then use the radio tracking collars
to find them, open the den, tranquilize them, pull them out, and take them back to the university
where we surgically implanted the recording devices and then put them into their luxury
hibernacular nests that we had prepared for them.
Now all of this worked beautifully and lots of the credit has to go to a young Norwegian
scientist, Oven Toin, who took daily care of all of the bear watching and data collection
that was necessary.
And now we have a very good idea of what hibernation is like in bears, at least in black bears.
We've not yet had the courage to work with grizzly bears or polar bears.
Just like our ground squirrels, the bears lose their circadian rhythms of sleep and wake
at the beginning of the hibernation season.
And these sleep and wake circadian rhythms do not come back until the spring when the
bears are coming out of hibernation.
Unlike the squirrels, however, the bears do not allow their temperatures to drop much
below 32 degrees centigrade, even though the outside temperatures in Fairbanks could go
well below 40 degrees, minus 40 degrees centigrade.
The bears actually regulated their body temperatures by shivering and thereby increasing their
metabolic rates.
Because of the relatively high body and brain temperatures, we were able to record their
sleep states.
And they continued to show mostly non-rem sleep and rem sleep with very brief episodes
of wake throughout the hibernation season.
Another big difference with the squirrels is that the bears do not have periodic arousals
from torpor.
Once they enter hibernation, they remain in hibernation for the entire winter season.
This adds support to the concept that the squirrels have to arouse periodically to reestablish
the connectivity of their brains, that is lost at low temperatures.
In one case, we had a female bear that was pregnant.
We know that bears give birth during hibernation, usually in February.
And that's what happened in this case.
The newborn bear is very tiny.
It fits onto a teaspoon, and it's very altricial.
It's blind and hairless.
It attaches to one of mom's teats, nurses, and grows throughout the rest of the winter
into the cute bear cub that is shown in many nature films.
The birth in our study occurred, but the newborn died because of a congenital defect.
What was interesting, however, was that even though mama bear was clearly in hibernation
mode prior to giving birth, she did not drop her body temperature until after she gave
birth.
We do not know what her temperature regulation would have been had the cub survived.
We have been very thrilled to have had the opportunity to study hibernation in these
remarkable animals, the black bears of Alaska.
So in summary, we believe that hibernation is an evolutionary extension of non-rem sleep.
And it also involves major changes in the circadian control of sleep and wake.
In the next lectures, we will delve deeply into the neuroanatomy and the neurophysiology
of sleep.
But until then, sweet dreams.
