Fair warning, this is not going to be an easy lecture.
You may have to go over it more than once, but it is absolutely central to the important
question, what is the function of sleep?
If you master the basic concepts that I will try to explain as simply as I can, you will
be able to easily understand our subsequent lectures on experiments that investigate the
function of sleep and on lectures having to do with sleep homeostatic regulation and even
the lectures on sleep problems and therapies.
I promise that from here on things will get easier, so stick with it.
Here is the basic rationale of what I am going to tell you about today.
In our previous lectures I have frequently referred to the important features of non-REM
sleep, the EEG slow wave activity which we also call delta power.
You will remember that slow wave activity or delta power is a measure of how much the
complex EEG pattern is dominated by brain waves at the very low frequencies between
one half and four and a half hertz.
The important fact is that the magnitude of the delta power is determined by the duration
of prior wakefulness.
Thus delta power seems to be a measure of sleep need, a measure of the homeostatic drive
for sleep that builds up during wakefulness.
So it seems quite logical to propose that if we understood the cellular mechanisms that
cause these EEG changes, these changes in slow wave activity that we are interested in,
that understanding should bring us closer to discovering the function of sleep.
Let me unpack that statement a little bit.
First it is safe to assume that a function of sleep has to involve mechanisms at the
cellular level.
Sure, organs have functions, the heart pumps blood, the lungs exchange gases, the kidneys
produce urine, but the basic mechanisms underlying those functions are at the cellular level.
In these examples the cardiac muscle cells, the cells of the lung alveoli, and the cells
of the kidney tubules.
Second, the EEG measures we have been discussing are reflecting activity of the brain, but
the mechanisms underlying these brain wave patterns are properties of the billions and
billions of neurons that make up the brain.
Putting these two lines of reasoning together, wakefulness is producing a change in the cells
of the brain that are influencing their activity during sleep, and during sleep those cellular
changes are being reversed.
So the bottom line is that if we understand the cellular processes underlying the generation
of slow wave activity in the EEG, that knowledge should bring us closer to the cellular changes
produced by wakefulness and reversed during sleep.
Those changes should be at the very core of the function of sleep.
The first question we need to answer is what generates EEG slow wave activity?
We already discussed that at the whole brain level.
Slow waves in the EEG are generated when large groups of neurons fire together in a synchronous
rhythmic pattern.
Remember our concert hall analogy from the second lecture.
Before the concert begins there are thousands of independent conversations going on at the
same time, and what you hear is simply white noise, like static, no pattern.
This is like the brain during wake when it's doing so many different things all at the
same time.
Then the concert starts, and now those who are making the sounds, the musicians, are
all synchronized by the music score and by the conductor, and you hear the beautiful
patterns of the sound that constitute the piece being performed.
This is like the brain during non-rem sleep when waves of synchronous activity of huge
numbers of neurons are sweeping across the cortex.
Just thinking about it is almost enough to lull you to sleep.
Okay, but at the cellular level, the level of individual neurons and groups of neurons,
what is causing them to fire in synchronous bursts of activity?
To delve into this question you need to know some very basic neurophysiology.
Not much, but if you know how a flashlight works you can understand how a neuron works.
The fundamental principle of electrical circuits is Ohm's law.
This law says that the flow of electrons between two contacts, electrical current, is equal
to the voltage difference between those two contacts divided by the resistance of the
wire connecting them.
This is like the flow of water through a hose, the rate of flow is a function of the water
pressure difference between the inlet and the outlet of the hose, and the resistance
of the hose, how long it is and how big a diameter it is.
So back to the flashlight.
When you close the switch on the flashlight you are creating a circuit that runs between
two poles of a battery, the positive and the negative, and includes the high resistance
filament that's in the bulb.
When the circuit is closed electrons will flow from where they are abundant, the negative
pole of the battery, to where there is a deficit, the positive pole of the battery.
The electrical force that is causing the electrons to flow is the voltage, a AAA battery
creates a 1.5 volt force, and a car battery creates a 12 volt force, and your house circuit
creates a 110 volt force.
A neuron is like a tiny battery, it separates electrical charge across its membrane so that
it is negative on the inside and positive on the outside.
The membrane of the neuron is like the insulation on a wire, it does not allow electrical charges
to cross it.
The equivalent of the flashlight switch on the neuron is tiny channels in the membrane
that can be opened or closed.
If the channels open electrical charges flow across the membrane.
Now in neurons electrical charges are not simple electrons, but they are charged chemical
ions.
For example table salt is sodium chloride, and one molecule of sodium chloride contains
a positively charged sodium ion and a negatively charged chloride ion.
Neurons have other types of charged ions as well including potassium and calcium ions
that are positive.
The ion channels in the neuronal membrane are selective for these different types of ions.
There are sodium channels, potassium channels, calcium channels, and chloride channels.
To make things a little more complex there are different ways that channels are opened
or closed.
They can be opened just a little bit all of the time, and that's called a weak channel,
or they can be caused to open by a change in electrical charge across the membrane.
These are voltage gated channels, and they can be caused to open by a neurotransmitter.
These are chemically gated channels.
Now I still have not explained to you why neurons are like tiny batteries and have an
electrical charge across their membranes.
Besides ion channels in the membranes there are also ion pumps.
These ion pumps use energy to exchange potassium ions for sodium ions.
In other words they move sodium ions from inside the cell to the outside, and they move
potassium ions from outside the cell to inside.
As a result there are concentration gradients for potassium ions and sodium ions across
the membrane.
So there's a higher concentration of potassium ions inside the neuron and a higher concentration
of sodium ions outside the neuron.
This separation of sodium and potassium however does not create a battery.
If we had a beaker with a solution of sodium chloride next to a beaker with a solution
of potassium chloride, would there be a voltage difference between them?
Of course not.
In both beakers the positive charges of the sodium or the potassium would be balanced
by the negative charges of the chloride ions.
There would be no excess of negative charges in one beaker and no excess of positive charges
in the other beaker.
So how does this happen in a neuron?
The answer is that one type of ion can leak out of the neuron, leaving behind an unbalanced
charge.
In the neuron there are potassium leak channels, so always there is a tendency for the potassium
ions to diffuse down their concentration gradient from inside the neuron to outside the neuron.
When they do so they leave behind an unbalanced negative charge.
There is such a strong attraction between positive and negative electrical charges that not many
potassium ions can leave the cell.
The negative charges on the inside of the cell tend to pull the potassium ions back in.
As a result in a resting neuron an equilibrium is created between the tendency for the potassium
ions to leak out and the electrical force that is pulling them back.
And this voltage is about 60 millivolts.
This is how a neuron behaves like a tiny battery.
Now let's use our tiny battery to do a job.
Let's send a signal.
How would you do that with a flashlight?
Simple, turn the flashlight on and off.
That is what the neuron does to create its signals, nerve impulses, also called action
potentials.
The switch that the neuron uses to turn itself on and off, or to turn these action potentials
on and off, is the sodium channels.
When the sodium channels open briefly, sodium ions can rush into the neuron, both because
there is more sodium outside than inside and because they are attracted by the excess
negative charges inside the neuron.
So briefly the inside of the neuron in the vicinity of these sodium channels becomes
electrically positive.
I say briefly because the sodium channels rapidly close and the negative charge inside
of the neuron is quickly reestablished.
But the brief change in voltage across the membrane is the action potential.
The action potential then travels down the axon of the neuron to where it ends on a target
cell.
There at the nerve ending the action potential causes the release of a neurotransmitter.
You don't have to worry about all of that now, okay?
So when I explained to you how the neuron was like a tiny battery, I said that its voltage
was about 60 millivolts.
That word about is very important because the voltage across the membrane of a neuron
is variable due to the opening and closing of a variety of ion channels.
And reciprocally the changes in the membrane voltage influence the opening and closing
of the voltage-gated channels.
The sodium channel that generates the action potential is a voltage-gated channel.
The membrane potential has to become a little less negative to reach a threshold value that
causes the voltage-gated sodium channels to open.
At the same time, but slower, voltage-gated potassium channels open so that just after
the rush of the sodium ions into the neuron, there's a rush of potassium ions out.
And that helps rapidly restore the membrane potential to its resting value.
Anything that causes the resting membrane potential to be less negative will increase
the sensitivity of the neuron and increase the probability that it will generate action
potentials.
Anything that causes the resting potential of the membrane to be more negative will take
it farther from threshold, make it less sensitive, and make it less likely to fire action potentials.
Now remember from the last lecture that I described the neurotransmitters of the wake-promoting
nuclei as increasing the sensitivity of the cortex, making it more excitable.
What all of those neurotransmitters, or more accurately in this case the neuromodulators
do, is to raise the resting potential of the cortical neurons, make it less negative.
As a result, the cortical neurons are closer to threshold for firing action potentials,
and therefore they're much more sensitive to any inputs, such as sensory stimulation.
When you go to sleep and the levels of all of those neuromodulators go down, the resting
potentials of the cortical neurons become more negative.
They are less sensitive to input and less likely to fire action potentials.
Now you can understand why you lose consciousness at the onset of non-REM sleep.
You can also understand how the cortex is reactivated during REM sleep to allow you to dream.
But to explain how EEG slow waves are generated, we have to add another ion channel to the
picture, a calcium channel that has very special properties.
Have you ever seen a toy jack in the box that when you turn it on, a hand pops out and turns
the button off?
That's sort of what this calcium channel is like.
It is called a low threshold voltage gated calcium channel, because it can be activated
at a membrane potential that is much lower than the sodium channel threshold.
But once it opens, it is inactivated and it closes until it is de-inactivated.
Now de-inactivated, that's a confusing word.
This is sort of like the toy hand in the box.
Once it does its thing, you have to wind it up again to de-inactivate it so that it's
ready to respond when you turn the button once again.
So when you are awake, these calcium channels are inactivated and they have to be de-inactivated
before they can be made to open again.
The interesting feature of these calcium channels is that they are de-inactivated when the
membrane potential becomes really negative.
I want to be sure you know what de-inactivation means.
This is like rewinding that hand in the box toy I just told you about, or it's like setting
a mousetrap.
Once the calcium channels are de-inactivated, they are all set and ready to respond again
to a very slight rise in the resting membrane potential.
When that happens, the calcium channels open and since calcium is at a higher concentration
outside the neuron than inside, calcium rushes through the open channels making the inside
of the neuron more positive.
This change in membrane potential to a less negative value brings the neuron to the threshold
that opens the voltage-gated sodium channels and there's a burst of sodium action potentials.
The calcium channels close, they inactivate and the resting potential becomes more negative
shutting off the sodium action potentials and returning the membrane potential to a negative
value that if it is negative enough will de-inactivate the calcium channels.
We can readily see how this chain of events can result in a cyclical process and since
the local voltage change created by the bursting of sodium action potentials can spread to
adjacent areas bringing their calcium channels to threshold, the cycles of bursting of sodium
action potentials can spread across large areas of the cortex creating the slow waves
that we record in the EEG.
Let's summarize what we have just gone over.
Sleep need is reflected in the EEG delta power during sleep.
Delta power is a measure of the dominance of slow waves in the EEG.
EEG slow waves are created by large populations of neurons in the cortex firing bursts of
action potentials in a synchronous pattern.
Homing is generated by the properties of low threshold calcium channels that rapidly inactivate
after opening and are de-inactivated when the membrane of the neuron becomes very negative,
a state called hyperpolarization.
So homing in on our original question, what happens at the cellular level during wakefulness
that increases the expression of slow waves in the EEG during sleep, we can be more specific.
What causes the resting potentials of the membranes of the cortical neurons to become
so negative during sleep so that the calcium channels are repeatedly de-inactivated?
And what happens during wake to influence that factor, whatever it is?
We have a partial answer already to that first question.
What causes the drop in membrane potential at the onset of sleep?
That is the effect of the withdrawal of all of the neuromodulators released from the nerve
terminals of the wake-promoting neurons coming from the nuclei in the brainstem and from
the hypothalamus that we discussed in the last lecture.
I say partial answer because if you withdraw all of these excitatory neuromodulators, it
does not produce a resting membrane potential that is negative enough to cause the de-inactivation
of the calcium channels to the extent that's required to generate intense slow wave activity.
There has to be another factor that lowers the resting potential of the membranes of
these cells.
So what ions and ion channels could cause the neuronal membrane potential to fall to
lower values?
There are only two possible candidates, chloride and potassium.
Chloride is negatively charged and there's a higher concentration of chloride ions outside
the neuron than inside.
Potassium as we know carries a positive charge and it is at higher concentrations inside the
neuron than outside.
So chloride channels are targets of the major inhibitory neurotransmitter that we discussed,
GABA, gamma-amino-butyric acid.
Chloride channels are also the target of a whole class of sleeping medications, the benzodiazepines,
that we'll discuss later in the course when we go into sleep pharmacology.
Unfortunately however, chloride channels are not our answer.
Even if we open all the chloride channels, the membrane potential would still not fall
far enough to explain the very high intensity of slow wave activity seen in deep non-rem
sleep.
The concentration gradient of chloride between the outside and the inside of the neurons is
just not great enough.
So that leaves potassium as our only candidate, the membrane potential that is low enough
to stop the movement of potassium across the membrane can cause efficient de-inactivation
of the calcium channels.
Okay, we now have gotten down to a very specific proposition.
Something that occurs during wakefulness has to be able to open up potassium channels during
subsequent sleep.
If we line up all of the suspects, the neurotransmitters and the neuromodulators that could do this
job, only one stands out, and that molecule is adenosine.
Adenosine is part of a molecule you have surely heard about, adenosine triphosphate, or ATP.
ATP is the main coinage of energy exchange and utilization in the body.
The energy from food is stored in the high energy bonds of the ATP molecule, and that
energy is then made available to do work such as muscle contraction, biochemical synthesis,
and the creation of electrical events in the nervous system.
Adenosine itself acts as a neurotransmitter, acting through several receptor types.
One of those receptors increases the leak of potassium through a special class of potassium
channels.
When those channels are open, the increased movement of potassium from the neuron lowers
its membrane potential into the range that promotes the de-inactivation of the calcium
channels.
Now this is really exciting.
We have gone from a whole body problem, the effects of sleep deprivation, to a brain specific
response, EEG slow waves, to a cellular function, membrane potentials, to a molecular control
mechanism, adenosine and potassium channels.
Does this tell us anything about a possible cellular function of non-REM sleep?
One possible clue is the very central role that adenosine plays in energy metabolism.
Cells all over the body primarily derive energy for cellular work from the third high energy
phosphate bond of ATP.
This cellular metabolism results in the conversion of ATP to ADP, adenosine diphosphate.
Cells try to maintain their ATP-ADP ratio at highest possible levels so that they're
ready to respond and to do work.
When ADP accumulates, the cells can use two ADP molecules to make one ATP and one AMP.
They're taking two ADP molecules and transferring one phosphate from the ADP to another ADP
to make an ATP and then they'll have left over an AMP molecule.
What do they do with that?
Well, they degrade that AMP molecule to adenosine.
Whenever cells get energy challenged, they increase their production and release of adenosine.
Adenosine in the circulation gets taken up by cells very rapidly and converted back
into ATP, but it can also have direct effects on cells.
For example, it causes the relaxation of smooth muscle cells in arterials.
So if a working muscle, for example, is energy challenged, the adenosine it releases relaxes
the arterials in that muscle allowing more blood flow which carries with it nutrients.
So could the role of adenosine in the homeostatic regulation of non-rim, slow wave activity
indicate that a function of sleep has to do with energy reserves of the brain?
In terms of energy reserves, the brain is different from all the rest of the body whereas
muscle, liver, kidney, etc. can use as fuel carbohydrates, fats, and even proteins.
The brain can only use carbohydrates as fuel.
There are two sources, the glucose circulating in the blood and a very small amount of glucose
that is stored in the brain as glycogen and it's stored specifically not in neurons but
in glial cells in the brain.
So if a region of the brain becomes energy compromised, in other words its energy demand
exceeds the supply of glucose that it's receiving in the blood, it will have to dip into its
local glycogen reserves.
As the glycogen reserves diminish, the scavenging of ADP will result in increased release of
adenosine and the induction of sleepiness and sleep.
Could it be that a major function of sleep is to restore the brain's energy reserves?
Now we're going to explore this hypothesis in a later lecture.
Here suffice it to say that injections of chemicals that mimic the actions of adenosine
promote sleep with very high delta power.
And what happens if you block the action of adenosine on its receptors?
The answer to that question you surely know because a chemical that blocks the adenosine
receptors is caffeine.
So we have been very non-REM centric in our discussion so far.
So I would like to add a few neurophysiological details about REM sleep.
Remember that the EEG during REM sleep bears a very strong similarity with the EEG pattern
of wakefulness.
This fact does not seem to fit with what we learned in the last lecture about the activities
of the brain stem and the hypothalamic nuclei that promote the wakeful state of the cortex.
Most of these activities stay down or go down further at the transition from non-REM
to REM sleep.
But there's one exception, and that's the cholinergic nuclei of the brain stem.
Their activity goes back up at the transition to REM sleep.
Taking that as a starting point, what can we say about the neurophysiology of REM sleep?
Investigations of the brain mechanisms controlling REM sleep go way back to the 1960s, when the
very famous French sleep scientist Michel Juvais started to search for the brain site
or sites that were responsible for the many manifestations of REM sleep.
Using various techniques to lesion parts of the brain, they found that the critical site
for generating REM sleep was in the middle portion of the brain stem, a structure called
the pawns.
If the brain was damaged below the pawns, the EEG patterns of REM sleep still occurred
in the forebrain, but muscle atonia was gone, and the typical neurophysiological changes
in activity of the lower portion of the brain stem were gone.
If on the other hand the brain was damaged above the pawns, all the manifestations of
REM in the forebrain were missing, but cyclical patterns of muscle atonia and rapid eye movements
indicative of REM were retained.
If that last fact, the eye movements, seems strange, you need to remember that the nerves
that control eye movements leave the brain at the level of the pawns.
Further work, in which the lesions were more controlled, indicated that a region near the
locus ceruleus, that noradrenergic nucleus we talked about, is critical for normal REM
sleep.
The amount of the loss of REM sleep seemed to be proportional to the amount of cell loss
in this region of the pawns, and the loss of cholinergic cells was especially important.
As techniques were employed that enabled more and more precise lesions of the pawns, areas
implicated in REM sleep control, a very interesting result was obtained.
It was possible to eliminate certain aspects of REM sleep while leaving others intact.
So lesions in one area would eliminate the rapid eye movements, but not the EEG patterns
in the muscle atonia.
Lesions in another area eliminated the muscle atonia of REM sleep, but not the other manifestations,
rapid eye movements and EEG characteristics.
This particular area has been called the pontine inhibitory area, PIA, and further explorations
of it led to another very interesting result.
When cats were lesioned in the PIA, they continued to show normal sleep cycling, but
when they made the transition from non-REM to REM sleep instead of relaxing down onto
their substrate, they picked up their heads, stood up, looked around, and even though their
second eyelids were closed, they appeared to be seeing things in the environment that
weren't there, and they batted at them and seemed to pursue them and even jump on them.
They appeared to be acting out their dreams.
So subsequent experiments have shown that injections of a chemical called carbacol into
the pawns induces REM sleep.
Carbacol mimics the actions of acetylcholine and is used because acetylcholine is broken
down very rapidly if it's injected into the body.
Very precise injections could even stimulate specific components of REM sleep, such as
the muscle atonia.
The muscle atonia of REM sleep is due to neuronal processes that descend down the spinal cord
from the pawns.
The nerve endings of these axons release inhibitory neurotransmitters, GABA and glycine,
onto the motor neurons in the spinal cord that send their axons out to innervate the
skeletal muscles.
Inhibitory influences over sensory inputs, including feedback information that we normally
get from our joints and muscles, are also an aspect of REM sleep.
The massive inhibition of motor output and sensory input during REM, but the activation
of the cortex, may explain the bizarre nature of dreams.
The cortex is free to make associations between memories without being constrained by any
sensory feedback.
Comparing the neurophysiology of non-REM and REM control mechanisms leads us to an
interesting contrast.
Whereas the non-REM system appears to be very distributed and involves many different brain
regions and systems, the control of REM sleep appears to be rather localized in the pawns.
There also does not seem to be any homeostatic mechanism for the regulation of REM sleep,
as there is for the regulation of non-REM sleep.
So let's keep these observations in mind when we discuss different hypotheses about
the functions of sleep, and also as we explore different sleep pathologies in subsequent lectures.
Until then, sweet dreams.
