We have gone through a lot of information about sleep without addressing the one topic
that holds the most interest for people, dreams.
Dreams can be the most enjoyable and fascinating aspect of your sleep, or they can be the most
unpleasant and horrifying aspect of your sleep.
I am sure that all of you have had a dream that was so wonderful that when it ended with
a brief awakening, you consciously tried to go back to sleep to continue the dream.
Sometimes it works.
On the other hand, I'm sure that all of you have experienced the wrenching emotions of
nightmares that leaves you with a rapidly beating heart, sweating, and anxious feeling
when you suddenly wake up.
In this case, you don't want to go back to sleep.
The extreme case of this is experienced by those suffering from post-traumatic stress
disorder.
So let's explore dreams today.
What are they?
What do they mean?
What are they good for?
What is a dream?
Simply put, it is mental activity during sleep that is recalled upon awakening.
You might be thinking, wait a minute, I might not remember my dreams but I know when I have
been dreaming.
So why are you defining a dream as mental activity recalled upon awakening?
Well this might be a little bit philosophical but it is sort of like the question, if a
tree falls in the forest and there's no one there to hear it, does it make a sound?
Yes, if you define sound as a vibration in the air but no if you define sound as the
effect of air pressure waves on your inner ear.
So perhaps there is mental activity continuously during sleep.
There's certainly continuous EEG activity but whether or not that activity results
in something that we could define as an experience can only be ascertained if the experience
is recalled upon awakening.
So let's resolve this semantic argument.
We could say that knowing that you were dreaming is sufficient evidence of dreaming even if
you don't remember the details.
So back to the question of what is a dream.
A dream is experiencing images, sounds, ideas, emotions and other sensations while you are
asleep.
The details of the experience are not constrained by facts, reality or even physics and the
details are beyond the volitional control of the dreamer.
An exception to this lack of control is something called lucid dreaming which I will discuss
at the end of this lecture.
When do you dream?
The answer depends a bit on what you define as a dream.
At the beginning of sleep, mentation can be an extension of wakeful activity.
It just gets a bit strange.
Is that a dream?
An extreme extension of that experience is what we call a hypnagogic hallucination, a
real break from reality.
That would seem to be more of a dream than wakeful experience.
So if we define a dream as any mental activity during sleep then what has been called sleep
thinking that occurs in light non-rem sleep or at the beginning of sleep then that would
be a dream as well.
Most people consider true dreaming to occur in REM sleep and those experiences involve
weird narratives composed of wild sensations, illusions and strong emotions.
But going back to when a tree falls in the forest analogy, studies have been done in which
subjects were awoken at different stages in their nightly sleep and asked were you dreaming?
For those awoken during deep non-rem sleep, less than 20% report dreaming.
For those awoken during non-rem stage 2 sleep, 40 to 70% report dreaming.
And for those awoken during REM sleep, 80 to 95% report dreaming.
When asked about the content of the dreams, those awoken during REM sleep report the bizarre
vivid dreams whereas the dreams reported for non-rem sleep are more run-of-the-mill type
that could be extensions of wakeful experience.
A conclusion is that mentation can occur in any stage of sleep but during REM sleep the
brain is truly out of its mind.
Dreams during REM sleep are characterized by hallucinations, delusions, disorientation,
emotional ability and amnesia.
In an awake person these would all be symptoms of psychosis but it's totally normal for sleep.
What do dreams mean?
All societies and cultures throughout recorded history and probably before history was recorded
have had opinions on this question.
The ancient Egyptians and the ancient Greeks said they were messages from the gods.
The Chinese claimed that dreams were produced by the soul.
Native Americans had a similar belief that dreams were an expression of the inner desires
and fears of the individual.
Ideas such as these prevailed until the beginning of the 20th century and the beginning of the
Freudian era.
Sigmund Freud was a Viennese neurologist who is considered the father of psychoanalysis.
As a young medical graduate he traveled on a fellowship to France to study with a neurologist
Jean-Martin Charcot who was renowned for his work and uses of hypnosis.
A year later Freud set up his own practice and enthusiastically used hypnosis in the
clinic on psychopathology patients.
Rather than use the hypnotic state to impart to the patient post-hypnotic suggestions which
was the technique of Charcot, Freud used the hypnotic state to elicit information from
the patients by getting them to talk about themselves, their pasts and their problems.
He developed a method called free association in which he would speak a word and ask a patient
to respond with the first thing that came to mind.
From these practices Freud moved on to dream analysis as a means of getting at the complexity
of the underlying causes of individual psychopathology.
In 1900 Freud published his seminal book, The Interpretation of Dreams.
Freud proposed that dreams were expressions of repressed wishes and desires.
But since the frank expression of those wishes and desires would be so disturbing, the sleeping
brain disguises them as components of bizarre and less threatening narratives.
In his view the unconscious dream mind was a storehouse of repressed desires.
So if he could decode the dream, he could identify the patient's problems and treat them.
Freud referred to the manifest content and the latent content of a dream.
The manifest content was what the patient reported.
For example, I was living in an unfinished house.
Personal psychoanalysts had to decode or interpret that report to reveal the latent content of
the dream.
For example, the patient has incomplete aspects of life or personality.
Freud claimed that there were four ways that the brain could disguise the latent content
of a dream.
One, symbolization.
Neutral objects represent some disturbing or threatening aspect of life, especially sexual
life.
Two, condensation.
Different threatening ideas could be fused together into single images.
Three, representation.
Disturbing ideas are represented by less threatening visual images.
And four, displacement.
Disturbing ideas are replaced by related but less disturbing ideas.
So Freud would interpret a dream to get at its latent content by looking for these different
methods of dream disguise and then decoding them.
The assumption, of course, is that only Freud or someone trained in his subjective psychoanalytical
methods was capable of decoding the dream and revealing its latent meaning.
And most of the dreams in which these methods were based were Freud's own dreams and those
of a few select Viennese women.
The subjectivity of the Freudian approach to dream analysis is obvious and demonstrated
by the fact that different analysts produce entirely different interpretations of the
same dream.
In terms of modern scientific methodology, Freudian theory is not testable.
It is not falsifiable.
And that is part of the reason why it has been so popular and durable up until current
times.
It could not and it cannot be proven wrong.
Another player in this field was Carl Jung.
Jung was a Swiss psychologist and psychiatrist.
Early in his career, he was influenced by Freud's method of free association and conducted
his own research using that method.
In 1906, he sent his book about his work, Studies in Word Association to Freud.
They developed a close professional relationship over the subsequent six years and they greatly
influenced each other's work.
Jung contributed other popular ideas to the fields of psychology and psychiatry, such
as personality types, extroverts and introverts, art therapy, individuation or ways of resolving
opposites in the conscious and the unconscious, and the concept of the collective unconscious.
Jung became disillusioned with Freud's theories of the unconscious, which he considered incomplete
and too negative and too focused on sex.
He also disagreed with Freud's views of dreams as being disguised wishes and desires.
Jung maintained that dreams are transparent and they reveal rather than hide.
Nevertheless, Freudian-Jungian psychoanalytic theory and methods have dominated the field
of psychiatry through most of the 20th century and it remains a non-scientific practice today.
Now, that is not to say it is useless, far from it, but it is not based in mechanistic
understandings developed through the applications of scientific methodologies and standards of proof.
In the mid-1970s, two Harvard psychiatrists and neurobiologists, Alan Hobson and Robert
McCarley cast aside all of the Freudian ideas about dreams by proposing a new hypothesis.
That hypothesis was called the activation synthesis hypothesis of dreams.
The idea came out of neurobiological findings about the brain during sleep, especially REM sleep,
and simply said that during REM sleep, the cortex is episodically and randomly activated
by bursts of action potentials and the cortex tries to make sense of the patterns of activity
they generate, the synthesis part of the hypothesis.
The bottom line is that there is no disguised or transparent meaning to dreams.
There is no encoding of deep desires.
There is simply a random physiological process of activation of brain circuits that are stitched
together into bizarre narratives because that is what the cortex does.
It tries to make sense out of activity stimulated by incoming information.
In this case, the incoming information is randomly coming from the cortex itself.
In fact, the usual sources of incoming information, including all of the senses and the feedback
information from muscles and joints, is inhibited.
The patterns of association going on in the cortex during REM sleep are not constrained
by real information.
The emergence of a dream is a constructive process, an open process, a random process,
and it is not an integrated effort to distort or hide wishes and desires that are just too
horrible to allow to come to the conscious mind.
The inconvenient truth for the psychoanalytic community is that dreams may be epiphenomena
and have nothing to do with the deep psychological issues and processes.
So what are dreams good for?
There are a number of theories.
There are hypotheses that dreams are to integrate memories, and there are hypotheses that dreams
are to erase memories, and there are hypotheses that dreams are to alter the emotional component
of memories.
I want to make it clear that I am now talking about dreams specifically and not about sleep.
Yes, dreams occur during sleep, but sleep is much more than dreams.
There are lots of processes going on in the brain associated with memory that are not
necessarily tied up with dreams.
The hypothesis that dreams erase memories was proposed in 1993 by Sir Francis Crick
of DNA fame and colleague Graham Mitchison, neither of which were neurobiologists, let
alone sleep researchers.
Nevertheless, new ideas frequently come from out of left field and cause us to rethink old
ideas.
So their idea was that during the day, the brain takes in lots of information and most
of it is not relevant for future purposes.
You remember where you parked your car this morning and that's useful information, but
you don't remember where you parked your car several days ago.
That would be useless information.
Thus memory banks have to be regularly cleaned out and valuable information stored efficiently.
If instead we stored every bit of information brought into our brains from our senses, our
brains would have to be far larger than they are.
Crick and Mitchison hypothesized that dreaming is a meaningless byproduct of this daily memory
management process.
During the day, we take in lots and lots of information and store much of it as short
term memories.
During REM sleep, these short term memories are sorted out, eliminating useless information
and consolidating information that might help us out in the future.
This is sort of like cleaning out the study or cleaning out the garage.
The little clutter is eliminated and what remains is stored in a more orderly way so
that it is more readily accessible.
So is forgetting the price we pay for remembering?
Now this is an interesting idea, but there is no direct evidence to support it.
We will come back later to another similar hypothesis that proposes a function of non-REM
sleep is the pruning of excess unimportant synapses as a means of clearing out memory
banks.
The hypothesis that dreams during REM sleep may decrease the emotional intensity of memories
is based largely on indirect evidence.
I say indirect because there is good evidence that REM sleep plays a role in emotional memory
processing and dreams with emotional content occur during REM.
Therefore, dreams may be the critical process for modulating the emotional valence of the
memory.
But this is difficult to test directly.
Let me lay out the argument.
First, the stimulation of emotional reactions by an experience has a powerful influence
on the memory of that experience.
In other words, highly emotional experiences are very arousing and form long lasting memories.
Surely you can attest to this fact from your own experience.
But it has also been measured in controlled experiments.
In a simple experiment, subjects were placed in an FMRI machine to image the activity in
their brains.
They were then shown a series of pictures, some with disturbing content.
They were asked to rank the pictures in terms of emotional impact.
When they were seeing the pictures they ranked as emotional, activity increased in the part
of their brains that regulates emotional responses.
This structure is called the amygdala.
At a later time, they were shown a new group of pictures that included some of the ones
that were in the original set.
They were much more likely to recognize the pictures that had stimulated the amygdala.
This effect on memory was seen even when the subjects were tested months later.
When you recall an emotional experience, let's say a car accident, a mugging, a death, planes
flying into the World Trade Center, your first romantic kiss, you also experience the associated
emotion.
However, with time, the intensity of the emotional component of that memory decreases.
Can we understand this phenomenon in terms of brain activity?
The hippocampus is a part of the brain that is responsible for short term memory of events,
people, and places.
When an emotional memory is formed, both the hippocampus and the nearby amygdala are activated.
And when recall of that memory is stimulated, both the hippocampus and the amygdala are
activated.
But with time and with repeated recall, the activity of the amygdala relative to the activity
of the hippocampus goes down.
So is this dampening of the emotional response and the activity of the amygdala due to processing
of the memory during REM sleep and during dreaming?
We can't say for sure.
But there is reason to expect that this is the case.
Pioneering work of Rosalind Cartwright has shown through studying the sleep logs of patients
that not only the occurrence of dreaming, but also the content of the dreams correlates
with their recovery from emotional trauma and are actually predictive of clinical remission
months later.
One possible explanation for why the emotional content of a memory can be decreased during
REM sleep and maybe dreaming goes back to our discussions of the neurochemistry of sleep
and wake.
A traumatic experience stimulates extreme wake, extreme alertness and vigilance due
to very strong activation of the several brainstem nuclei that in turn activate the cortex.
When a traumatic experience is recalled during wake, it is also alerting and stimulates emotional
responses and activity of the wake-promoting nuclei.
But remember that the activities of these nuclei are very low during REM sleep, therefore
the memory is activated during REM, but it would not stimulate the same neurochemical
responses and this may modify the emotional content of the memory.
The idea that the emotional content of the memory is reduced during dreaming does not
seem to fit with the cases of PTSD, post-traumatic stress disorder, in which the major complaints
of the patients are that they cannot live with their nightmares.
Apparently the emotional content of their dreams gets worse and worse and the individuals
avoid sleep to avoid experiencing the nightmares.
Clearly the emotional content of those dreams is not decreasing.
As a possible explanation of this problem, let me remind you of the amnesia for dreams.
The strong propensity for us to immediately forget our dreams makes dream research difficult,
but it is probably highly important as an aspect of REM sleep because if you remembered
your dreams and you mixed memories of dream content with memories of real experience,
you would be really messed up.
So let me ask you, when are you able to form a very complete memory of a dream?
It's when you wake up, consciously replay the dream in your mind and think about it.
So perhaps in the case of PTSD, the nightmare is so strong that it stimulates an awakening
and upon awakening the patient thinks about the dream and therefore reinforces its emotional
content.
There is an interesting area of dream research that may have therapeutic potential in PTSD
and that area is called lucid dreaming.
A lucid dream is when the dreamer is aware that he or she is dreaming.
Now in a dream you usually recognize yourself as the main actor or as the main observer
of the action of the dream, but you cannot step aside and become an observer of yourself
dreaming.
In other words for the dreamer, the dream is real.
The dreamer usually cannot view the dream objectively and say that is not logical, kangaroos are
not purple, that is not possible, I really can't fly.
This is different in a lucid dream.
In a lucid dream the dreamer is aware of the fact that he or she is dreaming and that components
of the dream don't make logical sense.
Or an emotional dream is less threatening because you know it is just a dream and you
will wake up.
It is even possible for lucid dreamers to direct the dream.
Many people report that they have experienced lucid dreams, maybe you have, but lucid dream
research suggests that you can improve your ability to be a lucid dreamer and perhaps
those who have not experienced lucid dreams, at least to their knowledge, can learn to
do so.
There are even lucid dreaming goggles that supposedly help you enter your dream as an
observer as well as the main character.
These goggles sense the rapid eye movements of REM sleep and they initiate flashes of
red light.
These flashes are not sufficient to wake the person, but they are sufficient to generate
a conscious awareness that a dream is beginning.
The therapeutic potential of lucid dreaming is in treating nightmares.
If the dreamer becomes aware that the nightmare is a dream and he or she will awake from the
dream, the nightmare is less threatening.
It may even be possible to change the content of the nightmare and steer it into less threatening
areas.
The hypothesis that dreams serve to integrate memories is very intriguing.
After all, what are memories good for?
Memories enable us to use lessons learned through past experiences in dealing with current situations
and in preparing for the future.
For some sorts of memories, especially the ones we will call procedural memories, like
how to ride a bicycle, they remain useful in exactly the same form as they were learned.
But most challenges and opportunities involve entirely new situations and combinations of
factors that hadn't been experienced before.
Thus, we have to be able to use what we have learned and remembered in new ways.
This is what we think of as creativity, using what we have experienced and putting it together
in a totally different way and coming up with something new.
In a later lecture, we will show that sleep in general may serve this purpose, but do
dreams per se enhance our ability to be creative.
A scientific approach to answering this question is probably impossible, but anecdotal reports
are intriguing and interesting.
Here are a few.
London, 1965.
Paul McCartney was staying in an attic room of his family's house on Wimpole Street.
Early one morning in a dream, he heard a classical string ensemble playing.
As McCartney tells it,
I woke up with a lovely tune in my head.
I thought, that's great.
I wonder what it is.
There was an upright piano next to me, to the right of the bed by the window.
I got out of the bed, sat at the piano, found G, found F sharp minor seventh, and that leads
you through then to B and E minor and finally back to E.
It all leads forward logically.
I liked the melody a lot, but because I dreamed it, I couldn't believe I'd written it.
I thought, no, I've never written anything like this before, but I had the tune, which
was the most magic thing.
The resulting song is yesterday.
Elias Howe had the idea of a sewing machine, but he couldn't quite figure out how to make
it work.
He actually was putting holes in the middle of the needles that he was trying to build
his sewing machine around.
So one night he had a dream and in that dream he was being captured by a group of wild savages
and they were threatening him with spears.
He noticed that the spears all had holes near the pointed ends.
His problem was solved and we had the sewing machine.
Mary Shelley got the idea for her novel Frankenstein in a dream.
Jack Nicklaus changed his golf swing after seeing it in his dream.
The Russian scientist Dmitry Mendeleev was struggling with understanding and organizing
the properties of the elements when in a dream he saw them arranged in columns and rows in
a table and that table is now our periodic table of the elements.
The German scientist Friedrich August Kerkuli made a huge contribution to organic chemistry
by discovering how carbon atoms could make a ring structure.
He had been working with ideas of how carbon atoms could be linked together in chains and
then in a dream he saw the chains of snakes twisting and twining and then one snake started
to eat its tail.
Voila!
The ring structure.
Otto Loe, the physiologist who discovered chemical transmission between a neuron and
another cell, which we talked about extensively in the neurophysiology of sleep lecture.
He dreamt of an experiment that would prove that nerve impulses generated chemical signals.
He woke up and wrote down the details of the experiment and then went back to sleep.
He got up the next morning very excited to do the experiment that came to him in his dream
but he could not read the scribbles he made in the middle of the night.
He said that day was the longest one of his life as he tried and tried to remember his
dream and he couldn't.
But the next night he had the same dream, maybe a true case of lucid dreaming, I don't
know.
He immediately got up, went to the lab, did the experiment and by morning he had the
evidence for neurochemical transmission.
When we discuss the role of sleep in learning and memory, we will come back to a different
kind of dream, the dreams of light early sleep, the hypnagogic hallucination that occurs
at sleep onset.
But the experiments I will tell you about are only confirming what was already known
by Thomas Edison.
He reportedly slept very little but he thought that he got his best ideas when falling asleep,
the hypnagogic hallucination.
He called the transition between wake and sleep the genius gap.
He therefore invented a way to maximize his sleep onset dreams.
He would sleep on a lab bench with one hand clutching a handful of ball bearings.
If he transitioned into deeper sleep his hand would drop the ball bearings and as they hit
the floor it would wake him up.
Then he would quickly get up, write down any wild ideas that he had just experienced.
Well until we delve into the function of sleep and learning and memory, I wish you sweet
and creative dreams and no nightmares.
