We have discussed many characteristics of sleep and many of the mechanisms of sleep,
but we still have not answered the question of what is sleep for?
We and many other species of mammals spend one-third of our lives sleeping, some much
more.
So, sleep must have one or more very important functions other than reducing sleepiness.
The sleep researcher Alan Rexhafen at the University of Chicago once said, if sleep
doesn't have a really important function, it is the biggest mistake that evolution
ever made.
Seriously, finding the function or functions of sleep is one of the biggest challenges
facing biology today.
In the next several lectures, we will explore some of the hypotheses that have been put
forward and tested in an effort to answer this challenge.
There are four major classes of hypotheses.
One, sleep is essential for restoration and recovery following a prolonged period of wake,
but restoration of what?
Sleep is necessary for memory consolidation or for forgetting.
We will spend a lot of time on that hypothesis.
Three, sleep is for energy conservation.
Well, we do save energy during sleep, is it all that significant?
And four, sleep aids and predator avoidance.
Well, today we are going to focus on that first hypothesis, that sleep is for restoration,
and we will specifically consider whether it could be brain energy reserves that are
being depleted during wake and restored during sleep.
We could call this lecture fuel for thought.
The second hypothesis that sleep is for memory is quite a large subject.
It is large because there are several stages of sleep, as you know.
There are also different kinds of memories, and there are a number of steps in the memory
formation, storage, and recall process that could be influenced by sleep.
So you can see the numbers of combinations and considerations are quite numerous.
So we will spend several of the subsequent lectures on sleep and memory.
Now I'm not going to explore in any depth the third and fourth class of hypotheses for
two reasons.
The main reason is that they both fail to explain why the animal has to go unconscious
and give up vigilance to achieve those functions.
This one feature of sleep indicates to me that we have to seek the function of sleep
in the brain.
Why take the brain offline if it is not absolutely necessary?
In fact, when we think about the predator avoidance hypothesis, it seems a little strange
to propose that giving up vigilance is a means of predator avoidance.
The second reason we are not going to spend more time on these latter two hypotheses is
that there are no experimental data that would allow us to test them.
Yes, it is a fact that metabolism is lower in sleep than awake across all animals that
have been studied.
On the average, it results in less than a 15% reduction in energy expenditure over the
rest phase only.
But how could we go beyond that observation to prove that energy conservation is a primary
function of sleep?
That sleep evolved to conserve energy.
Predator avoidance is surely facilitated by daily patterns of rest and activity and being
vulnerable during any time of day that you don't have the sensory equipment to be vigilant
would be a bad idea.
But that does not necessarily require sleep, and the major predators sleep more than their
prey.
One interesting study that lends some credence to the concept that daily rhythms are important
for predator avoidance was done by Pat D'Corsi at University of South Carolina.
Pat trapped a bunch of Eastern chipmunks.
She brought them into the laboratory just long enough to lesion their circadian clocks,
half of them at least, the other half were controls.
Then she returned them to their natural environment.
She also put devices in them that sent out radio signals so she could find them again.
Her goal was to see how loss of circadian rhythms would affect animals in the real world.
The experiment was very definitive.
The animals with lesions disappeared over time and the intact control animals survived.
She concluded that activity of the chipmunks at inappropriate times of day made them more
vulnerable to predators.
However, there was no direct proof that the demise of the arrhythmic chipmunks was due
to predation.
Even if there were such data, it would seem to lend more support to predator avoidance
as a function of circadian rhythms rather than as a function of sleep.
Now, I do not mean to apply that energy conservation and predator avoidance are not influenced
by sleep, but they were probably not the driving forces in the evolution of sleep, and they
are most likely not the primary functions of sleep.
In this lecture, we will start with the hypothesis that sleep is for the restoration of brain
energy reserves.
The brain uses a lot of energy.
In a resting individual, the brain counts for about 20% of the whole body's energy expenditure,
even though it is only about 2% of the total body mass.
Also, the supply of energy for the brain cannot be episodic.
It has to be continuous.
Energy comes to the brain in the blood, the same way that energy flows to the muscles
of your arm.
You can cut off the blood supply to your arm for many minutes or even hours without
serious consequences, but cutting off blood supply to the brain for only a minute or two
results in unconsciousness and death.
In spite of the critical need of the brain for an adequate and continuous energy supply,
it can use fewer sources of fuel than can other tissues and organs of the body.
The blood carries fuels derived from dietary carbohydrates, fats and proteins.
Most cells of the body can use all of these types of fuel, but not the brain.
The brain requires the sugar glucose.
You may know people who you would call fat heads, but sorry, the brain cannot burn fats.
I am sure that you know all about insulin from the pancreas and about diabetes, which
is a malfunction of the insulin system for controlling blood sugar.
But did you realize that the major function of the insulin system is to ensure a constant
supply of glucose for the brain?
When you are digesting carbohydrates and absorbing the resulting sugars from the gut,
there is plenty of glucose for the brain and other body tissues.
The high blood glucose stimulates the pancreas to release insulin.
Insulin circulates in the blood and makes it possible for the cells of the body to take
up glucose and use glucose as fuel.
But when you are not absorbing sugars from the gut, blood glucose levels fall and the
pancreas stops releasing insulin.
Without insulin, most of the cells of the body can no longer take up glucose from the
blood.
But that's okay.
They just switch to other fuel sources, mostly fats.
Proteins can also be broken down for fuel, but that is usually as a last resort in a
condition of serious undernutrition or starvation.
The brain, however, does not have this flexibility.
It requires glucose.
But since the uptake of glucose by the cells of the brain does not require insulin, it
continues to take up glucose when all the other cells of the body cannot.
So by shutting off the production and release of insulin from the pancreas, the body conserves
whatever blood glucose it has for the nervous system.
When the fuel demand of tissues changes, blood flow to those tissues increases to meet that
demand.
There are limits, however, to how rapidly blood flow can change and the extent to which
it can change.
Many tissues can change their rates of energy utilization very fast.
Think of the leg muscles of the sprinter.
The race is over before there can be a significant change in the blood flow to those muscles.
The same is true of the brain.
The activities of neurons in different local areas of the brain can change very rapidly.
But the blood flow through those areas of the brain cannot match that rate of change.
So how do tissues manage the lag between their demand for energy and the supply of that energy
by the blood?
The answer, of course, is they have reserves.
Muscles have reserves of energy in the form of fats and carbohydrates.
You can see the fat reserves in a nicely marbled steak.
The carbohydrate reserves are not that obvious.
They are in the form of the substance called glycogen.
Brain molecules are long branched chains of glucose molecules.
Muscle cells take up glucose from the blood and whenever that glucose is not needed for
immediate energy needs, it can be used to synthesize glycogen.
When glucose is not being taken up from the blood, in other words, when there is no circulating
insulin, the muscle cells can then break down that glycogen to release the individual glucose
molecules to use as fuel.
There is a limit to the amount of glycogen that can be stored in muscle.
It's about 2 grams of glycogen per 100 grams of muscle.
Now that limit sets particular bounds on muscle performance.
Your supply of muscle glycogen is enough to fuel intense aerobic exercise for several
hours, but you know when it's depleted.
As your muscle depends more and more on burning fats, you slow down.
The brain has only one kind of energy reserve, and that is glycogen.
There are two major neural cell types in the brain, neurons and glia.
For every one neuron, there are nine glial cells.
So glia are really a dominant cell type in the brain.
We know much less about glia and their functions than we do about neurons.
Glia are rather silent until recently they were thought not to produce action potentials.
But some examples of glial action potentials have now been reported.
But glia do release neurotransmitters, and that will play a big role later on in this
lecture.
One thing that glia do is to synthesize and store glycogen.
When the activity in a brain area suddenly and rapidly increases and the glucose in the
blood flowing through that area is not sufficient to fuel that activity, the glia rapidly break
down their glycogen and supply fuel to the neurons.
Just like in the muscle, however, the amount of glycogen in the brain is limited and can
be depleted in hours.
So here is the hypothesis for today.
The function of sleep is to enable the restoration of the brain energy reserves, namely glycogen.
This hypothesis was originally formulated by a graduate student working with me, Joel
Bennington.
Joel is now a professor of biology at St. Bonaventure University in New York.
The roots of the hypothesis go back to the discovery that a major signal controlling
EEG slow wave activity during sleep is the molecule adenosine.
As we discussed in a previous lecture, but I think it bears repeating here, the major
coinage of energy exchange and utilization in the body is ATP, or adenosine triphosphate.
Chemical energy is stored in the phosphate bonds.
By breaking those bonds, energy is released to do biological work, including contraction
of muscles, synthesis of new molecules, or generation of electrical impulses in the
nervous system.
It is the third phosphate bond that is preferentially used so that the ATP is converted to adenosine
diphosphate ADP as the work is done.
If glucose is available, cells metabolize that glucose and use the energy in its chemical
bonds to convert the ADP back to ATP.
But if glucose is not available, the ADP builds up in the cell.
One thing the cell can do is to scavenge two ADPs to produce one ATP and one AMP adenosine
monophosphate.
The AMP can be degraded to adenosine and thrown out of the cell.
Thus, extracellular adenosine is a signal that cells or tissues are running out of energy.
In muscle, the increase of extracellular adenosine signals the blood vessels to dilate so that
more blood and more fuel can flow into the muscle.
What does adenosine do in the brain?
We have already learned in Lecture 6 that adenosine opens potassium channels in the neuronal
cell membrane.
Opening these potassium channels increases the movement of positively charged potassium
ions out of the neurons.
This movement of the positive charges leaves behind negative charges, so the electrical
potential across the membrane becomes more negative.
We say that neuron is hyperpolarized.
Remember those unique calcium channels?
They are the channels that are de-inactivated by hyperpolarization.
De-inactivation is sort of like setting a mousetrap.
When the mousetrap is de-inactivated or set, it can be triggered to go off again.
When the calcium channels go off, or in this case open, calcium rushes into the neuron,
the neuron becomes depolarized and it generates a bunch of action potentials.
And it's these bunches of action potentials that are measured as slow waves in the EEG.
Joel showed very nicely the relationship between adenosine action and slow wave activity.
When he injected a molecule that mimics the action of adenosine into the blood or into
the brains of rats, they showed what appeared to be normal deep sleep for several hours
with very high slow wave activity.
That slow wave activity gradually declined as the animal slept, just as it does during
normal sleep.
This response was seen even when the drug was injected four hours into the rat's normal
sleep phase.
In other words, after the rats had already paid back most of their sleep debt, it sort
of made the animal pay back another sleep debt which really didn't exist.
The obvious next question is whether brain adenosine levels reflect prior wakefulness.
The critical experiment was done by a group at Harvard, led by Drs. Tarya Porcohyskinin
and Robert McCarley.
They used a method called micro dialysis.
And what this enabled them to do was to continuously measure levels of adenosine in several brain
regions of cats, while the cats were kept awake or were allowed to sleep.
During sleep, they showed that the adenosine levels gradually fell in all brain areas.
But when the cats were kept awake, adenosine levels gradually and significantly rose, predominantly
in two brain areas, the cerebral cortex and the basal forebrain.
The basal forebrain is the region where the cholinergic nuclei and the sleep on neurons
are.
When the cats were allowed to sleep, these high adenosine levels gradually fell with
a time course similar to the decline in slow wave activity during sleep.
The conclusion from these experiments seems to be that adenosine may be acting to regulate
sleep, mainly through two different sites.
First, adenosine acts in the basal forebrain to influence the switch from wake to sleep
and to maintain the flip-flop switch we discussed in lecture seven in the sleep position.
And secondly, the adenosine acts in the cortex to produce and sustain the slow wave activity
that seems to be the homeostatically regulated variable of sleep.
OK.
Where does this get us?
To summarize so far, we see that the brain needs glucose.
That glucose comes from the blood, but the blood supply to specific brain regions cannot
change as rapidly as the neuronal activity in those brain regions can change.
To solve this problem, the brain has an energy reserve in the form of glycogen, a polymer
of glucose.
This glycogen reserve is in the glial cells.
The glial cells synthesize glycogen when there is an abundant supply of glucose in the blood,
and when the glucose levels fall or the neuronal activity suddenly increases, the glia break
down glycogen into its individual glucose units and use those units to supply the neighboring
neurons with energy.
The next question is what is the relationship between sleep and glycogen metabolism?
The hypothesis is that glycogen reserves are depleted during wakeful brain activity
and replenished during sleep.
The biochemistry of glycogen metabolism seems to support this hypothesis.
Glycogen breakdown, known as glycogenolysis, is accomplished through the actions of an enzyme
called glycogen phosphorylase.
And synthesis is accomplished through the actions of an enzyme called glycogen synthase.
Now I'm engaging in a little bit of biochemical simplification here, but the basic message
is not in the details of the multiple biochemical reactions involved.
The basic message is in the mechanism by which the activities of these enzymes are regulated.
The neurochemicals like norepinephrine that promote wake activate the glycogen breakdown
enzyme and inhibit the glycogen synthesis enzyme.
When those neurochemicals are withdrawn, when there is less activity in the brainstem
nuclei that promote wake, the glycogen breakdown enzyme is inhibited and the glycogen synthesis
enzyme is activated.
In addition, ATP inhibits the glycogen breakdown enzyme, so if the cell has plenty of energy
and its ATP levels are high, it does not use its glycogen reserves.
So the story is that during wake, the glia are poised to give up their glycogen at a
moment's notice if energy levels start to fall.
And during sleep, the glia are put into the mode of replacing their glycogen stores.
Now if this story is true, we should be able to see effects of sleep deprivation on the
glycogen content of different areas of the brain.
These are very difficult experiments to do because of the very sensitive nature of the
biochemical mechanisms that I just explained.
Any experimental manipulation that compromises the continuity of the energy supply to the
neurons will trigger the very rapid breakdown of glycogen.
Therefore it is difficult to determine changes in glycogen due to sleep and wake or due to
the experimental methods used to measure the glycogen.
Nevertheless, some good methods have been developed and they have produced some believable results.
First, is it possible to use these methods to measure an increase in glycogen levels
in the brain?
The answer is yes.
Glycogen levels at the proper plane of anesthesia show almost continuous slow wave activity.
And under these conditions, brain glycogen levels go up.
Similarly, as I discussed in the lecture on hibernation, hibernation is an evolutionary
extension of slow wave sleep.
And brain levels of glycogen go up during a bout of hibernation.
But can we show a decline in glycogen during wake and a recovery during sleep?
Dr. Jonathan Geiger and colleagues then at the University of Manitoba tackled this problem.
Jonathan is now at University of North Dakota.
They provided a beautiful demonstration of changes in regional brain glycogen levels as
a function of sleep deprivation and recovery sleep.
The interesting thing about their results was that the brain region that showed the
biggest reduction in glycogen levels was the cortex.
And the brainstem did not show a significant reduction at all.
Now you would probably characterize most of the functions that are localized in the brainstem
as being continuous ones, even during sleep.
Unlike the activity in the cortex, they do not show rapid big changes.
So a system for energy reserves would not be as important in the brainstem.
There are other results that support the energy restoration hypothesis.
For example, a biochemical study showed that mice responded to only six hours of sleep
deprivation with a three-fold increase in the activity of the glycogen synthase, the
glycogen building enzyme, during their recovery sleep.
Another molecule involved in the process of glycogen building is called protein targeted
to glycogen.
This protein helps line up the individual glucose units that are stitched together to build
the glycogen molecule.
The messenger RNA for this protein goes up following six hours of sleep deprivation
as well.
All in all, there is a substantial amount of evidence showing that brain energy reserves
are regionally depleted during wake and restored during sleep.
And there is also substantial evidence that control of this process involves the molecule
adenosine.
Adenosine seems to have dual actions.
One, working at the level of the basal forebrain to promote the transition to sleep, and two,
working at the level of the cortex to promote the intensity of sleep.
In terms of this second action, promoting the intensity of sleep, which is really mediating
sleep homeostasis, is there any evidence that this process is indeed regional?
In other words, does the activity in different specific regions of the cortex, activity that
could deplete the glycogen in those specific areas, result in regional sleep responses?
Very interesting experiments done by doctors Retto Huber, Giulio Tononi, and colleagues
at the University of Wisconsin show that parts of the cortex that work harder sleep differently
than other parts of the cortex.
Areas that worked harder have greater slow wave activity during subsequent sleep.
Another experiment depends on the fact that the cortex has a functional organization.
Parts of it process incoming sensory information, parts of it integrate different types of information,
and certain parts of it generate the commands to the muscles to drive behavior.
This latter part is called the motor cortex, and it is a band of cortex that runs over
the top of the brain, roughly from ear to ear.
In this band of cortex, the neurons are arranged so that the neurons that control specific
parts of the body are grouped together.
This is called somatotopic organization.
The muscles of the arm and the hand are driven by motor neurons that are located just a little
bit to the left or right of midline.
The left arm is controlled by the motor neurons on the right side of the brain, and the right
arm is controlled by the motor neurons on the left side of the brain.
Now the scientists train subjects to use their non-dominant arm to do a computer task.
That task was to use the computer mouse to move the cursor on the screen from a central
location to a target spot.
However, the computer was programmed to put an error into their movement.
The movement of the mouse that would normally take the cursor to the target did not work.
They had to learn a new movement to do the task perfectly.
The subjects practiced and practiced until they got it right.
Their EEGs were recorded during subsequent sleep with a large array of electrodes, therefore
they could measure the slow wave activity in different regions of the brain.
The EEG recording showed that the region of the motor cortex that was used to work on
this task had a differential increase in slow wave activity.
So an area of the brain that works harder sleeps deeper.
A reasonable hypothesis to explain these results is that the working region of the motor cortex
depleted more of its local glycogen reserves, and that caused an increased release of adenosine
during subsequent sleep.
And that increase in local adenosine caused a local increase in slow wave activity.
Now that hypothesis generates two questions.
One, how does the glycogen depletion and restoration influence adenosine?
And what do the EEG slow waves have to do with the glycogen regulation?
Unfortunately we do not have answers to these questions, so we have to speculate.
You can think of a speculation as a weak hypothesis.
The one fact that we know is that the glia are crucially involved in these mechanisms.
Two things about glia are probably relevant.
First, they release neurochemicals, and one of the neurochemicals they release is ATP.
ATP can then be broken down outside of the glial cell to generate adenosine.
Second, the glia do not simply break down glycogen and release the liberated glucose
to the adjacent neurons.
No, they put that glucose through the first step of cellular energy production that converts
it to lactate.
It is lactate that they release to the neurons as a fuel source, but in the process of producing
the lactate, ATP is generated.
Now an interesting experiment was done by Marcos Frank and his colleagues at the University
of Pennsylvania.
They genetically engineered mice so that they were able to turn off the ability of the glia
in the brains of these mice to release ATP.
The mice were fine, and they slept normally, but they showed a much blunted response in
slow wave activity following sleep deprivation.
How does this make sense?
Remember, the enzyme that breaks down glycogen is inhibited by intracellular ATP.
Therefore, as ATP is generated by the production of lactate, perhaps the glial cell has to
get rid of it to prevent shutting down glycogenalysis at the time the neurons are crying for more
fuel.
As a result, ATP would increase extracellularly, and it would be broken down to a denicine
contributing to the onset of sleep and the intensity of the slow waves at the beginning
of sleep.
Remember, this is speculation, but this is how new experiments are born.
We are left with having to explain the continued presence, but declining amounts of extracellular
adenosine after sleep onset.
As noted earlier, adenosine is taken up rapidly by cells all over the body.
Why should it be different in the brain?
Glycogen synthesis requires ATP, so part of the glucose entering the glial cell during
sleep has to be metabolized to produce ATP.
If at the beginning of this process, when the rate of glycogen synthesis should be maximal,
perhaps the supply of ATP is not adequate, and the glial cells start scavenging ADPs
to produce ATPs, they would then throw away the leftover AMP in the process, and this
AMP would be degraded to adenosine.
As the rate of glycogen synthesis slows down, the rate of glial ATP production would catch
up unless AMP would be thrown away.
Once again, this is all speculation, but it is a great set of ideas for future experiments.
The second question I posed was on the exact function of slow wave activity in this process.
I don't even have speculation to offer on that, but we will discuss other possible functions
of the slow wave activity later.
All in all, I conclude that the restoration of brain energy reserves is a possible function
of sleep, but is it the only function?
I doubt it, and we will discuss other possibilities in subsequent lectures.
I hope I have impressed upon you that there are many exciting questions to be asked and
fascinating experiments to do as we continue to search for the function of sleep.
Until next time, when we search for the function of sleep in processes of learning and memory,
sweet dreams.
