In the third lecture, I described the normal progression of sleep stages across the night.
We refer to this as the architecture of sleep, and we represent it graphically as a hypnogram.
Hypnograms are remarkably similar for the same person across nights.
Hypnograms also have the same general structure in different individuals.
Sleep begins with a rapid progression through non-REM stages one and two, down to the deep
non-REM sleep of stage three.
After about an hour, sleep lightens and transitions into the first bout of REM sleep.
These cycles between non-REM and REM sleep are called sleep cycles.
There are about five sleep cycles across the night, averaging about 90 minutes each.
Their composition changes considerably, however, with deep non-REM sleep in the first two cycles
and more REM sleep in the second half of the night.
The sleep cycles recorded in hypnograms suggest all sorts of questions about sleep.
Why does non-REM sleep always come first?
Why is non-REM sleep deeper early in the night and shallower later in the night?
Why do non-REM and REM sleep cycle?
Why do REM episodes get longer as the night progresses?
In the fifth lecture, I told you about sleep in other mammals.
Non-REM sleep and REM sleep are present in all, with the single possible exception of
the spiny anteater, a monotreme, which is an egg-laying mammal.
The amounts of sleep differ considerably across the species.
Predatory species tend to sleep more than prey species.
But here is an important point for this lecture.
They all show cycling between non-REM and REM sleep, and the relative amounts of non-REM
and REM sleep are rather similar, around 20%.
For me, that is a rather strong argument against dreaming sleep having any function like Freud
suggested.
If REM sleep really were necessary for us to work out our Freudian problems, then moles,
armadillos, and hamsters have similar problems.
There is something curious, however, about the non-REM REM cycle across the mammals.
The sleep cycle length is proportional to brain size.
The bigger the brain, the longer the cycle.
There is no explanation for this correlation, but it does suggest that the two states of
sleep have a very fundamental relationship between them that relates to some very basic
features of brain structure across a great diversity of species.
In the last lecture, we explored one possible function of non-REM sleep that would explain
why it is deepest and dominates the early part of the night.
In subsequent lectures, we will explore other likely functions of non-REM sleep in the processes
of learning and memory.
What I will focus on here is this very fundamental relationship between non-REM and REM sleep
that is reflected in sleep cycles.
At the end, I will extend this analysis into a hypothesis about one possible basic function
of REM sleep.
Let's begin by questioning a very common assumption.
That assumption is that the need for sleep builds up during wake.
You may think, how could you assume anything else?
It is obvious from personal experience that sleepiness results from prolonged wake.
True.
And in addition to your personal subjective experience, I presented to you lots of objective
data showing wake creates a sleep debt that has to be paid back during sleep.
One of the most important experimental findings about sleep is the very clear relationship
between time-awake and non-REM slow-wave activity, delta power, during subsequent sleep.
How could I even think about questioning the relationship between wake duration and subsequent
sleep?
But keep in mind that there are two sleep states, and one of those states always comes
first, except in some pathological situations I will discuss later.
Is it possible that wake creates a need for non-REM sleep, but then the expression of
non-REM sleep creates the need for REM sleep?
In other words, perhaps the need for REM sleep does not accumulate during wake.
The need for REM sleep might stem from some process that is occurring during non-REM sleep.
How could we evaluate this outlandish proposition?
The results from total sleep deprivation studies are not helpful.
Sure, sleep need accumulates, but during recovery sleep after modest sleep deprivation, non-REM
sleep generally comes first, and sleep has the characteristic structure of sleep cycles.
However, there is an exception that we will have to address.
In some studies of extreme total sleep deprivation, sleep-onset REM is observed.
In early sleep deprivation studies, an apparent result was the prominence of REM sleep during
recovery.
However, those studies were prior to the appreciation of the way in which the need for non-REM
sleep was made up during recovery by an increase in intensity, delta power.
Many more recent studies confirm that the delta power of non-REM sleep reflects the
duration of prior wake.
There is no real evidence for changes in the quality or structure of REM sleep during recovery
from sleep deprivation.
It still follows non-REM.
In some studies, the early sleep cycles after sleep deprivation were reported to have less
REM sleep.
The interpretation was that the increased need for non-REM sleep pushed off REM sleep
until later in the night, or even in the second recovery night.
This observation indicates the primacy of non-REM sleep's relationship to prior wake.
What about selective sleep state deprivation?
First of all, you can't selectively deprive an animal of non-REM sleep because non-REM
sleep always precedes REM.
Therefore, we are limited to selective REM sleep deprivation.
Many experiments have tried to selectively deprive animals of REM sleep, and many claim
success.
The results are complex.
In the very long-term sleep deprivation studies done on rats, at the University of Chicago
in the laboratory of Alan Rexhafen, just about everything goes to pot in the totally sleep-deprived
animals, while control rats getting the same level of stimulation necessary to prevent
sleep in the experimental rats do just fine.
I will discuss these studies in more detail in our later lecture on sleep and the rest
of the body, but here it is sufficient to say that lots of physiological systems fail
when these same methods are used to selectively deprive the rats of just REM sleep, the same
overall failure of physiological systems occurs, but more slowly.
An interesting behavioral change was seen in the selectively REM sleep-deprived rats.
They became much more aggressive.
Could this effect be similar to the occurrence of hallucinatory behavior seen in sleep-deprived
humans?
A confound in all of the selective REM sleep deprivation studies is that REM deprivation
has a significant impact on the quality of non-REM sleep.
The build-up of the need for REM sleep drives the animal to attempt to enter REM whenever
it goes into non-REM sleep.
Thus, non-REM sleep is terribly disrupted.
It is not possible to interpret the results of any study that claims selective REM deprivation
as anything but total sleep disruption.
We need new experiments to answer this question.
New experiments frequently start with models.
We can create two models describing the relationships between wake, non-REM, and REM sleep.
In one model, sleep need in general, both non-REM and REM sleep need, builds up during
wake.
This total sleep need is reduced by alternating between the two states during recovery sleep,
beginning with non-REM sleep, of course.
In the alternative model, only non-REM sleep need builds up during wake.
And at the onset of sleep, it begins to be reduced, but that process builds up a need
for REM sleep, and that has to be dealt with before non-REM processes can continue.
This also creates an oscillation between non-REM and REM sleep, but for an extremely different,
for an entirely different reason, a homeostatic one.
Remember, I discussed the nature of homeostasis in a previous lecture.
The word means same conditions.
Physiological systems function to maintain all of the conditions of the internal environment
of the body within a narrow range of values.
Deviations of a condition beyond its acceptable range induces a corrective response that continues
until the value of concern returns to an acceptable level.
If you get cold, you shiver until your body temperature comes back up to normal.
That is homeostatic response.
What our alternative model predicts is that there is a homeostatic relationship between
non-REM and REM sleep.
The need for REM sleep builds up during non-REM, and when that need reaches a certain level,
it has to be reduced before non-REM can continue.
The model in which REM need builds up during wake requires an additional component, an
oscillator, to time the transitions between states, the sleep cycles.
We discussed fixed-period oscillators back in the circadian rhythm lectures.
This would be a job for a fixed-period oscillator.
Some years back, a lot of effort went into research on a proposed fixed-period oscillator
in the brainstem that could generate the sleep cycle.
The idea was an interaction between two groups of nuclei, the serotonergic and noradrenergic
on the one hand and cholinergic nuclei on the other hand.
The model of these interactions included a pattern of reciprocal inhibition that would
produce a flip-flop switch.
Remember the flip-flop switch model that was proposed for the wake-sleep transitions?
In this model, the oscillations between the activities of these two groups of nuclei produced
an oscillation between non-REM and REM sleep with no input that represented any homeostatic
need or function.
The model simply generated an oscillation that, in this case, of humans was 90 minutes.
A homeostatic model and a fixed-period oscillator model make two very different predictions.
If the fixed period, 90 minutes in the case of a human sleep cycle, consists of two phases,
non-REM and REM sleep, then if one phase is shortened, the other must be lengthened and
vice versa in order to maintain the fixed period.
In other words, the lengths of the two phases in different sleep cycles should be an inverse
relationship.
In a homeostatic model, however, the relationship between the two phases should be a direct
relationship.
If the need has not been adequately met by a shortened restorative phase, then the subsequent
build-up phase should be shortened too.
If the need has been greatly reduced by a long restorative phase, then that would allow
a longer subsequent build-up phase.
How can we test these predictions?
The method we used was developed by Dr. Joel Bennington in my lab.
An undergraduate working with us made an astute observation.
The experiment we were conducting was one in which a rat received a stimulation every
time it entered REM sleep.
The student was to watch the EEG recording, and whenever a REM episode started, she had
to push a button to stimulate the rat to prevent the transition into REM sleep.
One day, Joel was standing behind her, checking her accuracy.
At one point, she pushed the button, and Joel said, why did you do that?
There was no REM sleep.
She responded, there was going to be, and she was right.
What her eyes and her brain were seeing in the EEG were subtle changes in the waveforms
that always occurred before a bout of REM sleep.
Subsequently, we developed mathematical tools to accurately identify those events.
Common practice for scoring EEGs at that time was that there had to be some defined amount
of REM sleep, say 10 seconds or 30 seconds, before it was scored as an episode of REM sleep.
But once we identified these non-REM to REM transition signatures that we called NRTs,
we could see that many times the animal would attempt to enter REM sleep, but the transition
would be aborted after only a second or two of REM sleep.
With the traditional methods of scoring EEG data, those events would be totally ignored,
the data thrown away.
So we had a new measure, a measure of the transition to REM sleep whether there was
any significant REM sleep or not.
The first application of this new measure was very informative.
We were doing experiments in which we expected a drug to have an effect on the sleep cycle
of rats.
However, the sleep cycle as measured by the traditional methods of sleep scoring had enormous
variability.
Such variability made it difficult, if not impossible, to see effects of the drugs.
But when we used the NRT to mark sleep cycles rather than an episode of sustained REM sleep,
we saw a very precise distribution with a sharp peak.
Clearly, we were measuring something with more precision than we had before.
Another interesting observation was that the sleep cycle length as marked by NRTs was
almost identical during the sleep or the wake phase of the daily cycle.
Let's get back to the different predictions of the models of sleep cycle control, the
fixed period oscillator model and the homeostatic model.
Remember that the fixed period oscillator model predicts that there would be an inverse
relationship between the lengths of non-REM and REM sleep across multiple sleep cycles.
The homeostatic model predicts a direct relationship.
We went back to lots of EEG recordings of rats sleeping and used NRTs to define the
sleep cycles.
The results were definitive.
There was a very clear direct correlation between the length of a REM episode and the
length of the subsequent non-REM episode.
In other words, if a REM episode was short, then the subsequent non-REM episode would
be interrupted sooner with another attempt to enter REM sleep and NRT.
If the REM sleep episode was long, then there would be much more non-REM sleep before the
next NRT.
These results supported the homeostatic model and not the fixed period oscillator model.
We looked at the data in still another way.
We arbitrarily defined any REM episode lasting less than 30 seconds as being a brief REM episode.
We then analyzed the EEG records to see how the length of each non-REM episode correlated
with the number of brief REM episodes that preceded it.
Once again, a very clear relationship emerged.
The longest non-REM episodes were preceded by no brief REM episodes.
The length of the non-REM episodes progressively fell as the number of preceding brief REM
episodes increased.
Again, we interpreted these results to mean that REM need builds up during non-REM sleep.
And unless that need is discharged through a suitably long REM sleep episode, it accumulates.
As the REM sleep need accumulates during non-REM sleep, it is more likely to interrupt the
non-REM episode with an NRT.
Another difference between these two models of sleep cycle control is whether or not REM
sleep need builds up during wake or during non-REM sleep.
The homeostatic model predicts that REM sleep need at the beginning of the sleep phase should
be minimal.
The fixed period oscillator model predicts the opposite.
If REM sleep need builds up during wake, it should be maximal at the beginning of the
sleep phase.
This is similar to how process S that drives slow wave activity of non-REM sleep is highest
at the end of the wake phase.
It occurred to us that the frequency of NRTs was an indicator of the drive to enter REM
sleep.
In other words, the magnitude of the need for REM sleep.
Therefore, according to the homeostatic model, the frequency of NRTs should be low at the
beginning of the sleep phase.
But if REM sleep deprivation was imposed on the animals, the need for REM sleep should
build up, and the frequency of NRTs should increase rapidly.
We did an experiment in which we used a very mild electrical stimulus to the serotonergic
nuclei to interrupt REM sleep episodes.
Whenever an NRT occurred, the brief electrical stimulation brought the animal back to non-REM
sleep.
Control rats received the same number of stimulations, but they were randomly spread
across all arousal states.
Our results supported the homeostatic model.
The frequency of NRTs at the beginning of the sleep phase were the lowest.
In the control rats, this low frequency of NRTs did not change across the sleep phase.
It remained about 10 NRTs per hour of non-REM sleep.
However, with REM sleep deprivation, they steadily increased.
By the end of two hours of sleep deprivation, the NRT rate was four times higher in the
REM sleep-deprived rats.
After four hours, it was six times higher in the sleep-deprived rats.
The six times higher was close to a maximum.
Since it takes an animal about one minute to cycle through the transition process, about
the maximum is 60 NRTs per hour of non-REM sleep.
These results were significant for two reasons.
First, they strongly supported the idea that the need for REM sleep builds up during non-REM
sleep and not during wake.
Second, they showed that it is not possible to infer a function of REM sleep by doing
a selective REM sleep deprivation.
Why is that?
This experiment showed that REM deprivation for only two to four hours greatly interfered
with the quality of non-REM sleep, 40 to 60 NRTs per hour of non-REM sleep practically
eliminates the ability of the animal to get into a non-REM state with high slow wave activity.
For long periods of supposed selective REM deprivation are necessary to produce clear
physiological or behavioral deficits, any such experiment greatly impacts non-REM sleep
as well.
Therefore, you cannot conclude that any observed effects from selective REM sleep deprivation
reflects a specific function of REM sleep.
All of these experiments on rats produced clear and significant data that supported
the homeostatic model.
The conclusion had to be that REM sleep need builds up during non-REM sleep and not during
wake.
This means that non-REM sleep alone is restorative of waking, but REM sleep need has to be periodically
discharged to enable the continuation of non-REM sleep.
What about humans?
It seemed to us that there would be little chance of seeing evidence for a homeostatic
relationship between non-REM and REM sleep in humans.
After all, there are only about five sleep cycles per night and they are generally consolidated
with few short REM sleep episodes.
Nevertheless, Tom Ware at the National Institutes of Health analyzed an extensive amount of human
sleep recordings he had accumulated to see if there might be a relationship between the
length of REM episodes and the length of subsequent non-REM episodes.
Much to our surprise, his answer was yes.
He had to exclude the first non-REM episode because it is not preceded by any REM sleep,
of course, but the subsequent sleep cycles in humans showed the same direct relationship
between duration of REM sleep episodes and subsequent non-REM sleep episodes that indicates
a homeostatic relationship between these two sleep states.
Human sleep studies, however, present another challenge to the homeostatic model.
This challenge is sleep-onset REM episodes, or SOAR REMS.
If the need for REM sleep builds up only during non-REM sleep, how can you explain SOAR REMS?
SOAR REMS are observed in individuals that are severely sleep deprived.
In other words, people who are suffering from excessive daytime sleepiness.
These may include shift workers, individuals with sleep apnea, and individuals with narcolepsy.
Two factors in these individuals could explain SOAR REMS.
First, excessive daytime sleepiness is frequently associated with brief naps or microsleeps.
Also, high-density EEG recordings, that is EEG recordings with many, many electrodes distributed
across the head, reveal local sleep events, that is intrusions of slow-wave activity in
different regions of the brains of awake individuals.
It is therefore possible that non-REM processes occurring during the wake phase of sleep-deprived
individuals could result in an accumulation of REM sleep need that is expressed at the
onset of the daily sleep phase.
A second factor is seen in individuals with obstructive sleep apnea.
We will discuss OSA in greater detail later, but what it is is periodic cessation of breathing
due to airway obstruction.
That causes a brief awakening to restore airflow to the lungs, and it greatly fragments sleep.
The obstructive apnic events are more likely to occur during REM sleep than during non-REM
sleep, and therefore the individuals will be carrying a considerable accumulated REM
need that could produce SOAR REMS.
The conclusion is that SOAR REMS are not proof against the non-REM-REM homeostatic hypothesis.
Okay, if you buy the argument that non-REM sleep creates the need for REM sleep, what
could explain that need?
That imbalanced results from non-REM sleep that has to be reversed during REM sleep.
We don't know, but we can speculate and produce new hypotheses.
Warning, we are now going into the fantasy world of pure speculation, but this is frequently
how new ideas are born, and it's fun, sometimes not to be constrained by real data.
I want to recall our discussions about the neurophysiology of non-REM sleep and the generation
of EEG slow-wave activity.
The important detail is the cellular mechanisms that hyperpolarize the neurons of the cortex.
Remember that this hyperpolarization of cortical neurons deactivates their low-threshold calcium
channels.
When these calcium channels then open, the resulting depolarization of the cell causes
a burst of action potentials.
The synchronization of this bursting activity generates the EEG slow-waves.
That was difficult material to comprehend at the time, but I think it's probably old
hat for you now.
What causes the hyperpolarization?
It is increased leakage of potassium ions from the neurons.
The increased movement of these positively charged ions out of the neurons leaves behind
negative charges.
As a result, the membrane potential of the neuron is more negative during non-REM sleep
than it is during wake.
It is hyperpolarized.
What happens to all of those potassium ions that end up in the extracellular fluid?
The composition of the extracellular fluids in the nervous system is controlled by the
glial cells.
Remember that the cortex is about 9 to 1 glial cells to neurons.
The glia take up the excess potassium ions from the extracellular fluid.
This mopping up process by the glia can't go on forever.
Presumably at some time, the movement of potassium has to go in the reverse direction from the
glia back to the neurons.
Maybe this occurs during REM sleep.
During REM sleep, the cortical neurons are again relatively depolarized.
Their membrane potentials are not as negative as they are during non-REM sleep.
That means that the leakage of potassium has decreased.
Could it be that by lowering the potassium leak, this sleep state allows a period of
time when the potassium homeostasis of the neurons can be re-established?
That is a very simple proposition that should be testable.
We did a small pilot experiment to do just that.
Our idea was that if we could reduce the potassium leak a little bit, we should reduce
the need for REM sleep and see a reduction in REM sleep time.
How to slow the potassium leak?
Drugs of course.
In this case, the drug is a natural product, honeybee venom.
The sting of a honeybee includes injecting a small amount of the chemical apamine into
your skin.
Apamine blocks potassium channels, depolarizes the neurons, making them more sensitive.
And when these neurons are pain fibers, it hurts.
Of course, if you are too effective in blocking the potassium channels in the cortex, you
are going to eliminate the hyperpolarization necessary to produce non-REM sleep.
And then you just have an awake animal.
Therefore, we titrated the dose of apamine back to an extremely low level that reduced
the magnitude of the slow wave activity of course, but it did not decrease the amount
of non-REM sleep.
We were expecting to see a slight decrease in the amount of REM sleep.
But REM sleep disappeared all together.
As the drug wore off, the REM sleep came back, but did not show a rebound.
And we seen a rebound, the conclusion would be that we just interfered with the expression
of REM sleep and not with the need for REM sleep.
But the fact that there was no rebound indicated that we had indeed decreased or eliminated
the need for REM sleep.
So could it be that the basic function of REM sleep is to maintain ionic homeostasis
of the brain?
Perhaps but this little experiment is all we have to go on at present.
Much more work has to be done to explore this very simplistic hypothesis.
Whether or not REM sleep is involved in ionic homeostasis or learning in memory or emotional
regulation or some other function, I cannot say at present.
The function of sleep in general and REM sleep in particular remains a mystery and will keep
sleep researchers busy for many years to come.
But the quest is exciting.
What you can take away at this point, however, is that the experiments I told you about today
strongly indicate that REM sleep is in a homeostatic relationship with non-REM sleep.
Specifically, I think that means that it is non-REM sleep that is restorative of wake.
And the expression of non-REM sleep then generates the need for REM sleep.
Perhaps that REM sleep need is periodically satisfied, non-REM sleep will be compromised.
It is the periodic discharge of the REM sleep need that generates the sleep cycle.
We will next take up possible roles of sleep in learning and memory.
But until then, may your sleep cycles be long and your REM sleep episodes generate sweet
dreams.
