Imagine what it would be like to not have memory.
I don't just mean a selective memory, such as not being able to remember your dreams
or not being able to find your car keys.
I mean no memory at all.
The reality is that without memory you would not be conscious.
What is consciousness?
There is no universally agreed upon definition, but I define it as the capacity to have a
percept of yourself in relation to your physical and social worlds and the ability to project
that percept into the past and into the future.
Without memory you would have no concept of a past and you would have no basis for constructing
a concept of the future.
In fact, you would not even be able to develop a percept of yourself because you would not
know what a finger is, what a knee is, or what a shoulder is, and what they were doing
just seconds before.
You would really be an automaton simply acting reflexively to stimuli that come from inside
and outside your body.
The German physiologist Ewald Haring put this proposition in an interesting way in 1895.
He said that just as our bodies would fall apart if the atoms did not attract each other,
our consciousness would fall apart into as many pieces as there are moments without the
binding property of memory.
The important point is that the abilities to form, store, recall, and integrate memories
are central to our conscious existence and sleep plays an important role in these memory
processes.
Sleep and memory is not only a very important topic, it is also a very big topic.
This subfield of sleep research has been rapidly growing for several decades.
The approaches are many and diverse and the literature is huge.
I will spend the next three lectures on the role of sleep in learning and memory and still
we will just only cover a brief overview of some of the important findings.
The reason for the enormous diversity of research in this area is just as there are multiple
stages of sleep, there are multiple forms of memory, and for each form of memory there
are multiple types of neural processes that are involved.
Thus the number of permutations and combinations of questions and experiments is practically
infinite.
Now you already know a lot about the stages of sleep, so I am going to start by describing
the different types of memory.
There are two major categories of memory, declarative and nondeclarative.
Declared of memories are those that you can consciously recall and describe.
There are two main categories of declarative memory, episodic and semantic.
An episodic memory is a person, place, or event.
A semantic memory is general knowledge such as the organization of the United States government.
Nondeclarative memories can be several types as well.
The major category that we will discuss today is procedural memory, like learning to ride
a bike or play the piano.
Another type of nondeclarative memory is associative.
An example of associative memory is how a bird watcher will expect to see a particular
species of bird when he hears its song.
Conditioned reflexes such as your dog salivating when you pick up its dish are other examples
of associative memory.
There are more classification schemes for memories, but for our purposes we will focus
mostly on procedural memory and episodic memory as we look for the effects of sleep.
In addition to there being different kinds of memories, there are also different neurophysiological
processes that are involved in the formation, the storage, and the uses of memories.
First, there is the encoding of the sensory information of the initial experience.
You can think of this as the creation of a neurophysiological pattern that stores the
experiential information.
Maybe that is a pattern with specific neurons firing together.
Next, there is the consolidation of the memory.
It is consolidation of memory that is probably most influenced by sleep.
Next the consolidation of memory is strengthening of these synapses between the ensemble of
neurons that fired together during a particular experience.
Memory consolidation is outside of our conscious experience and it makes the memory resistant
to interference by new information that is always coming in.
Consolidation also includes a process of integration.
The memory is integrated with previously formed memories.
Consolidations between memories are established that might make the information more useful
in the future.
Associations also make the specific memory more robust because it is in a context of
related memories that can help with retrieval.
That means remembering.
The process of consolidation also involves the transfer of memory from short term to
long term.
This may involve communicating the neuronal representation of the experience from one
region of the brain to another.
As I said before, it is the various aspects of memory consolidation that are probably
most influenced by sleep.
The stored memory is outside of our conscious experience unless it is recalled or as we
say reactivated.
Think of memory reactivation as bringing the memory back into the foreground.
Once this is done, the memory has to once again be reconsolidated into long term memory.
During this period of reconsolidation, the memory can be vulnerable to modification.
Memory reactivation and reconsolidation during sleep is an important phenomenon that I'll
discuss.
Finally, there is memory erasure, forgetting sleep may also play a role there as well.
The evidence for sleep being involved in the formation of memory is most clear and
uncontroversial for procedural memories.
Remember that's the kind of memory involved in learning skills such as riding a bike or
playing a musical instrument.
Results from experiments across different sensory modalities all point to the importance
of sleep for some aspect of procedural memory consolidation or enhancement.
It is important to emphasize at the outset, however, that all of what we learn about memory
processes for procedural memory will not necessarily apply to declarative memories.
Different brain systems are involved.
To illustrate that, let me tell you a story that you might have heard before.
This is the story about a very famous neurological memory case.
This is the case of Henry M. who was studied for many years by Brenda Milner, a neuropsychologist
from McGill University.
In his teen years, Henry M. began having epileptic seizures that got progressively worse.
By his mid-twenties, they were totally incapacitating and no treatments were effective.
As a last resort in 1957, a new neurosurgical procedure was tried.
Large portions of his temporal lobes of his cerebral cortex were removed.
These regions include the hippocampus, which we now know is critical for the acquisition
of declarative memory.
After his surgery, Henry M. could form no new declarative memories.
He could remember events prior to his surgery, but in the present, every experience was entirely
new.
He could engage in a conversation because he could retain information in short-term memory
for a few minutes, but after that, it was gone.
Even though Dr. Milner worked with him almost daily at times for over 40 years, she was a
new person to him every day.
However, Henry M. could form procedural memories.
He could learn a manual skill, but he could not describe the task or his practice the
previous day.
Only showed steady improvement with practice.
I bring up this Hallmark case in neuropsychology for two reasons.
One, it showed for the first time that discrete brain structures were essential for learning
and memory.
And two, different brain processes and different brain regions were responsible for different
kinds of memory.
Let's turn now to our first series of studies on the role of sleep and procedural learning.
Do you know a really good birder?
Someone who, as I mentioned earlier, can identify a species simply from its song?
Or importantly for our consideration now, is it someone who can quickly detect a bird
at a distance and immediately identify its species?
Maybe you are such a person.
But I am always amazed that at times when I can barely detect the form of a bird, the
good birder sees subtle details about its feather patterns that enables him to identify
the species.
This exceptional ability for visual discrimination is learned, and it is a form of non-declared
of memory.
Extensive studies were done by Avi Karni and colleagues at the Weissman Institute in Israel
to measure how this non-declared of or procedural memory is formed.
The experimental protocol requires the subject to stare at a fixed point at the center of
a computer screen.
The screen then goes blank, after which it flashes a textured pattern on the screen for
only about 10 milliseconds.
That's ten thousandths of a second.
This pattern consists of many rows and columns of little horizontal or vertical lines, with
two exceptions.
At the center of the screen is either the letter T or L, and somewhere on the screen
three of the little lines have a diagonal orientation, and these three aberrant lines
are either next to each other in a row or a column.
So after the stimulus is presented, the screen again goes blank for a short time, and then
a random pattern of lines appears on the screen.
This random pattern is called a mask, because it is information that conflicts with the
stimulus.
The variable that is manipulated is the duration of the blank screen before the mask appears.
The subject is asked to report two things.
Is the letter in the center of the screen a T or an L?
And are the three aberrant little lines arranged vertically or horizontally?
Remembering the T or the L assures that the individual is fixated on the center of the
screen.
The critical measure is the percent of correct answers about the orientation of the three
aberrant lines as a function of the duration of the blank screen following the stimulus.
The longer the blank screen lasts, the easier this visual discrimination task is.
In successive blocks of trials, the duration of the blank screen exposure becomes less
and less and less.
This allows the investigators to identify the blank screen duration that results in
eighty percent correct answers, horizontal or vertical, for the orientation of the three
little aberrant lines.
This is a complex task, but you can think of it as similar to identifying the feather
pattern of a bird that flits by.
The results from this experiment are straightforward and interesting.
The first question asked was what is the time course of acquisition of this procedural memory,
this discrimination ability?
Across one day, the threshold blank screen duration for the eighty percent performance
does not change.
But significant improvements are seen overnight.
In other words, when the retesting was done on the following day.
For the first few days that these training sessions are run, the subjects are able to
get eighty percent correct at shorter and shorter blank screen durations.
After about five sessions or five days, their performance plateaus.
The next question was whether this acquisition of the procedural memory simply required time
or did it require sleep?
And if sleep, what stage of sleep?
Turned out that it was sleep that was required and not just time.
Robert Stickgold, working with Alan Hobson at Harvard, repeated the visual discrimination
task used by Carney's lab and showed that if the subjects were sleep deprived over the
night following the initial training, they showed no improvement.
If these same subjects were allowed two days of recovery sleep, they still showed no improvement.
Thus it seemed that sleep had to occur within a certain limited time window following the
training.
But what kind of sleep was critical, non-REM or REM?
Studies in the Carney lab seem to indicate that REM sleep was the critical stage.
During the night following training in the visual discrimination task, they deprived
subjects of either stage three non-REM or REM sleep.
Thus their interventions to disturbed sleep were either predominantly in the early night
during deep non-REM sleep or in the late night when there is the most REM sleep.
Now importantly, there was plenty of stage two non-REM sleep across all of the experimental
conditions.
That perhaps was a flaw in their experiment.
They concluded that only REM deprivation interfered with the performance enhancement over the night.
Their non-REM deprivation had no effect.
The subject showed normal improvements in performance the following day.
But even though these subjects had very little deep non-REM sleep, stage three, they had even
more stage two non-REM sleep than the controls.
Another approach was taken in Jan Born's lab at University of Lubeck in Germany.
Using the same visual discrimination task, they designed a very ingenious experiment
to see if sleep early in the night, mostly non-REM sleep, or sleep late in the night,
mostly REM sleep, was the most important for the consolidation of this procedural memory.
The early sleep group had their training session at 6 p.m. and they were allowed to sleep from
10.30 p.m. to 1.30 a.m. and then they had their testing trial at 2.30 a.m.
The late sleep group also went to bed at 10.30 p.m. and were also awoken at 1.30 a.m. at
which time they had their training session.
They were then allowed to go back to sleep and were awoken again at 7 a.m. and tested
at 11 a.m.
In both groups, the time between the training and the testing was the same.
There were also weight control groups with the same training and testing times as the
experimental groups.
They just were not allowed to sleep at all.
There was also a normal sleep group.
The normal sleep group showed a big improvement between training and testing.
Other of the weight control groups, the sleep-deprived groups, showed improvements at all.
The late sleep group also showed no improvement, but the early sleep group did.
These results confirmed that sleep is essential for the procedural memory consolidation and
not just the passage of time.
Also the results indicated that it was early sleep and therefore non-REM sleep that was
most important for the memory consolidation.
However, the gain in performance in the early sleep group was not nearly as great as in
the normal sleep group, the group that had a full night of sleep.
Now, another experiment by Bob Stickold and colleagues indicated a possible resolution
to the question of whether it was non-REM or REM sleep that was required for procedural
memory.
It was both.
In his experiment, subjects were trained in the visual discrimination task in the evening.
They then had all-night polysomnographic recordings and were retested in the morning.
The researchers then did a statistical analysis of their task improvement scores as a function
of the amounts and timing of each sleep state.
The results indicated that the biggest performance increases correlated with the amount of non-REM
sleep early in the first quarter of the night and the amount of REM sleep in the last quarter
of the night.
This suggested that the memory consolidation process had perhaps two steps or two components,
one requiring non-REM and one requiring REM.
The conclusion that both non-REM and REM contributed to the consolidation of this procedural memory
was supported by a subsequent study by Sarah Mednick, also in Bob Stickold's lab.
Sarah's study was aimed at asking whether or not a nap was as good as nighttime sleep
for the consolidation of this type of memory, procedural memory.
In Sarah's experiment, all subjects were trained in the morning and tested at seven
in the evening and then again at nine the next morning.
Two groups of subjects took naps beginning at 2 p.m.
One group was allowed a 60-minute nap and the other group was allowed a 90-minute nap.
Their EEGs were recorded.
The no-nap group showed a decrease in performance over the day as had been seen in previous
experiments.
They did show an overnight improvement, however.
Both nap groups performed better than the no-nap group in the evening test.
What was really interesting, however, was how the composition of the nap influenced
the performance gains.
The subjects in both nap groups had much higher performance in the evening if their
naps included both non-REM and REM sleep.
Another interesting result from this experiment was that the improvement due to the nap was
additive to the additional improvement that occurred over the subsequent night.
Thus, the sleep obtained during the nap was perhaps not sufficient for maximal benefit,
but it definitely had a benefit.
All of these experiments I have been describing involve one sensory modality vision.
Would we reach similar conclusions if we examined a procedural memory that involves a completely
different set of neural circuits, a motor task?
I mentioned earlier that learning to ride a bike is forming a procedural memory, but
riding a bike would be a difficult skill to study in the lab.
A much simpler and quantifiable one is a finger movement task akin to playing the piano.
This experiment was designed and carried out by Matt Walker when he was working with Bob
Stickgold at Harvard.
Matt is now at University of California at Berkeley.
Matt's task is just playing the computer keyboard rather than the piano.
The task is to use four fingers to tap out a particular sequence, such as 4-1-3-2-3-4.
That sequence is on the left side of the keyboard because the experimenter asks the subjects
to use their non-dominant hand.
The measure is simply how many of these sequences the subject can tap out in 30 seconds.
In any motor task, practice makes perfect, so of course you initially get better at this
task over the first 12 or so trials, and then plateau.
When retested the same day, four or six hours later, there's no improvement, but after a
night of sleep, there is about a 20% increase in speed.
No improvement in performance is seen over a night of sleep deprivation, but if the subject
sleeps on the night following training and shows improvement, then after the next night
of sleep, even more improvement is seen.
This suggests that the process of memory consolidation is not even complete after one night of sleep
following training.
What sleep stage is important in the overnight improvement in the finger tapping task?
In this case, it is stage 2 non-REM sleep in the last quarter of the night.
This appears to be different from the state dependency of the overnight improvement in
the visual discrimination task, so perhaps there are different mechanisms involved.
But as with the visual task, a daytime nap also improves performance in the finger tapping
task.
The stability of a memory as it is being consolidated is another issue.
Certainly the encoding of a memory occurs during wake.
After all, you continue to get better at the finger tapping task with repeated practice
during a training session.
If a test is only half an hour later, you retain your initial performance improvements.
Moreover, if the training occurs in the morning, the memory encoded that morning has to remain
stable until nighttime sleep occurs when it is consolidated.
Clearly some memory consolidation has to be occurring during wake.
How stable is that memory?
Can additional experience interfere with the stability of that memory before it is consolidated
further in sleep?
Is the memory more resistant to interference after sleep?
The finger tapping experiments indicated some answers to these questions.
If 10 minutes after training with one sequence, you train with another sequence.
When you retest a short time later, the speed and the accuracy on the first sequence has
not changed.
Thus, that memory is fairly stable only 10 minutes after training.
A different story appears, however, when you compare the speed and accuracy of the subject
on the two sequences after a night of sleep.
Both show the expected overnight improvement in speed, but the accuracy in the first sequence
is less than would be expected had the subject only learned that sequence alone.
So, there has been some interference during the consolidation process on the ability to
perform this particular task.
An interesting difference occurs if there is a bigger gap between the training on the
two sequences, let's say 6 hours instead of 10 minutes.
When retested after a night of sleep, improvements are seen for both sequences for both speed
and accuracy.
It therefore seems that a wake-related process of consolidation progresses following the
original training.
In summary, we can conclude that when a procedural memory is encoded during wake, some consolidation
process begins immediately to stabilize it, but enhancement of the memory is dependent
on sleep within a 12- to 24-hour time frame.
In the absence of sleep in that time frame, there is no further enhancement of the memory
even during subsequent daily sleep cycles.
Daytime sleep following training is effective, however, and is additive to the effects of
nighttime sleep.
The specific roles of non-REM and REM sleep are not entirely clear, but for optimal memory
consolidation and enhancement, both seem to be necessary.
I want to give you one more example of the role of sleep in procedural memory formation
because it makes the connection with a specific property of sleep, the slow-wave activity.
This is the study by Reto Huber and Giulio Tononi and colleagues at the University of
Wisconsin that I described in a previous lecture.
The researchers wanted to see the effects of motor learning on the subsequent local
characteristics of sleep, specifically in the motor cortex.
You will remember that the task they created was to have a person use his or her non-dominant
hand arm to move a computer mouse so that the cursor went from the center of the screen
to a target.
However, the computer was programmed to put an error into their movements.
Therefore they had to learn a new pattern of hand arm movement to be successful in this
task.
After they learned the task, they had an all-night polysomnographic recording with a high-density
electrode array.
What the EEG revealed was increased slow-wave activity over the region of the motor cortex
that controlled the movements of the hand arm that was being trained.
They interpreted these results to indicate that local slow-wave activity reflected some
recovery process that was proportional to the activity of that region during wake.
The next question was whether that slow-wave activity reflected the learning that had taken
place, and the answer was that it did.
First, as in the other two examples of procedural learning I described, in this one as well
there was overnight improvement.
If the subject slept, but there was no improvement during the same amount of time spent awake.
More importantly, however, the investigators were able to quantify the slow-wave activity
over this region of the motor cortex and correlate it with two measures of learning.
First, the magnitude of the improvement during training, and second, the performance improvement
on the subsequent day.
In other words, the enhancement of the performance over a night of sleep.
In both cases there was a significant correlation.
Therefore, the greater the learning during training, the greater the slow-wave activity
during subsequent sleep, and the greater the slow-wave activity during subsequent sleep,
the greater the improvement on the next day.
I hope I have convinced you that sleep after procedural learning can facilitate the consolidation
of the memory and improve performance beyond what was achieved by practice during wake.
Can this effect be exploited to maximize learning?
Here is an example that indicates the answer to that question might be yes, and it uses
a test paradigm closer to a real-world learning scenario, learning to play a piano.
An experiment led by James Antony in the lab of Ken Pahler at Northwestern University
was to train subjects to use one hand to play two melodies on a piano.
During subsequent sleep, during a daytime nap, one of the melodies was played back to
the subject.
The playback did not arouse the subject from sleep, but when he or she was retested, following
the nap, the performance improvement was greater for the melody that was played back
during sleep.
And the degree of improvement was correlated with the slow-wave activity during the nap.
The degree of improvement also correlated significantly with the density of sleep spindles
during the nap.
Now, you remember that sleep spindles are a hallmark of stage two non-REM sleep.
The interpretation is that the auditory stimulation reactivated the memory during sleep.
The repeated reactivation and reconsolidation during sleep strengthened the memory.
So induced reactivation of a memory during sleep may be a useful tool for manipulating
memories.
We'll come back to that later.
A final question we could ask is whether or not the consolidation of the procedural memory
during sleep could result in higher-level cognitive improvements, for example, insight
and creativity.
If indeed a function of sleep consolidation is to integrate the memory with a larger body
of memory, in other words, knowledge, is there a benefit beyond the simple improvement of
the performance on the task?
That question was addressed by Ulrich Wagner and colleagues in Jan Born's lab at University
of Lubeck in Germany.
Subjects were asked to reduce a simple string of numbers to a final answer.
But to do this, they had to apply two simple rules, not mathematics.
So as they practiced, they got better and better at this task.
But what they did not know was that all of the problems they were given could be more
easily solved by applying a hidden rule.
It was possible to see when they achieved insight about that rule because all of a sudden
their scores went up in a step function.
Subjects were trained on three sets of problems.
They were then divided into three groups, those that slept overnight, those that were
sleep-deprived overnight, and those that had an equal period of wake during the day between
training and testing.
The testing was on ten sets of problems eight hours after training.
The remarkable finding was that in the retesting, sixty percent of the subjects that had overnight
sleep gained insight as to the hidden rule, but only twenty-three percent of the subjects
that were awake during the night or during the day reached the point of insight with
respect to the hidden rule.
The conclusion was that sleep did more than facilitate the memory.
It improved the integration of that memory with prior memory in such a way that produced
insight required to solve a problem during subsequent wake.
The bottom line is that sleep is good for acquisition and consolidation and integration
of procedural memories.
So until the next time when we discuss declarative memories, sleep well, learn well, and sweet
dreams.
