In the last two lectures, I have presented the evidence that sleep is critical for the
consolidation of both declarative and non-declarative memories. Beyond memory consolidation, sleep
is also critical for the integration of those memories into the total memory stores of the
individual, so that the new information can be used with existing memory to face new challenges,
prepare for the future, and reinterpret the past. I ended the last lecture with a very general
model of a two-step process for memory consolidation that involves a fast learning short-term memory
repository and a slow learning long-term memory repository. The model proposes that during
non-REM sleep, reactivation of memories in the fast learning system drives reactivation in the
slow learning system and essentially tutors the slow learning system so that important memories
get stored and less important information gets deleted. This occurs during sleep so that memory
transcripts being processed are not interfered with by the encoding of new incoming information.
Further, higher level integration of long-term memories may take place during REM sleep when
exchanges with the fast learning system are not taking place. This two-stage model applied to
declarative memory consolidation identifies the fast learning system as the hippocampus and the
slow learning system as the cortex. However, the model could also apply to non-declared or
procedural memory formation, but the fast learning system has yet to be identified as it is not,
the hippocampus. The model is compatible with all of the human studies we discussed, but those
studies are phenomenological. Thus, they do not enable us to examine the model from a mechanistic
perspective. What are the possible neurophysiological components of the model? How do their interactions
fit with the proposed dynamics of the model? To answer questions like these, we have to go to
animal studies. Animal studies have limitations as well. The chief one is that it is more difficult
to interrogate cognitive processes in an animal since we do not have the convenience of verbal
communication. The second limitation is that the sleep cycles in animals are much shorter than
those in humans, and therefore it is more difficult to isolate specific functions to specific sleep
states. A third limitation is that animals are not motivated to cooperate with the investigators.
Nevertheless, most of our knowledge about the neurobiology of sleep has come from animal studies,
and that is what I will turn to today in our continuing consideration of learning in memory.
The first part of this lecture will focus on evidence that sleep promotes physical structural
changes in the nervous system. The second part will deal with the neurophysiological processes
of memory consolidation. The third part will begin to explore some factors that can disrupt
the sleep-related functions required for learning in memory.
First, can we see structural changes in the nervous system as a function of learning
that might reflect the substrate of memory? The time course of the visual discrimination task
strongly suggests that some process with a time scale greater than immediate synaptic activity
is involved. Existing synapses can change their strength very quickly in seconds,
but no improvement in performance on the visual discrimination task was seen across the 12-hour
day. Improvement was seen after a night of sleep. Continued improvement was seen with
subsequent nights of sleep until the performance plateaued in about five days.
This is in contrast to the finger tapping test, or to just about any motor skill that you acquire.
Steady improvement is achieved through practice, even over a period of wake. Of course,
subsequent improvement also occurs over sleep. There was another detail of the visual
discrimination task I want to discuss now. The performance enhancement was limited to the
region of the visual field that was used in the training. So if the stimulus was presented in
this particular part of the visual field, it showed improvement with subsequent testing,
but a stimulus applied in this region of the visual field did not. This means that the improvement
was not in the visual system as a whole, but only in the specific visual circuits that were
involved in the training. Could the improvement be due to structural changes in those circuits?
A study that answers this question was done by Marcos Frank, who was then working with Mike
Stryker at University of California in San Francisco, but who continues this work as a
professor at University of Pennsylvania. Marcos studied the development of binocular vision in
kittens. Let me remind you of some details of the visual system. Remember our discussion of
the optic chiasm in the circadian lectures? The optic nerves from the left and the right eye
meet at the optic chiasm. At that point, the axons coming from the medial or nasal half of each
retina cross over to the visual cortex on the opposite side of the brain. Thus, the visual
cortex on each side of the brain receives information from both eyes. This is how we have
binocular vision with depth perception. The neurons in the visual cortex are arranged in
columns. A column is mostly driven by inputs from either the right eye or the left eye,
and these right left columns alternate. However, there are neurons between the columns
that receive input from both eyes. These are the binocular neurons.
From the classic work of Hubel and Wiesel at Harvard, we know that if one eye is closed during
development, the other eye will become dominant and its connections will take over more space in
the visual cortex. Marcos exploited this phenomenon to explore the role of sleep and the rewiring of
the connections in the visual cortex. Here is what he did. He had three groups of kittens.
In one group, he closed one eye for the last six hours of the light phase. In another group,
he closed one eye over the same time, but then allowed the kitten to sleep in the dark for the
next six hours. The third group also had one eye closed for the last six hours of the light phase
and then placed in the dark, but prevented from sleeping. It was sleep deprived for the next
six hours. In each kitten, he then measured the amount of input to the visual cortical neurons
from the left and the right eyes. He found that even six hours of monocular deprivation
in the light caused there to be more inputs to the visual cortex from the open eye. This shift
was amplified during the next six hours in the dark if the kitten slept, but if not, if the kitten
was sleep deprived, this rewiring did not occur. So only six hours of asymmetry in visual stimulation
was sufficient to induce structural changes in the visual system and these changes were largely
dependent upon sleep. It is therefore likely that the changes resulting from training in the
visual discrimination task were also due to synaptic structural changes in the specific pathways
that were used and these changes were dependent on sleep. The synaptic changes documented by
Marcos Frank involve both gains and losses. A hypothesis about the function of sleep and
synaptic remodeling that has gained lots of attention in recent years emphasizes just the
loss of synapses. This is called the synaptic downscaling hypothesis from Giulio Tononi and Chiara
Cirelli at the University of Wisconsin. They argue that experience during wake results in many many
new synapses being formed. This involves new structure being added to the brain and these
new structures have to be maintained so there are both spatial and energetic costs involved in
memory formation. Now this simply cannot be an ever accumulating process. They propose that the
function of the slow waves is to produce a global synaptic downscaling across the cortex. The result
would be that the strongest synapses survive and the weakest ones are eliminated. Therefore
important synapses hence important memories would be preserved and the less important ones erased.
The synaptic downscaling hypothesis is ingenious and has received some neurophysiological support
that I cannot deal with adequately here although it may play a role in in the important phenomenon
of forgetting. It cannot explain memory processes which must involve both the construction and the
destruction of synapses as shown by Marcos Frank. A major structural change in the brain that must
reflect declarative memory is the volume of the hippocampus, the fast learning system.
An aspect of declarative memory is spatial memory. Taxi drivers have to have excellent spatial memory
and especially taxi drivers in cities like London where nothing is organized in a grid pattern as
are the streets in New York City for example. In a famous study Eleanor McGuire of the University
College London used brain imaging technology to study the hippocampi of London taxi drivers in
comparison to matched individuals who were not taxi drivers. The hippocampi of the taxi drivers
were larger than those of the comparison group and among the taxi drivers themselves the size of
the hippocampus correlated with the number of years of experience. Now what could cause a change
in size of a brain region? Aren't we born with all of the neurons we will ever have and don't we
steadily lose them as we get older? That was the dogma before it was discovered that there was
birth of new neurons in some areas of the brain. That was a major discovery and interestingly one
of those areas is the hippocampus and the birth of new neurons called neurogenesis is stimulated by
activity and by learning. But the process of acquiring new neurons in the hippocampus has two
stages birth of the cells through cell division and then survival of the cells that get incorporated
into new networks. Several studies have shown that sleep deprivation does not impair the rate at
which new hippocampal neurons are born. But work in my laboratory by Alana Hairston showed that
sleep influences their survival and incorporation into new networks. It is almost as if there is
a steady progression of new candidate neurons to be incorporated into new memory circuits
but if they are not needed they disappear. Some recent work by Yan Li in Rusty Gage's lab at
the Salk Institute for Biology gives us some insight as to how this process of recruitment
might work. Yan followed the fates of new hippocampal neurons after they were born.
She showed that it took about two weeks for them to mature. Then there was another two week period
when they were sensitive to synaptic input but after that they became increasingly inhibited.
One interpretation of Yan's findings is that there is a window of time when the new hippocampal
neurons are available to be incorporated into new circuits. Now this is highly speculative
but it is a very interesting possibility. Let's move on now to how the hippocampus encodes
declarative memories and tutors the cortex in its formation of long-term memories.
Matt Wilson at MIT claims that he can see what a rat is thinking and dreaming and I
bet he's right. Matt and his colleagues have progressively increased their abilities to record
from more and more neurons simultaneously in a behaving rat. They directed a lot of their
recording efforts to the hippocampus and what they discovered is truly amazing.
When the rat is moving in a simple circular track they record neurons that only fire when
the rat is in a particular location on that track. They call these neurons place cells because
their firing correlates with a place. Sometimes when the rat reaches a particular location on
the track and stops they can see the place cell pattern fire in reverse order as if the animal
is thinking about where it came from. They also have run their rats in tracks with choice points
go left or go right. When the rat is in the start box of a track with a choice point which
it has run before the investigators can see the place cells fire in a forward pattern as if the
animal is thinking about where it is going to go and based on the firing pattern they can predict
whether it will go left or right when it gets to the choice point. Can there be any doubt that
these hippocampal neurons are coding spatial experience?
The really interesting thing is that during subsequent sleep and specifically during non-rem
sleep the firing patterns of these place cells are replayed but whereas during wake they are
replayed in a real-time relationship with actual behavior when replayed during sleep they are
replayed seven times faster. The information is compressed in the small packets. Where do these
packets go and how do they get there? To answer that we have to go back to the different types of
brain waves that make up the EEG. The communications between the hippocampus and the cortex involve
an interesting choreography of these different brain waves. Of importance here are the slow waves
of non-rem sleep. Frequencies averaging less than one cycle per second are less than one hertz.
Then there are the short episodes of faster oscillations called sleep spindles. Sleep spindles
have a frequency about 15 hertz and they originate in the circuits involving the thalamus and the
cortex. And lastly there are the really brief events called sharp wave ripples. These originate
in the hippocampus and they are very fast. They have an oscillation rate of over 100 hertz.
Slow waves are mostly cortical events. They typically originate in an area of the cortex and
then they travel across the cortex. The slow waves are very important in controlling the
sensitivity and the activity of the neurons in the cortex and in other brain regions.
The trough or the lowest point of the slow wave corresponds to the time when the cortical neurons
generating this EEG potential are severely hyperpolarized and are insensitive to incoming
signals. This is called the down state of the neurons. The peak of the slow wave corresponds
to the up state of these cortical neurons and it is when they are depolarized sensitive to input
and firing. Now the slow wave is not a sine wave meaning it is not entirely symmetrical so there
is more time in the up state than in the down state in each cycle. The firing of the cortical
neurons is clustered in these up states and the cortical neurons tend to be silent during the
down states. Therefore the activities of the cortical cells during up states can be considered as
frames of activity that correspond to the slow wave oscillations.
Sleep spindles are generated in the thalamus. They are most common in stage 2 non-rem sleep.
We get more stage 2 than any other kind of sleep. Sleep spindles are generated when the
cortical neurons are in the up state and are presumably bringing the thalamic neurons into
an up state excitable state as well. The slow wave oscillation also synchronizes activity in the
hippocampus so that hippocampal activity also occurs in frames. The cortical frames precede
the hippocampal frames by maybe 50 milliseconds but the indication is that the cortex is driving
the hippocampus. As a result sleep spindles and sharp wave ripples occur together.
Okay back to Matt Wilson's compressed packets of place cell firing patterns. These ensembles
of hippocampal cells fire in bursts during the spindle ripple events. We have to ask do these
spindle ripple events indicate the communication of information between the hippocampus and the cortex?
Some remarkable experiments by Dayun Ji and Matt Wilson indicate that this is indeed the
case namely that these spindle ripple events reflect communication of information between
the hippocampus and the cortex. The researchers recorded firing patterns from large numbers of
neurons in both the hippocampus and the visual cortex of the rats running in their complex tracks.
In addition to seeing patterns of place cell firing in hippocampus they also saw similar
patterns in the visual cortex and the expression of these patterns in the visual cortex accompanied
spindle ripple events. The activity in the hippocampus and the cortex matched frame by frame.
The evidence seems very good that during non-rem sleep there is a dialogue between the hippocampus
and the cortex that is coordinated by the three types of brain waves I just described the slow
waves the sleep spindles and the sharp wave ripples. These results seem to fit very nicely with the
two-stage model of memory consolidation I described in the last lecture that involves a fast learning
system the hippocampus and a slow learning system the cortex. Another bit of supporting evidence
that the hippocampal sharp wave ripples are involved in memory consolidation comes from
a study measuring the frequency of sharp wave ripple events before and after training on an
associative memory task. The details of the task are not terribly important here the only thing I
want to relate is the major finding that training resulted in a greater number of sharp wave ripples
during subsequent sleep and there was a significant correlation between the frequency of the sharp
wave ripple events and performance on the task the next day. Okay I have presented lots of
information about the importance of sleep for memory consolidation and I have given you a
reasonable story of how this memory consolidation process might be carried out during sleep.
The story involves an extended dialogue between the cortex and the hippocampus
at least for declarative memories and maybe between the cortex and some other as yet unidentified
brain area for the procedural memories. If this process involves an extended dialogue then perhaps
it is not just the amount of sleep that's critical but also the quality of that sleep.
What if this dialogue process is interrupted during sleep? A set of experiments recently
done in my lab addresses that question is the quality of sleep important for memory consolidation?
Why is this important? As we will see in subsequent lectures there are sleep problems
that primarily affect the quality or the continuity of sleep and they have serious cognitive consequences.
The idea behind the experiment is to fragment sleep without changing the quantity of sleep
or the amounts of the different sleep states. How could you do this? How can you essentially
wake the animal up without waking the animal up? The answer is a very interesting new methodology
developed at Stanford by Carl Deiseroth. The method is called optogenetics. Let me explain it.
You may know that one of our visual pigments is rodopsin. Rodopsin molecules in the rod cells of
our retinas are activated by light initiating the process that sends action potentials to the
visual cortex. But you probably didn't know that algae also have rodopsin. In algae the rodopsin
is an ion channel so it's called channel rodopsin. When channel rodopsin is stimulated by light it
allows positive ions to enter the cell. Carl developed a means of coupling the gene for
channel rodopsin to the promoters of mammalian genes. The promoter of a gene is what stimulates
its expression. Carl then packaged this new gene construct into a virus and used that virus to
infect neurons with his gene construct. Once neurons express the gene construct they became
sensitive to light and when illuminated the channel rodopsin would allow positive ions
to depolarize the cell causing it to fire action potentials. So optogenetics enables you to turn
infected cells on or off simply by shining light on them or taking the light away. Which cells are
expressing the channel rodopsin depends on what promoter you attach to the channel rodopsin gene.
Different cell types express different genes so a promoter will only be activated in the cell
type that normally expresses its gene. My colleague Luis de la Silla connected the promoter for
hypocreatin to the channel rodopsin gene. When a virus with this construct was injected into the
hypothalamus of mice it infected the hypocreatin urgic cells along with other cells. But in the
hypocreatin urgic cells the channel rodopsin was expressed. When light was directed with an optical
fiber into the hypothalamus of these mice it activated their hypocreatin neurons. Remember
what hypocreatin does? It coordinates the activities of those several brain stem nuclei that promote
wake. Postdoctoral fellow Asya Rolls developed a stimulus protocol for these mice that would just
barely bring them back to wake when they were asleep. But the wake would only last for seconds.
By delivering these stimuli at regular intervals she was able to fragment the sleep of the mice
without decreasing their total sleep time or how much time they spent in non-REM or REM sleep.
She could now address the question of whether or not the quality or the integrity of sleep
was important for memory consolidation. A test that we use for memory in mice is called the
novel object recognition task. A mouse is put into an arena with two or more objects. An object
might be a small bottle or a chess man or a toy. Care is taken that the mice do not show a preference
or an aversion to any of the objects and care is also taken to wash and deodorize the arena
and the objects between trials. The typical experimental protocol is to leave the mouse in
the arena for five or ten minutes. Mice are naturally curious and they will explore the
objects extensively. The mouse is then returned to its home cage and at a later time maybe one
hour later or 12 hours later or one day later the animals return to the arena but one of the
objects has been changed. If the mouse remembers the objects it encountered in the earlier run
it will now spend more of its time exploring the new object than it will spend with the old object.
So you can see how this task gets the name novel object recognition.
In our experiments the mice were trained in the NOR task novel object recognition task at the beginning
of their rest phase. They were then returned to their home cages and for the next four hours
they were either allowed to sleep uninterrupted, they were or some were totally sleep deprived,
or some had their sleep fragmented at 30 second intervals, 60 second intervals,
120 second intervals, or 240 second intervals. The total sleep time over this four hours was
the same for all conditions except for the total sleep deprivation group. After that four hours
the mice were undisturbed for the next 20 hours. Testing occurred 24 hours after the initial NOR
training. The mice that were undisturbed and therefore slept performed perfectly well on the
task. The mice that had been sleep deprived showed no retention of the training experience.
The sleep fragmented mice showed two types of responses. Those that had their sleep fragmented
at 120 or 240 second intervals showed normal memory of the training just like the mice that
had the opportunity for uninterrupted sleep. But the mice that had their sleep fragmented at 30
or 60 second intervals showed no ability to recognize the novel object. We concluded that the
minimal quantum of uninterrupted sleep for memory consolidation in a mouse is between 60 and 120
seconds. What we can't say at present is how many such bouts are necessary for consolidation of the
memory or how soon the non fragmented sleep has to occur after training for it to have a beneficial
effect. Do these results on fragmentation of mouse sleep apply to humans? We think that they do.
Robert Stickgold and colleagues at Harvard conducted sleep memory experiments on subjects
with sleep apnea and normal controls matched for age, body mass, index, gender, etc. As we will
see in the sleep apnea lecture that's coming up, sleep apnea causes sleep fragmentation.
Each time the person stops breathing, he or she has a brief arousal to restore airflow.
These bouts of apnea and therefore sleep disruption may occur hundreds of times each night.
The individual, however, is usually not aware of these arousals and total sleep time is not
seriously compromised. Actually, because of the excessive daytime sleepiness of these individuals,
they may get more sleep than individuals without sleep apnea.
In this study, the subjects came into the lab in the evening and they were trained in the
finger tapping motor sequence task I discussed in the previous lecture on procedural learning.
They were also given a psychomotor vigilance test or PVT, which is a way of measuring sleepiness or
sleep debt. There was no difference between the subjects with sleep apnea and the normals.
The subjects then had overnight polysomnographic sleep recordings. The results from the polysomnographic
recording showed no difference between the groups in terms of total sleep time, sleep efficiency,
which is how much time in bed you spend asleep, or sleep stage distribution. The only difference
was that the control group averaged less than four apnic events per hour and the apnea group averaged
over 17 per hour. In terms of training in the task, both groups showed equivalent behavior.
They improved rapidly over the first couple of trials and then had a steady but lower increase
in speed over the remaining nine or 10 trials. The big difference was in the overnight improvement
in the two groups. In the morning, the control group showed an initial overnight boost of about
15 percent and the apnea group showed none. By the end of the morning testing, again 12 trials,
the gap closed a bit. The control group had about a 25 percent improvement and the apnea group had
about a 10 percent improvement. The conclusion was that the greater sleep fragmentation in the
apnea group impaired the overnight consolidation in this procedural memory.
I hope you will agree that in both humans and animals, sleep plays an important role in memory
consolidation and therefore in learning. The experiments that have been done in this field
are very fascinating, but many questions remain. Nevertheless, we need to keep the importance
of quality sleep in mind when we consider possible reasons for poor performance in school
or at work. In the next lecture, we will look into a serious example of learning impairment
and try to understand the underlying causes that might have roots in sleep.
Until then, I wish you good and intelligent sleep. Sweet dreams.
