Learning disabilities are devastating to the individual and to the family.
Can you imagine what it would be like not to be able to learn?
You may find some of the lectures in this course difficult.
You might have to go over them more than once.
You might have to seek some additional reading.
But did you ever doubt that you could master any of the material we have been covering?
I don't think so.
But what if you absolutely could not learn from these lectures and your extra work no
matter how hard you tried?
This is the situation of many individuals that have learning disabilities.
Since sleep is so critically involved in learning in memory, as we have been discussing, it
seems reasonable to explore for any specific learning disability whether an underlying
cause may be in sleep-related systems or mechanisms and whether they offer a route to a therapy.
In this lecture, I would like to tell you about one such effort, one that I have been
deeply involved with over recent years.
The learning disability I will discuss is part of a complex genetic condition that we
call Down's Syndrome.
Let me tell you a little bit about Down's before I go into our research and the promise
of being able to improve learning in memory in these individuals.
You might say that Down's Syndrome is due to too much of a good thing.
It is due to an extra copy of one chromosome, chromosome 21.
This is our smallest chromosome containing only 1.5% of our total DNA, but it still contains
between 300 and 400 genes.
So you can see why Down's is a complex condition because many genetic pathways are altered
by the extra copies of these hundreds of genes.
A little bit about Down's Syndrome in general.
It occurs in about 1 in 700 births.
Therefore, there are about 350,000 individuals with Down's Syndrome in the United States,
500,000 in Europe, and more than 3 million worldwide.
The probability of having a child with Down's Syndrome increases in mothers over 35 years
of age.
Individuals with Down's Syndrome are likely to have a number of health issues, including
cardiovascular problems, immune system problems, problems with vision, and problems with balance.
But given good health care, the major issue is the cognitive deficit.
Although babies with Down's Syndrome learn fairly normally up to about 6 months of age,
learning progressively declines after that.
Mature individuals generally have IQs between 20 and 80.
Language skills are slow to develop and are deficient throughout life.
There are severe deficits in both short and long-term memory.
Declared of memory is particularly impaired, but procedural memory is also affected.
A second stage of cognitive decline occurs in adults with Down's Syndrome.
Since one of the triplicated genes is implicated in the pathology of Alzheimer's disease,
it is common for the symptoms of Alzheimer's to begin to appear in the third to fourth
decade of life in these individuals.
Currently, there are no successful treatments for the cognitive impairment associated with
Down's Syndrome.
We are determined to change that, and I will tell you about our efforts and our success.
Can you imagine how much it would improve the quality of life for individuals with Down's
Syndrome to be able to learn and remember?
How much it would change the quality of life for their families?
I applaud companies like Safeway that make a special effort to hire individuals with
disabilities, but every time I visit a Safeway and I see a person with Down's Syndrome
bagging groceries, I think, why can't that person be a cashier or someone dealing with
inventory?
There is so much upscale potential for so many individuals if we could improve their cognitive
function.
To our nation's credit, we do a lot to support individuals with physical disabilities.
It's time that we do more for individuals with cognitive disabilities.
Your work began with a very simple hypothesis from a graduate student, Fabian Fernandez,
working with my colleague Craig Garner.
Fabian asked, could the cognitive deficits be due to too much inhibition?
That might not seem like a very revolutionary idea, but it was.
All of us, neurobiologists and non-neurobiologists alike, tend to emphasize the excitatory components
of the nervous system.
If I could offer an analogy.
We tend to conceptualize the brain as being like a puppet master, pulling the strings
and the puppet moves.
In reality, the brain is more like an orchestra conductor, bringing some instruments up and
instructing others to play more quietly, to speed things up and to slow things down.
Inhibition in the nervous system is just as important as excitation.
Overfunctioning requires a balance.
In terms of cognition, too much excitation can result in psychotic behavior, hallucinations,
illusions, hearing voices, and eventually seizures.
Too much inhibition can result in mental impairment and eventually coma.
Consider the balance between excitation and inhibition in your own nervous system.
You remember things that get you excited, and you are prone to forget things that you
find boring.
Think of altering your excitatory inhibitory balance.
Is it easier to learn on caffeine or on alcohol?
Fabian's idea was worth exploring.
To do so, two things were needed, an animal model and a means of altering inhibition.
It turns out that there was an excellent mouse animal model of Down syndrome.
This mouse had been genetically engineered to have most of its genes triplicated that
are homologous to the genes on human chromosome 21.
This animal is the TS65DN mouse.
I will just call them TS mice for trisomic.
We now breed these mice in our laboratory.
A trisomic mouse must be bred with a normal mouse, which we call a 2N mouse because it
has the normal complement of two copies of each gene.
Therefore, the litters are a mixture of TS and 2N pups, and we have to determine the
genotype of each one.
The important point is that for experiments, we can have experimental mice and control mice
from the same litters.
The TS mice have many of the symptoms of Down syndrome that are seen in humans, including
severe cognitive impairment.
The second thing that Fabian needed was a way to manipulate inhibition in the nervous
system.
Since he did not know exactly what brain systems were involved, he opted for a general inhibitory
mechanism.
This is the neurotransmitter, gamma-aminobutyric acid, or GABA, which we have discussed in
the neuroanatomy and the neurophysiology lectures.
GABA is the major inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain.
It works through receptors that are also ion channels.
Specifically, they are chloride channels.
Chloride ions have a negative charge, and there are more of them outside of cells than
inside of cells.
So when the chloride channel opens, chloride ions flow into the neuron, making the membrane
potential more negative, and taking it farther from its threshold for firing action potentials.
There are numerous drugs that can influence the GABA receptor and the chloride channel.
There are drugs that interfere with GABA binding to its receptor.
These are called competitive antagonists because they compete with the natural neurotransmitter.
There are also drugs that simply block the channel, plug it up.
These are called non-competitive antagonists.
And there are drugs that change the properties of the channel without binding to the receptor
or blocking the channel.
Most sleeping medications are examples of this latter category of drugs, and we will
come back to them in a later lecture.
Fabian identified three drugs that could be used to block the GABAergic inhibition in
the nervous system.
Picrotoxin, Pentaline Tetrazol, and Bilobolide.
And he began to do studies of the effects of these drugs on T.S. mice.
To measure memory in the mice, he used the novel object recognition test that I described
in detail in the last lecture.
Briefly a mouse is put in an arena with two or more objects.
After the mouse has had a short time to explore the objects, say five or ten minutes, it's
returned to its home cage.
At a later time, maybe an hour later, maybe twelve hours later, maybe twenty-four hours
later, it is returned to the arena.
But one of the objects has been changed.
If the mouse spends more time exploring the new or the novel object, that is evidence
that it remembered the other object, or objects.
T.S. mice cannot perform in this task, even with only two objects.
Their short-term memory is not bad, so they can usually recognize the novel object if
the training-testing interval is twenty minutes or less, but not if it is more than an hour.
Fabian did not want to stress the mice, so he trained them to expect a small bottle cap
full of chocolate milk every day.
They loved it.
Then he could slip the drug into the chocolate milk.
In his first experiments, he gave the drug on one day and tested the mice on the next
day.
There was no effect.
We have more recently found that if we give the drug just before the training session,
we do see an improvement in the ability of the mice to recognize the novel object when
tested one day later.
However, if the training and testing is repeated one week later, these mice that have been
acutely dosed with the drug are again impaired.
Fabian then made a truly remarkable discovery.
He gave the mice a dose of the drug every day for two weeks.
He did not train them.
He did not test them over this period of time.
He did not disturb them for another week, and after that he conducted the novel object
recognition training and testing.
The TS animals performed just like the two N animals in the tests.
They had no obvious cognitive impairment.
He tested them a week later, a month later, two months later, and they still performed
just as well in this memory task as the two N mice.
The drug treatment had produced a long-term change in the brains of these TS mice.
What could explain this result?
At that point, we began to think of possible involvements of sleep and circadian rhythms
in the learning impairments of the TS mice.
After all, both sleep and circadian rhythms involved GABAergic mechanisms.
We decided to tackle the circadian rhythms first.
The reason was that we had made a very surprising discovery about circadian rhythms and learning
in another animal, the Siberian hamster.
I will take a few minutes to tell you about that discovery because it will become relevant
later on.
Why Siberian hamsters?
These animals live very far north where the days are exceedingly short in the winter and
long in the summer.
These animals are like the potato chips of the tundra.
Lots of predators eat them.
They are night active to avoid most avian predators.
They also have other adaptations to avoid being eaten.
They turn white in the winter and mottled brown in the summer to maximize their camouflage.
Change in color is only one aspect of their seasonality.
They breed in the spring and they go into daily torpor throughout the winter.
And all of this seasonality is controlled by photoperiodism and circadian rhythms.
Circadian is sensitivity to day length.
When days start to get longer, they prepare to breed.
And when the nights get longer, they prepare for winter.
Their circadian rhythms give them the ability to be sensitive to the length of the day and
the length of the night.
These animals are great for doing research on circadian rhythms.
One day, an undergraduate working in our lab turned the lights on in the animal room when
it should have been dark.
And this mistake was not discovered for five or six hours.
As a result, the hamsters suddenly got one long day.
Like all of a sudden, it was the middle of summer.
The timer was immediately reset to the proper light-dark cycle, but this one long day had
an amazing effect on the animals in that room.
For the rest of their lives, they had no circadian rhythms.
It did not matter what the light-dark cycle was in the room.
They were just as likely to drink, sleep, eat, wake at any time of the day.
This is now a much-repeated protocol in our lab.
We can render hamsters a rhythmic by just giving them one long day.
It seemed as if this was totally bizarre and pathological.
But I began thinking about how they live in nature.
They are nocturnal.
And where they live in nature, the nights get very short, just at the time of year
when they breed and have to feed their young.
There must come a time when they do not have enough nighttime hours to obtain enough food
to support themselves and their pups.
At that time, they would have to give up the safety of the night and forage during the
day.
Could it be that at a critical day length, they break free of the tyranny of their circadian
rhythms?
But why permanently?
Two possible reasons.
First, most of these animals do not live more than a year in nature.
So after they breed, it would not matter what they do.
And second, perhaps in nature, as the nights gradually get longer, they re-entrain to the
light-dark cycle.
We have not yet done an experiment to test that possibility.
That would be at least a six-month experiment, and we simply have not had the patience.
Why is this circadian sidebar important?
Once these hamsters are arrhythmic, they cannot learn in the novel object recognition test.
And the same GABA antagonists that restore learning in the TS mice restore learning in
these arrhythmic hamsters.
So a first hypothesis was that the TS animals had weak circadian rhythms that turned out
to be totally wrong.
When we recorded their rest activity cycles, they had beautiful, strong circadian rhythms,
even better rhythms than their two-end litter mates.
We were very disappointed.
Second hypothesis was that they had disrupted sleep.
Remember the experiment on fragmented sleep from the last lecture?
So Damien Koloss in my lab did EEG studies of the TS mice before and after treatment
with GABA antagonist drugs.
Here the data were complex and not easy to understand, but a few details seemed interesting
and relevant.
During the sleep phase, the TS mice had differences in the brain rhythms that we discussed in
the last lecture.
They had lower delta power, thus less synchrony in the non-REM sleep slow wave activity, and
they had greater theta power, a frequency that characterizes alert wakefulness and also
REM sleep.
They had more REM sleep and less non-REM sleep during the sleep phase.
All in all, the theta-delta ratio in the EEG of the TS mice was greater across the day.
Thus it is reasonable to expect that there was a problem with communications in the brain
that were essential for transfer of short-term to long-term memory.
But the penaline tetrasol treatments had little effect on the EEG patterns of the TS mice.
I should mention why I'm discussing PTZ, penaline tetrasol, specifically when we had
other drug candidates, picrotoxin and bolobolide.
The reason was that we were looking forward to clinical trials, and PTZ was the best candidate.
It had been used in humans for decades and only recently taken off the approved drug
list by the FDA.
It had originally been prescribed for Alzheimer's disease and had been taken in large doses
by many people for long periods of time.
It was not taken off of the approved list because of any safety or side effects, but
rather because there was a lack of solid data showing efficacy in Alzheimer's disease.
There had been many studies in the 60s, but the results were totally mixed.
We thought that we would have the easiest route to FDA approval with PTZ.
But what about bolobolide?
After all, bolobolide is an ingredient of a nutraceutical that is not even controlled
by the FDA, ginkgo boloba.
Ginkgo boloba has been taken for hundreds if not thousands of years by the Chinese to
improve mental functions.
Maybe it does actually work because it contains bolobolide.
However, you would still have to do clinical trials to have bolobolide accepted as a therapeutic.
And that means it would have to be either synthesized in pure form or extracted from
natural products in pure form, both difficult propositions in comparison to PTZ, which is
a rather simple molecule to synthesize.
Because of our increasing interest in PTZ as a potential therapeutic, we initiated lots
of typical preclinical studies.
It turned out that we could use a much lower dose, 10 to 100-fold lower, than we had originally
used.
The PTZ was effective in mice of all ages, and therefore it was not having a developmental
effect, nor were the deficits in the TS mice due to losses of particular neuronal types
as the animals aged, which had been expected.
In fact, our work on the older mice, which like humans with Down syndrome develop Alzheimer's
symptoms, was so effective that it led us to study mouse models of Alzheimer's disease,
and lo and behold, the PTZ improved their cognitive capacity very significantly.
As part of these studies, we began to think again of the circadian work and wondered if
there would be a different efficacy of the drug if it was given at different times of
day.
Wow, worth it.
When the PTZ was given at the beginning of our workday, which is the beginning of the
mouse's sleep phase, it had the large effects we had observed.
But if we gave the drug at the beginning of the dark phase, the beginning of the animal's
active phase, it had absolutely no effect.
Now our circadian results on the TS mice became interesting.
Remember from our circadian lecture that the circadian clock, the SCN, is most active
in all animals, nocturnal or diurnal animals, during the light phase, and least active during
the dark phase.
The stronger circadian rhythms of the TS animals might indicate greater activity of their SCNs
during the light phase, and therefore that is when the PTZ would be expected to have
its major effects.
Remember from the circadian lecture that the outputs of the SCN are largely GABAergic?
Confirmation of this line of thinking that GABA from the SCN could be contributing to
the ovarian abition came from another eye-opening experiment on the Siberian hamsters.
Studies in the past on rats in particular showed that circadian arrhythmia induced by
lesioning their SCNs did not impair their learning ability.
So why does arrhythmia have such a devastating effect on the cognitive ability of the hamsters?
Could the method of inducing the arrhythmia be a factor, lesion versus the light treatment?
The difference is that with the light treatment the SCN continues to exist and it continues
to have an output, and that output is the same at all times of day.
With this continuous output impair learning.
Accordingly, we made hamsters arrhythmic by the light treatment.
We showed that they were arrhythmic and we showed that they could not learn.
Then we lesioned their SCNs and learning was restored.
Can you appreciate how surprising that result is, destroying a part of the brain-improved
learning?
The only conclusion could be that the activity of that area of the brain was inhibiting learning.
Now if that is true, we have to ask what is the adaptive significance of active inhibition
of learning?
We'll come back to that later.
Well this is a sleep course, so you must be thinking, the circadian stuff is okay, but
there must be a sleep angle.
Where is it?
The lecture is almost over.
You will remember that the circadian system has a powerful effect on the organization
of sleep.
Could there be an interaction between the circadian system and the sleep system in the
TS mice that results in impaired cognitive ability?
The next experiment was to give the PTZ at optimal circadian phase beginning of the light,
but sleep deprived the animals for about two and a half hours after each dose.
That is about the time that it takes for this drug to substantially clear the system.
The results of these experiments were that the drug had no effect.
Therefore sleep is required for whatever action the PTZ is having to cause the long lasting
change in learning ability.
The next experiment was to simply increase the sleep in the TS animals.
We did this in two ways that did not directly affect the GABA system.
First we simply sleep deprived the animals for a couple of hours before their training
in the novel object recognition task.
Because of their increased sleep debt, they slept sooner and deeper immediately following
the training.
The second method was to use a hypocretin antagonist.
Remember that hypocretin coordinates arousal.
We stimulated hypocretin cells to fragment sleep in the experiment described in the last
lecture.
Now we were doing the opposite.
By blocking the hypocretin receptors we were removing a level of arousing stimulation and
as a result sleep increased.
Both of these methods resulted in improving sleep and also improving learning and memory
in the TS mice.
What does all of this mean in terms of developing therapy for humans with Down's syndrome?
First we should blunt the over-innovation in the brains of individuals with Down's syndrome
and PTC is a potentially good therapeutic for that purpose.
But in humans at what time of day should it be delivered?
If the primary effect is to blunt activity of the SCN it should be delivered during the
day.
But if the primary effect of the drug depends on sleep it should be delivered during the
evening.
So it's probably important to maintain really good sleep hygiene in individuals with Down's
syndrome.
An associated condition here is assessing and treating sleep apnea.
Due to some of the facial and mouth structural features that go along with Down's syndrome
sleep apnea is a common problem.
The associated sleep fragmentation could contribute to their cognitive dysfunction.
PTC is now in clinical trials for improvement of cognitive function in young adults with
Down's syndrome.
These clinical trials are not currently in the United States but hopefully that will
be a next step.
Given the good safety record of PTC and the fact that animal studies show that the effective
drug doses are low and do not have to be applied at very young ages it should be possible
to move fairly rapidly to meet requirements of the FDA if resources are available.
Clinical studies are expensive and PTC will never be a billion dollar drug therefore no
large drug company is likely to fund clinical trials.
Another effort that we are undertaking is the development of learning tasks for individuals
with Down's syndrome.
Tasks that will enable efficient data collection on smaller numbers of individuals over less
time.
What must be shown of course is improvements in declarative memory.
Many of the existing declarative memory tasks such as ones described in the last lecture
require language abilities that might be impaired in individuals with Down's syndrome.
Surely we can adopt and adapt tests that are normally used in younger individuals.
In addition I think we can develop methods to see how the brain processes information.
Seeing how those processes change with drug therapy should be very revealing.
An example, eye tracking.
Eye tracking technologies now enable you to follow precisely what a subject is looking
at.
So if a subject is presented with images, text or puzzles on a computer screen you can
get a measure of how the subject is interacting with and assimilating that information.
I believe that will change with effective therapy and change over relatively short periods
of time.
We are in the midst of developing applications of that technology in our laboratory now.
Are there other learning disabilities that might involve sleep and circadian rhythms?
Perhaps.
We have already seen potential benefits from the therapies we are developing for patients
without simers.
Considering other learning disabilities of younger people however, a place to start will
be characterizing their sleep and their EEG.
But for making progress and understanding underlying mechanisms and potential routes
to therapy, developing good animal models is essential.
Over the past four lectures we have focused on how we sleep to learn, but now in the next
and succeeding lectures we will be more concerned with learning to sleep.
First we will explore some of the major causes of sleep disruption and then we will discuss
ways of dealing with them.
Until next time, sweet dreams.
