Imagine a man walking up to the registration desk in a hotel and telling the desk clerk
that he locked himself out of his room and he needs another key.
Not unusual, and you might have done the same thing yourself, I did just last week.
But in this case, the man is stark naked, and he is asleep.
He's a sleepwalker.
This is a real story, written up in the London Times in 2007.
According to the article, this particular hotel chain saw in one year a seven-fold
increase in sleepwalking incidents.
The total was over 400 cases, presumably not all involving naked guests.
Nevertheless, the chain instituted special training for staff to help them deal with
these increasing incidents.
One recommendation in the guide that was issued to the staff was to keep a supply of towels
at the reception desk just in case the sleepwalkers forgot their pajamas.
Why the increased incidents?
It's probably due to a number of interacting factors, including sleep deprivation, jet lag,
stress, and alcohol.
That is an amusing example of a parasomnia.
But how about this one?
A 60-year-old surgeon is seen in a sleep clinic because of repeated episodes of violent nightmares
of being attacked by criminals, terrorists, and monsters.
During these nightmares, he punches and kicks his wife and jumps out of bed.
This is also a parasomnia.
What is a parasomnia?
The word literally means along with sleep.
The medical conditions are defined as types of unpleasant or undesirable behaviors or
experiential phenomena that occur predominantly or exclusively during sleep.
They are distinguished from dyssomnias, which are disorders that are problems with sleep
itself.
We have discussed dyssomnias in the previous lectures.
They include, for example, insomnia, sleep apnea, and narcolepsy.
Parasomnias are a wide range of different conditions with different causes, but in most
cases they are treatable with some degree of success.
We can divide parasomnias into non-REM sleep parasomnias and REM sleep parasomnias.
There are even some that occur during wake.
We already discussed one of those in the narcolepsy lecture, Cataplexy.
I will describe a number of parasomnias.
Most of them are not chronic conditions and are not serious threats to health and will
resolve all on their own.
However, if you or someone you know is concerned about recurring or particularly severe episodes
of the types of symptoms I describe, then you or that person should see a sleep physician.
As I describe different parasomnias, one thing to keep in mind is the complexity of the mechanisms
involved in sleep.
There are two major sleep states, non-REM and REM, that involve different neurophysiological
mechanisms.
I told you how a number of brainstem nuclei and neurotransmitter systems activate the
cortex.
I also mentioned descending influences from the cortex on these brainstem nuclei.
And then there are the pontine brainstem systems that control the components of REM sleep,
including activation of the cortex and inhibition of skeletal muscles.
You can imagine that normal sleep involves the very precise and controlled integration
of all of these mechanisms.
But what if they become dissociated?
What if their integration breaks down or simply lapses briefly?
That is when we get the bizarre combination of conditions and events that we call parasomnias.
Let's begin with the parasomnias of non-REM sleep.
There are many.
The most prevalent one is sleepwalking, also called somnambulism.
Sleepwalking is most prevalent in children.
It is seen in less than 20% of children and it peaks around 11 to 12 years of age.
There is a familial element.
A child who has one parent who sleepwalked has a 50% chance of sleepwalking.
If both parents had history of sleepwalking, the risk rises to 65%.
But sleepwalking can occur at any age, as seen in the hotel chain example I mentioned.
Sleepwalking can be agitated or it can be calm.
It can vary considerably in duration.
Most episodes last less than five minutes, but occasionally episodes can last up to
an hour or more.
Sleepwalkers can engage in rather complex behaviors, such as trying to prepare a meal
or even driving a car.
One woman sent semi-comprehensible emails to her friends, inviting them to cocktails
and dinner at a later date.
Sleepwalking typically occurs in the first third of the night.
There have actually been EEG recordings of sleepwalkers.
It seems common for the event to begin close to the end of the first or second non-REM
episodes when sleep lightens to stage two or stage one.
The sleepwalker is semi-conscious and may mumble incomprehensibly.
It is difficult or impossible to communicate with a sleepwalker and it's difficult to
wake them up.
Sleepwalkers to wake them up frequently result in a state of agitated, confused arousal that
might even involve aggressive or violent acts.
In terms of dissociation of states, sleepwalking is a state of a semi-aroused cortex.
The transition to full arousal has been stalled.
Sleepwalking in children rarely warrants treatment.
Children typically grow out of it.
Sleepwalking, however, can have very serious consequences.
It is important that a child who has a tendency to sleepwalk is in a safe environment.
A case in point, early January in 2008 in a small town in Minnesota, the nighttime temperatures
were extremely cold below zero degrees Fahrenheit.
A two-year-old boy sleeping with his mother gets out of bed sleepwalking and leaves the
house.
He is found early the next morning curled up in a snow bank 15 feet from his front door
dead.
In this case, a safe environment would be a security chain on the front door.
Such tragedies can occur in adult sleepwalkers as well, also in cold wintery Minnesota with
sub-freezing temperature.
A man leaves his house sleepwalking in pajamas and bare feet.
He comes back into the house and gets back into bed and sleeps the rest of the night.
The next morning, when he pulls back the covers, he finds his feet severely frostbitten,
requiring toe amputations and skin grafts.
For an adult with a history of sleepwalking, a safe environment might require a door alarm.
In case you are wondering why both of these examples are from Minnesota, it is not because
sleepwalking is more common in Minnesota.
It isn't.
However, leading experts in Parasomanias, Dr. Mark Mayowald and Dr. Carlos Schenck are
in Minnesota.
It is possible that some cases of reported suicide could actually be sleepwalking events
that ended badly.
An example is a young man who was about to be married had lost his job and was in debt.
While sleepwalking, he crashed through a window, fell to the outside, and had severe lacerations
to his wrists from the broken window glass.
Fortunately, it was a first floor window.
But had it been an upper floor and the fall was fatal, this was a combination of factors
that might indicate suicide, depression over lost job and debt, anxiety of marriage, cut
wrists and fall from a high place.
Another Parasomanias that is a particular category of sleepwalking or develops out of
sleepwalking is sleep-related eating disorder.
The individual who gets out of bed, goes to the kitchen and eats considerable amounts
of food.
There is no recollection of the event in the morning, it is almost as if a stranger had
been in the kitchen.
Other Parasomanias of non-rem that are frequently seen in children and less so in adults are
confusional arousals and night terrors.
Like sleepwalking, they arise out of deep non-rem sleep and are a partial rise to consciousness.
Typically the child will thrash about in bed, sit up and show very confused and illogical
thinking.
It may last from one to fifteen minutes and then he or she goes back to sleep.
There is no memory of it in the morning.
A night terror is more dramatic.
The individual will spring bolt upright and issue blood-curdling screams and shouts.
They will be unresponsive to intervention and inconsolable.
But in a few minutes, they will lie down and continue sleeping.
There will be no memory of the event in the morning.
Both confusional arousals and night terrors can occur in adults as well.
Night terrors can be quite shocking when they occur in a new college roommate.
In one medical legal case, an on-call physician was called about one hour after his sleep
onset.
He gave incorrect instructions to the nurses, which he never would have given when fully
alert.
This had serious consequences for the patient.
The physician had no recollection of the call in the morning.
Tooth grinding or Bruxism is mostly a non-rem parasomnia.
The individual clenches jaw muscles and grinds teeth together.
Considerable tooth wear and even fracture can result.
Jaw pain and migraines can also result.
An important immediate treatment is an oral appliance, but lowering stress levels can
also be effective.
Periodic limb movement disorder is a parasomnia that is very common in individuals who suffer
from restless leg syndrome.
Restless leg syndrome is the uncontrollable urge to move the legs.
It is frequently associated with very disturbing and even painful sensations in the legs.
The major sleep problem associated with restless leg syndrome is insomnia.
People can't get to sleep.
During sleep, there is the condition of periodic leg movement that may or may not involve the
same underlying mechanisms.
In periodic leg movement disorder, there are involuntary slow rhythmic flexions of the
hips, the knees, and the ankles.
The condition is usually more disturbing to the sleep partner than to the individual
himself.
And finally, for a non-rem parasomnia, there is sexsomnia, inappropriate sexual activities
during sleep without conscious awareness or memory of the event.
Sexsomnia can include masturbation, fondling of self or others, and outright intercourse.
It can be aggressive and therefore be considered assault.
In one case, a woman came to a sleep clinic with a complaint that in her sleep she had
sex with strangers.
Her claims were not checked out.
Let's turn now to the parasomnias of REM sleep.
There are two main ones, nightmares and REM sleep behavioral disorder.
REM sleep behavioral disorder is predominantly a condition seen in older men.
The average of onset is between 50 and 65 years of age.
It may be associated with a neurodegenerative disease such as Parkinson's or MSA.
MSA stands for Multiple Systems Atrophy, a condition in which cells in various regions
of the brain degenerate.
REM sleep behavioral disorder may be a predictor of the development of Parkinson's, MSA, or
Alzheimer's years later.
Remember those cats that had lesions in their brain stems that resulted in their presumed
acting out of dreams during REM sleep?
That's an experimental case of REM sleep behavioral disorder.
This condition is characterized by loss of muscle atonia during REM sleep so it mostly
occurs in the latter third of the night.
It results in individuals acting out their dreams.
The action can last for minutes and be quite violent with the individual physically doing
battle with imaginary foes.
Is likely to injure himself and his bed partner.
He will destroy things like lamps and furniture in the bedroom.
He will shout and swear.
Speaking may be quite coherent and the individual can actually carry out a conversation with
someone who is trying to intervene.
In fact, talking and yelling in sleep can occur years before the full development of
the REM sleep behavioral disorder.
Episodes may occur only a few times a week but they can escalate to multiple times per
night during each REM bout.
Here is a case example.
A 62 year old military veteran started having nightmares of his wartime experiences.
These nightmares began after he visited locations where he had fought.
His nightmares escalated into REM sleep behavioral disorder in which he would scream profanities,
punch, kick and jump out of bed while dreaming of being attacked by enemy soldiers.
He broke lamps and kicked a hole in the wall.
In one occasion he gave himself a head laceration that required 10 sutures.
When examined by a sleep physician, he reported his sleep was sound and he had normal daytime
alertness.
I can give you another example from personal experience although I was not the one with
the REM sleep behavioral disorder, it was one of my students, a young woman.
This condition is not strictly one for old men.
On this occasion she was dreaming that she was being chased by a giant cockroach.
She stood up on her bed and started to run.
Falling off the bed and into a bureau, she severely injured her back.
Obviously REM sleep behavioral disorder can be quite serious and requires treatment but
there are effective treatments using several types of medication.
A number of arousal parasomnias involve the transitions from wake to sleep and from sleep
to wake.
Several of the parasomnias we ascribe to non-REM sleep can also be considered arousal
parasomnias.
They involve the transition from deep to light non-REM sleep.
Several times I have mentioned hypnagogic hallucinations.
This is mental imagery that relates to wake experience.
Wake hallucinations become more and more weird as less of the cortex is activated.
Perhaps this condition is due to an uneven decline of brainstem activating influences
at the onset of sleep.
You will remember that this is the state that Thomas Edison called the genius gap.
He thought he got some of his very best ideas from these brief and minor flights from reality.
Wake jerks have probably been experienced by everyone.
It is sort of like suddenly catching yourself falling asleep and responding with a quick
muscle contraction.
It might be the legs or the arms or the head.
This is quite a normal event accompanying the transition from wake to sleep.
In some individuals however it can become pathological to the extent that it causes sleep onset insomnia.
The common treatments are to avoid chemical stimulants and establish a regular sleep time.
Only rarely is medication required.
At the other end of sleep there is sleep paralysis.
This is a partial return to wake following a bout of REM sleep without the loss of muscle
atonia.
The individual cannot move the trunk, arms or head.
The eyes remain mobile however.
Sleep paralysis of a dream become mixed with real sensations and the person can feel frightened.
The paralysis may last up to several minutes but it disappears spontaneously or in response
to someone's touch.
Probably half of the population have experienced sleep paralysis at least once in life.
Sleep paralysis is seen frequently in shift workers, in individuals with jet lag and in
sleep deprived students.
The incidence is about the same in men and women.
There are more types of parasomnias but they all involve some component of a state of arousal
being missing or being expressed inappropriately in another state.
In the case of sleep walking the cortex is inappropriately activated.
In the case of REM sleep behavioral disorder muscle atonia is absent.
In the case of cataplexy muscle atonia is present inappropriately.
These are situations in which components of arousal states are dissociated.
Things that disrupt normal sleep such as medication, stimulants, odd schedules, poor sleeping
environments can all trigger parasomnias.
The simplest treatment for most parasomnias is to improve sleep hygiene.
It is easy to think of a sleep jerk or a hypnagogic hallucination or tooth grinding or sleep paralysis
or cataplexy as a dissociated component of an arousal state.
But what about the more complex behaviors that occur in sleep walking or REM sleep behavioral
disorder?
If amnesia of the event indicates that the mind is unconscious, how can the unconscious
or semi-conscious mind orchestrate complex behaviors?
As a possible explanation sleep scientists put forth the concept of central pattern generators.
The basic pattern of walking for example is programmed into the spinal cord.
That is the origin of the phrase running around like a chicken with its head cut off.
Yes, a beheaded chicken can run around.
Now if a newborn child is held up under the arms and her feet are allowed to touch the
ground while moving her slightly forward the legs will generate walking movements.
We have many behavioral reflexes and as we learn procedural tasks patterns are laid down
in our spinal cords and brain stems which become central pattern generators for executing
those tasks.
A pianist could probably not play Rachmaninoff if each command to the finger muscles was a
conscious command from the motor cortex.
According to this concept even a semi-conscious mind can activate central pattern generators
without fully conscious mentation.
Perhaps this is similar to the activation synthesis type mechanisms that Hobson and
McCarley proposed to explain dreams.
At the transition from deep non-rem sleep to stage one non-rem some activity in the
cortex could activate central pattern generators.
The resulting action would be synthesized by the brain at some level to activate other
central pattern generators and coordinate them into a behavior but not a behavior generated
by the forebrain by the part of the brain that plans and orchestrates meaningful purposeful
behavior.
Given that rather philosophical speculation let's consider its practical implications.
There is a fundamental legal principle called mensria, guilty mind.
This concept goes way back in legal history and is the basis for the statement in Latin
Actus non facet reonisimensit rea.
The deed does not make a man guilty unless his mind is guilty.
This is the legal basis for the judgment not guilty by virtue of insanity.
But what about sleep?
Can sleep walkers murder?
Is the complexity of a violent murderous act beyond what the sleeping brain could be
expected to commit?
Sleep scientists are being drawn more and more into debates and legal proceedings over
this question.
The judicial system is increasingly giving serious consideration to authentic science.
However the way this generally works is that experts are retained by the prosecution and
by the defense.
If the evidence in question were black and white such as a DNA sequence the interpretations
of the data would be generally agreed upon by virtually all experts in that field.
Such cases create few problems.
But the scientific evidence is frequently not black and white and even highly qualified
and respected experts can disagree on the interpretation.
In these types of cases expert witnesses are selected on the basis of their leanings
on an issue rather than on their ability to reach an objective conclusion based on solid
data.
The experts become advocates for one side or the other.
This is not good for science and it's not good for the judicial system.
In worst cases it has led to junk science influencing important decisions.
When you get to a topic as poorly understood in mechanistic terms as parasomnias even the
top experts will have different views especially when they are expected to apply their scientific
knowledge to a controversial and complex question.
Here are some examples.
Scott Folliter was a 43 year old deeply religious engineer.
He stabbed his wife of 20 years 44 times, put the bloody knife and his bloody clothes
in the trunk of his car, returned to the still alive victim, rolled her into the swimming
pool and held her head underwater until she expired.
His defense was that he had no recollection of the 45 minutes of violence.
He had a history of sleepwalking and therefore the act must have occurred during an episode
of sleepwalking.
The experts could not agree on whether or not such a complex and violent act could be
committed by a sleepwalker.
He was found guilty and sentenced to life in prison.
A quote from a prison interview with Scott Folliter.
Sometimes when I think about this I wonder what kind of Jekyll and Hyde am I?
There is no way I would, could hurt yarn.
I didn't know that something like that could be in anybody I've ever known, much less me.
A quote from his mother.
You try to make sense of his actions.
The sequence of events.
It's all off center, trying to hide her body in the pool with the lights on.
He's technically guilty, but he's morally innocent.
He was there and he wasn't there.
Here's another case.
Kenneth Parks was a 23-year-old Toronto man with a wife and infant daughter.
He was suffering from severe chronic insomnia caused by joblessness and gambling debts.
He was a nonviolent man whose mother-in-law called him the gentle giant.
Then came May 23, 1987.
In the early morning hours he was sleeping on the couch.
He got up, got into his car, barefooted, drove 15 miles to his in-laws' homes, stabbed
his mother-in-law to death, assaulted his father-in-law who survived.
He got back into his car, drove to the police station and said, I think I have killed some
people, my hands.
Only then realizing he had severed the flexor tendons of both hands.
The defense was that he did all of this while he was sleepwalking.
Since he could not remember anything about the murder, he had no motive and he did have
a history of sleepwalking.
His team of defense experts concluded Ken Parks was asleep when he committed the crime
and therefore unaware of his action.
In this case the jury rendered a verdict of not guilty.
Even more, Joanne Keager, a teenager, was asleep when she took a revolver and acting
to defend her family against a monster she fired and fatally shot her brother and her
father.
She was found not guilty.
Rarely has the sleep defense been successful, but it is recognized that violent behavior
is frequently a component of parasomnias.
For a set of considerations has been formulated, they are.
There should be reason by history or clinical evaluation to suspect a bona fide sleep disorder.
Two, the duration of the action should be minutes, and this does not correspond with
some credible sleepwalking durations.
Three, the behavior is abrupt, immediate, impulsive and senseless, not in keeping with
character of the individual and no evidence of premeditation.
Four, the victim just happened to be present.
Five, upon arousal, feelings of horror remorse and no attempts to conceal or escape.
In addition, some degree of amnesia for the event.
The act should conform to one of the following, may occur at awakening, at least one hour
after sleep onset, may occur when there is an attempt to awaken the subject, or may have
been potentiated by alcohol, medication or sleep deprivation.
There are other places where sleep science comes into contact and may be collision with
the legal system.
Sexomnia has been used as a defense in cases of sexual assault and rape.
In cases of false accusations, could hypnagogic hallucinations be so convincing to a victim
that they are absolutely convinced of their false accusation?
Can utterances made during sleep be taken into evidence?
And here is a very interesting development in understanding a very serious and unfortunate
problem, Munchhausen syndrome by proxy.
This is a situation in which a child is repeatedly seen for injuries that are supposed to be
self-inflicted or are unexplained.
In some cases, near suffocations of children have been suspected as being due to severe
sleep apnea.
So the result is that the child is seen in a sleep clinic and an all night EEG recording
is done.
Because the patient is a child, the mother is allowed to stay in the clinic overnight.
However, sleep clinics have video monitors in the recording rooms.
These monitors have documented cases in which the mother, apparently in sleep, has tried
to suffocate the child.
True Munchhausen syndrome by proxy.
What the legal issues come down to is whether or not the sleeping individual is an automaton.
In medical terms, automatism is complex behavior in the absence of conscious awareness or
volitional intent.
The legal concepts are different.
There are two types of automatism under the law, sane and insane.
The sane stems from external causes and the insane stems from internal causes.
The consequences for the accused are quite different.
In the case of insane automatism, the sentence is commitment to a mental institution for
an indefinite period.
In the case of sane automatism, the result can be acquittal.
Thus by legal definitions, a violent or criminal act committed while sleepwalking would be
due to insane automatism unless the defense could claim that it was drug induced.
So if indeed, sleepwalking is insanity, then a very large percentage of the population is
insane.
Clearly, there are things to be worked out between the judicial system and the sleep
medicine community.
The more interesting question for me, however, is what is consciousness?
What are the essential neural components of consciousness?
What determines when we are conscious and when we are not?
Is memory of an event a valid criterion for whether or not the individual is conscious?
I can't remember what I did when I was two years old.
Was I not conscious then?
I can't even remember what I was doing on this day last year.
Was I not conscious then?
The interesting question of consciousness bridges the neurobiological and the philosophical
realms and is a much bigger question we can deal with here.
So let's sleep on it.
Let me end this lecture with a quote from Plato's Republic.
In all of us, even in good men, there is a lawless, wild beast nature which peers out
in sleep.
I wish you sweet dreams and peaceful dreams.
