The Harvard Sleep and Dream Researcher J. Allen Hobson once wrote a paper titled, Sleep
is of the brain, by the brain, and for the brain.
Throughout this course, I have emphasized the brain mechanisms of sleep and the brain
mechanisms that are affected by sleep.
In the discussion of sleep across the animal kingdom and in our considerations of possible
sleep functions, I repeatedly pose the question, why take the brain offline during sleep if
the function of sleep is not for the brain?
After all, in contrast to the dramatic changes in brain activity that occur during sleep,
there are no obvious changes in the overall physiology of the body that differ in quiet
wake and in sleep.
So why can't the body be restored through quiet wake?
Why are all of those bizarre activities of the offline brain necessary if sleep is for
the body?
In spite of all of these considerations, I still think that Dr. Hobson overstates the
case.
Whether the effects are direct or indirect, many physiological systems are seriously impacted
by sleep deprivation and are restored by sleep.
And even with compensatory sleep, there can be long-term consequences of sleep deprivation.
Back in the 1980s, in the laboratory of Allen Rexhafen at the University of Chicago, a monumental
series of experiments were conducted on rats.
The purpose of these experiments was to discover the ultimate consequences of total sleep deprivation.
The thought was that such experiments would reveal the essential functions of sleep.
Since sleep deprivation involves stimulation of the animals and since such stimulation
could be considered stressful, an ingenious sleep deprivation device was invented that
enabled extremely well-controlled experiments.
The importance of a control in an experiment is to be able to isolate the factor of interest,
in this case sleep deprivation, and rule out extraneous factors that might influence the
outcome of the experiment, for example, stress.
The device was called disk over water.
It consisted of a circular platform over a shallow container of water.
The platform was rotated slowly by a motor and it was divided in half by a partition.
Two rats could be on the platform at the same time but have separate food bins and separate
water bottles.
Also the EEGs of both rats could be recorded at the same time without the cables getting
all twisted up.
Rats are champion sleepers and left alone they would sleep often and a lot in this apparatus.
They preferred to sleep of course where the platform was the widest.
If the platform were slowly rotated they would get up and move back to the preferred location.
Why not just get off the platform?
Rats don't like to get their feet wet.
Here is the basic experiment done by this group of researchers.
The motor to rotate the platform was connected to a computer that also received input from
the EEG recordings.
Whenever one rat, the experimental rat, fell asleep the motor was turned on, the disk rotated
and the rat had to wake up to move back to the center of its half of the platform.
Of course the rat on the other side of the partition, the control rat, also had to get
up to move back to the center of its half of the platform.
Thus both rats got exactly the same stimulation and had to do just as much walking.
There was a big difference.
As long as the experimental rat was awake the control rat could sleep.
Of course its sleep was frequently interrupted but it was able to accumulate significantly
more sleep than the experimental rat.
The results of these experiments were dramatic.
The control rats did fine.
The sleep deprived rats died.
They died after 16 to 21 days without sleep.
Why did they die?
A specific answer was not obvious.
Every parameter the researchers evaluated seemed to go to pot.
The sleep deprived rats lost weight even as their food intake increased a lot.
The fur of the sleep deprived rats became oily and matted.
They developed sores on their skins and their feet.
There were hormonal changes and immune system changes.
There were pathological changes in the digestive system of these rats.
Apart from any changes in the brains of these rats they truly fell apart.
In many ways it was like accelerated aging or multi-organ system failure.
A common cause of death was septicemia, a spread of infection in the blood.
This indicated the inability of the immune system to protect the body.
I call this set of experiments monumental because they were very effective in calling
attention to the effects of sleep and sleep loss on the body.
Researchers began to seriously address these issues.
A leader in this area of investigation is Carol Everson at the Medical College of Wisconsin.
As a graduate student, Carol was part of the rec-shafen team and she has pursued the consequences
of sleep deprivation on physiological systems ever since.
Carol's work on rats and now the work of others, notably Evan Cotter at the University
of Chicago on humans, show how long-term or even short-term sleep deprivation can result
in serious consequences for bodily systems and have long-lasting effects.
I will tell you about some of these studies involving energy metabolism, the immune system,
cardiovascular disease, the endocrine system, and finally some very recent work from Stanford
on functions of the bone marrow.
The most striking results on the sleep-deprived rats were their increase in food intake, loss
of body mass, especially fat tissue, and even a fall in body temperature as they went into
increasingly negative energy balance.
From previous work, Everson knew that rats could tolerate 10 days of sleep deprivation
and recover without apparent negative side effects.
She therefore wanted to know if repeated episodes of sleep deprivation could be equally
well-tolerated.
Using the disc over water, she exposed rats to six episodes of sleep restriction lasting
10 days each.
These episodes were separated by two recovery days.
The repeated episodes of sleep restriction were followed by a four-month recovery phase.
Control rats had the same amount of stimulation to force movement, but their movement was
consolidated into longer periods, so they also had time to sleep.
During the sleep restriction, the experimental rats showed loss of body weight and increase
in food consumption, and they did not recover during the two-day breaks.
The control rats showed the usual gradual increase in body weight seen in rats over
the entire experiment.
When the sleep-deprived rats were released to complete recovery, their body weights were
about 15% lower than the control rats, in spite of the fact that they were eating twice
as much as the control rats.
Over the next four months, their body weights caught up with the control rats, but they
were still eating 20% more food.
What these results showed was that repeated sleep restriction has cumulative and long-lasting
effects on energy metabolism.
Putting this in human terms, weekend recoveries from weeks of short sleep may not be sufficient.
But these were extreme animal experiments.
What about experiments on humans that more realistically reflect behavior in our 24-7
society?
Such experiments have been done by Ev Van Cotter and colleagues.
In one protocol, they limited healthy young men to four hours of time in bed for six nights,
followed by 12 hours in bed for seven nights.
They measured many parameters associated with glucose metabolism.
After only six nights of restrictive sleep, the subjects showed large changes in their
glucose metabolism.
Their rate of glucose clearance from the blood was decreased by 40%.
A calculated value that represents the health of glucose metabolic systems is called the
disposal index, the DI.
Without explaining exactly what the DI is, I will just say that a value under 2,000 indicates
high risk for type 2 diabetes, a value over 2,000 is considered healthy.
After only six days of short sleep, the young men averaged a DI around 1,700, and after
they were fully rested, their DI's averaged almost 3,000.
Clearly in humans, even short-term periods of poor sleep can have large changes in glucose
metabolism.
More extreme studies cannot be done ethically in humans, but what do epidemiological studies
tell us?
Many survey studies have asked about sleep time and other aspects of health.
Most of these studies have reported a strong correlation between short sleep and type 2
diabetes, especially in men.
Once again, we are faced with a question of how to interpret correlations.
We know that obesity is a risk factor for type 2 diabetes.
How do we factor that in?
We can turn to other epidemiological studies, the many, many studies that have asked if
there is a relationship between obesity and short sleep.
These are studies from many different countries and studies that look at different age groups.
The overwhelming conclusion is that obesity correlates with short sleep.
It is therefore reasonable to propose that short sleep contributes to obesity which in
turn leads to type 2 diabetes.
Another interesting piece of this puzzle is data on hormone levels associated with appetite.
In recent years, two hormones have been shown to play a role in regulating food intake.
Leptin is a hormone produced by fat tissue and it suppresses appetite.
Grayland is a hormone produced by the stomach and it stimulates appetite.
Using the same protocol I described above for restricting sleep to 4 hours for 6 days,
Van Korter's group showed that small amounts of sleep deprivation caused a decrease in
leptin levels in the group by 18% and an increase in grayland levels by 28%.
Subjective reporting of the individuals indicated an increase in their appetite, especially
for carbohydrates.
Also keep in mind the neurotransmitter we discussed earlier, hypochretin.
Its other name is orexin because it was thought to increase food intake.
Usually orexin has been shown to stimulate the food intake circuits in the brain and
of course prolonged wakefulness prolongs the release of hypochretin orexin.
All in all there is pretty convincing evidence that sleep loss impairs how the body handles
glucose and regulates appetite, leading to long lasting effects on metabolism and body
mass.
Now I will turn to relationships between sleep and the immune system.
Surely you have made this connection yourself many times.
What happens when you get the flu or some other illness?
You get chills and a fever and you just want to get into your flannel jammies, crawl into
bed and go to sleep.
Your immune system is responsible.
Sales of your immune system are circulating in your blood to provide an early warning
system and to defend against invading microorganisms.
These circulating defenders release chemical signals called cytokines and they play many
roles in the protective actions of the immune system.
For many years a sleep researcher at Washington State University, James Kruger, has shown
that one of those actions is to induce sleep.
That is indirect evidence that sleep has a role to play in protecting the body from invading
microorganisms.
Cytokines also stimulate a host of cell and tissue responses that constitute inflammation.
Inflammation literally means to set on fire and it takes its name from the reddening of
tissues around a wound or an infection.
But inflammation is a complex suite of reactions that are not just confined to the skin around
a wound.
The cytokines that have these effects are called pro-inflammatory.
In the short run inflammatory responses are protective but in the long run chronic inflammation
is damaging contributing to such conditions as arthritis and atherosclerosis.
Sleep loss, even modest sleep loss leads to the increased production of pro-inflammatory
cytokines.
So chronic sleep loss leads to chronic inflammation.
Let me give you an example.
You might have heard of C-reactive protein, CRP, as a marker of risk for cardiovascular
disease.
High levels of C-reactive protein are found in the blood of people who eat lots of trans
fats and people who have early atherosclerotic disease.
CRP is a protein produced by the liver in response to pro-inflammatory cytokines.
It is an acute phase inflammation protein.
This role is to mark damaged cells for attack and removal by cellular elements of the immune
system.
In the short run the actions promoted by CRP are protective but in the long run they can
create damage.
The pro-inflammatory cytokines that stimulate CRP production go up with sleep loss and so
does CRP.
In summary, pro-inflammatory signals of the immune system go up with sleep loss.
If you are being invaded by microorganisms the actions of these signals are protective
but when triggered unnecessarily and repeatedly inflammatory reactions can be damaging.
We don't have to go into the complex biochemistry of the immune system to see the consequences
of sleep loss.
You can see them in a very simple experiment in which sleep is restricted.
Here is such an experiment.
It is a vaccination experiment.
When you get vaccinated a killed microorganism such as a flu virus is injected into your
body and your immune system produces antibodies to that microorganism even though it is not
active.
If at a later date you are infected by the living microorganism those antibodies attack
it and protect you.
Okay, in this experiment we have two groups of healthy young men.
One group sleeps normally and the other group is restricted to only four hours of sleep
per night for six nights.
After night four they all get flu shots.
They are tested immediately for flu antibody responses and there is no difference between
groups.
Their antibody titers are nil.
When they are tested again however ten days later after four nights of recovery sleep
the group that had been sleep restricted had only half the antibody responses as the control
group.
A month later the sleep restricted group still had a significantly lower antibody response.
So which group is more likely to get the flu?
Another immune system experiment.
This one is on a class of immune system cells called ominously natural killer cells.
These are cells that attack bad actors such as virus infected cells and tumor cells.
In this experiment a group of healthy individuals was studied over a five day period.
On the first night they slept normally.
During the following day their blood was analyzed for the number of circulating natural killer
cells.
On night two they slept normally and no blood test was made the following day.
On the next night, night three, their sleep was limited to four hours and on the following
day their natural killer cell titer was measured again.
On the fourth night they slept normally and their blood was analyzed on the following
day.
The result.
After one night of restricted sleep their natural killer cell count was down 73%.
It recovered fully after one night of normal sleep but what if sleep is restricted for
multiple days?
Good for the virus infected cells or for the tumor cells.
Turning now to the endocrine system, hormones of course control many physiological processes
in the body.
We already discussed one of these control processes in relation to sleep loss and that
was the hormone insulin.
Insulin controls all aspects of glucose metabolism.
Remember those results?
Glucose tolerance after five nights of sleep restriction was down by 40%.
A level that indicates risk for diabetes.
And two more hormones that regulate appetite, leptin and grailin.
They were altered by only two nights of sleep restriction and they were altered in the wrong
ways and bad ways.
Now back to animal studies and the effects of long term sleep restriction.
A study by Everson looked at changes in important hormones in chronically sleep restricted rats.
These are hormones that support tissue metabolism, repair and growth.
Thyroxin, growth hormone, prolactin and also leptin.
The appetite suppressing hormone.
All of these hormones normally go up with sleep.
In all cases these hormones were suppressed in the sleep deprived rats.
But importantly the suppression was seen early in the experiment.
Thus the effects of sleep deprivation on these hormones could contribute to the overall
declines in physiological system health that are seen in the experiments on chronic sleep
deprivation.
Lastly, I will tell you about some very new work on sleep restriction and bone health.
Bones are continually being repaired and remodeled in response to use.
Two types of cells are the yin and yang of this process.
Cells called osteoclasts are continually tearing down bone.
And cells called osteoblasts are following in the wake of the osteoclasts to lay down
new bone.
The material laid down by osteoblasts is called osteoid before it becomes fully mineralized
into hardened bone.
Obviously, a balance between the activities of the osteoclasts and the osteoblasts is critical.
Bones are long lasting structures, so alterations in the activities of these bone cells can
result in stunted growth, abnormal growth, and weakened bones, as in the condition of
osteoporosis.
Another study by Everson and colleagues on long term sleep deprivation of rats subjected
the rats to six periods of ten days of sleep restriction separated by two recovery days.
After the 72 day experiment ended, the sleep deprived rats had a 45 fold reduction in bone
lined by osteoid in comparison to the control rats.
However, there was no reduction in the osteoclast activity.
The bone density of the sleep deprived rats was much less than that of the control rats.
Obviously, these results do not augur well for bone health in repeatedly chronically
sleep deprived rats or humans.
Another result from this study was a dramatic change in the bone marrow composition.
This is complicated, but there is a balance between different paths of cell differentiation
in the bone marrow.
All bone marrow cells ultimately come from stem cells.
Early in this process, cells can go down one path to marrow fat and osteoblasts, or down
another path that will produce all of the blood cells.
In the sleep deprived rats, there was a reduction in bone marrow fat and osteoblasts and an
increase in the blood forming cells.
The increase in blood forming cells might sound like a good thing, but it also reflects
a pro-inflammatory process.
The natural activity of the bone marrow in generating all of the different types of blood
cells is the focus of the last study I want to tell you about today.
This process is called hematopoiesis, and it produces red and white blood cells.
The white blood cells, of course, make up our immune system.
The numbers of different types of white cells in the blood are closely regulated.
But leukemia is a cancerous proliferation of white blood cells.
One therapy for leukemia is to kill all of the blood forming cells with radiation and
chemotherapy.
The patient is left without any immune system at all and has to be maintained in an absolutely
sterile environment.
Still the natural bacteria that live on and in the body start taking over.
It is absolutely essential to re-establish hematopoiesis and therefore the immune system
as soon as possible.
This can be done with a bone marrow transplant.
In some cases bone marrow from the patient can be extracted before the chemo and radiation
treatment.
This bone marrow is stored until it can be injected back into the patient.
In some cases a procedure is used to eliminate any cancerous cells from the stored bone marrow.
Another approach is to take bone marrow from a healthy person who has a good genetic match
with the patient.
These foreign marrow cells are then injected into the patient.
In either case the intent is to inject hematopoietic stem cells that will migrate into the bone
marrow spaces of the patient, proliferate and produce new blood and immune system cells.
Hematopoietic stem cells normally migrate in and out of the bone marrow to do their job
of populating the blood with all of its different cell types.
Dr. Asya Rolls was interested in discovering whether or not the process of bone marrow
transplantation and the re-establishment of hematopoiesis was sensitive to sleep deprivation.
The donation of bone marrow involves putting a very large needle into the hip bone and sucking
out the marrow.
You can imagine that someone facing this procedure might not sleep very well the night before.
Asya combined the expertise of several laboratories at Stanford in designing and conducting her
study.
One was the stem cell laboratory of Irv Weissman and the other two were mine and that of my
sleep research colleague, Luis de la Silla.
She used a mouse model in her studies.
A designated recipient mouse received a lethal dose of radiation to destroy its hematopoietic
stem cells.
Bone marrow was then taken from a donor mouse and injected into the irradiated mouse to
see if it could be saved.
The simple variable she altered was whether or not the donor mouse was sleep deprived.
In her experiments, the sleep deprivation was not several weeks or even several days,
it was only four hours.
She found that the ability of the hematopoietic stem cells from the sleep deprived donors
were only half as successful in their ability to create a long term restitution and recovery
in the irradiated mice.
She then wanted to know what the effect of sleep deprivation was on the hemopoietic stem
cells themselves.
She compared the numbers of hemopoietic stem cells in the blood and in the bone marrow of
normally sleeping mice and in sleep deprived mice and in mice that had been sleep deprived
and then sleep restored.
Mice that had slept had more hematopoietic stem cells circulating in their blood.
The sleep deprived mice had more hemopoietic stem cells in their bone marrow.
Sleep restoration made the distribution of hematopoietic stem cells in the sleep deprived
mice normal.
What could cause this difference in the distribution of the hematopoietic stem cells?
Remember that I mentioned the importance of the ability of the hematopoietic stem cells
to migrate in and out of the bone marrow.
ASIA's results indicated an impairment of this migratory ability.
Matopoietic stem cells are attracted by certain cell signals.
She exploited this behavior of the hematopoietic stem cells to measure their migrating abilities.
She set up an assay in which the attractant chemical was on one side of the membrane.
A sample of the hematopoietic stem cells purified from the blood of normal or sleep deprived
mice was placed on the other side of the membrane.
This assay showed a pronounced decrease in the migration of the hematopoietic stem cells
from the sleep deprived mice.
Was sleep loss responsible for this impairment?
It seemed rather difficult to imagine that short term sleep loss could be seen in the
behavior of cells in an in vitro assay.
Yet all of the animals and the cell preparations were done in exactly the same way.
The only difference was the sleep deprivation.
So she decided to see if restorative sleep could reverse the inability of the hematopoietic
stem cells to migrate.
She did the same sleep deprivation protocol, but before harvesting the hematopoietic stem
cells from the sleep deprived mice, she gave those mice two hours of recovery sleep.
That was enough to completely restore the migratory ability of these hemopoietic stem
cells from the sleep deprived animals.
Thus, very small changes in sleep amounts can have enormous effects in the cellular
properties of our hematopoietic system.
So what could mediate this effect of sleep?
Assia was able to narrow down the sleep effect on the hematopoietic stem cell migration to
the expression of a single gene in those cells.
Interestingly, the expression of this gene is under control of growth hormone, a hormone
that is specifically released during sleep and is suppressed by sleep deprivation.
The results of these experiments are extremely important for a couple of reasons.
First, the implications they have for current clinical practice.
The major focus of concern for bone marrow transplantations is on the patient, the recipient,
of course.
But the success of the procedure may depend on some attention being given to the sleep
history of the donor.
Second, these results demonstrate that seemingly small compromises of sleep amounts and sleep
quality can have large effects on the functions and health of physiological systems.
Although we have considerable ability to rebound from acute losses of sleep, cumulative, long-term
effects are possible.
Also the coincidence of an acute episode of sleep loss and a random event such as exposure
to a flu virus could have serious consequences.
My intention in this lecture was not to totally destroy the proposition of Dr. Hobson that
sleep is of the brain, by the brain, and for the brain, but to suggest that sleep produces
benefits below the neck as well.
Given the need for a sleep wake cycle to support the functions of the brain, it is not surprising
that other physiological processes would have latched onto that cyclicity as a means
of giving temporal organization to physiological functions that might be in competition for
substrates or energy, or might benefit from sequential organization.
Sleep surely serves many functions.
Some may be primary, maybe for the brain, and some may be secondary for the body.
Although changes in brain systems such as those that regulate many of our hormones surely
have effects on the body as well.
Until next time, I wish you healthy and restful sleep, and I hope that your hematopoietic
stem cells keep migrating.
Sweet dreams.
