A few lectures back, I discussed the prevalence and the seriousness of insomnia, the inability
to fall asleep, maintain sleep or both.
In a Gallup survey, almost 50% of the respondents said that they were dissatisfied with their
sleep at least five nights a month.
Various surveys indicate that between 40 and 50% of adult Americans suffer from occasional
insomnia and 10 to 15% have chronic insomnia.
There are consequences to this lack of healthy sleep that we have mentioned throughout these
lectures.
First, financial consequences.
Probably around $100 million are spent each year on over-the-counter sleep aids.
In 2008, the number of prescriptions written for sleeping pills in the United States was
56 million.
Last year in the UK alone, it was 63 million, and they are only about one-fifth of our population.
And of course, there are the costs of lost productivity increased accidents and death
that we have discussed in the first lecture on the national sleep debt.
Second set of consequences, health.
Many conditions are seen to be comorbid with insomnia, even though the causative relationships
may not be understood.
Examples are obesity, diabetes, cardiovascular disease and psychiatric illnesses.
Third set of consequences, lost opportunities.
A motto of the US Army is be all that you can be.
Now that's difficult to achieve when you're carrying around a sleep debt.
Here all of the information I presented to you on the role of sleep in learning and memory.
Another set of consequences, quality of life.
I told you that there are three fundamental components of a healthy lifestyle.
Nutrition, fitness and sleep.
Would anyone disagree with the fact that food is enjoyable?
That a good exercise program is fun?
What about sleep?
Shouldn't sleep be something we enjoy?
That we look forward to?
That we relish as we do a fine wine, a gourmet meal or a terrific game of tennis?
A brief summary of our course would be that sleep is important, even essential for a healthy,
productive, full and rewarding life.
Yet many of us struggle with the ability to satisfy our basic sleep need.
Much less enjoy it as a quintessentially enjoyable part of life.
So what can we do about it?
How can we improve sleep?
I will discuss with you some pharmaceutical and some non-pharmaceutical solutions to
the problem of insomnia.
There is not one size that fits all, but there are lots of options that can be made to fit
just about any combination of problems.
An absolutely critical admonition is, do not hesitate to seek help.
It is truly remarkable to me that so few people suffering from insomnia consult with a physician
about their problem.
It is estimated that only about 20% of individuals with insomnia discuss it with their physicians
and only about 5% receive treatment.
Yet it is estimated that 10% to 30% of the population purchase over-the-counter sleeping
aids and about the same number use alcohol to promote sleep.
To what can we ascribe this inability to face the problem of insomnia head on and get the
best possible help?
All answers have been suggested, including thinking that insomnia is a trivial issue,
embarrassment because insomnia reflects psychological problems, fear of having to take sleeping pills,
or just plain ignorance that there are remedies.
Before diving into treatments for insomnia, let me reiterate an important admonition from
the insomnia lecture.
Most insomnias fall into the category of secondary insomnias.
In other words, nothing is wrong with sleep control mechanisms.
They are just being interfered with by other conditions, whether they are environmental,
psychological, psychiatric, or medical.
Therefore, in most cases, insomnia is the symptom and not the disease.
The first step that should be taken is to identify and treat the underlying causes.
Only putting an insomniac to sleep with a pill is treating the symptom and not the disease.
In most cases, resolving the underlying cause will cure cases of secondary insomnia.
This is obviously one reason why insomnias of different individuals are diverse and may
require different treatment strategies.
Let's begin with pharmaceutical approaches.
They generally get a bad rap, but they are not as bad as some would make them out to
be.
In many cases, sleeping pills can be a very valuable adjunct to other forms of therapy.
Remember the tragic case of the woman who was suffering from acute insomnia after her
husband was called to active duty and her brother-in-law had a heart attack?
In that case, a short-term use of a prescribed sleeping medication would have saved the lives
of three children.
There are over-the-counter or OTC remedies and there are prescription remedies.
The OTC remedies almost all use the drug diphenhydramine, which is an anhistamine and is also found
in cold, cough, and allergy medications.
I told you about the role of the tuberomammulary body in maintaining wake through the release
of its neurotransmitter, histamine.
Like many molecules in the body, histamine serves different functions.
In the immune system, histamine is a pro-inflammatory signal released by circulating immune system
cells in a response to foreign substances such as pollen.
So you can understand why anti-allergy medications that block the actions of histamine can make
you sleepy.
Conversely, you can see why OTC medications for insomnia use an anhistamine as their
active component.
Another OTC remedy used by many who suffer jet lag is melatonin.
Melatonin is actually a hormone produced by the tiny pineal gland that is situated between
the cerebral hemispheres.
The pineal is controlled by the circadian clock, the SCN.
Melatonin is released at night and its release is inhibited by light.
Melatonin, taken as a sleep aid, acts by resetting the circadian clock.
When taken a few hours before bedtime in the new location, it can improve sleep.
And then there are several herbal remedies.
The two most prominent are Valerian root and St. John's wort.
There are no convincing studies showing any sleep-improving benefits from these remedies.
In one meta-analysis, an exhaustive search of the literature on Valerian produced 16 studies
that used a randomized control trial with a placebo.
Most of the data reported were subjective reports of sleep quality.
Of seven studies that used visual analog scales to report sleep quality, five reported no
statistical difference between Valerian and placebo.
The five studies used polysomnographic sleep recordings and they reported no consistent
or significant changes.
Chamomile tea is a very well-known grandma's sleep remedy.
But here also there are no data showing an objective effect on sleep.
However, chamomile, as well as other herbal teas that do not contain stimulants such as
caffeine, may play a very significant role in relaxation routines that we will discuss
later.
Another herbal sleep remedy that you might have heard about is Kava Kava.
Kava is grown throughout the western Pacific region and its root is used to produce a sedative
anesthetic tea that supposedly does not produce mental dulling.
It is not recommended by the FDA because of the potential for liver damage.
The cause of these adverse events are not clear, but they could be due to contamination
in the preparation process.
Whenever using herbal or nutraceutical remedies, you have to keep in mind that they are not
produced under the same requirements of quality and purity that are enforced for FDA-approved
drugs.
Okay, the herbal offerings don't get us very far.
What about the pharmaceuticals?
Prior to the 1960s, the leading drug treatment for insomnia was barbiturates, and it had
been for over 50 years.
Barbituric acid was first synthesized in Germany in the 1860s, but the first derivative that
had sedating properties was produced at the Bayer Company in Germany in 1903.
It was called Veronao because one of the inventors said that the most serene and peaceful city
in the world was Verona, Italy.
In early 1900s literature, it is referred to as taking the powders.
During World War II, it was given to troops in a form called goofballs.
Many came back from the war addicted and had to go through withdrawal.
The addictive nature and the abuse potential of barbiturates got lots of attention in the
1950s.
I wonder if, in part, this concern was staged to open up the field for the new line of sedating
drugs that were about to hit the market, the benzodiazepines.
First a few words about addiction, which is a topic that comes up frequently in association
with sedating and hypnotic drugs.
These drugs, as do a large number of drugs, act by interfering with signaling molecules
and their receptors.
The signaling molecules in the nervous system are neurotransmitters.
The drug can mimic the action of the neurotransmitter by binding to the same receptor.
The drug can block the action of the neurotransmitter, or the drug can either enhance or reduce the
efficacy of the neurotransmitter.
Since there are so many different kinds of receptors for each neurotransmitter, the possibilities
for different kinds of drug actions are enormous.
The body resists being thrown out of its status quo, and in some cases the status quo
is not desirable, like chronic insomnia.
So in the case of many drugs used over time, the body, or the brain in our case, develops
a resistance or a tolerance to the drug.
The same dose of the drug has less and less of an effect.
Therefore the person tends to take more and more of it.
Still the desired effect continues to be elusive, and a point is reached at which toxic side
effects of the drug are a problem.
Reducing the drug dosing creates serious problems called withdrawal symptoms.
At this point the individual is seriously addicted to the drug.
An example of addiction is alcoholism, and the withdrawal reactions when an alcoholic
is deprived of alcohol are the DTs.
Some drugs are more prone to induce tolerance and addiction than others.
Barbituits are an example.
In the 1960s there was a real need for a new sedative hypnotic, a fancy name for a sleeping
pill.
The desire was for a sleeping pill that was less likely to cause tolerance and addiction
than barbiturates.
Barbiturates and most other sedative hypnotics act through the GABA receptor.
I mentioned GABA many times in previous lectures.
It is the major inhibitory neurotransmitter in the nervous system.
Its receptor is an ion channel that lets chloride ions move into the neuron when they open.
As chloride ions carry a negative charge, it makes the membrane potentials of the neurons
more negative and less likely to respond to incoming information by firing action potentials.
The GABA receptor is complex.
It is composed of different subunits and the compositional mix of those subunits in a given
receptor determines the properties of that receptor.
This increase the duration of chloride channel opening in response to GABA and therefore
increase the efficacy of GABA.
However, barbiturates and are rather non-selective.
They alter the activity at many other neurotransmitter receptors as well.
So the actions of the barbiturates are complex and the resulting attempts of the brain to
counter these actions are also complex.
More and more drug is necessary to get the desired effect.
When the drug is withdrawn, things are really messed up.
How's that for a technical description?
There was a great need for more selective GABA drugs and they are the benzodiazepines.
The first benzodiazepine was synthesized by Hoffman-Laroche in 1955 and put on the market
in 1960 under the name Librium.
That was followed in 1963 with the iconic drug Valium.
Since then, many benzodiazepines have been produced and are prescribed by physicians
for insomnia, for anxiety, for muscle spasms and other indications.
All benzodiazepines work by binding to a particular site on the GABA receptor and increase the
efficacy of GABA on the receptor.
The benzodiazepines are more selective than the barbiturates and by 1970 had largely replaced
them.
The potential for the development of tolerance and therefore addiction to the benzodiazepines
was thought to be less than for the barbiturates and it is still a controversial subject.
It is safe to assume that chronic long-term use of any of these drugs will result in tolerance
and it is highly recommended that they be used in short-term regimens only, a couple
of days to a couple of weeks.
The most common withdrawal symptom is rebound insomnia, which is more likely to occur with
longer-term use of the drug.
The issue of tolerance is the main reason that physicians may be reluctant to prescribe
benzodiazepines even for acute insomnia.
Consensitivity arises out of the largest class lawsuit against drug manufacturers ever
in the United Kingdom.
The allegation was that the manufacturers knew about the tolerance and addiction potential,
but they had not informed physicians and patients.
This lawsuit never reached a verdict, but it put the tolerance addiction withdrawal issue
front and center.
Many lawsuits were filed in the United States as well.
Until today, for many people and for many physicians, the issue of tolerance and addiction
come to mind immediately when benzodiazepines are mentioned and they avoid them.
However, these drugs can be very valuable pharmacological treatments for many conditions
and especially for acute insomnia.
They can also be a very effective adjunct therapy for the increasingly popular cognitive
behavioral therapy that I will discuss later.
As you might expect, different benzodiazepines have different properties and effects on GABA
receptors.
Some are short-acting, some long-acting, and some in between.
Which drug is best for an individual depends on the diagnosis.
For sleep-onset insomnia, a short-acting benzodiazepine would be best.
For sleep maintenance insomnia, an intermediate term benzodiazepine would be preferred.
And for an anxiety disorder, a long-term drug might be best.
An interesting use of the long-term benzodiazepines is to help with withdrawal from other bite
benzodiazepines that had been used over a long time and produced tolerance.
A sudden cessation of use of such a drug can cause very distressful withdrawal effects.
And with a low tapering dose of a long-acting benzodiazepine can ease the withdrawal process.
Beginning in the late 1980s, a new class of sedative hypnotics prominently named non-benzodiazepines
began to appear.
They're also called Z-drugs because they have mostly been named with words beginning
with Z, zopaclone, zaloplon, zulpidem, ezopaclone.
These drugs work through exactly the same mechanisms as the benzodiazepines, but they
differ chemically.
They are mostly short-acting and were touted as being less likely to produce tolerance
and addiction as the benzodiazepines.
That has turned out not to be completely true, and once again they should be used for short
periods of time and in low doses.
There are prescription medications that do not act through the GABA receptor.
One of these is a drug called rameltion, which is a melatonin receptor agonist.
When taken in the evening, rameltion is thought to advance the circadian sleep phase and to
dampen the circadian alerting action.
Thus, the major indication for use of rameltion is sleep-onset insomnia.
It does not seem to produce tolerance and dependency.
Another non-GABA-ergic drug that has been recently approved for insomnia treatment is
doxypin, which is a tricyclic antidepressant.
The mechanism of action of doxypin is through blocking the wake-promoting effects of histamine.
It does not seem to have an effect on sleep-onset, but it is much better than benzodiazepines
in maintaining sleep later in the night without producing early morning hangover effects.
Thus doxypin is an appropriate drug for early morning insomnia.
And then there are drugs that are used off-label for insomnia.
Most commonly, these are antidepressant drugs.
As I mentioned in the insomnia lecture, physicians frequently misdiagnose insomnia as depression.
So I wonder whether this off-label use of antidepressants for insomnia largely results
from such misdiagnoses.
At any rate, there is a paucity of data on the dosage, the safety, and the efficacy of
these drugs used for the treatment of insomnia in non-depressed individuals.
Finally, in the realm of drugs for sleep problems arising from insomnia, there are drugs for
excessive daytime sleepiness.
Of course, the common drug of choice here is caffeine.
The more infamous drugs, however, are amphetamines.
Amphetamines increase wakefulness and focus.
They produce high energy levels and reduce fatigue and appetite.
They have a very high potential for abuse, addiction, and serious side effects such as
psychotic breaks.
They were and are used in the military in situations that require extended alertness.
Drugs such as Adderall and Dexadrine are used even by college students to enhance wakefulness
and study abilities.
A recent and probably safe wake-promoting drug is Modafinil, marketed under the name
Provigil.
This is now a common treatment for the daytime sleepiness of individuals with narcolepsy,
those with shift work disorder, and even individuals with sleep apnea.
Of course, it is being used off-label for a host of other disorders, even though there
is a paucity of data to support such applications.
My goals in going over the menu of choices for pharmaceutical treatment of sleep disorders
are two-fold.
First, to let you know that there are viable treatments for acute insomnia that are safe
and efficacious for short-term treatment regimens.
And two, to let you know that long-term of such treatments is not advisable and can be
dangerous.
Any drug does more in the body than simply reduce one particular symptom, and those other
actions can lead to undesirable side effects.
Please, do not take anything I have said as medical advice.
You should appreciate by now that sleep disorders can be complex.
Any pharmaceutical treatment should be based on a solid diagnosis by a physician knowledgeable
in sleep medicine.
Let's turn now to non-pharmaceutical treatments for sleep problems.
These are largely good advice for anyone, and they do not have any undesirable side
effects.
Most importantly, they are easy to implement.
They fall under the designations of sleep hygiene and cognitive behavioral therapy.
The goal of these modes of treatment is to replace wrong ideas and wrong behaviors with
regards to sleep with healthy alternatives.
Good sleep hygiene involves simple and straightforward, common-sense practices that are good for everyone.
But it is important to follow these practices religiously and not just when it's convenient.
An important advantage is that you don't even need a physician for these practices.
There are, however, practitioners who can be very helpful in implementing these therapies.
Such help might be particularly important to make the transition from chronic insomnia
to healthy sleep practices and good sleep.
Here are the basic principles of good sleep hygiene.
First, keep a regular schedule of sleep and awakening, even on weekends, and train your
biological clock to expect to sleep and wake at the same time every day.
Second, and this might seem counter-intuitive, sleep only as much as you need to feel rested.
Do not oversleep.
What this really means is that you should not spend an excessive amount of time awake
in bed.
You want to associate being in bed with sleep and not with wake.
At first, your time in bed asleep may not be enough to leave you rested.
That's okay.
We will come back to how to fix that later.
Third, is a corollary of not spending wake time in bed, and it is not to force yourself
to sleep.
You do not want to reinforce any impression that it is a chore to sleep.
It is difficult to sleep.
Quite to the contrary, sleep is quite natural and should be a joy.
Fourth, maintain a good sleeping environment, quiet, not too hot, not too cold, low noise,
comfortable, relaxing, etc.
Fifth, are lifestyle issues that are also common sense.
Exercise regularly at least 20 minutes per day, but avoid intense exercise in the few
hours before bedtime.
Do not consume caffeinated beverages from mid-afternoon on.
Also avoid nightcaps, alcoholic drinks right before bed with the idea that they will promote
sleep.
Do not smoke.
Good advice at any time, but especially in the evening.
Do not go to bed hungry, but also do not eat a heavy meal just before bedtime.
First importantly, do not take your worries to bed with you, resolve them before going
to bed.
Let's talk about how to implement some of these basic principles.
How do you limit your time in bed to sleep and still feel rested the following day?
The technique curiously enough is sleep restriction.
The goal is to achieve maximum sleep efficiency, which is the percent time in bed asleep while
gradually extending the time asleep.
The first step is to set one end of the desired sleep schedule, the time awakening, and enforce
that time even if you have to get five alarm clocks.
The second step is to wait until you feel sleepy to go to bed.
As a result, you may not get enough sleep that first night to have good daytime alertness
the following day.
But that should result in you feeling sleepy a bit earlier the next night, and gradually
you will arrive at the optimal bedtime for a fixed schedule that leaves you alert and
not sleepy all day long.
One way to initiate this schedule setting activity is to keep a sleep log and average
the amount of time you spend asleep over a week or two.
Take that average and reduce it by 30 minutes.
Then determine when you should go to bed to have that amount of time in bed before your
set awakening time.
Obviously, you will be a bit sleep deprived the next day.
But no naps allowed.
That next evening, extend the time in bed by 15 minutes.
Repeat this process until you feel maximally rested and alert during the day and still have
a short sleep latency in the evening.
That is the amount of time it takes you to get to sleep.
If you maintain a sleep efficiency above 80%, you'll be doing great.
The purpose of cognitive behavioral therapy is to change ideas and attitudes.
One aspect of cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia is stimulus control.
You want to create and maintain a strong positive association between bed and sleep.
The simple advice here, only use your bedroom for sleep and sex.
Do not watch TV in bed.
Do not read in bed unless it's a very boring book.
Do not eat in bed.
Most importantly, do not bring your work to bed or even into the bedroom.
No desk, no computer, no cell phone in the bedroom.
As you associate with work and with the worries that go along with work, should be kept out
of the bedroom.
If you do not fall asleep within 30 minutes after going to bed or if you wake in the middle
of the night and can't go back to sleep, don't lie in bed awake and worry about it.
Get up, go to another room, do something relaxing, and when you begin to feel sleepy, go back
to bed.
The important thing is to establish a strong psychological association between bed and sleep.
Relaxation techniques can be very helpful in leaving the worries and the tensions in
another room when it's nearing bedtime.
A warm bath is relaxing.
Calm music is relaxing.
Meditation and yoga can be relaxing.
Here is where the non-effective herbal remedy can become effective.
A cup of chamomile tea may not have any pharmaceutical efficacy, but is part of a relaxing bedtime
routine and it can be very helpful.
Progressive muscle relaxation is a technique that can be used once you get into bed.
Just clear your mind and focus on one part of your body at a time.
Start with your toes.
Consciously relax your toes.
Relax your ankles.
Relax your lower legs, etc.
You will probably fall asleep long before you have to relax your ears.
For someone who is suffering from chronic insomnia, the implementation of cognitive
behavioral therapy might be difficult at first.
And here is where low doses of sleeping medications applied over a short time period can help.
It's sort of like priming the pump.
Quite a few large-scale studies have been done on the effectiveness of cognitive behavioral
therapy.
Positive and long-lasting efficacy has been demonstrated.
In a 1999 meta-analysis of 48 clinical trials, 70-80% of those receiving cognitive behavioral
therapy experience benefits.
In 2006, another systematic review of clinical studies done after the 1999 review also documented
sleep improvements.
It also showed that cognitive behavioral therapy facilitated the discontinuation of chronic
sedative and hypnotic drug use.
Most informative have been two studies that compared groups receiving cognitive behavioral
therapy, drug treatment, cognitive behavioral therapy and drug treatment, and placebo.
In both studies, all of the non-placebo treatment groups showed improvements in sleep, but only
the cognitive behavioral therapy group showed sustained sleep improvements at follow-ups
months after the treatments ended.
The bottom line is that cognitive behavioral therapy is proving to be highly effective
in the treatment of insomnia, and there are no side effects.
To me, an important aspect of this new movement in sleep medicine is that it seeks to achieve
a desirable positive result that I mentioned at the beginning of this lecture, namely to
make sleep an enjoyable part of our lives.
Just as a great and memorable meal is enjoyed after an exhilarating physical activity, a
fantastic night of sleep should be eagerly anticipated and indulged in after that great
meal.
Even though, after all of these lectures, I still can't tell you exactly why you should
spend one-third of your life asleep, I want you to enjoy it.
Sweet dreams.
