I have titled this lecture, Sleep in the Future and the Future of Sleep.
That may seem like a tautology, so I will explain the distinction.
On the one hand, I want to project what I have been telling you about sleep into the
near future.
I want to give you some impression of what our sleep and the treatment of our sleep problems
might be like.
On the other hand, I want to explore what I think will be the most promising and exciting
future areas of sleep research and applications of that research.
Where will the breakthroughs come?
What new applications will we find for sleep technologies?
Will we ever understand the function or the functions of sleep?
First, how will our experiences with sleep change in the years to come?
What I hope for above all is expanded, improved, and universal education about sleep.
Several times I have emphasized that there are three essential components of a healthy
life, nutrition, fitness, and sleep.
Nutrition is drilled into kids from elementary school on what school kid has not learned
about the basic food groups, the food pyramid, vitamins, milk for strong bones, carrots for
good eyesight, iron for healthy blood, not too many sweets, and not too much fat, etc.
Classes in nutrition are common in colleges and universities.
There are even majors and degrees.
Choppers are faced with mandatory ingredients label on every prepared food they buy in the
grocery store.
And could you find anyone who could not explain to you what it means to count calories and
how one might do so?
I am not saying that we have universally good nutrition in the U.S. and in other developed
countries, but I am saying that we have plenty of information to steer us in the right direction.
And there is much public discussion about such things as school lunches, the obesity epidemic,
food additives, genetically modified foods, etc.
Also there is practically universal appreciation of good food, gourmet food, ethnic foods,
famous chefs, excellent restaurants.
We not only know a lot about nutrition, but it is an important component of a rewarding
and enjoyable life.
I can make the same case for fitness.
In elementary schools it is physical games and activities at recess.
In high school it is PE and team sports.
In college it is varsity and intramural sports.
In addition there are yoga classes, Pilates classes, spinning classes, swimming classes,
weightlifting classes, 24 hour fitness salons, gyms and so on.
You can't go anywhere without seeing bikers and joggers.
Vacations are focused on tennis, golf, sailing, skiing, hiking.
We not only know a lot about fitness, we eagerly seek it.
We embrace it.
We find ways of making it even more enjoyable, new running shoes, better tennis rackets and
golf clubs, different kinds of bikes, mountain bikes, road bikes, new and fashionable ski
outfits and of course the latest in skis, bindings and boots.
There is a multi-billion dollar industry aimed at keeping us fit and having fun while
doing it.
What about sleep?
The dearth of public attention and education is appalling.
Under mandatory nap time in kindergarten elementary school kids learn nothing about sleep.
At home the information associated with sleep is bed time, time to get up.
Kids bedrooms are usually their play rooms as well so they learn that sleep is a forced
cessation of what they want to do and have fun doing.
It is also a time of isolation from ongoing family activities.
Oh mom, do I have to go to bed now?
In high school attitudes about sleep are tainted by the experiences resulting from the sleep
phase delay that occurs with adolescents.
School board members who know nothing about sleep put in place the wrong school schedules
to deal with this situation.
When it is the little kids who should have the earlier school bus and school start times
they bring the older kids to school on the early buses.
These adolescents have no trouble staying awake late to do homework and many other activities
but getting up early in the morning is a struggle, a struggle with their sleep debts and a struggle
with their parents.
More negative attitudes about sleep develop.
College kids are finally in an environment that can suit their sleep habits of late to
bed and late to rise.
They just don't sign up for 8 a.m. classes.
But overall there is little in that environment to encourage or enable good sleep hygiene.
The same physical space serves for sleep, for work and for social interactions.
The possibility of a fixed bedtime is non-existent because of the activity going on in the dorm.
Bedtime is more set by sheer exhaustion than by a regular sleep schedule.
To obtain peak performance of varsity athletic teams they are frequently taken out of the
dorm environment and put into a hotel for the night before a game, even before a home
game.
So they can get a good night's sleep.
Maybe coaches know more about the importance of sleep than do academic advisors.
How many colleges or universities have courses on sleep?
Very, very few.
And adult life.
All I have to say is 24-7.
Unwittingly, Thomas Edison created a multi-billion dollar business segment and I don't mean the
electrical power industry.
I mean the market for sleeping aids, antidepressants, anti-anxiety drugs and the growing practice
of sleep medicine.
The general public knows next to nothing about sleep other than the fact that they can't
sleep.
Too often the level of knowledge about sleep is not much better in the medical community.
As I mentioned before, many physicians will simply conclude from a complaint about insomnia
that the patient is depressed.
Insomnia usually handles shift work in the worst possible way.
For most individuals, sleepiness is simply an inconvenience and quality sleep is elusive.
Knowledge about sleep, good sleep habits and the value of good sleep is scarce.
If I can offer an analogy, suppose we had no knowledge of nutrition and the only sources
of food in our world were vending machines and fast food restaurants.
Would we be healthy?
Would we enjoy eating?
I don't think so.
I just hope that you will benefit from the information I have given you in the last 23
lectures and that you will share this information with others.
I hope that you will seek out even more information and share that as well.
If you sit on boards or committees or are in supervisory or administrative positions
or attend hearings on public policy, I hope you will put questions and concerns about sleep
on the table.
Slowly but surely, we can improve sleep practices and sleep health in our society.
It would be wonderful to see large declines in the sales of OTC sleep aids and the numbers
of prescriptions written for sleep drugs.
For those with sleep problems, I want to see cognitive behavioral therapy become the
standard of care rather than sleeping pills.
For sleep problems such as sleep apnea that are not resolvable with cognitive behavioral
therapy, I hope we will continue to see an expansion of the sleep medicine community
so that diagnoses are thorough and accurate and the prescribed remedies truly reflect best
practices including limited use of drugs where necessary but largely emphasizing behavioral
modifications.
Mostly, I want to see people take responsibility for their own sleep health.
I would like to see families just as interested in remodeling their bedrooms as their kitchens.
Monitoring one's own sleep health is now possible.
Just as you can buy devices to monitor your blood pressure, your blood oxygen levels and
your blood glucose, you can now buy devices to monitor your sleep.
Wrist actigraphy has been around for a long time and is actually used clinically.
An actigraph is a device that is worn on the wrist and is sensitive to movement.
It records movement throughout the day and the night.
It is fairly reliable in revealing total sleep and sleep efficiency.
Newer systems also are analyzing sleep structure.
Many low-cost systems are on the market and are incorporated into fitness monitors.
There is even new technology that enables you to record and analyze your own EEG.
The electrodes are incorporated into a headband and they communicate wirelessly to a recording
device that sits by the bed.
Associated software does a good job in interpreting the data for you.
I don't mean to suggest that everyone can become a sleep physician, but surely paying
attention to your own body and now your own brain is an important step in the path to
good health.
The future of sleep research is a large and exciting topic.
I will focus on only a few areas that are particularly interesting to me.
First, a few comments about an area that I won't cover in much depth and that is the
genomics and the molecular biology of sleep.
Sleep is complex.
It involves many areas of the brain.
Therefore, you can expect that many, many genes are involved in sleep processes.
Nevertheless, progress is being made on identifying genes associated with different features of
sleep.
Also, progress is being made in understanding more about the specific neurotransmitters and
receptors involved in sleep phenomena.
The Nobel Prize in Chemistry was recently awarded for work on G-protein-coupled receptors.
These are the types of receptors that mediate the actions of many of the neurotransmitters
that control components of sleep.
I think we can expect some truly major discoveries in the area of the genomics and the molecular
biology of sleep in the near future.
These discoveries will help us resolve two burning questions, the function and the evolution
of sleep.
Knowing the cellular molecular processes that are involved in sleep will definitely give
us clues as to function.
And once we nail down a cellular function of sleep in one species or group of animals,
we can then ask the question of whether that same cellular function occurs during rest
in species that do not share EEG features with mammals.
In other words, in spite of differences in brain structure and therefore EEG, we will
be able to see the homologies between sleep and mammals and rest in other very different
species.
An issue that I think is very critical is the long-term consequences of sleep loss
or poor sleep.
I think we have only uncovered the tip of the iceberg here.
One laboratory that has delved into this area quite a bit is that of Dr. David Dinges
at University of Pennsylvania.
Some years back, Dr. Dinges developed a very simple method for measuring alertness.
And that method has become a standard technique in the field of human sleep research.
It is called the PVT for psychomotor vigilance test.
The basic form of this test is that the subject hears a tone or sees a light flash on a screen
and has to respond by pushing a button.
The sound or light stimuli are delivered at semi-random intervals, so the individual
has to pay attention to the task.
The computer registers several metrics of performance, time to respond, failures to
respond, and false responses.
Typically, after some sleep manipulation, the subjects are tested with the PVT during
the subsequent day.
If a person is totally sleep deprived, his error rate on the PVT goes up dramatically
on the first day following no sleep and continues to increase with the second and third night
of no sleep.
To put some numbers to this, the baseline error rate might be one error per PVT test,
but after two days of sleep deprivation, it is around 13.
Now what are the consequences of sleep restriction?
Groups of subjects were restricted to four, six, or eight hours of time in bed per night
for two weeks.
The PVT error rates steadily increased for each group.
After six nights of restricted sleep, the four-hour group had an error rate equivalent
to what was seen after one day of total sleep deprivation.
After 12 nights, the error rate of the four-hour per night sleep group was the same as what
was seen after two days of total sleep deprivation.
The group receiving six hours of sleep each night had an error rate equivalent to what
was seen after one day of total sleep deprivation after 11 nights.
The important aspect of these results is that the rise in error rate for any of the sleep
restricted groups showed no sign of plateauing.
The trajectory was a straight line of continuing decrement in performance.
What about recovery?
The groups did not recover to baseline after even two nights of unlimited recovery sleep.
Two important results from this study.
First, a point I made earlier in our course, sleep debt is cumulative.
After a week of even modestly restricted sleep, such as might happen during a work week,
your vigilance is not much better than someone who was just totally sleep deprived for a
whole night.
The second point is what really concerns me.
One or two nights of recovery sleep do not return vigilance to the optimal level.
Thus, there is a long-term consequence of inadequate sleep that is not easily resolved.
In real-world terms, the impairment would extend into the next work week.
The story gets even worse.
In a heroic study, the Dengist group did this experiment multiple times with three-day recovery
periods between the episodes of sleep restriction.
Remember that for any level of sleep restriction, the PVT error rate curve goes steadily up
over the days of restricted sleep.
During the three recovery days, the error rate curves may not return all the way to baseline,
but they do go down considerably from where they were after two weeks of restricted sleep.
What happens during the next period of restricted sleep?
After the very first night of restricted sleep, the error rate returns to where it was following
the last night of the previous period of restricted sleep, and it continues to rise from there.
This is a monumental discovery.
Not only did the recovery from two weeks of restricted sleep require multiple days, but
the susceptibility for further impairment was elevated even after the allowed three
days of recovery.
What is the basis for this very serious long-term consequence of restricted sleep?
How can it be resolved and how can it be prevented?
It seems to me that it is extremely important to answer these questions.
I hope you can see why I suggested that our current understanding of the consequences
of restricted sleep may be the tip of the iceberg.
Most of our data come from the period immediately following sleep deprivation, or at most only
a couple days beyond.
I would like to move now to extensions of our discussions about the role of sleep in learning
and memory.
First, I want to suggest how continuing progress in understanding these processes might be
used therapeutically.
And second, I will speculate how learning and memory processes during sleep might be
applied to improve our abilities to learn and remember.
The specific therapeutic potential I have in mind is for PTSD, Post Traumatic Stress
Disorder.
PTSD is very much in the news these days, as its incidence is high in our warfighters
who have served multiple deployments in the Middle East.
The estimate is one in four.
It is debilitating for the individual, it is difficult for the families, and it is believed
to contribute to the unusually high rate of suicides by military personnel and veterans.
PTSD, however, is not limited to the military.
PTSD is an anxiety disorder that results from an individual experiencing a severely traumatic
event such as a life-threatening accident, sudden death of a loved one, a natural disaster,
or a terrifying personal attack such as rape.
Typically, vivid memories of this event will reoccur repeatedly, sometimes triggered by
specific stimulus.
The individual will be hypervigilant and will try to avoid situations that might trigger
the mental playbacks.
Also, they will suffer from extremely terrifying nightmares.
Using terminology and concepts from our learning and memory lectures, PTSD involves overactivity
in the hippocampal amygdala and frontal cortical circuits.
It can be thought of as super consolidation of the memory and its emotional valence.
As a result, this emotional memory is not only resistant to extinction, but it may even
strengthen over time.
Remember I am talking about the future of sleep, so what I say is my speculation.
It is not proven fact, it is what I think is possible.
I think that nightmares are a critical component of the development and the maintenance of
PTSD.
In other words, PTSD stems from a REM sleep disorder.
And here is the important part, we should be able to treat it through sleep.
One of the most curious things about dreams is the amnesia we have for them once we wake
up.
I think this amnesia is highly adaptive.
It prevents us from mixing dream world experience with real world experience.
A failure of this mechanism might be a factor in psychosis, but I am not aware of any evidence
for that nor I do not know how you could investigate that possibility.
When do we remember a dream?
When we wake up, following the dream and replay it in our minds and think about it.
My hypothesis is that in PTSD traumatic nightmares are so severe that they arouse the individual
from sleep.
The individual then replays the dream in the waking state which is almost like re-experiencing
it.
If he or she then goes back to sleep that new version of the memory gets consolidated.
I see this as a positive feedback mechanism through which the problem makes itself worse.
But I propose that we can use these same mechanisms to cure the problem by altering the memory
that gets reactivated and by interfering with its re-consolidation.
The studies from Ken Paller's lab on reactivation of memories during sleep in humans indicated
that specific memories can be reactivated by their associated cues.
Reports on mice that I described to you suggest how we can use specific memory reactivation
therapeutically.
In the mouse experiments, as in the human experiments, reactivation of a memory by an
associated stimulus during sleep strengthens the memory.
This is consistent with ideas about the process of memory consolidation during sleep.
If a memory is selectively and repeatedly reactivated during sleep, it should be selectively
and repeatedly re-consolidated and therefore strengthened.
There is also the mouse experiment I described to you showing that sleep fragmentation following
learning disrupts memory formation.
This effect is presumably because of interference with the memory consolidation process.
A current treatment for PTSD is extinction therapy.
In repeated therapy sessions in a safe, comfortable environment, the patient is asked to recall
the traumatic experience.
The idea is to associate a calm, safe environment with the memory rather than the threatening
environment in which the original experience took place.
Efforts are made to associate the fearful memory with more calming and positive memories.
There are two problems with this therapy.
First, the repeated recall sessions are unpleasant for the patient and compliance with the treatment
regimen can be poor.
Second, the new association is specific to the environment of the therapy.
In the real world, the same stimuli that caused the highly emotional memory might do so again.
Putting this all together, what about using reactivation during sleep to weaken the emotional
valence of the memory?
I can see doing this in three possible ways.
Both ways begin with recalling the memory in the therapy sessions, but using that recall
to associate the memory with a conditioned stimulus such as an odor.
That conditioned stimulus could then be used to reactivate the memory during sleep, but
during non-rem sleep.
One possible outcome is that the sleep reactivation of the therapy session memory might reinforce
the benefit of the therapy session without requiring the patient to consciously recall
the trauma.
The other possibility would be to follow the memory reactivation by the conditioned stimulus
with an hour of sleep fragmentation.
The intent would be to interfere with the reconciliation of the memory and therefore
weaken it.
Third approach would be to couple the sleep reactivation method with drugs that block
noradrenergic activity.
In other words, blocking the fight or flight system.
Traumatic, fearful situations trigger the fight or flight suite of reactions that includes
increased activity of the locus ceruleus.
This is the brainstem noradrenergic nucleus we discussed.
The activation of the locus ceruleus and the release of norepinephrine during a fearful
experience contribute to the strong consolidation of that experience and especially its emotional
valence.
PTSD patients have high circulating levels of norepinephrine.
Conscious recall of the traumatic memory further activates the fight or flight reactions.
Perhaps if the patient takes a drug that blocks the fight or flight reaction before
sleep and then the memory is reactivated during sleep, its reconciliation will be weakened
or at least the emotional valence of the memory will be weakened.
I think there is enormous potential for sleep related therapy in other areas as well.
We have discussed many medical problems caused by insufficient or poor quality sleep, cardiovascular
disease, diabetes, osteoporosis, immune deficiency to name just a few.
It seems quite logical that part of the therapies for these conditions can be sleep related.
There surely will be others as well including psychiatric illnesses.
There is one example that has been around for a very long time but for which there is
no explanation.
Sleep deprivation and especially REM sleep deprivation has a powerful antidepressive
effect.
Problem is that the depression returns with subsequent sleep but this observation and
the insomnia of depression tells us that there is a sleep mechanism involved and pursuing
that connection could lead to new therapies.
Turning now to the possibility of using sleep to enhance learning and memory.
Going all the way back to the 1950s when the first portable tape recorders were introduced
there were attempts to learn during sleep.
The idea was that if you played for example a foreign language while you slept you would
learn the language.
There were scams galore but nothing panned out.
Why not?
Perhaps the reason was that the memory transcript was not there to be reactivated but now that
we know specific memories can be reactivated and strengthened during sleep the possibility
of sleep learning should be reinvestigated.
What if a particular foreign language lesson is studied before sleep and paired with a stimulus
such as an odor?
If the odor is then reintroduced during sleep would the material learned be reinforced through
the reactivation reconsolidation process?
Actually language learning might be an excellent research focus as with the pallor experiment
in which sounds were paired with images here the sounds could be the spoken words.
If a student studied a list of phrases in a foreign language and then some of those phrases
were replayed during sleep would they be more likely to be recalled during the subsequent
day?
Language learning is a mixture of procedural and declarative memory formation so it would
also be of interest to see whether reactivation during sleep is effective for both types
of memory alone.
Remember the studies in which subjects learn new movements to use the computer mouse to
move a cursor on the screen to a target?
Clearly performance improvement on that task was a function of non-REM slow wave activity
in the appropriate region of the motor cortex.
But could that activity be stimulated during sleep by a cue that reactivates the memory?
Current work in the lab of Bob Stickgold at Harvard is studying how the skills of subjects
in a virtual reality task downhill skier in this case are improved during sleep.
They're also correlating the subjects reports of dream imagery with the observed improvements.
The indications are that the experience of training before sleep is reflected in mental
processes during early sleep.
In any of these experimental paradigms it would be of interest to have multiple tasks
associated with different associated stimuli to see if they could be selectively improved
during sleep.
But what about the 1950s craze?
Is it possible to learn new information during sleep?
A very recent study by Noam Sobel, Alana Herston and colleagues in Israel shows that
humans can acquire new information during sleep, at least at the level of conditioned
reflexes.
When humans experience a new odor, they sniff.
If the odor is good, they sniff deeper.
If the odor is bad, they sniff more shallowly.
During sleep the investigators introduced good and bad odors to subjects and paired them
with tones.
They showed that during sleep the subjects learn to associate the tones with deep or
shallow sniffing.
Training in early sleep resulted in appropriate responses to the tones during late sleep.
Carryover to wake?
Only the conditioning during non-REM sleep carried over to subsequent wake.
But these new associations learned during sleep clearly carried over to wake.
Finally, what about improving the non-REM processes apparently involved in memory consolidation,
the slow wave activity?
The experiments of Marshall and colleagues in Jan Born's lab indicated that potentiating
slow wave activity improved learning.
We also learned in our lecture on brain energy reserves that slow wave activity could be
enhanced with drugs that mimic the action of adenosine.
Could we speed up the rate of training and learning by enhancing the quality of sleep?
Could we make sleep more efficient so that you could get the benefit of 8 hours of sleep
in 6 hours or in 4 hours?
There are so many exciting possibilities for major discoveries to come out of sleep research
in the future.
I hope that your interest in following these discoveries has been stimulated by our course.
Maybe you will get some of the new technologies as they become available and will study your
own sleep.
Most importantly, I hope you will become a sleep aficionado, savoring it, enjoying it,
and always seeking to improve it.
Thanks for sticking with me through all of these lectures and as always, sweet dreams.
