Hello, you found the portal. I'm your host, Eric Weinstein, and I'm here today with author
of the pendulum, Julie Lindahl. Julie, welcome. Thank you. So, Julie, we're doing this in
a little bit of a different situation than I usually do. You've been staying with us
here in Los Angeles in our home for several nights, and we did not know each other beforehand,
but you are on a book tour. Is that right? That's right, and I got very lucky staying
with you. No, we've been having a blast talking to you and just really enjoying your stay.
Can you tell us a little bit about who you are and what book it is that has brought you
from Europe over to the States? Yes. Well, I am a cosmopolitan who ended up 24 years
ago settling in Sweden, had the pleasure and surprise of ending up living on a small
isolated island in Sweden for about a decade, where I had some time to start to reflect
about my family's past and also grew some roots to start to be able to become grounded
in order to be able to do the work. I didn't know I was going to do the work, but then
in April 2010 went to the Bundesarchive in Germany and asked whether they had any material
on my grandparents who were German. I was born in Brazil in 1967. My mother was born
and occupied Poland in 1941, and most people around me always laughed a bit that I hadn't
put two and two together, but I guess I had tried to look away from those facts. So the
documents I received there set me off on a very long journey. I didn't know that it
would be that long, a six-year journey through Germany, Poland, Brazil and Paraguay to learn
about the role my grandparents played in the Third Reich. Wow, that's a hell of an answer
to a question. So here you are talking about, I guess, secrets deeply hidden from you about
why a German girl would be growing up in Brazil. Can you tell us a little bit about your evolution
as to how you came to understand that there might be something fairly interesting in this
family story? Well, first of all, there's a part of me that's German, so my mother's German,
but my father was an American, which also made matters more interesting because I also had an,
I guess, an outsider's perspective as well as an insider's perspective into my German heritage.
The way it started is hard to say, but the way I usually think of it is back in a time when I was
a two-year-old and put into a German Dirndl, so a traditional German dress, whenever my German
grandparents came to visit from the interior because they were settled on an estate near the
Brazilian Paraguayan border. And I noticed from the albums that I always had one of these traditional
dresses on when they came to visit, which to me seemed very strange given that I was the daughter
of an American and a German, and I was living in Brazil. There are large German communities there,
so maybe you could argue it that way, but it was a little strange. And in that girl's eyes,
I can see, and I also remember growing up bearing very considerable shame, and the nature of shame
is different than guilt. When you feel guilty, you know what you've done. It's a reaction to
something you think you've done wrong, but shame is something else. It's a feeling of self-worthlessness,
and you don't necessarily know why it's there. So I bore this with me from a very early age,
probably because my mother was very frustrated about her past and didn't really know how to deal
with it. I think she wanted to love her parents, like all children, want to love their parents,
yet at the same time understood that they had this troublesome past that was simply not acceptable
in the new era that she was living in, and so therefore I had this with me. Then I got educated,
but I had a very close relationship with my grandmother, who's affection, I guess I saw it
because I didn't have a close relationship with my mother, and my grandmother remained a devoted
Nazi to the end of her life. I just didn't know. I hadn't realized that she was a Nazi.
Wow, so your grandma was a Nazi to the end of a fairly long life, 103 years old. So she died
in what year? She died in 2014. She was born the year the Titanic sunk. Oh, wow. So it's pretty
amazing to think about a diehard Nazi in 2014. Well, obviously she wasn't a Nazi until the
1930s. Right, no, no, no, of course. But one sense is from a little bit that you've said that the
commitment was made and there was somehow no digging out of it, and so it was just kept going
full speed ahead. No, I think you can can compare it to the commitment of some people today to
alternative facts. At some point you've just gone too far and you can't back out. But it does
leave its devastation. You know, she was not free of nightmares and depression and so forth
after the war. But anyway, she and I became quite close or so I thought she was a well read person.
She loved classical music. She loved nature. We spent lots of time together, even more time when I
got a Fulbright in Germany. Let's humanize her a little bit. What kind of classical music did she
love? Oh, well, she loved. She loved the classical German composers, particularly from from the north
of Germany. She also loved Handel. She listened to a lot piano music, German piano music. I'm trying
to think of it's not coming to me right away now, all of them that she liked. But, you know, she
listened to Beethoven and Bach and Mozart and all of those. So very clearly, culturally, high German
culture. Absolutely. And high German literature. She passed on a number of the books that were her
favorites to me. And a lot of it, you know, well known high German literature. So when she then
started tossing out shards of this old ideology during our meetings in her apartment in southern
Germany, where we were having a cup of tea or a cup of coffee and a piece of cake, I was always stunned
and shocked and didn't know what to do with it, except to get up and go do the dishes. And over
time, though, doing that gets to you because you end up in the position of the bystander. You end up
feeling rotten inside when you don't stand up and say, but that's wrong. That's not true. And this was
particularly so when she tried to convince me that the Holocaust was a plot by the international
media to keep Germans down. So after the war, and I was at that time studying international affairs.
Later on, I went on to study German Polish relations in the 20th century at Oxford University. So I
knew what she was telling me was of course completely wrong. And yet I didn't say anything to her
because I was so frightened of losing her affection. That's really an interesting conundrum that we
can all worry about. But you've really been been through this where you're you realize that your
deepest emotional and loyal, your loyalty connections are running to people who are a mixture of pure
evil and pure normal and goodness. I mean, you know, an educated family from from everything I can
discern a family where there was love and caring. And then there's just this horrible,
festering. I don't know what even to call it. I mean, it's just some stain that can't be removed.
Yeah, absolutely. And which is why when I go out to schools and talk about this, I take out an
image which is painted by an artist in Michigan called chemo. And it's a face that has many
different surfaces and dimensions. And you can't really figure out where exactly the face is at
some level. But the point is that there are many different facades. And that's what I learned speaking
with my grandmother and when I when I think about her today. But our conversations as time went by
ended up troubling me a lot. And particularly my own reactions troubled me. I was also troubled by the
fact that I was was influenced by her perspective of Jewish people. Because, you know, she kind of
imparted in various ways that Jewish people were dangerous to us, which was kind of a reaction
of her generation because they were being punished for what they did in the Holocaust. But I didn't
know that at that time, of course. And I did a number of kind of crazy things to try to counteract
that inheritance of mine to really dig deep into myself and blow the whistle and say, hey, that is
a totally insane idea. Jewish people are not dangerous to you.
Well, you have been taking your life in your own hands, staying with us night after night, Julie.
I don't feel that way at all. I feel very well taken care of.
So, do you think your mom knew a great deal of this history that you somehow were screened out of?
Or do you think she was also in the dark about it? Or is even the idea of how much we know about
our histories, is that word too sharp and that there's some need for a kind of layered concept of
knowing where you sort of know something, but maybe you don't know, you don't keep a copy of it
that's too crisp in your mind, because it's too dangerous to have it in that state? What's
the right question I should be asking here? Maybe start with facts. Do you think she had
a lot of facts that you didn't have? No, she didn't. I know that she didn't,
and neither did her siblings, and neither did their mother, because my grandfather went to war
in the autumn of 1939. And first of all, not all of that is documented, what those men did in Poland.
Secondly, a lot of the documents were destroyed. Thirdly, they haven't seen any documents. I'm
the one who has bothered to go and find the documents and read them, and there were a lot of them.
And so I probably know more than any family member, because I've read primary documents
specifically about what my grandfather was doing, and also just what people around him were doing
in the areas where he was. Can you name your grandfather so that we have an individual? I
just call him Opa. I don't name his name because the people are, there are people who are alive
who bear his last name, and I don't want to make their lives difficult. So Opa for the purposes
of this podcast. Yes, and as to these layers, I think you're very right there. In my experience,
for the sake of the family unit, you look away from certain very glaring facts. I did that.
I think my mother and her siblings did that. The family has been our most important unit of
survival since forever. And so that's probably a natural knee jerk type of thing to do.
I think my, or I know that my family knew that my grandfather was in the SS,
because later on I met an uncle. So he was the oldest of the siblings. I met him in Paraguay.
So Opa not only volunteered in 1939, but went straight for the SS.
He was, he joined the SS back in 1934 already. Oh, wow. So he joined the Mounted SS. I think
what you should remember is that the SS in 34 was a political, primarily political organization,
and the Waffen SS, so the military wing of the SS, emerged out of this as the 30s went on.
But he joined as one of Hitler's political soldiers, and specifically the Mounted SS
in 1934, mainly because, well, the Mounted SS was very prestigious. The organization was also,
the Mounted SS was created out of writing associations that were drafted into the organization. So
some people argue that they didn't have a choice, but it's more complicated than that.
But so he was pumped full of propaganda throughout the 1930s, because he was a member of the SS
throughout, so that by the time he got into Poland, he was really quite full of it. And,
you know, Hitler and Himmler and the other Nazi leaders didn't really give very precise
instructions to the SS when they went into Poland, because they trusted that they'd pump these
people so full of propaganda that if they just unleashed them, they would fight a very brutal
racial war, which is exactly what they did. And with no documents indicating that they had been
instructed to do so. So that in part, and I think this has a lot of relevance for today, so let's
go there. One way of making sure that your fingerprints aren't on something is to pump
people full of ideology. And then we know enough about how ideology sits in the human mind
to know what's likely to happen next. I mean, there's this famous example from history
of the king saying, well, no one rid me of this troublesome priest and he doesn't have to give an
order to execute. He just has to say this idly to himself and then he knows what happens.
And then there is no record. So in effect, there is no trigger pulling finger from the central
command. No. And this is also reflected in the way my grandfather and others who had a similar
role as he had as the war went on in occupied Poland is reflected in the way they behaved.
Because he became engaged in a mission set by the Ministry of Agriculture, so the
under the Third Reich to transform West Central Poland to the bread basket of the Third Reich,
because he was a trained estate manager. He knew something about agriculture.
And that can sound benign. What it in fact means is deporting or murdering the existing landowners,
enslaving the local laborers and murdering anyone who's slightly troublesome and torturing people
on a more or less daily basis. Early on in the war, Himmler passed a law which
established that these estate managers were the law in their estates. There was no higher
law over them. And it's exactly what you're saying. It's a law that says, I don't need to know.
Do do what you have to do. That's terrifying. Yes.
Okay, so here you are, a young woman who has grown up in this unusual developmental environment.
You went to college with my wife. You guys knew each other perhaps vaguely. And you're living this
very modern American existence at that time. How is this playing out? I mean, American father,
you're in an American college. You're somehow also the granddaughter of an SS member who has,
you have an inkling at this point that your grandfather has done unspeakable things in
Poland or not? Not so much at Wellesley. I didn't think about it so much, although I was very
affected by it. Because these types of secrets, when they're this heavy, kind of inhabit a family
at a cellular level. I mean, it is physiological. Yeah, absolutely. Okay. And spiritual. Yeah.
I mean, I was very sick when I was at Wellesley. I didn't eat most of the time.
And so that was the way it expressed itself there. In fact, Pia and I worked out that we didn't see
each other that much probably because I was hiding out a lot from people because I had
pretty serious eating disorders. But these were all connected to a feeling of low self-worth that
were connected to the shame that I went around with. So I knew that there was something wrong.
My relationship with my mother was extremely troubled. And as the years went by,
our family relationships, in fact, all of them became quite troubled. Because when you have
something like this in the family that the adults knew something about, they didn't know the whole
story, but they knew enough. And that they try to keep from themselves. It's not so much they're
keeping it from the next generation. They're trying to keep it away from themselves because
they don't want to think about it. Then it starts to strangle the relationships. And that was already
going on at that time. And that affected me at a cellular level. And so when I returned to Europe,
I only spent three years going to college in the US. That was my American experience. Then I returned
to Europe to do a full bride and then went to Oxford. And of course, then I went back into the
European realm and of course got closer and closer and closer to this. And I wasn't that surprised,
or today I'm not surprised in retrospect that my mother was a bit so-so about my learning German
because learning the German language was a path into this history. Without it, I would not have
been able to do this work. You couldn't have gone through the archives. No. So I kept getting closer
and closer and closer to this history all the time without really knowing that I was doing it.
But I think there was something in me that was so desperate about what was happening in my family
because I love my family. It's not because I don't love my family that I've done this work,
which is what some family members may think. It's because I do love my family. And I realized that
there needs to be a little bit of pain in order to try to allow some sort of healing to occur.
Well, Julie, you were at Oxford after college in the States. And I think you've picked up some
British understatement when you say that there needed to be a little bit of pain.
It sounds like a heck of a lot more than that.
Well, I mean, I'm happy to sort of glance at it using our peripheral vision,
but we're talking about an unbelievable burden.
Yes, it's an unbelievable burden.
But, you know, let's put it this way. It was interesting to me that when I decided to actively
start to pursue this work in April 2010, as I was moving towards a decision to go towards the
archives and really exercise my academic training, there were quite a number of people around me who
knew what I was about to do who said to me, that's not necessary. Why do you have to do that?
That's past. Let it be past. It's over. You know, they were frightened. And some of them really were
extremely animated when they tried to convince me not to do this. These are well-meaning people
who want the best for me. But what I knew all the time was that, no, that is just going to prolong
the suffering, not only for me, but for other people, for my children. My children were a very
big motivator. So do you think that the people who were trying to dissuade you were dissuading you
because they knew what you were going to find or was it because they didn't know what you were going
to find? Some people, I think most people thought I would find something because they knew me too well.
They knew how troubled I had been. They knew these different pieces of my background. It was as though
they already knew and just wanted to put on the brakes because they didn't want me to go into that
pain that you name, which is a caring response. At the same time, I also think that there is a selfish
dimension to it because there is this idea in our society that looking back and particularly looking
back at what our ancestors did and those before us did is a dangerous thing. It's in the myths and
legends of Western culture. So I think there was a little element in that of trying to spare
themselves as well, which I sensed and it annoyed me greatly. At the same time, I tried to keep in
my mind that these are people who care about me. There was one person in particular who was an
elderly professor of German literature, a scholar of Moses Mendelssohn, a very great Jewish scholar,
who I knew from Wellesley. I went to see her just before I went to the archive. She lived in a
Wulfenbeutel, a town not too far from Berlin. She was 92 at the time and could barely walk, yet
she came with me to the train station and stood there and stared at me. She had survived the
Holocaust because her father had sent her away to Britain in the late 30s. She stood there and
looked at me and said, please don't do this because she knew my family very well and realized
that I would find something. All right. I got to ask, what did you find? When did you start
finding specifics that really caused the story to advance and caused you to change?
Well, the first find was at the German Federal Archives. It was about 100 pages, which
included mostly information about my grandparents. It was my grandparents'
application to marry as an SS couple, which required them to demonstrate their racial
suitability. They went through medical examinations and there were photographs of them from all
angles and their life accounts written by themselves. There was also information about
all the places where my grandfather had been stationed and occupied Poland. From there,
I went to a number of archives, found his denazification papers, which denazification was
a process that all people who joined the party had to go through after the war
and declare what they had been up to. Of course, most of them regarded it as a joke.
Eventually, I ended up in Poland at the Institute of National Remembrance in Poznan,
where they handed me a wad of documents that were eyewitness accounts of people who had
experienced what my grandfather and his comrades had done in local areas. These were
eyewitness accounts recorded in 1946. They were fairly fresh accounts, fresh in people's minds.
There, I saw the accounts of the brutality and of the beatings and the way that he behaved.
How bad? I mean, I should say, just so you know something about how I react,
I can't in general go to Holocaust films. It's not a topic that I can even almost talk about.
It's too hard, but I'm asking you because this is a journey that you've been on where I think that
the level of pain and the level of bravery and the uncertainty and the complexity is what animates
the story. And so I'm willing to risk it. What did you find? Well, probably what
made me just sit there and stop and look completely paralyzed when I sat in the Institute of
National Remembrance was the information about beating of labors to
now I'm thinking of a Swedish word, to unconsciousness on a regular basis.
Then in those documents, I did not find evidence of murder, but there were other documents I found
later on that pointed to that because he would not have tried to leave for Brazil later on
had he not murdered anyone because in order to be put on trial, you had to have murdered somebody.
And these would have been the local landowners. So I did find some evidence of that.
But still indirect? You spared any kind of direct account of it?
Oh, no, I would wasn't spared it. It spared a direct account. There were direct accounts of
beating people to total unconsciousness. But not to death? No. But I did find evidence later on of
engagement in a really awful episode where a small number of these estate owners would drive
the existing landowners to a nearby forest, tell them to run towards a trench that they dug
themselves and shoot them. Wow. So that's what I learned about later on as well. So there was
evidence of that which wasn't confirmed, but it was there on paper. And really that's what would
have got him to leave so quickly. So to me, it would seem very unlikely that he that wasn't true
at all. So anyway, there were some names of people in those documents so that the people who had
given testimony were named in those documents from the Polish National Archives. So I set out
to try to find, see if I could find some of those families, not expecting to find anyone,
because we all know that after that, the Soviet Union came in and redistributed everybody.
And so I really didn't expect to find any of these families in these places. But to my great
surprise, with the help of a wonderful young Polish archivist and historian who could see how
distraught I was and just simply decided to join me, found five families over different visits to
Poland. And those meetings were very important. They were very important to me. I don't know how
important they were to those people. But to me, they were important. And my friend who drove with
me, who's a young Pole, whose family had also suffered in the Second World War, said, trust me,
this is important to them. So I would say that for me, those meetings
showed me why I was doing this work. Because what I realized in retrospect I was doing
was looking for a transformational dynamic, which is the portal, which is how do we
take everything that we know about the horrible things human beings have done to one another,
and our own experiences of that, perhaps, and transform it into a force that's powerful enough
for us to take another path. And those meetings provided one answer. There's lots of answers.
Do you think it gave any relief to those people that you were meeting with? Do you think there was
a double portal just to riff off you riffing? And I can't answer the question. All I can explain to
you is a few of the reactions, and then you can decide yourself. So the first meeting
was with a person who didn't want to shake my hand, because his memories of what my my grandfather
was name was recognized instantly by all these people. By the way, no one had to remind them
of who he was, which is probably a chilling phrase. Yeah, which is incredible, whatever it is over
seven decades later. Right. So so he didn't want to shake my hand. And he was very sick.
He was dying, this man. And but he was conscious and able to register who I was. And my friend,
the archivist said, I don't think there's much point in carrying on with this conversation,
because he doesn't want to know he experienced too much. But what was in my mind was I must
shake this man's hand. I need to show some form of compassion. I can't ask for forgiveness,
because I didn't commit the crime. But I want to show humanity and compassion. And I did eventually
take his hand and shake it. And he looked completely bewildered. He didn't think that someone like me
was capable, I think of shaking his hand and showing compassion. The next person I went to see
was a person who had dementia and was in his 90s. So he couldn't remember what happened yesterday,
but he remembered things that happened over 70 years ago. And his great granddaughter was there
and started shouting my grandfather's name into his ear, which his reaction was to go back to an
episode in time in which he was hiding in a barn because some people were being shot and there
was violence going on outside. I don't know exactly what the details of it were, but you could see
he was recognizing a moment in time. And so I begged everyone present to switch this off. I
didn't want this to go on. And I decided that my journey was just a selfish journey. It was just
for me to somehow take care of my shame and all that. And so I said to my friend, the archivist,
we must stop now. This is enough because this is just bringing back bad memories for people.
And he said, no, believe me, we have to go on. So there was a third guy we met who was
healthy, a healthy 85 year old who had a very nice garden. As it happened, his
father was most likely my grandfather's gardener on this estate where his parents had worked.
And he'd been beaten over the head when he was a 10 year old. And my grandfather had
passed him and he'd forgotten to doff his hat. So he had a scar over his right eye.
Well, wait a second. He was beaten directly by your grandfather. So your grandfather's mark
was still visible on his on his head at 85. And when I when I realized this, I sat there and
I listened to him for several hours. And I felt awful. And but I didn't really have very much to
say. Of course, what should I say? I was there to listen. And there was a feeling welling up in me
of wanting to beg for forgiveness, because that was really all I felt I could offer. But he realized
that without my saying very much, he was a smart, very intelligent person, emotionally intelligent
person. And he stood up and took my lower arms and shook me up and said,
this wasn't your fault. You didn't do anything. So I want you to go out into my garden.
And I want you to enjoy my garden. And furthermore, I want you to enjoy your life.
And then I went out there and stood there and he and his wife and his daughter was also around
his grown daughter. And they have been very kind to me, serve me cherries picked from their cherry
trees in his garden. And anyway, I went outside and stood there and did exactly as he told me to do.
And he and his wife came and stood next to me. And it was almost like we were holding hands,
we were touching our hands together, and they were we were just silent together. And later on,
I thought, well, of course, it happened right there. This transformational dynamic happened
right there. It transformed everything that he knew, and that I knew about our violent past and
what we had experienced into something else. And what it what it was for me was that shame became
energy, it became responsibility. It became a feeling that you need and have to do something
with this get moving. And without him and without that,
I wouldn't have been able to carry on. Really? No, I would have given up. Because it would just
have been miserable and horrible and terrible. Well, the thing is, it's so disruptive, because
I think there's so many different layers going on in the in a story like this, that
most people have never been called upon to have to pull to pull apart so many different layers of
meaning, importance, guilt, responsibility, shame, the subtle shadings that make make us need so many
different words, we probably don't even have all the words that we need. And the idea that, for
example, two people could have been harmed, let's say, by the same person. And the person who was
harmed more might be much more capable of showing compassion, empathy, mercy to a descendant of the
person who would harm them than the person who had been harmed less might have been less capable.
So that it really isn't just about what happened, but it's also about how strong people
have become, how they're weak, how things played with their psychology. And the sadness that I
have in listening to this is I don't know how many people in our modern consumer day and age
have been pushed through this many layers of metacognition and self introspection that I
don't know when you give a book reading. How much variation do you think is in the audience in terms
of people who sort of can deeply relate to stories like these and people from the sounds almost like
too fantastical to be true? Do you find that these stories consistently find
enough depth in those who read and hear them to fully appreciate them? Or do you think that in part
you need to be close to a story this profound to have to be forced into this level of self-understand?
That's a very, very good question. On one hand, I think that
people who come to events to listen to me by their own free choice, there are events where
at schools and things where they have to attend, so they don't have a choice,
but the ones where they have a choice and they register to attend. Most people have, of course,
there's something in them that attracts them to this and that there's some level of reflection
that has taken place that is bringing them there, something in their personal histories usually.
At the same time, I'm always surprised that after I give these talks,
often people come up to me to express their thanks for the work that I've done,
but then they'll add something to that that demonstrates to me that there's no way they
could really understand the very complex dynamics of what I have encountered because
people then fall back on terms like forgiveness and guilt and things like that, which to me are
there's a whole vocabulary that's been developed around this history and the descendants of this
history, whether they're the descendants of the victims or the descendants of the perpetrators
or the descendants of the bystanders, there's a whole vocabulary. And to me, it's just old
stuff that we fall back on because we're not prepared to go deeper. We're not prepared to
let ourselves in to other levels, other experiences. And so when people start to talk to me about
forgiveness, I try to say to them, yes, well, I've already explained to you that I was seeking
forgiveness, but it was a rat wheel. It didn't lead anywhere. It didn't lead forward. And it
didn't lead forward because for me to ask my grandparents, victims for forgiveness is
not, doesn't lead us anywhere, doesn't lead me anywhere, which is what I had to learn
from one of his victims. And so but people fall back on this and other aspects of vocabulary
that are that we formed around this, the legacy of this history to kind of protect ourselves from
the pain of it somehow, I think that's my read on it. Because when you get into the
into the into the pain of it and really get your hands dirty, you start to come up with other things.
Well, you know, I have to tell you that one of the things that's been very weird about this
is I've used the opportunity of your visit with us to explore how many different dimensions of
reaction I myself am having. And you know, you and I have been talking about this a little bit. So
I don't mind trying to talk about it, but just it's fascinating to become metacognitive and look
at your own kind of automated reactions to a story like this. On the one hand,
I'm just really impressed by the work that you're doing with this book and telling this tale. And I
think it's really important. And we'll come back to this, to tell these stories right at the end of
living memory of the actual Holocaust. So it's hugely impressed. Second of all, just two modern
people hanging out having great conversations, been great talking to you. Third, maybe I have this
third, maybe I have this attitude of, I can't believe I'm stuck with the granddaughter of
an SS member in my house. Do you understand that? Which is like this lineage to lineage level,
which is that, you know, it's not just me and you, it's like the Jewish people and their murderers,
you know, are under the same roof. And then, you know, there's like this selfish thing,
which is this is really important for, I think for us Jews to do some hard work, which is
Germany was one of the most impressive cultures anywhere in terms of its intellectual artistic
contributions. And I am all wrapped up in the incredible contribution to world history that
is German. And my belief is that it is not safe to have a very guilty Germany. Perhaps as we saw
with the refugee crisis, where you're making sort of almost performative decisions to assuage guilt,
that it's the wrong tool to attack the problem. On the other hand, you don't want a super triumphalist
Germany to emerge and say, none of this was real and the Germans have been kicked to the curb.
So you're trying to figure out, in my opinion, should the Jewish people use the end of living
memory of the Holocaust to finally extend a warmer hand up to Germany, not that Germany is
suffering economically. I mean, but Germany was also just the seat of unbelievable genius
at a level that we've scarcely seen in the world. I mean, you have the Italian Renaissance, but
there was a period of German contribution, which was unparalleled. And I think that we have to do
this really hard work that I'm sort of not prepared to do. And we talked about a very weird metaphor.
Now, I wonder if we can draw you in. We were talking about how people get angry,
that the untrue story gets disturbed when you do this kind of research. And I went into one of our
smartphones and I found this triptych of three images, originally of something, I think it was a
fresco or a painting that had been beautiful, that in the second panel it had gotten damaged.
But in the third panel, there was a terrible restoration of the damaged painting. And it was
almost cartoon-like. And I worry that what we're left with right at the moment is a bit of a cartoon.
And what you're really trying to say is, I want to go back before this bad restoration,
in the case of your family's history, let's say, and look at both the beauty and the damage
that was your family more honestly in the hopes of maybe a better restoration.
Can you talk about sort of, I know that you're in a strange place with your mom. Can you talk about
kind of the love that you feel for your family and your mom having done this work and having
me tell you that I'm just being open, that I'm struggling with the fact that you're in my home.
And I think that this is just really courageous work to be doing. Can you talk about what you're
trying to do for your family? First of all, I wanted to say that you're having me in my home
and having this conversation is the work. So you are doing the work. So you don't have to say that
you are not doing the work. You are doing the work right now. And as far as my,
as that image goes that you shared with me of this poor restoration, I reacted to that immediately
as the best representation of what has happened in my family that I have seen so far really,
visually. You grasped it so fast and
which means that we're getting somewhere with our conversation. But if I think of,
you asked me about the love of my family and
if I had not done this work, I can safely say that I would have hated several members of my family.
I don't want to say which ones. You don't have to. No. I really would have hated them,
not just the generation that committed the crimes, but the generation afterwards too.
I would have hated them for lying to me about very serious things
and leaving me with a shame that I felt at a cellular level. Not only me, but my sister too,
and she's younger than I am, so my job was to protect her and I couldn't.
I couldn't protect her from this. It messed up her life for a long time.
But going back and, for example, getting in a jeep with a Brazilian genealogist in Brazil
and driving out into the interior of Brazil where my mother and her, some of her siblings,
ended up because my grandparents went there because of what they'd done in Europe.
And seeing what a young teenager faced, a life in a wilderness, a dangerous wilderness,
a place dominated by the drug trade, having your youth taken away from you,
not being able to grow up in Germany, which, after all, as you said, had a very rich and old culture,
having your, just having your opportunities taken
in, like that. And as I stood, actually, on this estate was the, this place where they
had established themselves and the interior of Brazil looked at the structures that were still
standing there. The man who was with me said, so I take a picture of you in front of this,
and I said, I never want to have a picture of me in front of this ever. This is the source
of our suffering. This is the source of my mother's suffering. And I realized then
how much sympathy I had for her situation and for her siblings as well. I don't think they
really realized that, that that's part of the consequence of this work. Today I have a sympathy
for them. And it's not like feeling sorry for just a hurt person. It's a deep love of them.
As you would love a person who you can see is enduring the unbearable.
We all have children. You have children who are teenagers. I have children who are just over
the teenage years. And if you just think of them in that situation, their future just taken from
them pulled out from under their feet by parents who had committed crimes. It's a terrible thing.
And so for me, I, there is a healing in that awful moment because otherwise I would have
remained in a space of hatred, which is exactly where we need to not be, which is exactly
that what everyone needs to get out of wherever they can.
Yeah. I mean, I'm finding our current vogue for talking about oppression very bizarre,
because to me, much of it lacks the, I don't know what to call it, the texture of
really deep discussions about how do these crimes perpetuate themselves and propagate
really as a wave in the, in the medium of our generational structure inside of our families,
that you see something that goes wrong and then it cascades generation after generation.
You know, in my own case, one of the things I wrestle with is that my family,
I think for the best of reasons, became interested in far left politics and that blinded them to
the horrors of communism and Stalinism for a period of time when the US was, you know,
not fully aware of what exactly had been going on in the Soviet Union. It was possible to think that
maybe the Soviet Union was trying to build a better world. They were more open to, you know,
blacks migrating to, to Moscow or, you know, interracial marriages or whatever that,
that were less comfortable in the US, who knows. And from that, you know, a blind eye is turned
because we don't know how to die in a la carte politically. It's very hard to say, well, these
aspects were positive, these aspects were negative. And we keep finding very simplistic
solutions that work their way through the, you know, the world historical spirit. But, you know,
tens of millions of people can die at a time as dumb ideas are explored. What work do you think
we should be doing now? Like, what do you think the most important thing is for people who can
make the leap to metacognition and kind of look in on themselves and say, isn't it interesting
that I'm simultaneously feeling, you know, like the both the blessings of multiculturalism and
the need to have cultures that are exclusive in order that there are cultures that can be made
into multicultural. So, you know, that that's a great contradiction right there that culturalism
is based on exclusion multiculturalism is based on inclusion, we can't resolve it.
What is our work right now? Do you think
for 2019 this time? Yeah. Well,
I don't want to go into this typical diatribe about we have to reduce polarization and all that.
You know, no simple answer. Yeah, because in some ways the polarization induces a lot of
thinking and reactions and forces new things to emerge and forces people to look for a new way,
new ways and a new way out of this situation.
Well, I can only refer to what I've been doing. I can't tell other people what they should be
doing. And so what is a person who has been done this kind of work? Do you live in Sweden?
Yes. So that's your base of operation. Yeah, yeah, I live in Sweden. And
although I come to the United States and I write in English, so therefore I speak here really,
I've been involved in doing the work in Sweden. And the direction that's taken me is that
I have become engaged in different circles of individuals who
have very different areas of expertise, but are working at a very high level of their field,
but have decided that it is insufficient that they remain in their fields.
We will not find a way forward that way. We have to come together in different networks with our
different areas of expertise and address problems that come up. So when I was pulled in by a bunch
of IT experts who are fighting white supremacy on the internet, I don't like to use the word
fighting, let's say counteracting white supremacism on the internet, and asked to
participate in some of their projects, I was wondered what it was I could do,
because I don't know anything about what they do. But as it happened, they saw that there were
things I was doing they couldn't do. And so one of the manifestations of this collaboration is that
we were called upon to
help an area of Sweden that was being blamed by white supremacy. So there was a neo-nazi party
that had brought a town to a halt. And as it turned out, the solution was not to try to get at the
neo-nazis, the solution was to move into that society and to inspire it to mobilize itself,
so to bring in all the major stakeholders, business, the church, local government, whatever,
everyone who played a role there, and to get them to decide that their community was too important
to allow the things that bound them together originally, which had weakened, to just fall
apart. And I think this is a story that is happening in many parts of the western world,
it's why we see this situation that we're in, that at a community level,
there isn't the things that bind us together, I don't know what we're going to call them,
the bonds have weakened, they have weakened in quality, in fact they're becoming so weak
that groups like the neo-nazis and in other places other groups can just move in
and finish them off, so basically finish off these bonds between us and just slice right through
them. And so by going into this community and saying come on everyone, let's all sit down
in this church, which was usually the largest gathering place in a Swedish town, not because
people are particularly religious, but because that's where people gather, and talk about how we can
strengthen the bonds between us, within one year people stopped moving out of that town,
and business had doubled down on its investment in that town. And to me, I guess what I should
extract from that as a sort of general thought about what we should be doing, it's seeking to
strengthen the bonds between us in whatever way we can, which is in my view, what you and I are
doing, despite the fact that we have to get over a number of emotional hurdles to do that.
But we're doing it, and this is what needs to happen everywhere where it can, especially
among individuals who have quite a lot of hurdles to jump in order to, you know,
where there are a lot of emotional, difficult emotional feelings that you need to overcome
in order to strengthen that bond. This has also been true for me in my interactions with the
Islamic community. I've been approached by people from the Islamic community who know that there
has to be Holocaust education in their communities, but who also know that their communities will not
welcome hearing it from a Jewish person or, you know, a descendant of a Holocaust survivor,
which is terrible. It's not always the case, but it is the case sometimes, because there are lots
of descendants of Holocaust survivors who generously give their time to go around speaking about what
happened to their parents and grandparents in the Holocaust. But often, at least what I have
encountered in Sweden is that in a number of Islamic communities, they just can't emotionally
break through. They can't get over the hurdles. They can't sit down and listen.
You know, even in the U.S., there's this very bizarre thing that we're going through where
suddenly slavery, which was one kind of a disaster that obviously was bound up in the
founding of the United States, has a tremendous salience inside of the media commentary. You have
a more recent situation like the Holocaust, which was not a North American phenomenon,
it was a European one, but it's much more recent. And the, you know, the body count is
spectacular, and the mechanized horror and deliberate nature of the whole thing, etc., etc.,
is fairly unparalleled. And it doesn't have the same kind of salience, because it's somehow
bound up in this question of, are we really talking about oppression, or are we really talking about
financial distribution and redistribution? Because the Jewish community is always vulnerable
in a violent way, but it's often very successful in a financial way. And so I've had this theory
that you can tell who's really focused on envy and who's really focused on oppression
by how do they treat whatever the minority communities are that are very financially
successful in some spheres. So like overseas Chinese, or you have Indian communities in East
Africa that are vulnerable, but often doing well in the Jewish communities, often, you know,
if you're measuring oppression financially, but you're talking about it as if what you're really
upset about is, you know, murder or one human owning another human, these things get pulled
apart based on the, on which community you're discussing. So for whatever reason, slavery
is very central to the current American discussion. And the vulnerability of Jews is
increasingly invisible to the far left and the far right. And I don't know what to do about that.
It's too weird because this, I mean, in human terms, this is super recent.
You know, there isn't anyone who can remember slavery. And thank God it's
moving into the past. So we have to, you know, rely on records, but we still have people walking
around who are quite old now, who were, you know, in the camps or exposed to what was going on.
And, you know, most of those people were children now, if they have any contact with that at all.
But it feels to me like we're, we're unable to remember the horror and the vulnerability
because somehow we just feel like it doesn't matter anymore. I don't, I don't know if you
have this feeling. Well, the thing is that you and I can't remember the Holocaust because we
didn't live through it. No, we're both in our sort of early mid fifties. Yeah.
So, so that's gone. But what we remember, and I think we remember it intellectually,
some, I don't know if you want to call it emotionally or spiritually,
and we recall it in ourselves. What we recall is the legacy and the reactions of our families
to the Holocaust. That's what we remember. And in some of us, it's more acute than in other people.
And in those of us where the memory of the legacy is more acute, as in my case, for example.
I think those people have a very strong responsibility to
support remembering the legacy of that time.
Remembering is gone, or will be gone soon. Will be gone soon. It's not entirely gone.
I shouldn't say that because there are Holocaust survivors out there doing the work
and continuing to do it. But I also know I Holocaust survivors have been and their descendants
have been my the greatest supporters of my work. They're the ones who have stood up and said carry
on when I just didn't feel like, you know, I could do well, there's a selfish aspect of
but you know, there's also this very weird, I don't swear that much on these programs,
but I will swear a little bit for emphasis. There is just this incredibly beautiful fuck you to
Nazism, when you invite somebody from that lineage as a Jew into your home, and you say,
boy, did you guys get us wrong. You guys were just such dicks, you know, it doesn't,
it's meant not to do it justice because there's nothing you can say to the Holocaust. But like,
all of these things that I'm reading on the internet about how Jews control everything and the narrative
and you know, spend time with Jews. I don't know anybody who's being invited as elders of Zion to
examine its protocols. It's just, it's a very bizarre thing that when people become divorced from
Jews and Judaism, they start telling incredible stories inside of their mind as to what it must
be and what it represents. So, I mean, I think that there's a way in which we need you to tell
the story. I think that there's a way in which we test our own strength and do what, you know,
because this is a struggle for me, Julie, a little bit. It's not the easiest thing in the world
because there's a lineage to lineage thing just as there's a human to human to human thing.
I couldn't be more admiring in the lineage to lineage thing. I'm thinking like, what am I doing?
And so, you know, the ability to sort of share, to be able to share that with you at a metacognitive
level and to also just like laugh at the whole thing, you know, that two modern human beings
are talking about something that we can't even imagine going through ourselves.
But can I say something? The what am I doing question is what we, where we need to get to
to open up this new space that is the purpose of your podcast?
Well, that's the thing is that we've got to break out of these things. I'm very concerned for them
at the moment in our country in the US that the Democratic Party has gone into this kind of
emotional feeling. We can't say no to anybody and
diversity is strength and we should sort of, there are no people who are illegal and why should
somebody born outside the US be any less fortunate than some. So this sort of Christ-like stance
on all things, which I think is incredibly irresponsible and very, very dangerous because
it's not sustainable and only Christ was Christ if anybody at all was Christ. On the other hand,
you see this troglodytic perspective, which is just like, you know, I'm tired of feeling guilty and
this is our country and very close to ethno-nationalism, even if it isn't as the media portrays it,
it's certainly inching in directions that I find terrifying. I don't know what to do about it because
I just want both of these parties to go away for very different reasons and I think that they're
feeding off of each other and our worst instincts and I feel like the hard work is done when people
sit down with people who are very different than them and find out that the conversations they end
up having don't don't sound anything like the conversations we might have imagined.
Yes, and who are
prepared to be open to an evolution because humans, humans like everything, like all other living
beings on this planet, develop, move forward in an evolutionary way and so when you have these
parties screaming out, visions to me are very dangerous, visions of things, of how things are
going to be unbelievably dangerous and, you know, all of the most destructive leaders have had them
and but people who are inching their way forward in this evolution
and having, doing the slow work of repairing the bonds between us is what is needed
and the other stuff to me is, it's always going to lead to a repeat, you know, just a rerun of the past.
You know, I've mentioned this before, I was going to start the podcast with this cousin
who I'd never met but I've been talking to a little bit on and off over the years
who lived in Indiana and she was a Mengele twin who had an incredible story in the camps and I
spoke to her just before the podcast started and before she left on her annual pilgrimage to Auschwitz
and she was really excited about about it. She had freed herself by having to go to the
extraordinary length of forgiving Dr. Mengele and the first time I heard that I had a cousin
who had forgiven Dr. Mengele, I was so pissed. It's like, how can you do that? You cannot let
this person off the hook, you know, there is responsibility. When I talked to her, I realized
I hadn't understood what a genius move this was so I was like, I had to take this anger that I felt
and realize that first of all, she had been through this episode and me getting angry on
behalf of her was a little rich when she wasn't angry herself. It was one thing if she was going
to carry that. Her perspective was I and her name was Eva. I, Eva needed to free myself from victimhood
by doing what he couldn't, what Dr. Mengele couldn't stop me from doing. He couldn't stop me from the
grave from forgiving him when I had every reason not to and she had no desire to forget or to let
him off the hook but simply to use her power not to be his victim and this woman was at incredible
powerhouse and she was a next level thinker and I'm sorry that I only got a chance to really even
connect with her at the very, very end. She dies on this trip to Auschwitz so she can't make it
onto the portal as my first episode. I learned a ton from talking to her about that which is
that we do have bizarre powers to write off things that still might have some value
to let people go or to find arrangements in which we can pass power back and forth and I'm talking
more about this on the podcast. The way I see it is that we Jews have the power to celebrate German
culture. There's a lot of things that happened in Germany that were unbelievable that happened well
before Adolf Hitler ever came to power and there you know if I could just even talk about
things that Nazis did that are incredibly beautiful and profound. So for example there's a guy named
Pascal Jordan who contributed some of the algebra around quantum mechanics that finds its way into
beautiful exceptional algebraic structures. I love his work. He was a straight up Nazi or I've
you know communicated with Carl Christian von Weizsiker the economist who was the son of
I guess a Nazi physicist. It's very clear that this kind of German precision enters into the work
that this economist was doing with one of the few people who could evaluate some of my work.
So there are ways in which we have to be in dialogue even with our purest representation of
true evil and have to be able to have a more nuanced relationship with it lest the childlike
relationship of you know this is pure bad and can't be talked about no now it's going to come
erupting out of Pandora's box trying to figure how to put that to bed by having these more
difficult more nuanced conversations is a lot of what what the portal is supposed to be about.
I wonder if we could turn it just towards the end to to your mom. The sadness that I feel
in listening to your story is you know at one level it's cosmic it's about you know two important
cultures that were intertwined in some kind of crazy memetic rivalry and earlier world war
reparations and the disaster that came from that but then there's just this very personal thing
about you and your mom and a question of how do we reconceptualize the work I don't even think
you had a choice in I think you had to do this work I think you were compelled and it was inexorable
in some sense. One thing you talk talk to me about was the idea that in Germany is that in all
cultures there's a concept of besmirching one's family and you can you say what the word for this
is? Nest Bischmtze which means one who dirties the nest and I was thinking about this from the
perspective of this restoration work and art that what you're doing is is that the nest
was Bischmtze if you would by
by the cheap coat of paint over the top of it and I don't think your goal is to focus just on the
whole I think your goal is to restore the nest and that that work may be pretty tough is that a fair
read? Yes and yes it's my goal I if I try to conceptualize that restoration as we're all going
to be able to sit around the table and be loving to each other and have natural relationships with
one another in my at least with the with the generation that came before me so my mother's
generation then I probably won't succeed and I'm not going to try and create that expectation
in my heart a restoration has taken place in the sense that I have sympathy I don't hate
I'm not furious and angry at everybody who came before me I see they're different facades
you can't forgive what some of them did but it's not for me to forgive so there's nothing to do
about it it's the victims who should decide whether to forgive or not like your relative
but when it comes to my own family my children and my husband who are my family now that is
my nest and it's sharing a nest of course with with the others too and that part is
becoming more like the beautiful painting at the beginning of the series the complex painting
when I first had to appear on television when the book was released in Sweden in January in
Swedish language I was asked to come and have an interview on morning television and it was
the first time when the story really hit the headlines everywhere in Sweden and so there's
a big deal in Sweden it's quite a big deal and suddenly after I came off this interview I
became very frightened about how my children would feel because I didn't anticipate that this
would be such a big deal and suddenly it was and I thought how will my children feel all
their friends will know everybody who knows them know that I'm their mother and how do they react
to this because I had not you know talked to them constantly about this through the years neither
had I hidden it from them but now we were in a different situation and well my daughter fixed it
my daughter my daughter showed me that we will move forward be able to hold this complexity
and she showed me by calling me up and saying mom I'm proud of you and it wasn't so much
that the need to feel that my daughter was proud of me that was so important
but what was important was that she could feel the emotion of pride in our family about
being open about what happened and that she doesn't feel
any form of hatred or anger or anything to any of the characters in the story rather she can see
and she can behold it and she knows and she can then draw strength from that and move forward
with that into a society that's changing very quickly and so if there's anything that I any
restoration work that I hope I've succeeded in it's in in that piece in in in making the part of
the nest that's inhabited by my children and me and my husband more true
yes I mean look I can't tell you how well it's not even you I really want to be talking to I
think it's really like I want to be talking to your mom and I want to be letting somebody know
that on the other side of this it's not just a question of shame and sticking somebody's head
in the toilet bowl for the rest of eternity forcing them to relive the worst parts of everything
it's a question of it really needs to be understood that this happened it was as bad as we say it was
and that that is not the entire story and in particular this issue of passing power back and
forth when people who have lineage and connection to the perpetrators of what happened during this
darkest of periods in human history talk about these things and own them from the lineage perspective
because you can't own it personally because it wasn't you and it allows the rest of us to do the
other part of the work which is to say you know I've always felt vaguely guilty about how attached
I am to Schubert leader or you know music is huge for me so you know whether it's Bach or Beethoven
or yeah me too Richard Strauss is my favorite right there you go and you know I remember the
first time I was in Berlin and somebody said my Germanic last name I never wanted to go to Germany
because of my trauma and suddenly I had this question did that sound awful or did it sound
awesome you know it's a very weird thing to be bound up I think that in part Yiddish which is
really some version of Judaic middle-high German we've gotten divorced from Yiddish kite the culture
that in part you know surrounds this language because of this horrible history so I think
that there's so much to be gained from people like you you know sort of owning the connection to it
and talking about the the deepening of understanding of it and the rest of us are in a position
to do the other part of that work which just letting your mom know I couldn't very easily
celebrate things that are Germanic which have had a huge impact and a hugely positive impact on the
world without people like your daughter writing books like this and having the courage to go on
the lecture circuit talking about the unspeakable and so I think it's really important that we
figure out how to restore Germany to her rightful place in the world order as the last people
to have touched the Holocaust from any side you know take their take their last bows
the one thing out let's let's leave on is you told me something I didn't know about child rearing
in Germany and empathy and I wonder if you could just share that a little bit with our listeners
and then I'll say a couple of words and we'll finish it out well I didn't know about it either
really except through observation in my own family my own experience until
Dietzeit major German daily newspaper finally published the research findings that show that
child raising techniques that were practiced in some of the more radical Nazi families but this
was this was these were techniques that were summarized in a book that was written by somebody
called Dr. Johanna Harer in 1934 this book was published and it was a book that made its way into
many Nazi households especially households of SS families and these were ideas about
how to raise children but not only how to raise children it was how to raise them for the struggle
because the the motivating idea behind Hitler society was that there was a constant struggle
going on between the races and the you know the the Aryans and the other degenerate peoples and
and so the the effect of these practices if if you take them in their sum total
is to remove empathy from people and there were all kinds of ways in which this took place mothers
weren't supposed to look into their infant's eyes and things like that and of course I don't think
that most mothers that implemented these things were conscious that that's what they were doing
but that was the that was the effect and I'm not saying that those babies ended up with no empathy
but what the research is showing is that those babies that are now elderly people
are moving into in their 70s if I don't know if you regard a person in their 70s as elderly but
anyway they're about I used to but I'm not that's why I added that but but um what is emerging is
that in families where these techniques were implemented in a systematic manner the effects
on the children were very serious and this there was research available about this already back
in the early 90s but no German paper wanted to touch it no one wanted to publish it wow and it was
at the beginning of this year Dietzite had the courage to publish an article about this which
was almost immediately translated into English and published in Scientific American and um
without going into the details when I read about it I recognized a lot of things and just
emotionally from from from things reactions the behaviors I'd seen in the generation that came
before me the behavior between my grandmother and her children things that I then experienced
because no one in my family really confronted you have to confront what came before you in order
not to repeat it and unfortunately that didn't happen so I am familiar with some of these things
and I think this is going to be very a very big thing and very important for a lot of families
that this is coming up out into the open now I think it's also important because there are other
places where extremism exists in the world and questions about whether the children of extremists
should be should remain with those extremists or not and I must say with my with with what I know
I would question whether that's a good idea in all cases because maybe some of those children would
be better off being raised in other families depends on a number of factors you're the grandchild of
extremists I know I don't know what to say about that but but I think what I can can say is that
the tendrils of that time are so long and so many yeah that
the remembering yeah will go on in another way and it's going to go on for a very long time
and it is the remembering will happen through those kinds of things these child rearing practices
were something that have left an imprint on families through generations what is more shocking
is that in 1945 when the war was over right and this this particular book which was called the
German mother and her first child should have been put on a big heap and well maybe we shouldn't
burn books but it should have just been it no I want to read it anymore and instead the worst
Nazi ideology was taken out of it it was republished and also translated to a number of European
languages and sold continued to be sold throughout Europe so these ideas continued to affect
you know people into the 1960s and then the 70s there was a break with this you know late 60s
there were the student revolts in Germany and then there was a sort of and and also student
revolts in different parts of Europe and so yeah exactly and so then this stuff started to be
people distanced themselves from this but it continued to have an impact after the war so
there are these continuities that means that the tendrils of the Nazis reached even further
that's not to say that the techniques that were in there are solely attributable to the Nazis because
they also drew on thinking that came before them there's you know there's an intertwining of responsible
and even very high German thought with this very dangerous and low Nazism authoritarian and authoritarianism
and of course you know it's not like there's no country on earth that's been immunized from
the authoritarian tendencies and you know there are founding murders and atrocities found everywhere
I don't want to overdo the idea that this is totally singular to Germany but just with this
empathy riff maybe we could close it out by me asking for something that I would never be able
to ask for if you hadn't done the hard work and might show a payoff to your family and anyone
else who's interested I would never want to hear a humanizing story about your life with your great
with with your grandmother and not a Germanic one but because of this work I wonder if we
shouldn't sort of explore a payoff of it which is can you take me into something that's really
precious and sweet to you about your relationship with your grandma as you said a committed Nazi
till 103 or whatever it is this work opens up to show what the benefit is of actually confronting
this that this is something that would be of interest to somebody who would would never be of interest
to me and under any other circumstance when I was writing the last chapter of my book and
actually it was that was the short version of the book so that's no longer the last chapter but
now it's somewhere in the middle of the book but it is the part of of the pendulum
where I reflect on my grandmother's death because she passed away in 2014 somewhere in the middle
of where I was doing my research and when I first excuse me when I first wrote
this section about my reflection on her passing I hurled my fury at her and then I took those pages
and I sat in the couch and I thought that's a lie that's a lie you're just doing that for
everybody else because everybody else wants you to hate her yeah but you don't hate her you don't
you love her but you also realize that she did she supported very bad things yep and so I wrote
rewrote it and what I wrote there was a recognition that my grandmother had influenced me and formed
my life in ways that I can never quantify she was an enormous influence on my life yeah yes she was
and well partly led me into this research after all it was her willingness to speak with me
over very very many years about many things just not
just not certain pieces of the the essential truth was just that they were an ss couple
but she was willing to speak with me about very many things opened up for me the gray zone that
women inhabited under Nazism that they were both victims and perpetrators at the same time because
Nazism also promoted male violence including at home and so I'm very formed by her and I
recognized it there and I went back to one particular memory which is which is a sweet
memory of her that I try to keep in my mind I don't cling to it because I can actually today
hold both the memory of her sitting there
in a harsh voice trying to convince me the Holocaust didn't happen as well as this sweet
memory but you can't let one memory erase the other one because then you're not you're not
dealing with the reality you're not facing the truth so the other memory is when I was a young
girl and I was I was kind of chubby as some young girls are and my mother sent me to stay with her
rather than in the apartment where the rest of the family were staying because my grandmother
was into health food into healthy food and she had a way of handling food in a very sparing way as
many people from a war generation people the person who's been through two world wars is very
sparing with food and she would prepare a muesli for the following day the night before because it
had to it had to rest before you ate it on the next morning it was a way of handling the fruits of
the earth with respect in a way that we don't do in our consumer society that's a problem
and we sat there grating an apple together and I would watch her grating this apple with such
reverence into this bowl because she really appreciated every ingredient and she would
talk quietly to me in her tiny little kitchen about you know not having food the absence of food
why this apple was healthy and the next day the next morning we would eat it together together
in this apartment and to me it's a positive memory it's a simple memory it's full of it's full of
things that we have lost in our society that perhaps we need to find our way back to
greater reverence for things that the earth produces and so I keep that with me next to
the other memories as well well thank you for trusting me with in my audience with a beautiful
vignette from your life with your grandma and for making it possible just to understand the
complexity you know the old adage that hurt people hurt people there were a lot of hurt
people in Germany before the Nazis came to power and people got swept up in things and there's
responsibility and a lack of responsibility and I assume we'll spend many years trying to sort out
what's what but I want to just say thank you at like the most human of levels I have so much love
for you and your project what you're trying to do Julie so thanks for coming on the program
and sharing your story with us thank you Eric for doing the hard work no no it's you who's doing
the hard work the book people is the pendulum check it out the author is Julie Lindell you've
been listening to us discuss this important work and this important book so thanks for coming
through the portal with Julie and please remember to subscribe to the podcast wherever you listen
to podcasts be that stitcher spotify apple or if you listen on youtube make sure to subscribe
and click the bell so you'll be let know whenever we drop our next episode
