Welcome to The Basin Conspiracy, I'm Yannesh Brotsky. I'm Stephen Zeeber. I'm Jessica Dickey.
And today Stephen's jumping us right into the rat chat.
Yeah, I was talking about it before we actually started, so I insisted that we just start the episode so I can plug these things.
Excellent. Plug the things.
Plug the things. They're actually both podcast episodes.
So I was just talking about episode 150 of Very Bad Wizards, Paul Bloom insisted that we talk about sex robots, is the title.
And the main thing that was really funny about it was they go through, I don't know, half a dozen of famous thought experiments,
but they substitute everything out with porn, or porn related things.
Wait, is there like a porn trolley problem? Please tell me there is one.
There must have been. I can't remember which one that was.
Okay, I'm going to listen to it.
We were joking about, because we had some pre-conversation, or pre-episode conversation for the Patreon subscribers.
If you guys listened to Ward, this one was all about the most recent episode of We've Got Ward's Discussion question about Kenzie's surveillance.
If you don't listen to Ward, you have no idea what that means.
So we were talking about that, and then that was sort of like our fluffer topic to get our brains engaged for the podcast.
And then I said, yeah, but then who fluffs the fluffer?
And that reminded me of the Very Bad Wizards thing.
Oh, okay.
And they have one about, like, and it was like their last one.
It was more of just kind of like a logic puzzle.
Oh, yeah, it was the all sets that contain themselves, right?
Yeah, and the fluffer fluffs all those that, it was some twisting on that, but it was funny.
But the one that I remember was like, that epistemological puzzle of knowledge is a true justified belief, unless you find the weird education where it's not.
So like, the standard one would be your neighbor pulls into the driveway in a Ferrari, and you're like, oh, my neighbor owns a Ferrari.
And it turns out that that's their, like, brother's Ferrari, but they have one in the garage that you didn't know about.
So like, is your belief that they have a Ferrari true?
Like, kind of maybe, but like the thing that gave you your belief isn't the thing that you have a belief about.
So that's kind of the way to get back to that.
But they twist it in that like, all right, so Enya, you're really into like incest porn.
Oh, right.
And so you're watching, oh, you said you heard the episode.
I did.
Oh, yeah.
They're like putting words each other's mouths and putting porn taste in each other's browser histories.
It's kind of funny.
But they're like, all right, so say you're really into incest porn.
And, you know, these two girls are pretending to be sisters and you're really into that.
But they're not.
They just met that day on set.
But then it turns out that they actually are sisters.
They just didn't know about it.
They're separated at birth.
Did you get off to incest porn or not?
So they all come back to some twists like that.
It was pretty funny.
I'm plugging that.
And then it was the, I think most recent or second most recent of Sam Harris's podcast
with Rebecca Tracer on the Me Too movement.
And I thought it was really well done.
She was awesome.
And it was probably the, I haven't done a lot of digging into like the history and impact
and motivations and all that of it, but I found it very informative and fun.
So I thought it was a great kind of dive into everything that's going on there.
And I'm sure there's good, good conversation the other way, but probably not in a podcast.
No, I mean, Harris pushed back because I mean, he's, he's one of the intellectual dark
web self masturbating people.
So his whole thing is like, yeah, but you know, what if it goes too far?
Like when Matt Damon was like, let's, let's all kind of be reasonable here.
And he just got castigated over it and dragged through the mud.
And she was like, all right.
So what actually happened to Matt Damon?
As we just talked about, he was on SNL last weekend.
He's fine.
You know, what happened to him?
People were mean to him on the internet, Sam.
That's what happened.
Like, oh no.
And so it was a really, you know, yes, there are cases where, you know, someone's injured
or something.
Well, maybe, but the point is that like she was really level headed and responding to
him, trying to entertain some of the not so reasonable concerns.
Yeah.
I mean, yes.
I mean, it's weird because there's different levels of power in society.
I heard someone say once, I think it might have been from the last psychiatrist that
you can tell who actually has the power by who is scared.
And in that interaction, it was Matt Damon that was scared and he shut right the fuck
up and apologized and then dropped off Twitter.
So, I mean, saying that he's fine.
Yeah, okay.
He is fine, obviously, and he has power in certain aspects, but in that particular interaction,
he was the one who was scared for his career and his reputation.
And so in that case, he was not the powerful one.
That's a really good point.
So, Matt Damon's specific example aside, I had fun with it, but I actually still had
fun with it, even hearing like I like what you just said.
And actually, again, I do this a lot.
I'm now moved back to your position.
I think maybe someone disagreed that definition of power.
I hate the idea of like taking statistical averages of power and saying, therefore, you
have power.
All right.
People have different power in different contexts.
But some people will do that.
So, I'm shutting that down right away because I think it's pointless to go up to some homeless
white guy on the street and saying, you have more privilege than Barack Obama.
Right.
So, Jennifer, like in a in a back alley shank fight, that guy's got some power that I probably
don't got.
Yeah.
Unless you're the one shanking.
I've never shanked anyone.
He'd probably have an advantage on me.
He probably also gives less fucks.
That's probably true.
He's shanking people.
Anyway, so those are my two, my two ratchets.
As long as we're plugging podcasts, I had a really good time with the Planet Money Halloween
episode where they told a spooky tale of haunting economics and it was, it was kind of fun.
I like that.
I have no recommendations.
So, but thank you for the ones that you guys gave because I just ran out of podcasts to
listen to.
So, I'm definitely going to check those out.
I tend to just jump on whatever Steven's doing.
Like when he was recommending a video game, I was like, oh, I don't want to recommend.
And now he's recommending podcasts.
I'm like, oh, I had a fun one.
So.
Well, I need more podcasts too.
So, Planet Money sounds like a lot of fun.
I love Planet Money.
They do such a good job with everything.
And last psychiatrist is a blog, right?
Yeah.
But hasn't been updated in years.
Yeah.
You've plugged this before.
I think I have this bookmarked somewhere, but I'm going to actually read stuff on here
because it sounds interesting.
What was the one that you mentioned?
The, that was the with the power thing, right?
I have no idea.
Like I said, it's been years since he's updated and I don't know what post it was, when it
was.
I'm going to just put power and balance and Google and leave it there.
All right, cool.
It's always worth doing the five minute Google.
Yes.
Well, especially it's worth it to me to do it now because I'm definitely going to forget
in five minutes.
So.
Did you find that a death note fan fanfic thing?
I forgot to keep looking.
No.
I have a tab open in on my phone to keep looking.
So fuck it.
I'll put that in here as long as I'm distracted.
For people who are listening, there's a really cool, like, I don't know what the term is
for a fanfic.
That's actually manga, like fan manga.
Oh, um, don't Jinchi possibly.
Is that the term?
That's usually like an amateur.
Yeah.
I don't know.
Okay.
It is usually like a fan comic of something, but you just say that it's a fan comic.
Yeah.
That takes, takes, continues the story after, um, after light has died and he wakes up in
the afterlife and immediately starts munching his way into taking over the afterlife.
Sounds dope.
Yeah.
Kind of like a shishio in Kenjin.
Is that what he did?
Yeah.
There was there was a brief thing at the end of the Kyo-ri arc where what's that his devoted
guy who threw the gun away during the fight because he trusted shishio to win and his girlfriend
that he stabbed as a whatever visual obstruction to stab through her to hit Kenjin.
They meet, they all meet up at the gates of hell and shishio is like, yeah, no, we're
going to take over this place.
Shit.
What happened in the, in the anime?
I apparently didn't get that far.
Yeah.
I might have seen it half a dozen, 10 times as a kid.
So.
Okay.
Cool.
I got to go back and watch that.
There's actually pretty decent jobs in my, uh, in my Kenjin watching.
There's just a number of episodes I missed.
Oh yeah.
That's cool then.
Then that's going to be a lot of fun to go back through.
I should probably just read the manga.
I've tried to rewatch the show and it's there's so much filler and it like every episode drags
on for so long.
It's almost unwatchable.
It's really weird how my attention has changed as I've grown because I've gone back and
rewatched anime that I loved and it's just unwatchable now.
Yeah.
They, they really drag things out way more than they need to.
That's fair.
Definitely a background show maybe.
And then tuning in for the good episodes.
Or just read the manga.
I tend to like the manga a lot better because you can read at your own pace.
Yeah.
And there's, there's, I like the artistic style in a lot too.
Yeah.
Art tends to be better in manga too.
And I really care about art.
Um, what was I going to say about Kenjin?
Oh, skip the third arc, uh, after the Kyoto arc.
I mean, if you're going to budget your time.
I'm not snuck in.
I'm like the Kyoto arc is the only really good arc, right?
That's true.
Yeah.
I would just stop the Kyoto arc.
Yeah.
But I need someone to, cause there's a number of enemies out there that just have, you
can skip all these episodes and I need to find that list for Kenjin.
Cause I remember like there was some episode about a sumo wrestler or something when I
was done watching and I was like, why did they make this episode?
Yeah.
There's a handful.
I could probably skim through the episode list and tell you which ones to skip.
I should probably find a list online.
Like I'm, I'm sure that there's websites that do that for you.
Right.
It would just be fun for me if I could remember.
I enjoyed seeing the one for Dragon Ball Z with their like, and then you can skip these
next hundred episodes.
I want so badly to write a rationalist DBZ fanfic, but I can't be arsed.
There's probably someone trying it.
Someone mentioned it one time on Reddit, but I don't think anyone's actually written
one yet unless, uh, unless I haven't seen it yet.
Okay.
You should write it.
All right.
Didn't we have a topic or something?
We did.
Sorry.
I didn't mean to.
Yeah.
We did have a lot of episodes.
The sequences first.
But we're all over.
No, no, no.
Let's do the productivity thing, and then we can do the sequences after that.
That sounds good to me.
So Jess, what are we talking about today?
Well, we're going to do the second half of the productivity tools.
I actually don't remember where we left off the last time.
Oh, I wasn't going to pick off where I left off.
I'm just going to talk about other stuff.
Cool.
All right.
Although no, I did have, um, there was feedback that I missed on the productivity tools one.
It was, uh, Will Lando on the subreddit who commented, uh, first of all, he recommended
Cal Newport's deep work.
Uh, I haven't read that one yet.
So thanks, Will, for that recommendation.
And I will check that one out.
I've heard that recommended by a few people and I just, uh, was reminded of it again.
Um, Will said, long and uninterrupted periods of isolation and concentration are incredibly
important.
This was in response to promoteros, uh, the longer we've been continuously thinking about
a task, the better we perform, as long as we still make an effort to recover from strenuous
mental activity, the contemporary workplace with too many emails, too many meetings, instant
messaging, open office environments, random interruptions from colleagues, and the sensation
of being watched all the time obstructs productivity.
So he strongly agrees with any Ash and Steven that it takes too much time to recover from
interruptions.
Will says he'd advise against tools like timers that pull you out of your work every 20 minutes.
I think we read this on the, uh, the follow up episode.
I think you might be right.
Yeah, I think so.
I didn't have an answer for it, but, um, I think if I had to repeat what I'm guessing
I said last time, which is like, probably whatever works best for you, especially if
you're stuck on something and you spend 20 minutes poking at it and nothing happens,
then you get up, grab a cup of water and come back because you've changed, you know,
your environment enough to trigger a new thought.
I'm assuming there's different strokes or different folks here, right?
Different things work for different people under different circumstances.
So I'd be, I'd be against a blanket recommendation pro or against something on any of this stuff.
Probably.
Yeah.
It kind of, uh, depends on the task too.
Like I have my anecdotes as far as interruptions, uh, which was that I partially agree with
what Will said, and I don't really use the Pomodoro method that often.
I mentioned it because it's one of the most well known and a lot of people, uh, find
that it really works wonders for them.
I sometimes use Pomodoro as like a mind hack to just get started.
Uh, sometimes getting started is a really difficult, um, hurdle that you have to
overcome.
So just setting the timer gives the illusion that I'm on the clock and it makes me
feel like, okay, now I've got a 20 minute deadline to get started on this work.
If I'm working on something that I like, uh, like I'm doing my own art or my own
writing, I actually prefer not to take breaks if I'm in the flow.
But if I'm doing something that's like boring and wrote, uh, Pomodoro's help,
I've used Pomodoro most successfully when I did work in an office and I was doing,
for example, uh, like managing social media.
And I really like, it wasn't my favorite thing.
So it's like, all right, I got to post all these, uh, you know, stupid things with
hashtags and then hashtag Motivation Monday, uh, you know, set the
tomato timer and try to just kind of space out while I do it.
It's like, all right, just get it over with.
I certainly see the, yeah, like we talked about if you're in the zone, you
don't want to be out of the zone, but, um, breaking up like undesirable work.
If you know you're only going to be doing it, you know, for 20 minutes, it
makes it easier to dedicate like, all right, cool.
I get a break in 20 minutes, not like when I'm done or when I get too
tired to go on, maybe that's motivating to keep you going for the
you know, small increments.
I find it good to just get you started because you're like, okay, I'm
going to do this for 20 minutes.
And that makes it a little bit more approachable.
Yeah.
Rather than saying I'm going to do this all morning or until I finish this
big stack of crap, right?
I like that there was even, uh, they have studied promoter rows and
show that even, uh, you know, the five minute interruptions did actually
help people to maintain their focus and they did better work over time.
And it was in like a test taking or a school setting.
So again, it probably like makes a difference, which tasks are using it for,
but it's might be that thing like where, you know, sleep-deprived people tend
to like self-report as being at 100% capacity when they're not.
So it might be a good idea to try to, you know, take breaks anyway, just for that
reason.
That's interesting.
I like that.
Well, thank you all for that feedback.
We're all sharing the same notes because we're bad asses now.
This is amazing technology.
We all started this when you did your productivity.
Oh, really?
So it actually, yeah, we've never had outlines before.
Nope.
And Steven jumped on that grenade.
I was like, outline document sharing with people.
And I was like, holy shit, now we got something to work with.
Well, to be fair, it was like the productivity thing kind of encouraged me to
get off my ass and start doing a couple of things.
I was like, all right, I'm going to like start looking for things that I can do
to whatever make things better.
And I got this idea from, uh, we've got Ward because they share several pages
of notes for all the episodes.
And that's how they talk for two hours without dead air or whatever, because
they do it live too.
So like, they're not, you know, hanging out and doing all the crap that we do
where we cut all the shit out.
So, um,
That's really impressive.
I didn't know that actually.
Yeah.
I thought that they had a prerecorded it.
No, it's, they, they do a live one or rather they do it live.
And then I mean, they put out the episode like the next morning.
So there's minimal editing involved.
Anyway, so they do that's, I stole the notes from them, but I stole the, the
motivations, they still the notes from them from you.
Yeah.
Whereas we have to go through and, you know, take out all the parts where we
get sidetracked talking about fluffers, fluffing the fluffer.
Oh, that's, that's staying in there.
That's about a premium content.
Yeah.
That's right.
People got to pay for that one.
Oh, can I throw this in there before I forget?
Yeah.
Um, if you guys are Patreon subscribers, you'll notice that, uh, you probably
got two emails within the course of 12 hours, um, Sunday night.
You know, shouldn't I take turns editing?
And when he posts to Patreon, he checks the boxes that has charged patrons for
this thing and I don't, cause I'm an idiot.
I don't know what I was thinking.
I guess I was thinking that they got charged anyway.
And this was like an extra thing.
I, I looked at it and I've ignored it every time.
So we've, if you guys have noticed, you haven't been charged for roughly
half of episodes for the last.
What's, yeah, five, four months, four, five months.
Yeah.
So, um, I wouldn't have to reposted that one and charged it.
And so I'm going to be doing that from now on.
Okay.
Um, anyway, you notice that.
And if you, I don't know, keep track of the, the, your Patreon numbers,
you might see them return to what you thought you were paying going forward.
Cause I will now check the box.
All right.
Back to your regularly scheduled podcast.
Yes.
We were talking about how to be productive.
Okay.
Is this productivity like in our personal lives or our office lives?
I guess they're both, yeah.
Yeah.
It tends to be like the same tools that you're going to use either way.
And when we're talking about productivity tools, it seems mostly these are things
like to fight a crazy or crazy, I'm not sure how to pronounce it.
About when you want to get things done, but you're having a hard time actually
doing them.
Yeah.
Okay.
Just one, cause you know, there's a lot of productivity upgrades that are things
like buy a computer instead of a typewriter.
Yeah.
I feel like I shouldn't mention things like that that are obvious though.
Like that most people tend to struggle with the Crescia and there's things
that you can do to fix, you know, uh, or, or not.
Like if you don't have money, then you can't buy a computer and that sucks.
But we don't really like understand how a Crescia works or how to fix it yet.
Uh, see far and, you know, psychologists, people are working on it, but it's
really complicated and it's really difficult.
I think we should quickly define that as I can say, as far as our vocab game,
the Crescia is basically knowing what you should do and not doing it.
Cause of basically lack of willpower.
The old, the spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak kind of thing.
Yeah.
It's, it's, or it can also mean like working against your own interests.
Right.
That too.
Yeah.
I mean, failing to keep to a diet or something, right?
Or playing video games instead of doing your homework.
I can relate to that.
It's whenever there is a slight immediate reward, it's somehow managed to
overpower the really awesome future reward that is further away in time.
Yeah.
Hey, if I look back at like, I mentioned, I probably saw a Kenchen.
I probably saw every episode at least six times as, you know, as a teenager.
And, uh, I probably saw the Kyoto arc probably 10 times.
And so yeah, wow, it was right.
So imagine like if I'd spent the time reading fucking books or something,
right?
So, um,
or even if you had like been fingering a guitar as you were watching, you know,
right now you'd have some muscle memory down.
Yeah.
That'd be pretty cool.
Instead, I just watched it and hung out.
But did you hang out with other people?
No.
Oh, okay.
You think people are going to watch reruns of Kenchen with me?
You did learn, you learned fantasy, Japanese history.
That's right.
I sure did.
Which was based on real history.
Somewhat.
Yeah.
They got the names of some of the people, right?
Some inspiration from real historical figures, but they changed a lot of details.
Historically inspired is probably a good way to do it.
Although I would say as far as like, you know, I just question of like, are these
like mental hacks or like physical hacks?
So like, yeah, get a computer instead of writing everything out with a pencil is
probably too obvious, but like maybe getting under the, under the desk, um,
electric bike or something is not obvious, but it is a thing you could buy.
Are these like tools to have, like that cost money or things that, you know what
I mean, like stuff you can carry around and have to drag to work or the things
that you can use, uh, as like mental tricks.
I think it was kind of what you're getting at.
I was mainly just asking to differentiate this from things like, you know,
increasing industrial productivity, the, the reason that our standard living
keeps increasing being things like inventing tractors and the steam engine
and computers productivity on a, on a wide scale, as opposed to personal
productivity talking about on an individual scale.
Okay, cool.
Yeah.
Last time I actually made three bullshit categories just to try to kind of think
more efficiently about what I was talking about.
So I had a brain hacks, which was, uh, for example, like the illusion of
accountability when you're in a public workspace, if you're working at a
Starbucks or in the less strong study hall, um, there were actual tools, which
were apps, things like rescue time that blocks websites, uh, Habitica, which
gamifies productivity.
And then there was, uh, methods or philosophy of productivity, which were
things like getting things done, uh, promoter rows or the procrastination
equation.
You said you just read another book recently, right?
Better, faster, stronger.
Yeah, smarter, faster, better.
It's something like that.
Did, did you talk about that in the last podcast?
No, I just read it.
Um, you told me about that.
Someone was talking to me about this book and now I can't remember who it was.
Oh my God.
It was Drake.
We listened to it on the, we listened to the audio book of it on the way to
burning Jesus Christ.
So you have actually read this book, uh, about half of it.
Okay.
We didn't have time to get through the whole thing.
But yeah, disappointing.
Cause the end of it, they talk about, um, using like Bayesian updating.
Oh, like that's like the last chapter, I think the last segment.
Cool.
But, um, no, that was a really, that was a really interesting book.
Yeah.
That's a good one.
And they did actually talk about kind of more of the industrial productivity too.
They had the, uh, I don't even know if you got to that part.
I thought it was really interesting where they were talking about, um,
the Japanese plant.
Uh, yeah, I forget what it was called to, um, the on, on something cord.
Yeah.
The biggest, um, the biggest productivity hack they had for the entire creating
cars in a huge factory, their big productivity hack was making people feel valued.
And so they cared about the product and that, I mean, that's all they did.
And it, it seems like it would be something that would slow down production
because this guy can stop the entire factory, which apparently cost them
like $1,500 per second that the.
Yeah.
Stopping the assembly line.
Yeah.
They're not cranking out cars at the same rate.
Yeah.
But if the guy's like, no, I see a problem.
I want that fixed cause I don't want that car to go out into the world being a.
Product of my labor, you know, I have some pride in my work.
And sure, you lose some time when you're fixing these little things, but the
fact that everyone now had pride in their work meant that they put out better
products faster overall, uh, than as opposed to before, when people were
literally getting high and drunk on the job and throwing things into like this
parts of the car that you can't see to rattle around when people bought them
because they're like, fuck it.
I don't care.
You never, what are you going to do?
Fire me.
Brrr.
And because they just did not give a shit, simply making people give a shit
at a huge impact and they did it just by listening to them.
It's and making them feel valuable.
Not speaking for personal experience, cause my employer is amazing.
When we, um, yeah, it's amazing how hard it is to keep staff motivated and
wanting to do quality work when you don't recognize them at all and seem to
completely not give a shit about them.
Right.
But if your input is valued, all of a sudden you care.
Yeah.
And it, yeah, exactly.
And it's, it's amazing.
It's, it's a big turnaround cause then suddenly you feel like you're proud to
have your name to stuff rather than like, I'm just getting a paycheck.
So Steven, does your workplace use agile development?
Uh, yes.
And quotes.
Yeah.
And the same chapter in a smarter, faster, better, which I hope I'm getting the
name right.
They actually talked about how agile uses a similar system where of giving
people ownership of, or making them the expert to whatever's closest to them.
Yeah.
And they're, to their, to their credit, they do everything kind of by the book.
They kind of do like the improper use of humility style thing where they're,
they, they're doing agile, but in their defense, everything's all fucked up and
confusing and you know, whatever for them.
But yeah.
So like at the end of everything, at every two weeks, at the end of every, uh,
12 weeks, every big increment, um, there's big chances to get feedback to your
managers, to your team, to your, uh, managers, managers.
If you want, I mean, the VP of development is there on the, you know,
every 12 weeks and we're doing these big planning things and she'll, she's happy
to hear whatever you've got.
In fact, a confidence vote from everybody involved is, is required.
So they try.
And I think it's not really any one's fault.
It's just like everybody there feels like we're just going through the motions
of doing agile, but you're right.
In real life or in real places, it's definitely an awesome tool.
It's like, as long as I'm pitching about work, which I'll be, I'll be brief.
When I was hired on a year and a half ago, they were, we were told, all right guys,
we're building out this cool new floor at this building and it's going to be great.
It's going to be, you know, this is a very developer centered company.
And I've been there a year and a half and maybe in six months will we have that
floor that they were talking about?
So two years later, my, there's fruit flies in the office for like the
last three weeks that no one's taken care of.
Like it's hate fruit flies.
Yeah.
No, they're super annoying.
The, the fly is like the only thing that's actually annoying.
I, I'm not, it's bizarre.
The amount of entitlement that I see in this industry from the people who work
there, like for a while we had free cereal and like now it's gone and
everyone's bitching about it and they haven't stopped bitching for like three months.
We tried to get like cereal dispensers at our office because two guys were
bitching about like, oh man, it would be so nice if we had cereal.
You know, this other, this other company has a cereal bar.
Oh boy.
You know, it would really hit the spot right now.
A cereal bar.
They've kind of like got one and I feel like we used it like a few times and
then like the cereal went stale in it and nobody wanted to replace the
stale cereal and so it just went away after all.
I think ours was that it was too expensive.
Like we were, we were tearing through that stuff.
Oh, okay.
I was going to say because you were, yeah, like.
Oh yeah, people, people were just eating it for two meals a day and whatever.
Right.
So, it seems pretty gotten healthy too.
Definitely.
I can, I can test it.
I was one of those people.
It's not so much that it's more just like, as one coworker put it, like soda
machines are like indicative of like, does the company give a shit about you?
And all right, not really bitching about it.
We can cut all this.
It's really boring.
Works fine.
I've got a fine job.
Like, all right.
Yeah.
I remember another chapter.
I think it was an earlier chapter before the, uh, the Ford plant one.
He went into detail about what happened in the, um, the plane crash.
I don't remember which one it was now, but a French plane crash, right?
That was a really good, uh, well, I just really liked all the
anecdotes that he picked out.
Yeah, that one was really intense.
And yeah, that was really good.
And basically what he came down to was a really, a person who knows what they're
doing in any situation has a model of what they expect to see.
Yeah.
Mental frameworks.
Yeah.
A mental model, like perhaps a map in their brain of what they think they're
going to be seeing and they notice when, what they expect to see doesn't match
up with what they're actually seeing.
And that's what makes them really good.
They know like how to maneuver in this terrain.
They, they notice when things are different and the people that fuck up are
people who didn't really have a map.
They're like, okay, I'm going through the motions.
Not really sure what's happening, but going through the motion.
So things will be okay.
And usually they are okay, but sometimes they're not.
And that's when it's really good to have a model in your head of how things are
supposed to be and, and checking that against the real world.
I was like, this is, this is awesome.
This book reads like it was written by, you know, a rationalist or at least if
everyone is looking the world the same way, they should eventually get to the
same kind of ideas.
Right?
I like when people dog whistle rationality.
Like we're not, we're not, we're not going to drop the word less wrong, but
we're going to use map and territory.
Yeah.
Directly talk about like busy and updating in the last chapter.
So I'm kind of wondering.
Love it.
Sorry.
We've got sidetracked.
I want to get back to, to the topic at hand.
Yeah.
Let's talk about productivity.
It's funny that we keep getting derailed.
Well, I think we are being productive in our derailments though.
We're talking about things like, you know, keeping yourself passionate and
valued and keeping models of the world.
All good hacks for doing things, which is what productivity is all about.
Right.
Yeah.
There was such a thing as productive, uh, procrastination as well.
I found that the best way to like the thing that helped me most with the, uh,
when I was doing the Harry Potter methods of rationality podcast, uh, I would
always have something else to do when I heard this tip somewhere else too.
Always have something more important to do so you can procrastinate that thing
by doing your second most important thing.
Which is still pretty damn important.
So whenever I didn't want to, I don't know, write or work out or do some kind
of, um, less fun work, I'd procrastinate by doing methods of rationality.
And smart.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And, you know, if you don't want to write your novel, you procrastinate by
writing a short story, have, have a, a less important task that's still important
that you can procrastinate into.
Is that the productive procrastination technique that you were talking about or
that you alluded to?
Yeah.
Basically, it's, you know, when you're still getting things done, but it's
because you're avoiding something else.
And, uh, yeah, that was a good hack.
I guess that would be like one of the brain hack, uh, category of productivity
tools.
You can either choose a real task or you can kind of like make one up, like, uh,
you know, oh, figure out my 401k, uh, which, you know, and whenever you look at
it, you're like, Oh, I don't want to do that.
So you stick that at the top of your, uh, to do list and you stick the thing
that you want to like actually do underneath of it.
Every year between February and April, you can have, you know, uh, work on my
taxes after I'm done working on this other thing that is important to do.
Cause you know, you always have to do your taxes, right?
So you can procrastinate on your taxes, doing something that's more important.
Like the way you guys think it sounds like something I can actually weapon
or I actually utilize for myself.
You were about to say weaponized, weren't you?
Yes.
Fuck yeah.
Um, but it's that, it doesn't feel like an appropriate use of it.
Cause I'm just going to use it to be more productively lazy.
So you're weaponizing your laziness.
All right.
Bad ass.
Yeah.
It's still like taking a step forward.
Yeah.
That's not good.
Anytime you can use a word to make yourself sound cooler, life's more fun.
Well, I propose that what's the, what's the, what's the, I tried.
Yeah.
So last time I covered brain hacks, uh, some tools and methods and philosophy.
Uh, this time I want to cover task capture systems, uh, task prioritization, habit
building, and then maybe talk a little bit about mental and physical health,
which is pretty important to your productivity.
Uh, task capture systems are task lists.
Usually it's, what do you have to do?
Uh, most productivity systems, like, uh, getting things done, start with making a task list.
So there's a lot of different list making tools that you can use the most obvious
one being old fashioned pen and paper.
There's one that I used, uh, called work flowy, which is a free web app.
And they have a, um, I think they have an Android and an iOS app too that syncs with it.
And it's basically just like a text document, but what's neat about it is that
you can, uh, nest like sub topics underneath of topics.
You can either hide or drop down sub lists.
So you could kind of make like, uh, a bunch of projects by just making like, okay,
here's like, uh, write a book and then like, you can make more sub tasks under that.
Like, uh, you know, outline all the chapters and do research.
Yeah.
And in my experience, just having a list of chapters that, that becomes your
task list and it is so fucking handy.
And I mean, the, the chapters that you're going to write change as you're going
along, but having that task list at the beginning is much, much better than like,
okay, write 400 pages in a coherent novel story, character arc, go.
Yeah.
This way like, okay, I got 40 tasks.
Each one is one chapter.
I can write one chapter.
Well, I just interject really quick.
Sorry.
We, we talked about agile development and agile, I guess, uh, production methodology.
Um, lean is related to that.
I think I talked about that in a previous episode, but part of that is batching
things into small, small, small manageable chunks.
And so yeah, imagine, you know, this doesn't really work with books, but you know,
you make 800 pages and it turns out you made a mistake on the first one to start
over, whereas if you did 30 page chunks, then like, Oh, I only lost 30 pages.
And so that's that philosophy is built into agile too.
And so that's why you do two week sprints and you do iterative feedback every two
weeks.
So at worst you've wasted only that much time because you demo in front of your
stakeholders every two weeks.
So if they're like, no, wait, we wanted it like this, you don't like finish the
six month project or the year projects and deliver that.
And they're like, no, wait, start over, you get that on a two week basis.
So small, small, and that's, that's one example of batching things into a small
way and also makes things less imposing and scary, right?
Right.
Cause you're only committing to doing 30 pages this week or something.
Right.
So dope.
All right.
Yeah.
So that's why lists are important.
Uh, one more thing that I like about workflow is that you can also drag, like
unlike, you know, just using a text document or a writing on pen and paper,
you can drag and reorder your tasks, which is, it's, uh, still like just a really
simple, uh, paired down tool, which is kind of why I like it.
The other, um, list making tools, there's some that tend to be more complicated.
And that can be great for people that really like to mess with all the widgets
and they want to color code each one of their tasks and like assign it an icon.
Uh, I'm thinking of Todoist right now.
I'll talk more about that one, but, uh, that can get to be really distracting too.
If you end up spending all your time, just like working on your productivity
system and not doing the work, obviously that's an issue.
Uh, other list making tools that a lot of people really like ever note,
it didn't really work for me, but, uh, it's a lot of people swear by that one.
I think just because it helps you, like a lot of people, they use getting things
done, the GTD method, like that one, because you can pull from, you can use
like photos, you can, you know, save snippets of websites, it's multimedia.
So it's really good at capturing everything.
Uh, I like Google keep, which I mentioned last time, so I won't go on about it again.
Um, I also just like to use a text edit on Mac or, uh, wordpad on PC.
Like just, you know, the basic pared down text editor that I can kind of
keep floating on my desktop.
It just keeps things simpler, less distracting.
For my, my version of, I use notes too on my, on my computer, cause I use a Mac,
but I can also just open up reminders the same way.
And it's thanks to my phone.
So if I wanted to jump in like, Oh shit, I want to do this when I get home.
I don't have to pull up my phone.
If it's in my pocket, that's way too far away.
Cause my hands are already on my keyboard.
Um, you mentioned, uh, the GTD get things done method.
Did we talk about that or what is that?
That was, yeah, we talked about that one last time, uh, to like catch people up
if they didn't get that, or if they forget, uh, getting things done as a
productivity system or philosophy that involves, uh, capturing all of your tasks,
uh, sorting them, uh, deciding, you know, uh, there were, for example, if there's
like a five minute task, you do it now, then you decide whether you're going to
do it, like do it, um, do it, don't do it, delegate it, delete it.
That's right.
Okay.
Cool.
Thank you for reminding me.
Yeah.
And it's more complicated than that, but that one's neat.
Cause you can scale it up and down to be as complicated as you need it to be.
It has like reviews and stuff too.
Excellent.
Um, I said, excellent.
And steepled my fingers like Mr.
Burns.
You need a cat, right?
I would like a cat.
That sounds great.
Mr.
Princeton, have a cat though.
He didn't, I thought he had a cat.
No, he had a Mr.
Smithers.
Oh, well, it's kind of the same.
So there's just basically his cat.
Then there's that one.
It was like a Halloween special and I haven't seen the show in 15 years, but
I remember this, they were like Smithers is a snake.
His name is Slyther's.
Just a funny little thing.
It was Dr.
Evil that had the cat and Dr.
No, and every other cool.
Yeah, I think it was just like, yeah, that they became like a bad guy stereotype.
Which is weird because cats are great.
So they're also evil.
That's just not true.
You met my last cat.
She was the best.
Yeah.
Yeah.
It's true.
You know, you can't say anything bad because she died.
I think cats that aren't evil may be catting wrong.
I've met a few non-evil cats and I'm like, you're not doing cat right.
Oh, they're just, they're just doing their thing.
People tend to call them dog like cats.
All the dogs are also prone to just want it, like really enjoying killing things.
Who doesn't enjoy killing things, really?
I don't.
Okay.
Inches away from me, Nyash.
Yeah.
So once you've got your list, then you want to kind of brainstorm the steps of
your project or your list, which you can use with a, you know, a pen or paper.
Always works.
There's digital equivalents of brainstorming tools.
So this is for, you know, if you don't have off the top of your head, oh,
these are the items that I need to add to my list.
Or, you know, if you've written something down, that's a project and it's a multi-step.
I used to have that issue where you would put something that like is too
complicated on a task list and then you just stare at it and you end up not doing
it because you're like, okay, I have to do this thing.
I found that brainstorming things that you have to do is incredibly handy when
you're doing renovations, because sometimes you will find things, remember
things that you have to do in a certain order, which you might have forgotten if
you're just going through doing, you know, what you see, and also saves you a
lot of time driving to the hardware store when you see everything that you need at
once.
I'm sure you went to the hardware store plenty of times.
Oh, yes.
There's always something that I forgot, but going through first and like
brainstorming everything and being like, okay, got to do this and this.
And then I was like, oh, measure first, then cut.
Stick that on your task list.
Ways to brainstorm.
Uh, I like to just free form journal sometimes because that's how my brain
works.
You just do a total brain dump and then you can kind of refine that into a
list afterwards, just writing down a list of tasks in no particular order can
help and then editing that.
Cause sometimes you get really caught up in thinking, okay, what do I have to
do first, then what do I have to do second?
And sometimes it really helps to kind of just, uh, you end up drawing like your,
your memory into thinking of other tasks as you're coming up with, for example,
feed the dog, sweep the floor for complicated tasks.
It can help to make a mind map.
And that also helps when you're stuck mid project.
Like if you were in the middle of your renovations and you're not sure what to
do next, that's where you, uh, kind of create bubbles.
So you could do a bubble.
That's a, you know, the very middle of your page is renovate home and then you
kind of draw a little line off of it and it's like, okay, uh,
carpet the stairs and then you draw a little arrow off of that.
And it's like research carpet companies and prices.
And, uh, what's neat about mind maps rather than like journaling is that it kind
of, it kind of simplifies a bunch of the tasks where when you're journaling,
you're writing maybe whole paragraphs about like, Oh, I don't know which
companies to choose.
There's this one.
Then I know that my, you know, dad's friend works for this one, but they
might have higher prices.
It kind of forces you to be brief cause you're sticking everything in little
bubbles and it also, um, is a linear.
So if you did it like free form paragraph style, you're going to have to go back
and read that and extract the meaningful chunks later when it's time to do the
thing.
Yeah.
You can look at a mind map and kind of
exactly.
Yeah.
It more easily and you can see how things connect together in a way that you
can't like do as easily with journaling.
That's the same thing as a word cloud.
Or is that different?
Um, I think it's similar.
They look the same.
I think there's different kinds of mind maps too.
I just always tend to do the bubble one.
I like it.
There's different structures you can make.
Um, Scapple is, uh, one that I would recommend if you want to use a digital
mind mapping tool, I think, um, it, the same company that makes Scrivener, which
you might be familiar with, Aineash, it's a writing tool makes that one.
And it's good for writers, but it's just a good mind map tool in general.
Um, I really prefer just using paper for mind maps because digital tools aren't
as amenable to free form.
I tried a bunch of them and I found that, uh, the process of trying to digitally
create a word cloud kind of defeated the purpose of it being like quick and kind
of intuitive, but I haven't actually tried Scapple myself.
I've just heard it recommended really highly.
So I do want to look into that as, and if anyone else uses it, maybe you can talk
about your experiences with it.
Yeah.
And you might also just try using paper, uh, when you get stuck because apparently
writing on paper might help your memory.
I found a couple of, uh, studies that I'm going to link to the post about how
handwriting facilitates memory better than typing.
I would imagine maybe with, you know, that's the difference maybe between the, uh,
digital mind mapping tools and the paper ones.
I saw that too.
And I'm not sure why that is the case.
Does anyone know yet?
They actually talked about it in Smarter Better Faster.
Um, I think it was that book where they were talking about, um, adding, it's a
word similar to discontinuity and now I can't think of the word.
It was diss something, but they were talking about basically making a task
more difficult, um, actually helps encode it in your brain better because
you're devoting more of your attention to it as you're struggling with it.
You're spending a longer time on it.
So, um, writing by hand is more difficult.
It involves more, I guess it's more, I don't know, um,
it certainly takes more time and more muscle groups and typing.
I'm not actually sure about that.
Steven's making typing motions.
Yeah, but I don't know why you're, yeah, T-Rex typing.
That is a very inefficient way to type.
That's my miming.
That's how I always mime typing.
Oh, okay.
I feel like I hadn't said anything in a while.
So I just made a soundless gesture and now we're talking about it.
So here we go.
I do remember always taking notes by hand in college and could have typed.
Well, no, I couldn't have, I didn't have a laptop.
I always found taking notes super distracting because I have pretty
eligible handwriting and if I'm speed writing to keep up with what they're
saying, then I have a hard time reading it myself and I also find myself
focusing more on like writing shit down than just listening.
And I have fairly good retention of like what I hear, luckily.
So I found that to be not to my benefit for the most, for most classes.
I found it really focused me.
Like I would pay much more attention and my mind wouldn't wonder if I
was writing as I was listening.
And also I don't understand why exactly it helped, but I found like if I
just listened, then I wouldn't retain things that well.
But if I was writing them down, I very, very rarely like almost never went
back and actually read my notes, but just the fact that the writing it down.
Yeah.
Made a big difference.
That's super common for people.
Helps commit it to memory two different ways.
You're hearing it and rehearsing it immediately to get it on the page.
Yeah.
Um, that just didn't work for me a lot of the time, but maybe I'd
remember more about actually, if I had written stuff down.
So everyone's brains are different too.
So that just might be one of those typing works better for Steven.
Cause that's how your brain works.
Oh, just, yeah, just listening work better for Steven.
I, I, cause I also need to record recording lectures.
I have, I, for the most part, I could like hear it once and do fine.
I guess I also had an easy major, psych major.
So in the one like really trivia heavy class that we had to take, because it
was a science major, we had to take biomedical science 300.
And that was like kind of referred to as like the senior fail class.
I think I had like a 25% fail rate or something and it sucks.
Cause it was a senior level class.
And so you had to basically wait to see if you're going to graduate on schedule or
not.
So that one, I took tons of notes.
I went, I like, I helped coordinate with people to like study groups and flash
cart.
I did all the tricks for that one.
Cause it was just a bunch of bullshit.
Like which enzyme is involved with, you know, uh, leg muscles, but
not pulmonary muscles.
And I'm like, come on, man.
Like, first of all, even if I was going to be a doctor, knowing that off the
top of my head doesn't help me be a better doctor.
So it was, it was just a trivia class.
Um, that said, I did speaking.
All right.
I'm distracted again, but, um, he, he would do the lectures in person, but
he also recorded them and put them online for the class.
And so I wouldn't go to class.
I would watch them on my computer, which probably was veteran to my learning,
but those, these were the kind of, he was such a great lecturer.
They were the kind of lectures that I would watch for fun on other subjects.
Like he was, he was passionate.
He'd move around the board.
He was really good at illustrating on the white board with black sharpies.
And, um, yeah, it was, that was outstanding.
So he was a great lecturer.
And what he said was really engaging.
And that's why I think I had them saved for a while.
I hope I still have them somewhere.
Cause it'd be fun to go back.
They'd be fun to watch and get the content of again, without having to sit
there and like try and hear out like key phrases that like, is this
going to be on the test?
Does my life depend on knowing, you know, the name of this bullshit?
Um, cause that takes a lot of the fun out of it, but if you're just there to
enjoy it, then I found that to be a fun way to take that in.
So I got a soft topic success.
I'll just shut up for a minute.
You're good.
You're good.
I hear you.
I know it's more fun to like keep talking about things.
We'll power on.
It's important to, to stay entertained.
Cause if we're just here to get facts, then we get bored.
And it turns into school, right?
Just like biomedical science 300.
Exactly.
Yeah.
We're here to bullshit and have fun too.
The entertainment value is very important.
Fair.
That's, that's totally true.
All right.
Okay.
Uh, the other task list apps we'll go through quickly.
Um, bullet journaling is something I just started doing recently.
So look that up.
It's pretty cool.
Um, it's a task list system where you just keep a free form notebook, kind of
like, you know, just doing the free form journaling.
With whatever pens and markers you want.
And you see lots of people using pretty highlighters and whatnot.
Uh, the only things that you do are you add page numbers in an index and maybe
also look at calendar and a planner.
So you make an index so you can just find all your notes all the time.
Um, I like this cause task lists tend to evolve over time and starting from scratch.
I find to be mentally refreshing when I'm stuck on tasks.
I like that again, it's, it uses actual writing by hand.
Uh, you can have your notebook with you whenever and you can write anywhere on
the page and doodle and draw mind maps and scratch things out, which, uh,
I find really useful.
Speaking of which, I bought that, uh, little metal bound notebook that you can
take everywhere with you that has the pen to keep it.
Yeah.
That you recommended last episode.
It's very handy.
Thank you.
I'm a hipster and I make my own notebooks.
Okay.
It's, I'd recently, well, I guess it was months ago at this point, but I took a
book binding class.
There's something really cool about making your own notebooks.
And I find that it also makes me more likely to write in them.
Cause I've always like, as an artist too, I
have this weird thing about, well, I can't draw on my good sketchbook.
Cause what if it's a bad sketch?
So I got a lot of my art done on like shitty sketchbooks or the back of
printer paper because I always had a much easier time starting if it was like,
well, I'm not going to waste this paper.
So I feel the same.
Oh, I made this notebook.
So it's not like I'm ruining a good notebook that I bought from a store.
It's a weird, stupid, like brand thing.
Yeah.
You could think cause like the store one would have no logical sense.
Yeah.
But I poured time into this one.
That's what I was going to think too.
But yeah, you know, that's, depends on how much you value
your own products or it's like, I made this, I can do whatever
what I want with it, but if you go out and buy it, then it's like, no,
I feel like I need you to just use this for its intended purpose.
Whatever your, your algorithm is there.
It's one of the reasons I never get tattoos.
Yeah, exactly.
I will get them when you can move them around or delete them.
But I know I'll get sick of them.
I'm just worried about having a limited amount of skin space.
That too.
I also know I'll get addicted to them.
I don't know if I would.
That's one concern I have too.
I'm told that when you get, when you get an edge to get more, I don't
have any, but my, my thinking on it is like, yeah, you might change
your mind and what you like or something, but so far to get one, I have
ideas of things that I'm very confident that in 30 years, I could look
back and say, I understand why Steven at that age got that tattoo and I, I
don't regret it.
I want to get like Mickey Mouse flipping someone off just so that
you would probably end up regretting that.
Well, maybe not.
Maybe not.
Maybe it's really important to you.
No, I would like that because I fucking hate the intellectual property
laws we have in the country.
And I would be, this would be a giant fuck you to Disney, right?
You don't own my skin Disney.
Which technically they might based on the recent Kobe Bryant fucking lawsuit
that went around.
What happened?
Uh, the tattoo artist that tattooed Kobe Bryant is suing 2k games for rendering
his tattoos in their game when, yeah, Kobe Bryant, you know, licensed his
likeness to 2k games for their recent NBA or whatever the name of the company
is that you still own the tattoo after you place it on someone's skin.
That's weird.
That's, see, that's, that's what they're trying to hammer out in the
courts right now.
Is it?
I mean, I guess it is your original art if you designed it, but that's super
weird because it's on somebody's body.
Yeah.
No, that's, that's the thing.
Like I obviously understand that if I got a tattoo of something, I can't then
take that art and like make prints of it and sell it at conventions and stuff.
Right.
That's way beyond.
What about every time you get photographed?
Exactly.
But when I get photographed or when my likeness is to reproduce somewhere, if
I'm, you know, okay to that, then yeah, that's part of me now.
That is literally my fucking skin.
Yeah, that sounds like a really screwed up precedent.
And I get like having your artistic integrity or whatever, but then like,
all right, so say Kobe Bryant puts on a MAGA hat and murders three people.
Like, are you going to say, I want my artwork back?
I'm not going to represent it on that person.
And then what, like, are you going to make him like get, get coverups?
Oh yeah, or take his skin, but you can't take a skin.
Are you going to like legally mandate that you get cover up tattoos or something?
Yeah.
Well, I mean, I, I have several illustrator friends now who are a bit conflict on
this because the rights to their work are very important to them.
And they're like, you know, there is very standard contracts that you sign over
all your rights, you know, like this is now your art.
Congratulations.
And you people usually pay more for those contracts.
And basically what my position is, is that even though it was never written
out in any tattoo contract I've seen, generally the contracts are things
like I am over 18 and I am not drunk.
You know, I am of sound mind when I choose this contract or when I choose
this tattoo to be put on me, but none of them like talk about rights in that way.
And it was, I always fall back to the common law understanding that like it
was understood that I give you this money and this is now mine.
And, uh, but since it was never actually spelled out, I guess that's
something the courts might get into now.
That's insane.
Yeah.
Luckily, I would think of something was literally part of my body that bodily
autonomy rights, Trump copyright rights.
Like I said, I see, I, I see, I hear what you're saying.
I kind of see where they're coming from, but at the same time, well.
And which is why I want the Mickey Mouse tattoo.
Yeah.
And I'm, I'm, I'm guessing that the like tattoo art lobby is pretty small.
So this probably won't go through all the way.
But, uh, if they win this case, it might set a dangerous precedent.
So it was actually interesting.
It was kind of the, the, then again, I bet the guy who, who makes, who
does Kobe's tattoos is probably fucking loaded.
Well, here's the thing.
It, this is the same, the equivalent of the copyright, uh, or the patent
trolls that we all hate.
Uh, it was a company that went around and bought the rights to the tattoos
from various tattoo artists of NBA players.
So it wasn't even the tattoo.
No, it is a, yeah, it is a company that bought the rights to the tattoo
art from the artists and now is suing the, the game makers.
Of course it is.
Yeah.
So like this is a really great fiction opportunity for someone to
write a version of the repo man, but like, they just come for your skin.
Come from my tattoo back.
I'm not going to write that.
But anyway, if anyone wants to write it, just like send me a link to it after
you've written it.
Um,
back to, you know, so the task list, um, I talked about to do this before
briefly, I'll just plug that one again.
That's a task list app for people that love apps that have lots of features.
That is one where you can actually assign a different icon to each of
your tasks and color code it.
And, uh, it's neat.
You can sync your tasks with your Google calendar.
Uh, you can assign tasks to yourself on different days, which is kind of cool.
And what's really cool is they have an AI task scheduler that, um, works.
All right.
It kind of, uh, is it supposed to watch when you do tasks and then
kind of start to estimate after a while?
Well, you seem to do more tasks on Mondays.
So I'll assign you, uh, you dump your task list into it.
And it's like, well, I'll assign five of these tasks for Monday and then
three for Tuesday and then you never get things done on Wednesday.
So I'm just going to leave that day blank.
Um, it's all right.
How does it know you never, oh, cause you never check your task is done on
Wednesdays.
Okay.
Wednesday's my masturbation day.
I never got tested on a Wednesday.
I don't know why Wednesday is not a good day for me.
Oh, so you were speaking from experience.
Okay.
Yeah.
And I also got most tasks done on Monday, which kind of, I guess that kind of
makes sense because that's like the middle of the week.
You got all your, you know, momentum on Monday and then you start to lose it.
And then you realize you're losing it and you go, oh, shit.
And then you get a lot done on Thursday.
Or maybe that's just me.
Or you're putting off work on Monday morning and you're doing all your tasks.
Yeah, maybe.
So there's task lists with built in accountability, like be minder and stick.
Those are ones where it'll, um, charge you money, which you consent to.
If you don't get your tasks done on time.
So then you, you know, if, if sticks work for you better than carrots,
there's no task list with built in a reward systems that might be neat.
And at least not that I know of.
You know, it'd be cool if like be minder or stick evolved to, they use some of
the money that you give them instead of giving it.
So stick, I've mentioned before, that's where you say, Hey, I'm going to quit
smoking and you're going to be my judge.
And if I don't quit smoking in three months, the 50 blocks that I gave to
stick, they're going to give the KKK.
So you get to pick where it goes as like your carrot or as your, as your stick.
And so we want to really push stick among people with the opposite
ideology from us.
Right.
Well, what would be fun is instead of giving it to like whatever bad charity
that you used to incentivize yourself, they keep some of it, and then they
can use that to pay people who actually keep to their stuff.
That would be neat.
But then the thing is like, you're my independent judge, but we each stand
to make, you know, 40 bucks if I quit smoking and quotes.
So that sounds easily gameable.
What's really, because if you guys talk that out ahead of time, you also could
have just, I mean, you're just taking each other's money.
No, no, we're taking sticks money from other people in the, in the
shitty business model I'd split together and then shot down.
I was saying that say if I gave 50 bucks, um, stick would give 40 of it to
the charity, the anti-charity of my choice and keep 10 for themselves.
They'd put that 10 in a pool that they give to people who actually
commit to actually do their things.
So they would get their 50 back plus 10 or something.
Right.
So yeah, then, then the idea would be like, you know, now it's split the
difference.
So that, that, that way of doing it sucks.
Why would, what, what do you mean we would split the difference?
If you were my account, if you were my accountability person,
Oh, so I would lie and say that exactly.
Yeah.
If you cared more about the money than, or I would invent a third person who was
going to be my independent entrepreneur or something, right?
That said, there seems like a meat space option here where like,
you know, I'm going to quit smoking or in three months to slap me across
the face as hard as you can.
I, but say wouldn't slap you.
That is how I'm the person who invented Pavlock.
That was like the wristband that shocks you.
Apparently he got the idea because he hired someone to slap him.
If they saw him go on Facebook.
And this seemed a lot cheaper to just like, you know what, you're not, you're not,
you're not going to follow me into the bathroom when I'm Facebooking on my
phone. So I'm going to have my wrist shock me instead.
I think that's hilarious.
I like that.
I don't know if I'd learn from that, but it would be funny.
Yeah.
Why not?
The humor aspect is a big important thing for me.
So yeah, I mean, so, um, last thing I'm going to say about task list is it's
helpful if you can memorize your task list.
I like to do this, but I also like to keep my task lists, like 10 items are under.
So, uh, you can use a mnemonic device, like the one bun method or the memory
palace.
I know what a memory palace is.
What's a one bun?
Yeah, I could define quick of them.
It's, it's, there's a list where you say one is a bun, two is a shoe, three is a
tree, and then you take each of your tasks or whatever you're trying to remember
your grocery items that associate it with that.
So, uh, one is a bun.
You imagine, you know, something that has to do with a hamburger.
I was thinking of a bunny, but either way.
No, I mean, you just come up with some of, like, you know, the more ridiculous,
the better image in your mind.
Okay, cool.
So that's a good mnemonic for memorizing lists.
With memory palace, you can memorize more items for people that don't know.
That's where you use a place that you go frequently.
You use your house, um, your grandmother's house, school, and you kind of
associate each item that you're trying to remember with a physical, uh,
location, for example, like, okay, this thing is hanging on the door handle
that I need to remember.
This other thing is on the doormat when I walk through the door.
I read a book when as a teenager, and that was based on like the method of
loci or loci, loci, it was that Greek.
I don't know how to pronounce it either.
Yeah.
It was that story about that person who has had some fancy dinner and paraphrasing
and the roof collapsed and killed everybody but him.
And he remembered all 20 guests by picturing where they sat.
And I'm, I'm good at that.
And I liked that kind of special visualization.
And so when I was reading this book, it gave the example of go through your
house and put stuff around.
I remember half the shit from that list.
And this was 15 years ago.
I guess I don't remember how long the list was.
I remember a handful of things from the parents living room where I put a deck
cards and like a big diamond and other things around the room.
So, um,
so that's like a way to enhance your memory palace, make it more memory.
Yeah.
Cool.
So, um, yeah, I like to memorize my task list, uh, so I can kind of
just recite my task list throughout the day, which helps keep me more focused.
And, uh, if you're a scatterbrained like me, it'll help you remember the
things you said you're going to do.
So you're not constantly running back to your task list and checking it.
So the last one was task capture systems.
Yes.
And so you had basically what you have to do, list making tools, brainstorming,
a project or list, bullet journaling, tack list, task list, apps, um, task
list with built into accountability and task list memorization.
Yes.
All right.
I think, yeah, we might spend less time in the next couple.
I will try to speed through them.
No, I don't want to rush, but, uh, we were in out of time.
We are.
All right.
Prioritization.
You want to figure out if your task list items are, is this something that
should be one item of my task list?
Like obviously, uh, walk the dog, check the mail, call your mom.
You can just use a task list for a more complicated project.
Like sell your house, uh, you need to split the tasks into lots of sub tasks.
You can use, uh, the getting things done.
The GTD system has something called the project planning guide that they use
for multi-step tasks and they use a philosophy called natural planning,
which I like because it's easy.
You make a project planning guide for every major task and then the project
planning guide or the PPG structure is you start by first defining what,
why, and how, why is connect the task to your values, what is to find your
ideal vision, how is brainstorming?
So you could do your mind map and then you would do your next actions.
So you do that with the entire task list or like with one task at a time?
No, from one project.
Okay.
That's how you create a project list.
Um, and you kind of prioritize the tasks by first of all connecting it to your
values that you do some free form brainstorming and then you just decide
what is the next action?
Like, what's the first step that I need to get this project started?
Or if it's already underway, okay, what's the next step I need?
I really like the whole connecting it to your values thing,
giving you motivation to do it.
Yeah.
This sounds a lot like how you break down, like customer asks to your software
company into, if you're doing agile methodology into like user stories, like
as a user, I want a submit payment button so I can make payments.
You break down, if it's a big feature, you know, like I want to be able to pay my
bill online or something, then you break it out into small little things, break
it out into small things, like the why it connects to your values.
It's more connects.
That's why it's like a user story.
Like as a person who's using this on to be able to do this thing.
And, uh, man, if it wasn't so boring and academic, the history of agile and lean
is actually really cool.
Um, I was actually thinking, it's like, oh, we should do an episode.
But it ties into this a lot expert.
Well, yeah, it would be nice to have an expert too.
I know an expert, but I don't know if he would want to go on the podcast.
I could ask.
I know a bit.
I know enough to bullshit about it for an hour, but not.
Well, I know a guy who was a like scrum master and taught agile.
Nice.
But, uh, yeah, again, I don't know if he would want to be on the podcast.
I was a scrum master for four months, but only like I said, in agile and quotes
way, so yeah.
All right.
So natural planning says use your gut to figure out how to prioritize your tasks.
And after you've, you know, connected to your values and done your mind map, you
can sometimes just go completely off of intuition.
Uh, when, for times when you can't, you can use the Eisenhower matrix, which is,
I might have talked about that in the last, uh, productivity tools, but I'll go
over it again.
It's a two by two grid where the X axis is, uh, important and not important.
And the Y axis is urgent and not urgent.
So the idea is you assign all of your tasks in this grid and then you do the
urgent and important tasks first because they are urgent and important.
Then you do your not urgent and important tasks, which seems counterintuitive until
you think about the fact that these are important, even though there's not a
time limit on them.
You've done all the ones that are important than have a time limit.
Uh, then it's recommended that you, uh, delegate or decline the urgent and not
important tasks and just delete the not urgent and not important tasks.
So I like to just drop all my tasks from a mind map into the Eisenhower and
shuffle it until it makes sense and then make out one numbered prioritized list
afterwards, but now they're all in order.
Yeah.
You just want to work smart.
You want to do the tasks that make sense and, uh, figure out if there are other
ways to accomplish what you want to, so you can, for example, delegate tasks.
I forget if I brought this up to you, but there's a tool by clear thinking called
the decision advisor that can help with this too.
If you're blocked by a decision, uh, that's a really great tool that helps you
think through, uh, all the pros and cons in a really like statistical way.
Um, I've had a lot of luck with that one.
So I really like all their tools.
Go check out our clear thinking.
There's another decision making, uh, tool slash method called the SWAT method.
The strength, weakness, opportunity and threat, uh, kind of two by two board.
Oh yeah.
I think I heard of that one too.
That was because it was what, it was a hilarious episode of Silicon Valley.
Did anyone, anyone watch that show?
I saw only a few episodes.
It was too real when I was working in an office.
It's, it takes too long to paraphrase, but basically they're, they're misusing it
on deciding whether or not to let some asshole kill himself on it.
Like, so let me, let me make it less, less psychopathic.
So basically, well, not, not commit suicide.
He was going to do like a jump off a ramp onto a building, onto another building.
And they're trying to point out how bad, like, Hey, you're not counting for this.
And both times they try to tell him, he's like, listen, you know, you fucking nerds,
I'm busy.
Get the fuck out of here.
So they put together this enormous SWAT board and they're like, one of the
strengths is, or like one of the, uh, opportunities is like his girlfriend's
really hot and when she's mourning, I can, I can, you know, I can move in on her.
Um, whatever, whatever, all those things.
So, uh, it culminates with the guy walking in, talking to them, apologizing
for being an asshole saying, man, I noticed this mistake in my math.
I could have ended up on the side of that wall.
Then as he's leaving, he glances at their enormous SWAT board and he's like, you
know, he sees all the things and it was really funny.
So everyone wants to watch you look in Valley.
So is this a tool you could actually use or was it just a joke?
No, it was an actual thing.
It's, yeah.
Uh, a lot of the stuff that they mentioned in there is actual stuff, uh, that
they use for the show for community purposes, but a lot of it is really funny.
If you take a step back.
Yeah.
All right.
Next subject was habit building.
I've heard somewhere that you have to do something 21 days in a road to form a
habit or 21 iterations.
Yeah, I'm sure it's not an actual scientific number.
And it was just like, you know, roughly, if you do 21 times.
So I can, I can smoke for 20 days and drop it like that.
That's how this works.
Yes.
Maybe it's just 20 cigarettes.
Maybe it's 20 puffs.
Maybe it's 20 times thinking about it.
Yeah.
This sounds like, this sounds like bullshit in the Oscar.
Yeah.
Best way to start building a habit is, or one of the, you know, time tested
ways is having a morning routine because your brain is fresh in the morning.
Oh, is that why?
Well, and it's the first thing you do.
So you don't tend to forget it.
There's probably a lot of reasons.
I, I'd like to, if I need to do something, I weave it into a routine I already have going.
Yeah.
That's a, I think called stacking habits.
Okay.
Um, structure is really helpful for most people to get things done.
Uh, so offloading your mental energy and decisions to a system.
It can really help.
Morning is a good trigger point to get started because your brain is fresh,
but you can make a routine anytime.
It helps to have a trigger to start your routine.
I think a CFAR uses trigger actions, which is like when stimulus perform action.
So that's, uh,
I wanted to somebody do an entire episode about that.
That would be cool.
Can we go into it for another 30 seconds?
Yeah.
The trigger action plans, I believe, God, I think it was on Brianne's Facebook
that I saw this, uh, she just commented that she was trying to become more aware
of things in her environment.
And so she started just with whenever I see a red roof, I got this little clicker.
You know, the clickers they have when people go into like a club and they
click at once.
Oh, I thought it was like a dog training clicker.
Uh, I think, I think she said eventually she just switched one of those
cause it worked just as well, but at first it was like a number clicker.
So like at the end of the day, she could see how many red roofs she'd seen.
Whenever she saw a red roof, she would click at once, right?
She really started noticing like red roofs all the time because the dopamine
release on being like, ah, I made my number increase by one was like really fun.
You know, and at the end of the day, ha, I saw so many red roofs.
Just having that, I want to look for this now.
And I do a thing became rewarded in itself.
So eventually she dropped the counter clicker and just had like a little dog
clicker, you just click it and make a noise.
And that was still as fulfilling to like, aha, I see a red roof.
I click the thing and she used that like to form habits instead.
Like whenever I do this thing that I want to do, I click the thing once as a
reinforcement and it apparently works because humans are simple,
little biological machines sometimes works for dogs.
Yeah, right.
Works for dogs.
I imagine if you gave yourself a Skittle every time you noticed something
that'd be, I think Eleazar actually did that.
He was having people feed him M&Ms when he did something good.
That rings the bell.
Yeah.
I feel like I get to give myself half credit for doing a half baked version
of Brian's thing when I was, I used to drive for work all the time and I'd
count blue cars on this, on this, on the street and highway.
And that was just something to keep me engaged with the road.
But I, I only would keep counting my head.
I imagine if I had a clicker, I'd actually have been more focused too.
And less focused on the road cause I'd be reaching for my clicker while driving.
So, but similar, similar style thing.
I'll give myself a, a week high five for that one.
How's that?
How did, how did the M&Ms thing work out?
Do you remember?
I don't remember a follow up.
I remember, I probably not well.
Otherwise they'd still be doing it.
Yeah.
But he did his goal.
I guess it depends on how, how often you got M&Ms.
Like if you had 10 M&Ms a day, you won't get diabetes.
No, I know.
But that's what I'm saying.
He kicked so much ass with his goal that he got diabetes.
Right.
Yeah.
Sometimes you got to take that bullet in order to get your thing done.
Right.
And M&M for every line of code he writes on the AGI, right?
It's a tangent, but I was just talking to one of my friends about how
frustrated I am that we still haven't figured out how to make healthy food that
tastes like chocolate.
Like, right?
Well, why is that?
I'm sure there's a very good reason why this is hard, but it just seems like it
would be.
Well, the reason that it's hard is because calories is what tastes good.
Yeah.
But why can't we just, you know, they created Splenda.
Like, are there more hacks that we can do to just trick like your brain into
thinking one molecule is the other molecule.
If it's got a similar structure, I don't know how nutrition works, but I'm with
you.
There might be, there might be a good reason quote unquote, but not a satisfying
reason, certainly not the reason as satisfying as a Snickers.
I think it's probably just more of a malloc reason where there's more money in
creating M&Ms that are genuinely bad for you and taste better.
Cause they're super cheap.
Yeah, like.
Yeah.
But I mean, gummy Flintstones vitamins taste like candy, right?
Notoriously.
They're kind of a chalky aftertaste.
I've actually had them, but I've heard of people taking too many of them.
So, um, maybe, maybe like gross candy, maybe if you didn't have any other candy in
the house, or maybe it wasn't a full vitamin, right?
If you're not getting your full daily load of vitamin from a, from a gummy, but
it was 5% then you could eat 20 of these gummies.
The downside of the nearing 20 gummies a day.
So.
It's my problem with like marijuana edibles is that me and marijuana don't
get along, but like, I really just want to eat like the candy that kind of tastes
like marijuana.
Well, just a regular gummy or starburst work for you.
Well, someone blows smoke in your face.
I think you still get, I don't know if you get secondhand marijuana, but, uh,
I just, I really like the way that they taste though.
I wish somebody could just like make ones that don't get you high, but it's just
tastes like, okay, that's enough for this tangent.
On that note though, I have some CBD oil that tastes kind of like marijuana.
Um, because I've CBD that I've tried tastes like grass.
Yeah.
It's not the good kind of essence.
Yeah.
Not the devil's grass.
It tastes like essence of marijuana, maybe.
And that's probably because it has essence of marijuana in it, but there
might be hope out there for you.
If you want to spend a lot on an experiment, it's just more of a minor frustration.
All right.
What was I talking about?
Habit building.
Yeah.
Oh, stacking habits over time.
Yes.
So when you're making a new habit, you want to start small and easy and then
build from there.
What is this your, your usual method for filming habit?
Um, yeah.
Well, yeah.
You just want to start with like the smallest version of the habit and then
like build it over time.
So I started, um, there's a fitness center in my apartment.
And I finally started using it after being here for like a month.
I started by just, okay, I'm going to run on a treadmill for five minutes.
And then it's like, okay, now 10 minutes, now 15 minutes.
And then now I'm going to also do stretching exercises and lift weights.
So the first like thing was just getting into the fitness room regularly and
getting used to it.
And then you can start to, you know, so I'm stacking other habits with that one.
Um, I think I mentioned this before, but I, when I was first starting to work
out, I had a fallback plan, which I found was really important because you
don't always feel like exercising.
So it's really good to have a fallback plan of what you're going to do when
you don't feel like exercising.
Oh, so like, you don't feel like you wasted your time going there?
Uh, well, I mean, I would just always work out in my bedroom.
So I didn't have to go anywhere.
Oh, so, okay.
So you're still working out.
You're just not going to the gym.
Is that what it is?
No, well, I mean, my fallback plan was really stupid.
Okay.
The fallback plan, I guess was genius.
What's stupid is that it worked.
Uh, my initial plan was I get home from work before I eat dinner, do
anything else I work out for an hour.
And if I really, really didn't feel like it, my fallback plan was I work
out for an hour instead.
And it's ridiculous how often that actually worked.
That's pretty funny.
Give yourself your second choice of doing the same thing.
My version of that is doing the bike at the gym instead of the treadmill.
Cause I, I usually won't put either two miles on the treadmill or five
miles on the bike and the bike is easier.
So it's like, how engaged I want to be cause I can't play on my phone
while I'm running, but I can while I'm sitting on the bike.
So today I did the bike and it's still working out, I guess, but it's not,
it's not as direct as your hack.
I'm still surprised how well it worked.
I just, I feel like you have higher than average will power.
That's definitely wouldn't work for me.
I don't know.
I think you might be.
Yeah.
You know, I think I'm not sure what the average is.
If you're comparing to me, definitely.
I'm not sure where I'm out on the average scale, but you're like the kind
of guy who could take a year off and write a book and like dedicate yourself
to working on it every day.
Whereas like I had six months off and I could barely get myself to like get
out of the house.
Like I couldn't even bring myself to like play video games that I felt like
playing.
Yeah.
I need structure.
Big unemployed is terrible.
Yeah.
Well, I mean, but that's the thing.
I had a structure, which really helped.
Yeah, but it's a self-imposed structure.
Exactly.
Yeah.
Well, it's still a structure.
It is, but some people can do that.
I would, I would feel grave disappointment for myself.
No, you still feel the grave disappointment.
It just doesn't motivate you to create a structure.
Yeah, we get it.
We, we still hated ourselves.
We just didn't motivate us to do anything.
Yeah.
But no, I think, I think that's awesome.
Maybe we've been talking pretty long.
We should drop this out.
I just wanted to, the last thing I wanted to say was about the mental and
physical health.
It's that kind of, you know, uh, I think this is probably the most important
thing for productivity that I guess people do talk about it a fair bit, but
it's overlooked sometimes, especially when people talking about like tools and
other things, like the most important thing is to keep yourself healthy.
Your tools aren't going to do anything.
If you're, if your brain's not engaged with it, so.
Which means things like, I'm not, I haven't looked at your list yet, but
I'm betting it includes things like get good nutrition, get all the sleep you
need regularly and work out regularly.
Yup.
And picture diet.
Yeah.
You got it in the wrong order in you, but you listed the first three things.
I think sleep should come first, actually.
That which ones?
I think sleep is probably the most important of those because, uh, yeah,
the whole, you know, sleep deprivation, like being legally drunk and, uh,
it just messes with your whole body, messes with your, you know, physical and
mental state.
And I was joking in that you got all the things on the list, but they were in a
different order.
So, but yeah, right.
Sleep sounds important.
I guess I found that sleep, at least for me anyway, sleep doesn't work as
well.
If I don't work out regularly, like somehow they're connected.
So it's good to know then that way maybe it's more motivation to work out.
If you're like, well, if I don't work out, then I won't sleep.
Yeah.
And then I can't do anything and then I'm miserable.
And then it also kind of sucks that they're connected for you because you
have to do one to get the other.
What I'm hearing is that my chronic sleep problems are fucking me up hardcore.
Oh yeah.
Yeah.
It's been a problem for years.
I don't know what to do about it.
I, we got a nice new bed and mattress topper pillows.
I don't know.
I'll figure it out.
Somebody on the less wrong Facebook had compiled a lot of sleep advice in a
Google doc, which I could share with you.
And I could also put, assuming that person put that out there in the public.
So I'll, uh, credit them.
If you have it, that'd be great.
Yeah.
Do you keep your door open?
Yes.
Okay.
I keep it a jar to keep the temperature of the room, circulating the rest of the
house.
We have a fan going.
Yeah.
There's like a million interventions.
Yeah.
I just recently saw the thing that CO2 build up in room with doors and windows
closed.
I think that actually didn't, uh, like Scott tested that and it wasn't, the
effects weren't as strong as he was hoping or expecting.
Yeah.
I remember, I saw that as well, but it still seems to make intuitive sense.
That you should have oxygen.
Yeah.
I think it's helped me a bit anyway.
And also, um, your body temperature is supposed to drop at night.
So being too warm can inhibit your sleep.
So that might also have to do with it.
Like air circulation.
Interesting.
Okay.
There's a lot of stuff.
Yeah.
I want to, I want to see all of it because I get good sleep, like where I wake up
feeling awesome less than once a month, probably on the order of like once every
three months and those days, those mornings are awesome.
And like, I get by, I'm productive in the morning.
I get stuff done, but I'm kind of just like, I wake up and like, man, I wish
I could, I don't know.
Dude, when I have days like that, I don't do anything.
Those are the days where, like you said, I can't even motivate myself to play
video games.
Maybe eating ash has average motivation and it's just everyone's sleep
deprived, although you're pretty sleep deprived too.
So yeah, I think we have a serious problem with sleep in our society.
Absolutely.
I was sleep deprived my entire school life.
I was like one of those shifted sleep cycles and I'm an extreme
night person naturally.
Well, there's also the problem that teenagers have a naturally later awake
cycle and we all forced them to get up at fucking six a.m.
to go to school.
So they can be on their way to work.
So I got like four hours of sleep, like four to six on average, like throughout
all of high school and college.
It was really bad.
I'm surprised I was at functional at all that I graduated.
I think it may be a large part of the emotional disturbances in
teenage hood in our society is just that we force that on people and has a
bad psychological effect.
Well, and school in general too.
Yeah.
Um, if we didn't mention it before, uh, on sleep start codex, there's a
melatonin article that you should check out.
If you're having trouble with sleep, that's just like a, you know,
cheap quick intervention that could help a lot.
That's for example, if you're like me and you have a shifted sleep schedule,
I think there was a more proper word for it than I'm forgetting, but I'm
like an extreme night owl taking melatonin seven hours before you want to go
to sleep will kind of help bring your sleep cycle back to a normal circadian
rhythm so you can go to sleep at a reasonable hour, wake up at a reasonable
hour.
And take way less than you buy in the bottles at Walgreens.
Absolutely.
I think 300 micrograms was the recommended dose, which is like what your
body produces naturally.
And I think you're unlikely to, uh, make yourself melatonin intolerant,
which for the record is about one 10th of the lowest dose you can buy at most
stores.
Yeah.
A lot of places sell like five milligrams, which is an insane amount of
melatonin.
That's a hormone.
So like you do want to be careful with taking it.
Yeah.
There, there is a, a company on Amazon that makes melatonin in the right
amount.
And they're super cheap.
I bought a bunch when I read these articles.
So they're just as much as you would buy, pay at any pharmacy, which is,
you know, a sense per pill.
Yeah.
They're quite cheap and readily available in most like supermarkets and
pharmacies and yeah, melatonin doesn't work for everyone, but that's a, again,
you can buy it.
It's nice when you can take things in pill form.
You can't take sleep in pill form yet.
You can dig medafinil.
Interestingly, um, medafinil actually elevates a rexin or that's one of its
proposed mechanisms.
What is a rexin?
So like melatonin regulates sleep, uh, your circadian rhythm.
When you see lots of blue light, it tells you to be awake when, and, uh, so
you generate a rexin, which keeps you awake.
And then, uh, when you see lots of red light in the evening, you generate, uh,
melatonin, which makes you sleepy.
So I think, uh, it was on Scott's Tumblr.
He had a while before he wrote the melatonin article theorize that you could
completely control your circadian rhythm with, uh, medafinil and melatonin.
And it seems really useful and like something that, you know, should be more
widely known and used.
So if I buy a lamp, I don't know if you guys know the answer to this, but
if I were to buy it, I've got a desk lamp at work that I never used because I
had it when there was, I set a place that had poorer lighting.
If I got a blue light bulb for that thing and left that on, would I feel
more alert at my desk?
Well, not like blue, blue, but more like that white blue from an LED.
Yeah.
Like the kind of blue that you get from the sky.
I think most unnatural lights are blue spectrum lights anyway.
Yeah.
It's kind of an issue.
It's why they have like flux and twilight for devices or like those, uh,
like computer, uh, there's like ridiculous looking computer glasses.
Oh yeah.
Those little yellow things, the newer ones look kind of cool.
Basically never look into screens before an hour before bedtime, because that
really fucks you up.
And if you absolutely have to, and even if you don't have to, if you look at
in screens at all after the sun goes down, get something like flux.
Yeah.
I've had flux and iOS comes with all that built onto it now.
So cool.
Yeah.
Things should come with that built in.
We have the ability to.
That's the things that doesn't cost anything to like, considering how many
children are using devices like all day long too.
I think flux is available on PC, but I know it's available on Mac for free.
So there's a similar thing on PC.
It is.
And it is also free.
And it is also called flux.
There you go.
What's this about if you have depression, anxiety, or ADD?
That's just, uh, saying prioritize working on that.
A lot of people get like upset about, you know, oh, well, I don't really, you
know, want to waste a lot of time going to a therapist or trying out new
medications, cause it's going to slow me down.
But, uh, I like to just kind of think of it as delegating tasks to future you
who's better and better able to handle them.
So see a doctor, a therapist, if possible, if you've got one of those disorders.
If they are able to improve it at all, the productivity boost you get is
absolutely worth whatever time you put in.
Yeah.
And just the happiness boost, like that's really terrible at being depressed or anxious.
So, you know, I found them happier when I'm more productive though.
Oh, absolutely.
So it's a nice positive feedback loop.
Yes.
Yeah.
Exactly.
It's like, I did a thing.
I've made the world slash my life better.
Yeah.
And it gets to be this negative feedback loop.
If you have anxiety, so you can't focus enough to do your tasks, so you don't do
your tasks, which gives you more anxiety.
So fix that.
Um, you can get health insurance through Medicaid if possible in the United States.
Anyway, you can look for low cost clinics.
They usually have those and therapists usually have sliding scales, which are
based on your income.
Uh, so see if you can find a therapist who specializes in cognitive behavioral
therapy, which could help you also with, um, if you're trying to be more productive,
it's cool because they go hand in hand really well, or you could even use a
workbook or an app.
They have those for free.
You can get one at the library.
You could download one.
It's about as effective.
Uh, I've been using one called Wysa and, uh, I, I recommend it.
It's got like this cute cartoon penguin with AI that talks to you.
And then it kind of coaches you through different CBT methods and, uh, it has
like preloaded a bunch of free, uh, meditation exercises and physical
exercises, yoga poses.
So it's like, it's pretty fun.
Uh, it's pretty cute.
So if you're turned off by a cute cartoon penguins that send you like animated
gifts, then maybe that's not for you.
Penguins, then you aren't a monster and you should not be listening to our podcast.
Develop one for that person.
We're just like, Gilbert Gottfried yelling at you like, Hey, I asshole.
That's probably counterproductive.
I would find it really funny, actually.
I'm not even going to talk about in a tropics because we already had a, you
guys had an episode about that already.
We've really dug that into the ground.
So that's it.
Let's, um, move on to the other stuff.
Cause that would, that took too long.
Yay.
Thank you, Jess.
No, that was great.
It was, it was information dense, but I found it valuable.
We'll have a lot of links to some of these things in the description here.
Um, can't remember what I was going to say.
I'm, I'm grabbing back for it now.
And even the straws that I'm had in a second ago were gone.
I just, I'm, now I'm pulling on nothing.
There's some mind hack that you can use for recovering things.
You just lost like that.
There is.
It's called getting better sleep.
Sounds like sleep is super fucking cool.
I mean, you know, everyone knows that, but it's occurring to me that like, I don't
know, my, my lack of, my lack of energy and productivity being constantly exhausted.
I kind of use it like a self-depreciating humor, but it is kind of really wearing me
out and I need that to be managed.
So I don't know what's, what have jagged my ass on this stuff for, I think.
Oh, I'd like sleep is awful.
Uh, I hate the fact that you have to turn your brain off.
Yeah.
I don't, I don't actually, I mean, I don't really mind it.
I used to have.
I do.
I'm just not asleep.
Well, don't get wrong.
Well, I despise the fact that I have to sleep.
Don't get me wrong.
I, I, if I could take a pill that maybe not have to sleep, I totally would, but
that's not what's causing my bad sleep.
Um, it's, uh, I don't know, I think, well, no, I don't.
Well, I, I have suspicions.
Um, have you like tried to bring this up with a doctor?
I will.
I, I'm usually the first step that, well, I, I mean, I have in the past, but I
haven't seen a doctor about anything in years.
Moving on to our less wrong thing.
Yes.
Yeah.
Didn't we have a word for it?
Sequences.
Yeah.
Didn't we have like a, the segment of the show was called something that I recall.
I don't recall either, but we should, we should have something.
Yeah, it's not like, but we should have something snappy, but I'm not smart
enough to come up with something on the fly.
We'll brainstorm this for a while.
Yeah.
And then later.
Yeah.
That can go in post.
In fact, I have a great idea.
It is.
Here's the blank space for me.
Perfect.
No.
Uh, okay.
Uh, so our two less wrong posts for this week where I don't know.
And a parable of science and politics, politics.
Yes.
We're starting with, I don't know.
Uh, which one is this?
I don't know.
Are we going to do who's on first joke?
I don't know.
Thank you.
Yes.
So this post, uh, takes the form of a conversation that Eliezer had with, um,
an unnamed other individual over the phrase, I don't know.
And when it's okay to use and how it works within the Bayesian
rationalist worldview.
And it was sparked by a post on overcoming bias by Robin Hansen where to
summarize briefly, it's like, um, you aren't entitled to your opinions.
Honestly, I'll let you summarize it.
Cause I think this goes directly against maybe Hansen's just updated and
changed his mind on this in the last, what, 12 years.
Um, but he said the exact opposite on time.
Harris's podcast when he was here in what February last year.
That doesn't, that doesn't sound right time of year.
It doesn't matter where he, he's, he said that he's moving more towards
not volunteering an opinion when he doesn't, when he doesn't have an idea.
Yeah.
And so let's talk about the post and I'll talk about my objection.
And then you can explain why I'm missing the point.
Oh, I, I don't know if you're missing the point at all.
Okay.
Uh, the primary objection that Eliezer seems to have with people saying,
I don't know, is that it's a cop out because in the real world, you can say,
I don't know, but you still have to make a decision.
The first example he gave was that if someone asks themselves, what are the
chances of cryonics being successful at some time in the future?
Their answer very often is something like, I don't know, but regardless of what
they know or don't know, they still have to either sign up or not sign up.
And by saying, I don't know, that usually defaults to a position of not signing up.
So what he's saying that is in the general parlance, usually I don't know,
is just a screen that people think is defensible and unarguable before they go
on to do whatever they feel like.
And it's usually the wrong thing because they refuse to admit themselves,
what their actual guess is, or examine their justifications or even realize
that they're guessing.
I think I figured out what my discontent here is that, and I gave the example
here in the notes, you know, if you asked me, Stephen, what do you think we
should do about the refugee crisis in Syria?
I don't, I don't, I don't know.
And that doesn't feel like a cop out.
I don't have enough information on how to, how to satisfy this, how to
satisfactorily respond to this problem.
I think the difference between that and something like cryonics or whatever is
that I'm not making a decision on what to do about the Syrian refugee crisis,
right?
Right.
Um, you know, if someone said, Hey, Stephen, you need to pick right now what
we're going to do with them, then I need to, then I need to decide.
But if someone just asks me on the street, Hey, what's, what's your thoughts
on, I don't know, name something random and complicated.
What do we do?
What do we do if, if Robert Mueller's fired tomorrow protest?
Okay, sure.
But that's not an ad.
I mean, I can go to a protest or not, but that's, that's not it.
Like, I don't know, right?
So, um, yeah.
And I think that is a big part of where the split lies because they do also talk
about things like, uh, whether there's how many trees, how many apples are in
that tree outside the window, right?
And you can't see the tree right now.
And Elias or gives a number, he says, I don't know, between 10, he did
actually say, I don't know.
He says between 10 and 1000 as a rough guess.
And, uh, his interlocutor says, if it was my job on the line, I'd much rather
say, I don't know, than be wrong, because who knows what the boss will be
do with that information when he loses all that money.
And Eleazar says, just to be clear, this is not because I don't know
as irrational judgment, but because you want to avoid responsibility.
Like your boss is going to go and make a decision anyway.
He's just going to do it without your guess as part of his information.
Yeah.
And I think this is more just like kind of an exercise and like pedantry.
I don't, that might be too critical, but the real question isn't, how do you
answer a question as simple as how many hairs do you have on your head?
Right.
Cause nothing, nothing weighs on that.
You know, this isn't like, Hey, what do you think the odds of this
surgery working are?
Oh, I don't know.
So, you know, I'm probably not going to look into it is what is how it's
how he's anticipating people using it.
This seems to be intended to be read in the spirit of the improper use of
humility, right?
Cause it is a follow on, or like one or two, right after that.
Yeah, it's in the same days worth of reading.
Right.
And so again, makes the same, the same point that you are not, uh, you are
not helping someone when you say, I don't know, rather than to give an
estimate, you are, or a range, uh, you are covering your own butt.
So you're not doing them a favor.
If you really cared about their welfare, you would give them an
estimate, such as between 10 and a thousand apples.
Yeah.
And you know, to some extent that's useless, but like, so a more realistic
example would be, you know, if we didn't know it was freezing out where you
and I are leaving this place and you're like, Hey, Stephen, how hot is it
outside wondering whether or not you should grab a jacket.
And if I didn't have a phone and I wasn't outside and I can't see outside,
you know, my answer, I don't know, doesn't give you information on how
to prepare to go outside.
Right.
Me, me telling you, well, somewhere between zero Kelvin and 6,000 degrees
Fahrenheit, you know, six, uh, whatever, 6,000 degrees, uh, Kelvin, that's not
a helpful answer.
No, but you can usually, I mean, uh, I guess it depends on what your area
of expertise is, but you could kind of look out the window.
You could, you know, go based on your priors of how cold has it been lately.
Oh, welcome to Colorado.
Well, you're going to have those days where you look at like, it looks great
out, you're going to step out and be like, Oh, it's 45 degrees out.
So it's always really hot in my car regardless of how cold it is because of
the sun.
So that's weird.
Yeah.
Everyone just tells me to layer.
And don't get me wrong, there are times where, you know, you can make a good
estimate, but I think they were kind of talking past each other in this
dialogue in a way that was instructive, but not helpful.
Cause like X was trying to think of examples of like, look, what do I do?
If I really don't know, and someone wants this answer and me giving them a
vague, pointless answer, doesn't help.
Right.
And I think like your, your thing with the, the degrees Kelvin, uh, between zero
and 6,000, right?
It is my, my main objection to this argument that's being presented is that
most people, as far as I can tell, use the term, I don't know, in a shorthand
to mean within the normal bounds.
Like if someone said how many apples are on the tree and you answered, I don't
know, that's a shorthand for saying between zero and 10,000, right?
If somebody had some inkling that this might be a magic tree with a million
apples on it, then they wouldn't say, I don't know.
Yeah.
If you looked outside and you glance at it, you would say, Holy shit, a
fucking ton, or you'd say like basically none.
Right.
Yeah.
And that's, and so I don't know is somewhere right in the middle.
Yeah.
I don't know was like within the bounds of a normal app tree, but with maximum
uncertainty therein.
Right.
I like that.
And to qualify my welcome to Colorado to Jess was you last time we were on for
productivity 1.0.
Oh, we talked about, I was all like, altitude sick.
Last episode, but I'm better now.
So that's getting as that wasn't, that wasn't sarcastic.
That was a, that was a kind of nudging welcome to this welcome to the
crazy weather we get here sometimes.
I actually really like the weather here.
Okay.
The one thing I do want to say about the point, the post that I thought was
interesting is that it's, it shows like a divide between strict Bayesian thinking
and thinking in the normal world, because thinking as a strict Bayesian, like as
if one was an AI, you would never say something like, I don't know.
You would just spit out that maximum uncertainty number.
Right.
Well, you have access to it.
If you're a computer, right, your brain's still generating the same number,
which is what I think this, he was going towards.
It's like a true Bayesian operator would do something like that, as opposed to
just saying null value as my answer.
Insufficient data for meaningful answer.
Nice.
That was one of the comments.
Oh, I think it was, but it was also an asthma short story that I can't remember
the name of the last question.
Yeah.
And so first of all, if you have a million years, think of a better way to
fucking ask that question.
That really bugged me the whole time I was reading that.
He did make an interesting point that if you're dealing, there's some people
who will think that saying, you sing, I don't know, is a license for them to
make up their own ideas, which are just as valid.
Like if, if you were to, if someone were to ask, what was the state of
existence before the big bang?
And you say, literally, I do not know as far as we know right now in science, we
cannot know there wasn't anything.
It's just, and they say, aha, therefore God.
I'm like, no, but you don't know.
You just said, you can't know, therefore there's a chance of God.
And I don't know if that's legit of it, like, I literally run into someone doing
that to me a few months ago.
No, and people were going to do that anyway.
I feel like if, you know, that shouldn't stop you from saying, I don't know.
If you don't know, then you call, you know, if they start telling you their
grand theory, just call them out if they're wrong, or maybe they have
information you don't.
And then you're like, Oh, okay.
I hadn't thought of that.
Like, I don't, you know, that seems like a bad reason to not say, I don't know.
Because somebody else might have an idea.
You know, they're going to have an idea anyway, regardless.
Although this post does dive into ignorance priors, where if you're talking
with another rationalist who will know what you mean when you say, I don't know,
to mean I've got nothing to update my ignorance priors, then somebody won't
inject their, won't, won't privilege a one, one hypothesis in the pool of all
possibilities.
If you're dialoguing with somebody who gets it, right?
Yeah.
Um,
and he defines ignorance priors for us quickly in this, which is handy as a prior
which distributes probability evenly across all possibilities.
And assigns only a very small amount of, to any individual possibility
because there are so many.
One final thing before we move on, actually, you guys probably have final
things too, but one final thing for me, before we move on, he says in here, uh,
this quote, the meaning of the sounds that issue from your lips is whatever
occurs in the mind of the listener.
If they're going to misinterpret something, then you shouldn't say to them,
no matter what the words mean inside your own head, which I was,
eugenics, right?
Well, yeah, eugenics, but, uh, I was surprised to see that because one of the
things that annoyed me about rationalist Harry in HPMOR was that he would
think he wasn't lying when he would say things that are technically true, but
that he knows will be interpreted in the exact wrong way by his listener.
I'm like, you have implanted a falsehood in your listener's brain.
It doesn't matter if what you said is maybe technically, literally true,
you know, they're going to misinterpret it.
Well, he was intending to manipulate people though, which I guess is dark arts.
Yeah, yeah, but he was like all proud of himself about like how, uh-huh, I am
not breaking any moral laws because I still didn't lie to them.
You know, and I was like, you're totally lying, dude.
That didn't seem consistent with the rest of his ethics.
Well, it did cause he's turning somebody from to the light, but his,
his rationalizing it saying, I didn't technically lie.
It doesn't matter if you're technically that or not, you're, you're, you're,
yeah, you're, you're painting someone's map in a way that you know is inaccurate.
And I was kind of annoyed by that.
And for some reason, even though I know much, much better, it's still to me
seemed like that was a position.
Yes, or wasn't dorsing because sometimes I'm stupid too.
Uh, and so like seeing him literally say the exact opposite right here.
I was like, Oh, oh yeah, that was just a character in a book who was shown
to be wrong many times in that book.
I don't know why I impugned those motives on to Elias or I
shouldn't have done that.
Well, to be fair, Harry's so often a mouthpiece, right?
So in his defense at the top of the book, he says, don't, you know, don't trust
everything that the main character says as something that I would say and, you
know, be distrustful of bad advice or a vice from darker characters.
Um, so he's basically saying is like, I don't endorse Quirrell's politics.
But I think he had to say that I'm sure he did people that even if you
endorse Quirrell's politics, you got to say that it'd be one of Quirrell's
first rules is don't agree with me.
Even if you agree with me, don't agree with me in public.
Yeah.
Um, jump back to my, my dumb example of like Stephen, what do you do about the
refugee crisis in Syria?
Me saying probably don't walk them into a volcano is that's not
helpful, right?
That's like saying it's not zero Kelvin out.
It might be helpful to a strictly Bayesian AI.
It'd be like, aha, I will reduce my walk them into a volcano option by 100%
now.
Yeah.
Lower down all the things that you're going to do that will involve killing
them, you know, so like, yeah, but if you're talking to like a person, right?
So, which is so hard.
Yeah, you still don't know what's inside people's brains and how they, you
know, I mean, the example of, um, saying eugenics when you don't
actually mean, you know, uh, eliminating people who, you know, the weak races,
right, when you're actually trying to say like curing people of terrible
diseases and making sure that they, you know, have the same or better health than
average, but, uh, if you use the word eugenics, people are automatically
going to assume you're talking about the first thing.
So maybe just don't use that word.
And they'll, they'll try to use it for you anyway though.
Yeah.
As soon as you're like, I want people to be healthier than normal.
They're like, aha, eugenics, you want to kill the Jews.
I didn't say healthier than the Jews.
I meant healthier than all of us.
In fact, I want the Jews to be the healthiest first, just so that it were not
eugenics.
And on that note, speaking of, of, of fables of science and politics.
Okay.
A fable of science and politics.
I'll give a real, real brief summary of what this is.
Yeah.
I just want to point out this is the first, uh, like little short story sequence post.
There's a handful of these throughout littered throughout over the next, you know,
and they're delightful.
They are.
This one, yeah, it's fun.
And it's alluded to in method to rationality as well.
Not alluded to.
It's directly referenced.
Dumbledore read this.
So in the, uh, he starts out by telling us that in the time of Roman Empire,
civic life was divided between the blue and green factions.
The support of a faction became necessary to every candidate for civil or
ecclesiastical honors.
Uh, there were fights in the streets.
People actually murdered each other, uh, for being on, you know,
opposite sides of factions and these factions were sports fans,
the partisans of the blue and green chariot racing teams.
So he starts the story by asking us to imagine a future society that flees into
a vast underground network of caverns and seals the entrance.
People forget what the sky looks like, but they have texts saying that it is a
cerulean color, but there is a disagreement as to whether this means a blue
color or a green color and their society splits into two factions arguing
over what, uh, the color of the sky is.
They have the same kind of thing as the ancient Romans did.
Eventually a piece is born of a growing sense of pointlessness.
Uh, people think about how many people died, how little changed as a result of
these arguments and, and violent conflicts.
Uh, but there's still a blue and a green position on almost every
contemporary issue of political or cultural importance.
Things like how you feel about city density and your taxation policy and
stuff like that can be reliably predicted.
Once someone knows if you're blue or green.
Um, and then there are five, six little vignettes of someone who sees
a, the actual sky and how that affects their personal psychology, what
they determined to do now that they know what color the sky actually is.
Yeah.
These were kind of fun.
And we don't have to go into all of them, but they're the kind of
paint characters of different kinds of like either pragmatism or like
esoteric, you know, kind of like religious the audit or not the
odyssey, but, um, apologetics where it's like, Oh, you know,
greenness was always really more of like, uh, of a way of thinking
about things than it was about the actual color of the sky.
And yeah.
And one person was like, it was blue all along.
I'm going to go out and kill those people.
The war is back on.
What did you guys think about this?
I liked it.
I thought it was fun.
I find it depressing actually, because I know that there's, you know,
issues that if we did find a factual answer on people would absolutely
have those reactions where some people would be like, Oh, I need to
change the way that I think I'm going to reject my old way of life.
You know, I'm going to probably have to cut ties with lots of my friends
and family, but I want to be correct.
I want to be correct.
I want to, and then there were the people that were like, I'm going to kill all of
them.
I thought the most interesting one was the person who was a green and saw
that the sky was blue and was like, now that I know the sky is blue, I
have to change all my opinions on taxation and city density.
And I was like, wow, those two don't actually correlate, but I can totally
see how they would in that person's mind and in that society.
Well, and like that, that happens in our society basically now, right?
Yeah.
I mean, there's, you know, nothing that really kind of logically ties
together, uh, being a pro abortion, I guess, and like gun control.
And, you know, like there's, there's things that separate down party lines
that don't really like connect together and make sense, but just historically.
Yeah.
They're, it seems bizarre to me that if you tell me that you're, what do you
call it, pro life, uh, anti-abortion, that I think of pro life.
I couldn't, I, cause it doesn't make sense for me to call it that, but in
the case, uh, yeah, you can reliably predict somebody's, you know, position on
like drugs and guns and immigration, immigration.
Why are these tied together?
So that's, I thought that was kind of fun.
So yeah, it's super depressing and then how realistic it is.
Um, then there was the one that says, Oh, fuck me.
This is going to start a war.
I'm going to close this off, not telling anyone that we found a way to
the service and just ignore this and not tell anybody.
How long can I hide this from society?
Because that person knew that that like the first three stories were going to
happen, which is also depressing.
Cause I can kind of sympathize with that character.
This made me think about like me personally, like, how would I react if I
found out that something in my political sphere was provably undeniably true?
I guess I really feel that way about most of the things, but like,
I've had that happen.
Yeah, but it's pretty awful.
Is it like, if you find out that something you thought was true, is true?
No, something that, like, you know, I really strongly believed, uh, for
example, that men and women were exactly the same.
And like, I would have like, you know, fought to the death over that, maybe
not literally, but like, I definitely fought people literally over that.
Like I had like fist fights as a kid.
Like it was like, you know, really core tenant and then like,
But you never got kicked in the balls in those fist fights, thus invalidating your point.
Getting kicked in the vagina hurts a lot, actually.
It's probably not as bad.
But no, but I meant specifically, I was being pedantic and pointing out that
there are, that there are expressed phenotypic differences because you don't
have balls to kick.
I meant like, uh, you know, exactly the same in terms of personality types and
preferences that it's all.
Stephen was just proving that men, all men are assholes.
No, actually that was the example I was going to raise as like a hypothetical.
So like, if this was proven beyond a shadow of a doubt and everyone just had
to either accept it or deny it, um, then it's been pretty proven that they're,
you know, yeah, there's different personality types.
There's different preferences and, uh, it's, you know, along a spectrum, but
they correlate strongly with, with people aren't just blank slates.
Yeah.
And, and, uh, that strikes me as a good real world example.
I wonder if there's another one, uh, man, maybe even more offensive,
like racial differences.
Yeah.
That's too offensive, but no, no, I'm not, so that, that one, if there, if
there's anything, it's, I'm sure it's in the air.
So, but if it, if it turned out that for whatever reason, white people
were just more inclined to be serial killers and that the numbers up to the
state weren't, you know, a fluke or just other factors.
It was like, no, it turns out just like, if you have white skin, you're
more inclined to be a serial killer.
Um, that'd be a hard pill for a lot of people to swallow.
And it was really for the pill for other people to swallow, right?
It'll be really hard if it was something that, you know, was less
cool than that example, totally.
What if it turns out that Asians are both morally and intellectually
superior to all of the races?
I wonder what would happen if that were true.
Right.
So I like these, all these little short story, parable style posts,
cause they're all like that.
They're, they're all carefully distant in a way that everyone could
like, Oh, that's kind of interesting.
And, and look at it objectively, where then you start, you start taking
away the blue and green sky with something you actually care about.
And you're like, Oh, now I can actually feel the emotions of these characters.
And that's pretty intense.
Maybe it's just worth going over all of them really quick.
They all have names.
Um, so basically what they're like on an expedition and then they see, uh, a
whole into, to the surface.
Well, one of them gets split up in the group, the rest of them don't see it.
And so one person, and then it does kind of like a choose your own
adventure of which person made it out.
And then a Tidia, I've no idea if people pick names.
I, I can't even do it for characters in video games.
Like I spend a long time like over, it doesn't matter.
Like more time, like thinking of a name than customizing what they look like.
I love picking names.
I hate it.
I can never think of one.
I have stock names.
I always go with it with smart.
So I don't have to spend two hours doing that.
I don't even have to deal with it for the rest of the time in the game.
It's, it's a big deal.
Anyway, choose one that you know, you always like random name generator.
There's never one that I'll always like because it's, it's different games.
It doesn't matter.
It's, it's my own stupid hang up.
I'll get over it.
Yeah.
Search for fantasy, uh, or I guess it doesn't have to be fantasy, but random
name generators, the behind the name one is very good.
I've used those.
I'll, I'll try what was it called behind the name behind the name because
you can, uh, it gives you like a very, uh, comprehensive list of ethnicities,
like, uh, cultures that you could pull names from, like everything from like
modern day, Hellenic to ancient Greek.
Okay.
And then they have some like names from fantasy, uh, worlds and names that are
goth and names that are, you know, cyber or whatever.
That sounds helpful.
I hope that I can pick a surname too, or just first name and whether it's like
typically male or female or ones that could be either.
So that's all people dope.
All right.
I'll have to give that a shot.
All right.
Atidia, the blue, I don't want to read the whole thing.
So I'm just trying to paraphrase the one that decides to kill.
She's the one who says you were right all along.
This guy whispered down in here and now you can prove it.
And, uh, she curled the hand to a clenched fist, turned around and said,
the truce is over, um, burn the green, stared incomprehensibly,
incomprehensingly at the chaos of the colors for long seconds.
And then a pile of ever the pit of the stomach.
These are worth reading in real.
This is, this should be on, uh, one of your, uh, if you ever do more
like sequence readings.
Okay.
Oh yeah.
It would be cool to do a readings of all the little stories and the sequences.
Cool.
If you want more work, you know what bonus for our Patreon listeners.
That sounds fun.
Yeah.
I'll read this whole thing out for a Patreon listeners.
I'll help if you want.
That sounds good.
Excellent.
If you need, if you need any, uh, if you need anyone to hold you back and bring
down the project, you can call me.
I'd be happy to help.
That sounds fun.
Um, yeah, you probably don't want to commit to a time to do that.
This isn't that long actually.
Well, I mean, before this episode goes up, yeah, no, that's, that's why I was
thinking, yeah, that's not too long.
I could do that.
Cool.
That'd be awesome.
But you still want to like summarize each of the people real quick.
Yeah, I'll summarize them.
But yeah, it's a fun little, fun little list.
It'll be, it's a fun read and it'll be a great little listen.
So Baron the green is terrified of what they see and, uh, I'm just giving it,
but it looks at the sky and says, how can you be on their side?
And, uh, and then Charles the blue.
Yeah.
He's, he's the apologetics.
Oh, that was the one.
Um, professor of a mixed college, mixed college.
So they're the one who, um, who decides to hide it.
Right.
Yeah.
I'm trying.
I thought that was the one that tried to say, well, you know, it wasn't really
that important.
It was just more of a way of thinking.
So like green is still kind of right.
Oh, okay.
This was merely a natural phenomenon.
Nothing to do with philosophy or society.
Oh, he still might be misinterpreted.
So he, yeah, tomorrow he'll come back and block the passageway.
Yeah.
Diara, the green, she's the one who decides to change over to a blue, along with
taking all their positions on everything.
Ditching all her family members and friends and yeah, being this heavy sacrifice.
She's bummed and says, I guess I, I have to go, you know, change all these other things.
Eddin, the green, it's the one I kind of sympathized with.
Yeah.
It was the one who said that the whole war was stupid and pointless.
And now I'm going to have to hide this from the world to make sure that the
world doesn't tear itself apart over the realization.
Yeah.
And leaned against the cave mouth, weirdly trying to think of a way to
prevent this information from blowing up the world and wondering if they
didn't all deserve it.
And then Ferris is the, the, the right answer.
Notice no color on Ferris's description here.
Maybe they were unaffiliated or they, they didn't hold it that way.
Right.
Ferris gasped involuntarily, frozen by the sheer wonder and delight.
Ferris's eyes started hungrily about fastening on each site in turn before
moving reluctantly to the next.
The blue sky, the white clouds, the vast unknown outside, full of places and
things and people that no underground or had ever seen.
Oh, so that's what color it is.
Ferris said, and went exploring.
And that's the appropriate scientific approach to coming across challenging new
facts.
Yeah, I don't know about that though, because if you did discover, well, if
you did discover that white people are more likely to be serial killers, then
you're not going to go happily explore that.
That might be the kind of fact that you, I mean, you do want to explore it though.
I guess, yeah, in the sense that like, maybe it turns out that because white
people eat more of whatever food and we cut that food out of their diets, it'll
be less likely to be serial killers.
Now this, this, this is a deliberately stretched example.
But yeah, I was going to suggest that this might be the kind of thing you just
don't publish and hide from the world, but you're right.
The only way to do something about it, if there's anything to be done is to
learn more about it.
I felt like that was the viewpoint that was missing here.
The person that, I mean, because he picked the example of a sky color, it's
not like you have to go change the sky color.
That's just a fact that doesn't really matter.
But, uh, except, you know, to the extent that it changes other people's
opinions on other things, but something like, uh, figuring out that like, oh,
that these people are less intelligent.
It's like, oh, we could just hide that because it's kind of offensive or we
could figure out how to genetically engineer people to all be the same level
of intelligence or more, like, you know, you can't fix a problem by pretending
it doesn't exist.
So that's what really bothers me about it, uh, about like the mindset of people
that want to just like be willfully ignorant.
Like it, you know, the truth is true.
And I think the, the point that the intellectual dark web people that, uh,
term that Steven hates because it's masturbatory, but one of the, one of the
things that they say is that when all the good people refused to talk about this
and just hide it and the only people that are willing to talk about it are the
bad people that use this as an excuse for racism and hatred and other things.
Then if someone comes across a fact that is inconvenient and has been hidden for
so long, the only people that are talking about this fact are those evil people.
And they'll be like, the evil people must be right because if the facts are on
their side, they must be right.
So discussing certain facts and the interpretation of them that is not evil is
also very important so that you don't let the evil people dominate the
conversation and have the weight of being correct on their side.
Yeah.
And don't get me wrong.
I admire aspects of the project, like that motivation.
Um, I'm not convinced that every player in this game is, is doing it for those
ambitions, um, but it's, it's a compelling argument.
Yeah.
No, well, it's a valuable one too.
You're right.
I, I think about this, um, I had this, I don't think I could dig it up.
In fact, they were taken down because they were copyright infringement.
I may, maybe I can find them.
They were these 10 minutes cuts from Carl Sagan's audio books, usually put to
music or something with, you know, cool strategic breaks in the conversation and
stuff.
And one of them was talking about dragging the elderly Galileo through the
torture chamber underneath the church, showing them all the cool things we can
do to you if you don't shut the fuck up.
He just, he paints this picture of walking this elderly man through the
torture chamber and he's saying, why would the church do this?
If they're right, they don't need to.
Can truth not defend itself from truth in that line?
If I were to ever get something, you know, tattooed on me, you might be
something like, if I had to get a quote tattooed on me, it might be that that
if you're hiding facts or you're lying, you're, you're on the wrong side.
If you're right, the truth is on your side.
And some truths can be pretty ugly.
That, and that, and that sucks.
So it's worth being like handling them with care, but I don't agree that you
should cover it up either.
Yeah.
Handle with care is different.
You cause more harm that way.
The, the example of like the nuclear bomb might be a strategically released truth.
The, the prospects of good from that are too good to not, you know, to try and kill
everyone who might independently discover nuclear, nuclear energy, but yeah,
certainly you don't just publish it on Wikipedia or something, right?
So relating back to like why that perspective doesn't exist in this is
because it was chosen to be a, a physical fact of nature that was super
easy to observe.
And there was like no discussion once people saw it, right?
And it was one that, um, it's slipping away.
What was your, your discontent that there wasn't a position that
well, it was because that it's not an ugly truth, knowing whether the sky is
green or blue.
Oh, right.
Well, except for it is for some of them, but it's not for us.
Yeah.
Right.
But the actual fact of the sky being blue or green, isn't going to hurt anyone.
Except like only to the extent that other people's, you know, other beliefs
are tied to it.
Yeah.
And I think it was a carefully distant example for that reason.
You know, if, if he had used the example of racial intelligence or something,
people would have branded him a, you know, a eugenicist or supremacist or
something, right?
So, um, yeah.
Anyway, these ones are fun.
They're parable ones.
Man, we got heavy.
Well, yeah.
No, I actually like my response to these was that these were pretty depressing.
I think they're cool and important, but like when I say the stories are delightful,
I don't mean that they're all like really positive and happy.
Yeah.
And these are depressed, depressing specifically because what they point out
in a bad human society.
Yeah.
And not even just society, but our, our minds.
Yeah.
And it sucks that we're built this way.
And yeah, it is, it's not a happy note.
And, you know, Ferris's thing is more of like a relief and you're, you're more
just glad that you read that one last, not, not because this is the way it turned
out, you know, it could have gone any other ways.
But because this is the most joyous.
Yeah.
Kind of a historical rationalist point.
Uh, I think when these sequences were written, they tried to make a norm that
people use the words blue and green to talk about politics as opposed to bringing
up real world examples.
Eliezer would say politics is the mind killer.
I think he was the one that, um, kind of popularized that.
Yes.
That is the name of one of his posts that's coming up pretty soon.
Yeah.
And then after kind of, there was the rationalist by Asper away from less
strong people stopped using that norm and the world didn't explode.
But there, uh, there's probably more political conflict than there was.
There's less, yeah.
There's slightly less joy and slightly more acrimony.
I find it to be pretty good though.
For example, in Slate Stark, I think it's so much nicer reading the
comment section than anywhere else on the internet.
The weakness of trying to use blues and greens to discuss like today's politics
is that the second you name a political belief, you know, again, why is your
position on global warming, a political belief?
And yet it is, right?
So if, if you told me, oh, yes, even I accept the science ban global warming,
I can pretty much guess who you voted for.
And now I think the strength of using blue and green instead of anything
that's done in the real world is because these sequences aren't about trying
to do any sort of actual debugging of the world.
It's about just looking into the mechanisms of the brain and how to correct
for those and fix those without getting wrapped up in all the other crap.
It's like before you worry about who to punch, first figure out how to
form a fist and swing it correctly afterwards, you can decide whether you
want to punch Nazis or SJWs or whatever.
This course is just about how to train your body.
And for that, you have to distance yourself from those things that will
hijack the conversation.
So I think it was a very good idea for less wrong.
I, yeah, I like it there.
I guess I meant as far as discussing, um, real world stuff.
But as you, as you correctly pointed out, that's not the point.
The point is, is get your mind in shape so that you're prepared to actually
tackle problems and you're not going to do that by breaking your hands against
the test bin as I butcher this analogy by carrying it too far by, but by breaking
your hand against a test dummy when you weren't ready.
So don't try and attack politics.
First, if you have to talk about politics, use a vague, use a different thing.
Right.
So, yeah, even just don't derail your discussion.
That's not about, uh, the libertarian party.
Do you think we derailed the thing by going into actual real world stuff?
Should I edit it out?
Oh, you mean did we do that?
Yeah, just now, should I edit it out?
No, I thought that was valuable.
It was only for a minute.
Like we talked about how police are, that relates to, yeah, I just, I, now I feel
like I tainted the post by letting real world stuff get into it.
Real world's happening.
Well, it also brought up the norm.
So, yeah, yeah, I brought up, you know, what are we going to, as far as I don't
know, what are we going to do with Mueller gets fired tomorrow.
Today's Wednesday, the seventh, this is the day that sessions was fired and, uh,
replaced with a crony as opposed to the, the standing, uh, deputy attorney general,
which is what usually happens, but when it's usual, ever the case here.
So there's a good chance that things will be really weird when this
comes out in two weeks.
Anyway, so the real world's already here, guys.
Let's go, let's go be bummed.
Nope.
Fuck that.
I don't know.
I am all done talking about this post, but, uh, guys probably have something else.
No, that was it for me.
Do you want to plug your book release again?
Just so nobody misses it?
Yeah.
This comes out in two weeks.
So at this point, when this comes out, the first two chapters should already be
up online at whatliesdreaming.com of my novel that I have written and that I'm
publishing every week on Sunday.
One more chapter for our next episode, we are going to be reading the less
wrong sequence posts.
Some claims are just too extraordinary and outside the laboratory and there
will be links to both of those.
And once again, we didn't get around to listening to feedback, but we enjoy it.
So please don't hesitate to write us at the basin conspiracy.com on any of the
comments section.
So you can write us that Bayesian conspiracy podcast at gmail.com r slash
the basin conspiracy on Reddit or leave us a review on iTunes.
And, uh, that's what we got.
All those things help.
Uh, would you like to thank the patron this week?
Yeah, sure.
Our patron this week is Sebastian Moore.
Thank you very much for, uh, everything.
It means a lot.
Thanks, Sebastian.
You make this thing feel more warm and cozy when we do it.
Everyone here is, I think, how I flounder every time that this part is right.
It's, yeah, same sentiments all the time.
It's great.
Thank you so much.
Thanks, man.
Thanks, Sebastian.
And with that, we'll be back in a couple of weeks.
All right.
Peace out everyone.
Bye bye later.
