Big thanks to Skillshare for sponsoring this video.
Check out a free trial of Skillshare Premium
by clicking the link in the description below.
Hey everyone, Parth here.
And in this video, I want to discuss a way in which we work
with magnetic fields when we study them in physics.
We'll see that a concept initially created
as a bit of mathematical convenience
actually ends up being a very fundamental quantity
in the study of quantum mechanics.
But as always, we'll be trying to keep the mathematics
as simple as possible.
So if you enjoy this video,
then please do hit the thumbs up button
and subscribe for more fun physics content.
Let's get into it.
The first thing we'll understand
is that magnetic field lines are used to describe
how a magnet placed in a magnetic field will behave.
For example, if we took a small compass,
which itself is a magnet,
and we placed it in this kind of magnetic field
represented by these field lines,
then the compass would point in this direction
at this point in space.
And if we moved it to this point,
the compass would point in this direction,
and so on and so forth.
There is of course a lot more to magnetic field lines,
but this is a really nice,
basic visual description that we'll stick with.
Now, a magnetic field is often represented
by the capital letter B.
And on top of this B, we draw an arrow
in order to tell us that we're working
with what's known as a vector field.
We can assign a vector to every point in this space,
and each vector represents something
about the magnetic field itself.
The size of the vector tells us something
about the strength of the magnetic field
at that point in space,
and the direction tells us the direction
of the magnetic field.
For a long time, when physicists studied magnetism,
they treated magnetic fields
as very fundamental quantities of high importance.
The concept of magnetic fields very clearly
and concisely described how magnets interact with each other.
After all, every magnetic field must be generated
by some sort of magnet as well,
and so the magnetic field B was included
in a lot of mathematical equations
that described magnetism.
However, the magnetic field was not always
the most mathematically convenient quantity to deal with.
For more complicated scenarios, for example,
where the magnetic field is not quite as simple
as the one we're dealing with here,
the mathematics can get very complicated
and very hairy very quickly.
Instead, it made a lot more sense to work
with another closely related quantity
that we'll look at in a second
that made the mathematics a lot easier.
But essentially, this quantity was defined
just for convenience, no other reason,
it's just to make the math simpler.
Now, the quantity that we're talking about
is known as the magnetic vector potential.
As I mentioned earlier, it's meant to be defined
for mathematical convenience,
and the reason we can define it
is actually purely due to a mathematical trick.
Essentially, if we take any vector A
and we find what's known as the curl of this vector A,
doesn't really matter what curl actually means,
followed by finding the divergence
of the curl of this vector A,
then a mathematical identity tells us
that this quantity must always be equal to zero.
Again, just to reiterate,
we don't really need to know the meaning
of curl and divergence.
All we need to know is that maths tells us
that this quantity must always be zero for any vector A.
For more information on what this means
and why this identity is true,
I've made a couple of videos
discussing divergence and curl in the past,
and I'll also leave some useful resources
in the description below.
Now, interestingly, one of Maxwell's equations,
which are the equations that deal with electromagnetism,
tells us that the divergence of any magnetic field
must always be zero.
I've also made a full video
about this particular equation,
so check that out if you haven't seen it already.
But basically, the point is that
if our understanding of classical electromagnetism
is correct, then the divergence of the magnetic field
is always zero for any kind of magnetic field.
And the mathematical identity that we saw earlier,
the divergence of the curl of any vector
must be equal to zero,
also can be used in this scenario.
And so at this point, it might make sense for us
to just define B, the magnetic field,
as the curl of some vector A.
And specifically, this quantity A now,
we will call the magnetic vector potential.
What we've done is define any magnetic field B
as the curl of this other vector quantity,
the magnetic vector potential.
Because sometimes working with a magnetic vector potential
is easier than working with a magnetic field.
Now, before we go any further,
I'd like to thank this video's sponsor, Skillshare.
Skillshare is an online learning community
where you can find a large number of inspiring classes
focusing on topics such as productivity and lifestyle,
to building a business, to learning creative skills.
Many of you may know that one of my hobbies
is creating music.
Check out my music channel linked below.
And I've taken some classes on Skillshare
that have taught me some really cool skills.
For example, I took a class called Audio Mixing on the Go,
Professional Sound Without the Studio by King Arthur,
which gave me lots of tips for improving my mixes
without lots of fancy equipment.
And that's the key here.
Skillshare has a large number of classes to choose from
and it's all about learning.
So there are no adverts.
And Skillshare costs less than $10 a month
with an annual subscription.
But the first 1,000 of you to click the first link
in the description box below
will get a free trial of Skillshare Premium.
Please do go check it out.
And big thanks to Skillshare once again
for sponsoring this video.
Now, here's an important thing to know
about the magnetic vector potential.
If we want to find out what the magnetic vector potential is
for a particular scenario that we happen to be studying,
where we only know the magnetic field B,
then there is a family of different solutions.
All related to one another,
but there's no one right answers to what A is
if we know what B is.
The best analogy I can give you
is that it's like differentiation versus integration.
If we have a function and we differentiate it,
then we get an exact answer
because there is only one thing
that this could differentiate too.
However, let's say we didn't know
what we're calling the original function
and we want to find out what it is knowing this quantity.
When we integrate it,
it could be one of a set of solutions.
And that's represented by this plus C.
And even simpler, but slightly further away analogy,
is that if we want to find the square
of a particular number,
then we know that there's only one possible solution.
But if we want to go the other way,
well, it could be one of two different answers.
And similarly, if we just know B,
then we can find A,
but A can be one of a few different solutions.
Whereas if we know A,
then we know exactly what B is.
All of this will become important later,
so let's keep that in mind.
But basically, like I've said,
using A is just for the mathematical convenience.
It's a mathematical trick.
It doesn't represent anything physical
or correspond to anything real in our universe.
It is the magnetic field B
that actually represents how magnets interact with each other.
That's the fundamental quantity.
And that is what scientists thought
until the study of quantum mechanics
revealed something rather interesting.
To understand what quantum mechanics has revealed to us,
let's first recall that when studying a quantum system,
we most commonly deal with what's known
as its wave function.
This can be thought of as a mathematical function
that contains all of the information
that we know about our system.
In this video, we will be thinking about what happens
when an electron passes close by
to a coil of wire known as a solenoid.
Specifically, we'll be thinking about how the wave function
of the electron is affected by the solenoid.
To understand why a coil of wire would affect an electron
passing close by to it in the first place,
we should understand that when we pass a current
through this coil of wire,
it generates its own magnetic field.
In practice, this is the main purpose of a solenoid,
is to generate a magnetic field.
And importantly, the magnetic field inside the coil of wire
is very strong, but the magnetic field outside
is really quite weak.
Now, it's important to note that because the magnetic
vector potential relates to a magnetic field,
but is not the same thing as a magnetic field,
it is possible to have a region of space
where the magnetic field has a value of zero.
There is no magnetic field in a region of space,
but the magnetic vector potential
isn't necessarily zero.
I mean, why not, right?
As long as the curl of A gives us the magnetic field,
which is essentially the thing we're most interested in,
doesn't really matter what A could be.
But the point is that there are different versions of A
that satisfy curl of A is equal to B,
where B is equal to zero, but A isn't necessarily zero.
And so here's the thing.
If we pass an electron through a region of space
where the magnetic field B is zero,
then we'd expect nothing to happen to the electron.
And on the surface, that's pretty much what we observe.
I mean, the motion of the electron is not affected
or anything like that.
But if we consider the electron's wave function,
then we see that when passing through this region of space
where the magnetic field is essentially zero,
but the vector potential A is not zero,
the phase of the wave function actually changes.
Not necessarily 180 degree phase shift,
like we've shown here,
but the phase definitely changes.
And how much it changes depends exactly on
what the value of A is in this region of space,
even though we thought A was just a theoretical construction.
The phase of a wave function
has physical consequences as well.
We can actually measure how much the phase changes
by looking at interference patterns of these electrons
as they move close to our solenoid.
Now, it's worth me stressing that the specifics
of phase change or interference patterns
aren't really important.
Again, I'll leave some resources in the description below.
But the point I'm trying to make
is that we see a real physical measurable change
caused by the magnetic vector potential.
And it has nothing to do with the original magnetic field B
because the magnetic field strength in this region of space
is zero.
What we've just discussed
is known as the Aharonov-Bohm effect.
And what this effect is suggesting to us
is that magnetic fields and similarly electric fields
are not the fundamental quantity
that we should be talking about.
Really, we should be thinking about their potentials,
whether that's the magnetic vector potential
or electric scalar potential.
Because it looks like those are the things
that relate to something physical in our universe,
something that causes a measurable change.
And also because knowing the vector potential,
in this case,
allows us to find exactly what the magnetic field is anyway.
So if we know A, then we definitely know what B is.
It's a rather crazy idea,
something that we discovered as a bit of a trick
ends up being an actually important quantity
when we study it quantum mechanically.
And just to clarify, in this video,
we could have been talking about the electric field
and its potential rather than the magnetic field
and the magnetic vector potential
because the Aharonov-Bohm effect
deals with both kinds of field.
But the reason we talked about magnetic fields
is because one form of the Aharonov-Bohm effect
deals with an electron passing close by
to a loop of wire.
And that particular experimental setup
is the one that has shown actual evidence
of the Aharonov-Bohm effect being real.
And with all of that being said,
I'm going to finish up here.
Thank you so much for watching.
If you enjoyed this video,
then please do hit the thumbs up button
and subscribe for more fun physics content.
Hit that bell button if you'd like to be notified
when I upload and please do check out my Patreon page
if you'd like to support me on there.
Thank you so much for watching
and I will see you very soon.
샤옟
It's been long time
I don't know why, sorry
because I don't know if you know it
the whole time, so I thought I thought
I'd try and let it use that one someday.
If it does, I'd ask questions just to make sure
that macht got that, than bili haut.
Pre-printed
Hi gorgeous dish
G campers
I'm sorry, all you just did was
let's get back at home
and throw a nice wave.
Bye for now.
Woo eye
head
