I was asked to give an overview kind of introduction to quantum field theory and curve space time,
particularly algebraic approach to the subject and so on. So let me go ahead and proceed with that.
Well, as I would think, most people in the audience are already aware, but I might as well
start at the beginning. I mean, what is quantum field theory and curve space time? Well, it's a
theory where the matter, everything except gravity, that is, is treated fully in accord with the
principles of quantum field theory, but gravity is treated classically in accord though with
general relativity. I mean, this thereby avoids the issues of how to quantize gravity. Now,
you could perturbatively, I mean, you could look at a linearized gravitational field off some
background classical solution and treat it within quantum field theory and curve space time,
but otherwise, I mean, although one could do that, I'll just be considering the theory of a,
of a, well, in the examples I'll do, I'll just consider the theory of a scalar field, but it
could be any non metric field. And of course, you know, it is not then an exact theory of nature,
but it ought to be a good approximation when quantum effects of gravity,
you know, are not playing a dominant role as it might write near a singularity, etc.
But say outside a black hole, including on the horizon and a little inside the black hole,
there's no reason why the quantum effects of gravity itself should be dominant. And indeed,
by analyzing, well, in particular black holes, I think quantum field theory and curve space
time has certainly provided us with some of the deepest insights we have into the nature of quantum
gravity. It also, I think, has given us a lot of insights into the nature of quantum field theory,
because there's, there are crutches that are used in standard discussions that involve the use of
global punk array invariance, you know, thereby allowing one to define global notions of energy,
you get a unique punk array invariant vacuum state, or at least you can assume that you have one and
so on and build a lot of the machinery of quantum field theory around that. You don't have that,
as I'll be describing in curve space time, and that forces you into a purely local
characterization of the quantum field theory and in terms of the field properties, not
some constructs like particles and so on. So I'll be explaining that, but I think
that is another very important insight that quantum field theory and curves space time has given.
So just to, you know, introduce, well, the way quantum field theory is usually presented and
then what happens in curve space time, let me start with the quantum mechanical
harmonic oscillator that all of you are undoubtedly very familiar with, and I probably don't have to
go through these equations one by one, but you introduce these, this lowering and its adjoint
is the raising operator as it's called. And in terms of these operators that you
introduce for the harmonic oscillator, the Heisenberg position operator is given by this
formula in terms of the lowering operator and raising operator. Notice the positive frequency in
front of the lowering operator and the negative frequency in front of the raising operator.
So this is just standard quantum mechanics. The ground state in this harmonic oscillator is
determined by the, is the unique state that gets annihilated by the lowering operator.
And you can obtain all other states or, you know, a dense set of states in the Hilbert space by
applying the raising operator, the adjoint of that to this ground state.
Okay, so that's a review from, you know, would be an undergraduate quantum mechanics courses as
well. Now, let's move on to field theory. This, what I just said is very relevant,
because, well, if we consider, I'm going to consider a Klein-Gordon field as, you know,
just the main model, but similar statements would apply for all of, all other fields.
Let me, to avoid any technical awkwardness, put our field in some, you know, box, very large box.
I can let L go to infinity later, but just to avoid any awkwardness, let me do that.
I can then expand phi in Fourier modes of this box. And the Hamiltonian for the system then
can be immediately seen to be just an infinite sum. The, you know, integer type k, the discrete k's
are just the Fourier modes of this box of side L. The Hamiltonian that, for the system, I guess,
I didn't write the Hamiltonian down here that would be associated with this wave equation,
but the Hamiltonian then is just what I wrote down over here in the harmonic oscillator,
except now we have an infinite sum of them. So a free Klein-Gordon field is just an infinite
collection of harmonic oscillators, and we can apply the same quantization type procedures as we did
there. And I can immediately write down the formula for, or a formula for the Heisenberg
operator describing this, representing this quantum field phi in terms of, well, these
lowering operators are now called annihilation operators and the creation operators. Again,
I have positive frequencies in front of the annihilation operators, negative frequencies in
front of the creation operators. And this defines this quantum field, of course, in flat space time,
right? I'm in Minkowski space time now. For that, I should have emphasized that. Now, there's one
caveat on this. If you try to make sense of this formula as defining some sort of operator
at a sharp time and position, that doesn't make sense. This sum just doesn't converge in any
meaningful way. But if you smear, as it's called, the quantum field, you just try to define
the quantum, the average of the quantum field with some arbitrary test function f
averaged over a space time region weighted by some arbitrary test function f. This thing is
completely well defined and, well, that gives you, in a natural way, a quantum theory of the Klein
Gordon field. Now, the states are just, in this construction, are just the same thing as we had
for a harmonic oscillator, although the single harmonic oscillator, except now we have an infinite
number of them. But if I look at the joint ground state of all of these oscillators
in quantum field theory, that's referred to as the vacuum state. Here, again, we're in,
I emphasize, we're in flat space time. If I apply n creation operators to this vacuum state,
that has the interpretation of a state where a total of n particles, as they're called,
are present. So these excited states of the harmonic oscillator are referred to as particle
excitations of, well, the ground state is now called the vacuum state.
This, no, I've been discussing a free field, but if we have an interacting field, the state may
behave like the state of a free field at early and late times. And again, then you can characterize
the states in terms of, at early times, in going particles and at late times, outgoing
particles. And the S matrix, then, which relates those two descriptions of the states,
has a lot of the interesting dynamical interaction information about the interacting
theory. So this particle interpretation is, you know, has been remarkably
successful to the extent that you might get the impression, and you certainly would be encouraged
to get the impression reading most quantum field theory texts, that quantum field theory is really
a theory of particles, and these asymptotic particle states are all really what counts,
and you should only be talking about particles. But that's very much not the case. So when we get
to curved spacetime, we won't be able to do that. Before I get to curved spacetime, I want to emphasize
that the notion or the presence of a time translation symmetry was very
important in all this. Well, I use a spatial translation symmetry to break this into Fourier
modes. That's not as important. I don't really need to have any spatial symmetries to do this sort
of thing. But I do need very much need a time translation symmetry to define these
annihilation and creation operators and to define what I mean by this ground state.
So that's a comment I want to make right away. For later reference, because this will come up again,
you can compute the two-point correlation function of this quantum field, the expected value
of phi of x, phi of y in this vacuum state. And I just want to point out that this
behaves like one over the square of geodesic distance. Well, it's got to be to define this
as a distribution. Appropriately, you've got to put in these various epsilons. Well, as
this will come up, but if we were solving, if we were dealing with a curved spacetime wave equation,
this form would get modified by logarithmic term and so on. But the basic structure is one over
geodesic distance squared. And then it's also worth pointing out that just like the
ground state of the harmonic oscillator is a Gaussian function of x, the ground state here
of all the oscillators is Gaussian in the sense that all of the higher endpoint functions, which
are like moments of the distribution, the probability distribution are given in terms of
the second moment, the two-point function by an analog of the formula you'd have for a Gaussian
probability distribution. Okay, well, if we now move on to a curved spacetime, so I'm only going
to consider globally hyperbolic curved spacetimes that have a well-defined, you know, classical
dynamics for the field. I mean, they don't have, you know, time like singularities or other things
where you'd need extra boundary conditions or other conditions even classically to say what you're
doing. In the case of stationary spacetimes, you can do, well, you can't do it the same way,
you know, can't put it in a box or whatever the way I was doing it necessarily, but you,
you, in the end, you can do an exact analog of this construction and effectively decompose
the quantum field into its annihilation and creation parts using positive and negative
frequencies defined by the time translation symmetry. And if you have spacetimes that are,
that asymptotically become stationary in the past or the future, you could, you know, define
in and out vacua and in and out particle states then in a similar way, but that doesn't cover
a lot of the cases that one would be interested in like cosmology where you might start with a big
bang singularity. That's not asymptotically stationary. That's, you know, you're not going to,
in any natural way, define some ground state. I mean, especially if the big bang
singularity doesn't have symmetry, any symmetries associated with it. And if we want to look at
spacetimes describing gravitational collapse to a black hole, again, you know, the asymptotic future
includes the inside of the black hole. Then we don't have a natural notion of vacuum state or
particles and, you know, well, we don't want to tie the definition of quantum field theory in
curved spacetime to stationarity because that's way too limiting. Now, you might say, okay, we can't
get a preferred vacuum state using stationarity. We don't have this notion of a ground state if we
don't have a time translation symmetry, but maybe what we should do is seek some other way, you know,
of getting a preferred vacuum state. And then once we have a preferred vacuum state,
you know, we can then proceed in the same manner as I described in flat spacetime to formulate
quantum field theory in curved spacetime. This very much reminds me of, you know,
students who've studied special relativity and now they're moving on to general relativity.
And, you know, in special relativity, we formulate things usually using this preferred
notion of global inertial coordinates. And then we, you know, you hide the presence of the spacetime
metric in special relativity through the use of these global inertial coordinates. And then you're
all, you're just writing down, you know, laws of physics should be invariant under, you know,
Lorentz-Ponqueray transformations and stuff like that. And when such students get on to
general relativity, the natural thing is, well, now let's find the preferred coordinate systems
for general relativity. Well, that's a fruitless exercise and a very bad way of thinking about
general relativity, much better to realize that the theory is really about a spacetime metric.
And, you know, you don't need any preferred coordinates. I mean, for most things, you don't
need any coordinates at all, basically to formulate the ideas. So similarly, quantum field theory
in curved spacetime, the game should not be find a preferred vacuum state and a preferred notion
of particles, but rather recognize that quantum field theory, one of the few misnomer,
non-misnomers in physics is a very good name for the subject. It's the theory of quantum fields.
It's not a theory of particles. Particles are just introduced as a construct. So if you
think of what is physical in quantum field theory, it's the local field observables,
not particles. It's, of course, nothing wrong with introducing a notion of particles in
situations where it's useful to do so, just as in general relativity, there's nothing wrong
with introducing a nice coordinate system that's adopted to the symmetries of the spacetime and
working in those coordinates, but you shouldn't think of the theory as
being fundamentally being formulated in that way. But now, if we give up on a choice
of a preferred choice of vacuum state, or we can choose any or we don't have to choose any at all,
it's not difficult to see that there are zillions and zillions as an underestimate
of different Hilbert space constructions that you could give for quantum field theory.
Again, if we had a preferred vacuum state, then we can give the construction
that I described, the analog of the construction, the construction that I described in Minkowski
spacetime, that will give some preferred Fock representation of the quantum field.
But if we're giving up on there being a preferred vacuum state, well, then we have
all these uniterally inequivalent choices of Hilbert space constructions.
So if we're going to give up, even if we do all the Hilbert space constructions by choosing
a vacuum state and doing a Fock space construction based on that, which we can do, there are zillions
of possible vacuum states and that many of, well, there's still zillions of, not all
various vacuum states will give uniterally inequivalent, uniterally equivalent constructions,
but most won't. So there are zillions then of different constructions. So how do we,
if we're going to give up on this as the first step, how do we formulate quantum field theory
in curved spacetime? Well, there's a really nice answer to that question, which is use the algebraic
approach, which I'm now going to describe. And I should say when people use, you know,
the phrase algebraic quantum field theory, I think for most people that brings to mind
thick technical math type books on, you know, C star algebras and von Neumann algebras and so on.
But what I have in mind is an incredibly simple, simple minded, simple
ideas and constructions that take no particular mathematical sophistication at all.
So the idea is instead of starting with some Hilbert space of states and then trying to define
the field operator on that Hilbert space, we're going to start with an algebra of observables.
So the fundamental observable will be the field operator, as I've already indicated,
to do this properly, we have to smear it with a test function. So we have an object of this sort
for every possible test function. And now I'm going to generate, well, a free star algebra
associated with this symbol, well, and I'm going to include a unit element. So by the free star
algebra, I mean just write down any finite sum of finite products of this guy and its star.
These are all just symbols. So here's a, you know, typical element, but you could add 15 more of these
guys and, you know, products up to 98 of these and or, you know, 1,270 of them or whatever.
But it's a finite number of products of smeared field operators and their stars
and a finite linear combination of these things. So that's a completely well-defined algebra. I
mean, it has a completely well-defined vector space structure and a completely well-defined rule
for taking products. Right. Again, the identity element is another element of this. So we can add
in multiples of the identity if we want to any of these expressions. So this free star algebra is,
you know, almost a silly thing to construct, but it's actually just what we want if we impose
the relations that this object should satisfy. So there are a couple of trivial relations, one
that this object should be linear in F. If I take the sum of two F's, I get the sum of the
phi of F1 plus the phi of F2. So any, when I'm going, by, I'm going to impose these relations,
by the way, just by saying the two expressions of this sort are considered to be the same,
if I can manipulate one into the other using any of these, any or all of these relations. So
first one is linearity of phi and F. The second one, because this is supposed to be the real,
a real Klein-Gordon scalar field, the star is supposed to just, well, it's supposed to adjoint
and the field and complex conjugate the test function, but the adjoint of phi is going to
be the same as phi in this case. So this is the reality condition. Then I can distributionally
impose the Klein-Gordon equation. I want the field to satisfy the Klein-Gordon equation
in this way. And finally, this is just the canonical space-time version of the canonical
commutation relations for phi. This capital delta is the advanced minus retarded greens function
now smeared in with the F and G that appear here. So the star algebra that describes this
Klein-Gordon quantum field is just going to be this free star algebra factored by these
relations. So again, the observables, it should be noted then, are just these correlation functions
or linear combinations of these correlation functions. So it's sort of putting the emphasis
on the correlation functions. Well, they're not correlation functions yet. They're correlation
algebra elements, but they will become correlation functions when I tell you what states are. And
there's just a remarkably simple notion of the state. So now again, I haven't introduced a Hilbert
space. I'm avoiding that because I don't have a preferred Hilbert space to try to introduce.
But I can nevertheless give the following unbelievably simple definition, well, simple
looking definition of states. Namely, a state is just a mapping from these algebra elements into
complex numbers that satisfies this positivity relation. So this positivity relation is much
simpler than it looks because every single algebra element A, it's a separate condition for every
single algebra element A. Since it's a nonlinear condition, you can't just check it for a basis.
There's something you have to check it for all the algebra elements. So this isn't
so trivial to check, but that's all that a state is. And the interpretation is that the state
as a map in this way is just giving you the expectation value of these sorts of algebra
elements. So if we just had this, it's really just giving you the correlation. This thing would be
some three-point correlation function. So if I give you, giving you the state is equivalent
to giving you a list of all of the correlation functions of the quantum field. But of course,
I can't give you an arbitrary list of correlation functions that the list has to satisfy this
positivity condition. So what does this have to do with states as we know them as vectors in a Hilbert
space? Well, remarkably, they're really the same notion except I'm not sticking to a single Hilbert
space in this. If we have a Hilbert space, and on this Hilbert space, we've represented
the elements of the algebra by operators, which is the normal thing you do. I mean,
if you can represent phi as an operator on the Hilbert space, then of course you can represent
all of these products as well. And if you do that, the positivity condition will automatically be
satisfied when you take expectation values because the adjoint, we represent the star by an adjoint,
and this is automatically a positive operator. So any vector in this Hilbert space is going to give
rise to an algebraic state in this sense. So that's pretty easy, and that's nice.
But remarkably, it works the other way around to any state that I give you in the algebraic sense
here, in fact, can be realized as a vector in some Hilbert space representation
through the algorithm of take and expectation value. So in fact, I'm not constructing anything
really new with this notion of states, I'm just giving you all possible states and all possible
Hilbert space representations of the theory. And the proof that it goes the other way, I mean,
this is easy to see the proof that given a state in this way, you can construct a Hilbert space
representation of the theory so that your state is realized as a vector in the Hilbert space
is actually incredibly simple and only depends on this star algebra structure. Basically,
so to get a Hilbert space, you need a vector space, then you need an inner product on the vector space,
and it has to be complete, and then we need a representation of A. Well, A itself is a vector
space. And if we have a state, we can use this formula to define an inner product,
because this is positive, and inner product on the Hilbert space. Well, okay, this is only positive,
it's not positive definite. So you may have to factor out by zero norm vectors, and then you'll
have to complete the space. But then you get a Hilbert space. And the Hilbert space, because it
was made out of the algebra, A has a natural action of A on it. So we get a Hilbert space
representation of A. And then if you look at the vector corresponding to the identity element of A,
that gives you this relation. So every state in the algebraic sense corresponds to
a usual Hilbert space state. We haven't done anything new, but now we're free.
We specify the algebra first, that's easy. And now we're free to consider all states arising
in all Hilbert space constructions without having to make some choice of representation
to begin with, which as I say is problematic. So we can talk about general, in my analogy before
with classical general relativity, we can talk about general relativity as a theory, we don't
have to first introduce a coordinate system for the manifold, and then we can start talking about
things, or we don't even have to make a choice of manifold, we can look at all manifolds, we have the
theory. Okay, and that gives a completely, so what I've just described here gives a completely
satisfactory formulation of quantum field theory of a free Klein-Gordon field. But we want to go
beyond that, and it really is important that we've formulated things in the algebraic approach to
enable us to go on that, because if we had to first choose some Hilbert space representation,
then our constructions might only work for that representation, etc. It would be very hard to
make further progress. So we want to go beyond what I described in at least two ways. First of
all, even if we were only interested in the theory of a free Klein-Gordon field, there are
lots of nonlinear observables of interest, like the stress energy tensor, which is
classical, classically is quadratic in the field. That's not represented in our algebra, we only
have correlation functions of the linear field in the algebra. But furthermore, we might want to do
interacting quantum fields in current spacetime. Well, we don't know how to do interacting fields
really in flat spacetime either, but we do know how to do perturbative interacting quantum fields,
so we'd like to do at least that much in curved spacetime, but that will require us to be able to
define time-ordered products of, I mean, the perturbative formulas will involve time-ordered
products of powers, you know, weak polynomials of the free field. So the way to go about this would
then be to enlarge this original algebra that I described here, enlarge that so that it would
include all weak polynomials and all time-ordered products of these weak polynomials. And if we
can do that, then we've got this covered and we've got perturbative quantum field theory in
curved spacetime covered. So how do we go about defining something like phi squared?
The basic problem is that phi of x, as I've already described, is not defined. So if you try to,
I mean, even in flat spacetime or, you know, if you try to just square it, you get a nonsense
formula. I mean, if you write down some formula for phi of x and try to define the square,
you know, and it doesn't help to try to define phi squared smeared with some f in this way because
when you let this become a delta function, which should give you the, you know, the phi squared,
you get, you know, a divergent expression. So you need to do some sort of
subtraction of the infinity that you're going to get as you let the fn approach a delta function.
I mean, this right-hand side for a finite fn is perfectly well defined, you know, for a smooth
function fn, this is just some sort of smearing of, you know, the product of the two fields smearing
in each variable, but letting fn approach a delta function is problematical. So surprise that we're
just trying to define the expected value of phi squared in some state. I want to define phi squared
as an algebra element, but well, there are lots of states where have, that have
sort of worse ultraviolet behavior than the Minkowski space, than the vacuum state in
Minkowski space time. And one wouldn't expect you'd be able to define phi squared for that.
But if we look at Hadamard states, Hadamard states are ones for which the two-point correlation
function has singular behavior like that of the, of the vacuum in Minkowski space time. But if we're
in a curved space time, we need to allow some function of x and y in the numerator here rather
than one, and we need to allow a logarithmic term here, but we can construct solutions to the wave
equation in x and y of this form in a curved space time. So if we restrict to Hadamard states,
we can define the expected value of the square by subtracting off this singular behavior. So if
phi of x, phi of y is of the Hadamard form, when we do this subtraction with some locally constructed
Hadamard parametrics, then we're guaranteed to get something non-singular and I can let y approach
x with no problem now. So that's going to work. And that will give a unique definition up to some
local curvature terms. I mean, we have choice of what we're going to choose for this locally
constructed Hadamard parametrics. It gives rise to that, but that gives a satisfactory
prescription. Of course, if we don't have a Hadamard state, then we don't define this, but
it's really too singular is the view to, for it to exist. We don't want to define phi squared.
Okay, but we want to define this as an operator, not just define expectation values in some
states. So we'd really like to include this as an algebra element. So how do we go about doing that?
That's quite another step. Well, to carry out this step, the first thing is that this Hadamard
condition is actually, well is quite cumbersome to work with. So it's extremely useful to switch
to an equivalent characterization of this distribution here that we have on the right hand
side. And an equivalent, well, an equivalent characterization was given by now nearly 30
years ago by Radzikowski in terms of the wavefront set properties of this distribution. So I'm not
going to sidetrack into the definition of the wavefront set, what the wavefront set is, but the
idea is that if you take Fourier transforms and look at the behavior of the Fourier transform
distribution at large k, so you pick a direction in Fourier space, which I'm calling k, and you go
off to infinity, the failure of that distribution to decay rapidly in k space is a sign of
singular or at least non-smooth behavior of the distribution in position space. So you can characterize
this is all I want to communicate. The wavefront set describes the points and directions in k space
at which you don't have this rapid fall off, and it thereby characterizes in a quite refined way
the singular behavior of this distribution. So if I tell you the wavefront set, I'm kind of
characterizing the points and the directions in which this distribution is singular, the wavefront
set for a Hadamard-type distribution, well, is given by this. It includes only null geodesics.
We have two points, so we have two ks involved, and it's singular only when points x1 and x2
are connected by a null geodesic, and these null vectors are tangent to that null geodesic,
well, with one of them being minus the other in direction. So back 25 years ago or so,
Bernetti, Fred, and Hagen and Kohler realized that with this reformulated definition one could get
an enlarged algebra of observables, and I'll describe that briefly. So if we choose a Hadamard
state, well, we don't want to choose a Hadamard state, you know, that's like getting a preferred
vacuum. So this, we're going to have to get rid of this in the end, but in order to define the
enlarged algebra, we can start by introducing a preferred Hadamard state, and we can define a
normal ordered version of this endpoint product that appears in our algebra A that we're already
starting with, where we subtract off the vacuum expectation value of phi of x, phi of y, and
products of them by the same formula that would be used to define normal ordering with respect
to the vacuum state in flat space time. So in particular, we define the normal ordered product
of phi of x1, phi of x2 by its product minus the identity times the vacuum expectation value
of phi of x, phi of y. So this, we can switch to these normal ordered products as basically
a change of basis of A, right? There's no, we're not doing anything except introducing this new
notation and using these guys rather than these guys to describe the A elements, but then the
commutation relations are encoded for products of these guys.
Well, that can be written in terms of these type guys, but terms with a lot of products
of these vacuum expectation values. But if this is Hadamard, then once you have that formula,
you can see that the product formula continues to make sense when you smear this not just with
nice test functions in x1 through xn, but you can smear it with a big class of distributions,
including a smooth function times a delta function. But a smooth function times a delta function
would give you something that you should interpret as this. So you can enlarge the algebra
in the way that I, in this way that I've just explained, although the construction depends
on choosing a particular algebra, particular Hadamard state to do these constructions. However,
the algebra as an abstract algebra does not depend on the choice of omega naught. So
we actually then end up with an extended algebra of observables that is big enough to contain,
well, it should be big enough to contain the fields we want and big enough to contain product,
time-ordered products of these fields. But we have to figure out still how to define these fields,
because this thing, as I've written here, is an imposter for the nth power of the field. This
does not give choosing a state, well, you'd have to choose a different state in every space time,
you know, because you don't have one state for different space times. And that will just,
that will give something that is not locally and co-variantly defined. We want a definition of
phi n that depends on the metric in a local and covariant way. But if you proceed and look for
such a thing, then it's possible to show that indeed you can find objects that are kind of made
out of, that are like these guys, but now they're defined locally and co-variantly, basically
instead of subtracting off the expected value in some vacuum state or some chosen state omega
naught, we subtract off some locally constructed Hadamard parametrics. If you do that, that will
define a phi n that depends on the metric in a local and covariant way, and you can show that
the prescription you get is unique up to certain local curvature ambiguities.
It's a lot more complicated to analyze time-ordered products that way, and I'm not going to go through
that. I'm near the end of my time anyway, but again, you've got the algebra. The algebra is big
enough to contain time-ordered products, so you just have to find the elements in there that you
can legitimately call time-ordered products, and they do exist. Namely, there exist elements of
the algebra that are local and covariant and satisfy what's actually, in this case, a rather
long list of additional properties that time-ordered products should satisfy, and the prescription is
again unique up to what you would naively expect as renormalization ambiguities. I mean, you have
ambiguities in the definition of the wick powers themselves, like I've indicated here,
and you have additional contact terms that arise for the time-ordered products,
but they're just like the ones that you get in Minkowski spacetime
with additional local curvature ambiguities. Okay, so that is what the situation is in
quantum field theory in curved spacetime, and in summary, the theory of a free quantum field
theory in curved spacetime can be given, as I've written here, in a completely mathematically
rigorous formulation by just writing down what the algebra of observables is, what writing down
using the algebraic notion of the state, and over the last 25 years, we've learned how to
extend that algebra to include the nonlinear field observables. Those are not unique, but they have
well-specified local curvature ambiguities, and we can do perturbative quantum field
interacting quantum field theory in curved spacetime, as well as in Minkowski spacetime. Again,
there are additional local curvature ambiguities in the renormalization that you wouldn't
encounter in Minkowski spacetime, but as a matter of principle, it's still the same.
I mean, it's not worse other than having more counter terms as the terminology goes.
Of course, it would be nice to define interacting quantum field theory in curved spacetime in a
non-perturbative way. I'll just comment that a number, well, ideas have been explored,
I mean, particularly by Stefan Hollins, and work on this is ongoing of using the operator product
expansions that I have not talked about here, but there are, for interacting quantum fields,
well, perturbatively for interacting quantum fields, there are, I'm just looking for the right
thing to point to, short distance singular behavior in the products of fields that is analogous to
what I've written here. Here we'd have an identity operator coming in if I got rid of these,
well, I'd have the identity operator coming in as to how this behaves, I mean, but more generally,
there'd be all sorts of other expected fields coming in in the short distance
expansion, and some ideas of using this to try to give a non-perturbative formulation
of quantum field theory in curved spacetime is something being explored, but is in a
early stage right now. Okay, so that's what I wanted to tell you.
Thank you very much for this wonderful talk. We have some time for questions,
so please raise your hands or type them in the chat.
Okay, Stephen, please unmute yourself.
We cannot hear you. Okay. I haven't said anything yet, trying to get all everything turned off.
Hi, Steve, by the way. Hi, Bob. It's hard enough to make rigorous sense out of
interacting field theories in flat, so the last sentence of your talk, referring to work by
Stefan Hollins, is that something that adapts the work of, say, Glyn and Jaffe to curved spacetime?
No, no. It's a completely different idea, and again, it's, you know,
well, he's been working on it a while, but it's still, you know, overall in an early stage,
so this is a completely different approach whereby you try to define flow relations for the
parameters, well, flow relations for the operator product expansions in terms of how they flow
with the coupling constants of the theory, and those, well, provide some, I mean, you've got all
the infinite list of operator product expansion coefficients coming in,
they, what he proved is that order by order and perturbation theory, they satisfy
flow relations, let's see, there's some background noise that may be a little, but anyway, let me
continue on, that satisfy flow relations relative to the coupling parameters, so that effectively gives
some infinite system of ordinary differential equations, you know, d operator product expansion
coefficient d parameter equals, if you could solve those, which, you know, is a colossal if,
you know, then since you know the operator product expansion coefficients when the nonlinear
coupling constants are zero, so you have a free field, you could in principle determine the
operator product expansion relations for the interacting field, and that, well, we've previously
argued that that would give you essentially all the information about the, the interacting field,
it's very hard to imagine proceeding, you know, in a kind of, you know, glimjaffy way that really
heavily relies on a Euclideanization of the theory, you know, to make sense of, you know,
functional integrals and so on, because in curved spacetime, again, without, unless you're in a
static spacetime, you know, there isn't some natural Euclideanization of the theory or something,
so that was a long answer to just, I mean, I had a concluding sentence in my slides that I
talked about, but, you know, there are some ideas on the table, but, you know, again, they're not,
they're far from highly developed.
We have some questions in the chat. Akeem is asking for some references, recent reviews, books that you
like to recommend on the topic. Yeah, there's a review article published in Physics Reports, I mean,
it's probably from about five years ago by Stefan Hollins and me that my lecture notebook only deals
with the free quantum fields, all the developments of the last, you know, the book is 30 years old
or 28 years old or so, you know, these developments that I talked about at the end of the talk really
began about 25 years ago or so, so they're not included in the lecture notebook, but this review
includes every, certainly everything that I talked about, so again, it's Hollins and me,
Physics Reports, and on the archives probably about five years ago or so,
as best as I can remember.
We have another question by Bruno, and people physically motivate the introduction of quantum
fields by using particles, alibi, alibi, what suggests that our theory should be about fields
if we discard this particular argument?
I don't, you know, again, one could say in special relativity, we don't need any of this metric
nonsense, we can just work with global inertial coordinates and write everything down, but
that's not a good way to deal with what you have to deal with when you get into general
relativity, and again, you can use particles in flat spacetime and in stationary curved spacetimes,
you know, to great effect, but it, you know, it's just not a very good way of, or not a
good way at all in my view of approaching quantum field theory and curved spacetime,
and I think the unruh effect is probably, you know, which occurs in flat spacetime as well as a very
good example of that, it gets, you know, the accelerating observers in a thermal bath of
particles, that gets awfully confusing if you're trying to ascribe reality to the particles,
as opposed to it's a convenient way of describing what's happening with the fields,
and what the fields are doing to your detector, and so on, but how do you, how do you, I mean,
how would you explain, well, Weinberg, I'm not sure the reference to vile, but how do you explain,
if you want to say everything is about particles, how do you explain the unruh effect to somebody?
Okay, and for the last question, and can we gain any new physical insight from this well-formulated
quantum field theory and curved spacetime field algebraic formulation? Can this help to solve
black hole information loss products, shed new light into our understanding of spacetime singularities?
Okay, so on the understanding of spacetime singularities, no, I don't see that this helps
anything at all, and for that you clearly need quantum gravity, so it's not, not only is the
algebraic approach not helpful, but probably quantum, well, quantum field theory and curved
spacetime might be helpful, and that it might give you some hint of behavior that's occurring
in the matter fields near the singularity, but, I mean, as far as, you know, the information
issue is concerned, I mean, it, well, as far as I'm concerned, it makes,
it makes me, you know, a lot more comfortable with the idea of information loss, I mean,
I've never been that uncomfortable about it, but it, you know, you've got a perfectly good
state at late times, I mean, if there is information loss, if you want to look at
the algebra of observable, of late time observables, the state that you have there,
if there is information loss is mixed, but, you know, if you restrict to any
proper subalgebra of observables, the state on that subset of algebras will be,
that subset of the algebra will be mixed in general, so, you know, there's nothing,
if you're not trying to stick all the states in one Hilbert space, and you just think about,
you've got an algebra of observables, and you've got a state on it in the sense,
I mean, what's the problem with their being, with your state having the property that relative to
the subalgebra of late time observables, it's mixed, I don't see any problem at all, so I think
it helps in that way in terms of making one much more comfortable with, or more comfortable with
information loss, if, you know, if you're not kind of, it has to be a state, a vector in this one
Hilbert space that I chose at the beginning, and I'm not going to allow you to ever think of anything else.
