Hey, hi, everyone.
Apologies for a few minutes delay here.
Ken, I heard an, uh-oh, is everything OK?
She can switch.
Technical problems.
Beautiful.
Yeah, Mighty Networks is a little bit annoying
with sharing links outside of the community.
So anyway, glad we got that resolved.
Ken, so let's dive right in.
I mean, we chatted for the first time a few weeks ago.
I read your book.
I heard your podcast, heard your talk from, I think,
a few years ago at this point.
But, you know, we I think want to spend as much time
as possible sort of forward looking and not having you
recount the book for the umpteenth time.
But just as setting the frame, setting the context,
why don't you kind of start with why objectives might be,
why we should question them and why they might be especially
dangerous when it comes to innovative and ambitious ideas?
Why don't we start there?
Sure, yeah.
So hopefully not too redundant.
For those who've heard this a few times or read it maybe
in the past, but the reason that we wrote this book
about how having an objective can be harmful to actually
achieving something is because of this observation
that when you have an ambitious objective,
this often can be deceptive.
This is really deception that's the problem.
And it's really about ambitious objectives.
So as we conceded and tried to make clear
that nobody's against having like modest objectives.
Those do work.
People should continue to implement
their modest objectives.
But when it comes to really ambitious objectives,
the real problem is that there's a series of steps
that you need to go through to get to where you want to go.
That's your objective.
And we're saying it's ambitious because it's hard.
Like otherwise it wouldn't make sense to call it ambitious.
It was easy then you would just do it.
So this is by definition hard, kind of a truism.
So you have a hard objective.
That means you don't know what all the stepping stones
are to get there.
There's this path you need to follow.
And so, again, if you did know what the stepping stones were,
then it wouldn't be a hard problem.
So you must not know all of them.
So that means that there's this series
of like sort of intermediate states you have to go through
that you don't know what they are
that are gonna lead you to this thing.
And so when you set an objective,
you generally will now measure progress against it
by somehow with some kind of metric
that will tell you how close am I
to the thing that I'm trying to get to.
But the problem is that the stepping stones,
the things that you need to go through
to get to the objective,
they almost certainly don't look like the objective itself.
Because again, if they did look like the objective,
then you would just go through them.
I mean, it would be obvious.
So there are things that are surprising.
Like that's almost always true.
That's why discovery is so interesting.
Like you go through surprises.
It's like, wow, this leads to this.
Who would have ever thought that?
So it's almost surely the case
if you have something ambitious you're trying to do.
But by setting the objective,
you're almost ensuring that you won't register,
recognize, understand those surprising things.
Because they don't look like the thing that you're measuring,
which is the objective.
And so this is hence the problem.
And so actually makes it harder to achieve the objective,
but also just generally achieve anything ambitious.
Because the problem is that now
that you're focused on this metric,
which is this objective,
this one singular objective, which you care about,
you're gonna be blinded to all the other things
you might be able to accomplish.
Like if you have a bunch of stepping stones
that you're going through,
like things that you're doing,
but you don't think of them as on the path to your objective,
you're likely to dismiss them, ignore them,
and throw them away
because they don't seem to lead
to the thing that you care about,
even though they could lead to other things
that you might care about,
but you're not admitting those
because they're not the objective
that you actually care about.
So you're really closing yourself off
to all kinds of achievement, the objective itself,
as well as all the other things that you might achieve
if you weren't so myopic about your objective.
Thank you.
And just for, I guess, like syntax,
to make sure I really understand it,
can you talk really quickly about deception?
You kind of write that.
It's the ultimate false compass.
And stepping stone, I think is like a very clear metaphor,
but we'd love to hear maybe like,
double click on that for just a second.
How do you think of a stepping stone?
Is it super obvious what that next step is?
Is it sometimes unclear?
If you could dive into those two things, that'd be great.
Oh yeah, yeah, thanks.
That's helpful to get in,
make sure the vocabulary is not misleading or confusing.
Cause, you know, I come from computer science
and artificial intelligence.
And some of these are just like jargon words, you know,
like deception is a common word, like an AI.
But it's not like,
it doesn't necessarily mean exactly the same thing
in like, you know, regular speaking.
So like, what is deception?
What am I talking about in this case?
Basically, it really is a simple idea,
but I don't mean when somebody's trying to trick you.
That's not what I mean.
But what it means is basically that it appears to you
that you're moving in the right direction,
but you're actually heading towards a brick wall.
That's a deceptive situation.
There's also the converse of that,
which is that you appear to be going in the wrong direction,
but actually it would be correct
if you would just continue along that path.
Both of those are deceptive situations.
So the more, I think the more kind of a threatening one
when it comes to ambitious objectives is the latter,
where it looks like things are going wrong,
but they're actually not.
You know, so basically you're going along some path
and you get some weird results.
And it looks to you like this is nothing to do
with what I actually wanna do with my life.
And so you say, I'm not gonna go down this path any further.
Like I don't think I should pursue this.
That's deception if actually that is what you needed.
But the problem is that it looks like it isn't
because it's deceptive.
And the problem here is that like every interesting thing
you ever want to do will be deceptive.
That's why they're interested.
Like there's a surprise along the way.
Or else it wouldn't be interesting.
You would know exactly what you need to do,
then there's no problem.
So the things that are like challenges
are always going to be deceptive.
And so you're always gonna end up on some stepping stone
that looks like it's not the right thing.
And then you're gonna be inclined to dismiss it,
which is kind of like a tragic thing
if you really care about that objective.
And so deception is just like ubiquitous
across search spaces, which means like places
where you might be looking to achieve something.
And it doesn't mean that you need to become better at,
you know, somehow like defending yourself
against deception, like because that's basically impossible.
Like there's no way to know what leads to what.
Like we just don't know.
That's why these things are hard.
What it does mean is that you just have to be more open-minded
about potentially going somewhere else.
It's like you see something, this looks interesting to you,
but in your assessment, it's like wrong
for your objectives, you throw it away.
That's a big mistake.
If you think it's interesting,
it might not lead to your objective,
but it might lead to something else that's really great.
And you just threw it away.
And that's I think what we tend to do in our cultures
that we throw away all these deceptive stepping stones
because we think they're not leading in the right direction.
So Ken, in that vein, it's right.
Two things that struck me reading your book is one,
if you let go of achieving a particular great thing,
you're more likely to achieve something great.
Now it might not be what you want or what you predicted,
but more likely.
And then is it right to think of following your interests
as the right compass, right?
And in your case, tell me if I'm misremembering,
but something, the most interesting thing
opens up other interesting things, right?
So it sort of becomes this like fractal nature
almost where you open up a lot of doors.
Can you talk to us a little bit about
like changing our compass from one of objectives
and sort of, you know, I will achieve this by this day
versus following your interest.
Cause like it's such a, from like a Western mindset,
it's such a different way to approach problems.
Yeah, yeah.
So this idea of following your interests
and the idea of being able to achieve something
but not a particular thing follows directly
from what I said about deception.
So it's a really logical leap.
Like it's not as in, I like to say it's logical
because I mean, it's not like a new age kind of philosophy
or something, at least the way I'm presenting.
Like you could imagine somebody saying, you know,
just let's just all do whatever we want.
We're gonna have a good time and life will work out.
You know, that that sound might be pleasing sounding
to some, to others not, but that's not the point though.
Like this is like, this is actually a logical thing.
This comes from scientific experiments.
So if you think about the point about deception,
like you have a problem, which is that the things
that lead to where you want to go,
don't resemble where you want to go.
And this is like a fundamental aspect
of like all complex spaces.
And so like, you're not gonna know
when you cross that stepping stone,
which means you can't plan properly.
Like you don't know what to plan for.
And so like, it leads to something
that many people initially find depressing,
but I think it's actually liberating,
which is this realization that there's no way
to make a confident striving in a particular direction.
Like you cannot ensure that you're gonna get
to a particular place in life.
It's just, there's no formula for that.
Again, unless it's modest, modest things we can do,
but if you want to be ambitious.
And so that's like, at first it's depressing
because, you know, we feel like un-anchored,
like what can I do then?
Like, you tell me I can't like actually plan for anything.
But see, the thing that goes along with that,
the corollary is like actually really interesting
and liberating, which is the idea that,
but what you can do is increase the probability
that something good will happen.
It's just not a particular good thing.
And so that's like intuitively kind of hard to grasp
at first, like what does that actually mean?
Like I can actually be good at causing something good,
but not actually some particular thing.
But if you just think about it,
there's tons of opportunities out there,
like in your life, in general, for our society,
for institutions, there's all these opportunities out there.
It's not like there's a shortage of possible things
we could achieve.
And what we don't know is that we don't know the path
to any particular one of them.
But if you have a mindset,
and interesting as comes into this,
where you're willing to collect stepping stones
because they're interesting,
you're increasing the probability
that you're going to follow a path to one of those things.
We just don't know which one,
but all of them are worthy things to achieve.
It's just not something you knew
that you were going towards.
And so if you, now the interesting comes in
because like the question then is,
what you really should be doing
if you want to achieve something ambitious
is maximizing the amount of jumping off points
that you have towards things that are actually interesting.
And of course, it's kind of, it's almost like circular,
but the things that lead to interesting things
are interesting things.
So like if you encounter something interesting,
that leads to other interesting things.
So if you're a collector of interesting things,
what I was calling like in the book, like a treasure hunter,
like you just collect things that are interesting.
That's like a repertoire, or it's like an archive
of like, of stuff that you can use to jump off from,
to get to other interesting things in the future.
And eventually some of those are going to pay off.
You just don't know which and where,
you don't know what it's going to be in the end.
But so I think that when it comes to like really high
achievement, like think people doing remarkable things,
that's the kind of attitude that they have,
which was basically opportunistic.
It's like, well, this, I was going down here,
but then I saw something interesting over there.
That's no problem.
I'll just take that also.
It's not like you can't do two more than one thing
at a time in life.
I mean, you can have more than one thing going on.
That's true too.
So it's not as dismal as like,
you're just following some like extremely risky path
and that's the only path.
I mean, you can live life like that,
but you don't have to live life like that.
So it's more that let's keep a lot of things around
that are opportunities and follow several of them,
like probably simultaneously,
because the downside of it is that there's risk.
And so like with ambition comes risk.
If you want to achieve something ambitious,
you might fail.
And so that has to be taken into account
and you also have a right to not do it.
Like you could just say, I'm not going to be ambitious.
And you can do things that are modest
and just be perfectly happy.
So there's nothing wrong with that.
But this is about if you want to achieve things
that would be considered to be remarkable,
not honestly about other people, but by you,
like if they would be something that would make you feel
like you did something really amazing.
It strikes me that it feels like a very artistic way
to live life in the sense that like,
I think if you're authentic with it,
the things that interest you,
there will of course be overlap with others,
but like the very pointy specific things
that really catch you are probably,
that overlap is probably quite different
than most people, right?
So it's really interesting.
Again, like this fractal idea comes to mind
where like the overlap of tennis and mental models
and startups and whatever,
like it's probably relatively unique to me, right?
Just to put myself at the center of it for a second.
So Ken, one, I think that's a great frame
and jumping off point kind of covers the main arguments,
if you will, at least some of them from the book.
If we kind of move forward looking,
let's start with, I guess, has anything major changed
since you published the book,
whether that is new findings or good pushback you've gotten
or surprising results, anything there spark,
anything you'd want to dive into?
Yeah, let's see.
Actually, I just want to,
I did want to just say something on that point about art
because I do think I totally agree with that.
I think that's a really good insight that,
like the UNICEF is kind of artistic.
It's true that I keep running into art
and like at different levels,
like at one point I actually spoke
to the Rhode Island School of Design,
which is basically like an art school.
And I have to say that was like one of the most emotional
of all the times I've ever spoken about this
and I've spoken about it a lot.
The artists like really, really got it
and it strongly resonated with them.
And it really, it was like cathartic for them
because like for them, they were basically like,
this is what I do, but I can't justify it to anybody,
which is like this dilemma of the artist.
It's like my parents don't understand,
why are you doing this?
Like my teachers don't understand,
why are you doing this?
Like I'm constantly trying to justify my choices.
And this like kind of captures in some way,
like why this is justifiable.
The day of doing things because they're interesting,
not because there's some metric that says,
well, yeah, if you like,
bash this piece of iron onto like a piece of glass,
like this is like a good thing to do
that's going to help somebody.
I just thought that that's interesting to me.
And yeah, I met a guy like that
who's doing stuff like that, you know, at that school.
So that really made an impression on me,
like how the artists responded.
And I've also thought that like in science,
especially artificial intelligence,
that we should admit that there's actually
a very artistic aspect to what's going on
and that might change some of the dialogue.
Okay, but that's actually not your question.
So you're asking about-
Oh, it's great though.
Thank you for that.
You're asking about like what has changed since the book
and that's seven years basically.
And there's been things that have changed
like in the field of machine learning
where I mostly work and that like build on,
well, there are algorithmic principles.
Like it's funny, the book is really unusual
and that is basically saying,
like it came originally from algorithmic principles
and then they extended to like like life principles.
It's like almost never happens.
You know, it's like, oh boy,
my algorithm helped me to understand my life better.
Like computers, I just don't talk like that.
And actually take a lot of pleasure in that.
That's just been super fulfilling
to see an algorithm actually like give people,
like make people feel good about themselves.
It's very unusual.
But when I think about that,
something I've thought maybe something,
maybe someone new over the last several years
is that in some way that should happen
in artificial intelligence, you know?
Like if you think about this field,
like this is about intelligence.
Intelligence is obviously a natural phenomenon,
which is an aspect of human nature basically is,
in some ways it is what it means to be human.
Like intelligence encompasses,
it's not just like you're a human calculator,
like there's like a bunch of arithmetic,
like everything that you do,
which is about human nature.
And so it kind of makes sense.
Like if we're trying to reproduce human nature
in a computer, it should have insights to feedback,
shouldn't it?
If you ever hit on something deep,
it should tell us something about ourselves, I would think.
And so I kind of think that's a yardstick for AI
that is very little discussed,
but deserves like it really should be,
and that's kind of a result.
So it's funny because it does come
from these algorithmic principles,
like it feeds back into AI,
and there certainly in the last seven years,
you see change in progress.
Like one of the biggest things I think,
which does relate to what people say even outside of AI
is this kind of idea that people become uneasy
about the suggestion of randomness in life,
and also in algorithms.
And so like the book,
and in general this philosophy recommends something
like pursuing interestingness,
which is very relate to pursuing novelty.
And this makes people very uncomfortable
because they're like, well, but if I pursue novelty,
my basically I'm living randomly,
like I don't have any goal.
So I'm like, I just do this, I'll do that,
if there's no principle that I'm following and so forth.
And I really try to argue strongly
that this is not a novelty and interesting,
or not random, it's completely different from randomness.
Randomness is here's five things I could do,
I'll just like roll a die and just like decide what to do.
Like that's not what we're talking about here.
This is like very principled based on information,
like you decide what's interesting
based on your entire life experience
is anything but random.
And novelty is also like that,
like you're comparing where you are to where you've been.
So you have a real metric there
that you're actually using to guide you
and point you in directions.
But of course, like this also comes up in the field as well,
because we have algorithms like novelty search,
which reflect this philosophy, but in terms of like AI.
And in those, like there's been a lot of like attempts
to reintroduce objective notions.
So where can that happen?
Can that, like I have certain things
that I care about in life,
and I want those to be prioritized.
I don't just want to follow novelty.
And I think you see more sophistication there
over like the preceding years of like how can we incorporate
these notions without destroying the ability
to navigate freely, which is really the primary thing here.
If you destroy the ability to follow interesting
is you've destroyed everything.
Like you can't actually succeed anymore.
And so like if you reintroduce anything objective
into this kind of style,
you have to be very careful about it
because the objectives tend to be like a poison pill
that will like ruin the pursuit of interestingness.
So there's a lot of like sophisticated ideas
about like how these things can align in a way
that's very careful and delicate.
I think I heard EO Wilson talk about this the most,
but kind of this biological principle
of explore, exploit, right?
Like when your environment is very safe,
it makes sense to exploit it, right?
You have no predators, there's a water source,
you keep going back, you keep going back,
you keep going back.
But if there's a lot of novelty,
the explore mindset makes a lot more sense.
And it feels like there's some interesting parallel there
sort of between what you're saying
and that biological principle.
Yeah, if there's anything you want to add on there,
but I have a finer question to post on that after.
Yeah, let me add something to that
because that actually, that's a metaphor
that a lot of people bring up
that like this reminds me of exploitation
versus exploration,
which certainly in computer science has brought up
all the time, but I think even outside computer science
people talk about this,
like this trade, this trade off or dichotomy
between explore and exploit.
And I actually don't prefer that for this.
It's funny because I guess it may,
hopefully it's not too hair splitting,
but the thing is that I think what explore and exploit,
when people talk about that,
what they mean is that exploit means following a principle.
It's like, I know that this kind of thing increases
this metric, so I'm gonna go in that direction.
Whereas explore generally means having no principle at all.
It's like, I'm just gonna do stuff that's crazy,
but like maybe hopefully if I'm lucky,
I'll just like hit on something useful
and then I can start exploiting it.
But I think that that's not actually what I'm describing
because like what's different here
is that novelty and interestingness are principles.
So to me, they don't actually look like
what people usually mean by explore
because explore is almost like this,
almost is like this kind of like dirty indulgence.
It's like, well, I'll just do it
like when I get a little extra time on my hands.
Like I really shouldn't be doing this,
but it's something I'm gonna do.
But it's actually like,
I think that pursuing interesting
is actually a form of exploitation, not exploiting.
Exploration, because like you're using information,
actually very rich information,
which I would argue is more rich
than what you do when you exploit.
Because exploit tends to be like a very, very
impoverished type of activity.
Like you have like this one metric.
It's like, how fast is my robot running or something?
It's like this one thing.
And so it's very easy to follow, but it's not rich.
Whereas interestingness is about like thousands of things
all at the same time,
like what makes a picture interesting to you.
It's very rich, it's very complex,
high dimensional is what like a computer scientist would say.
There's many dimensions to it.
And so I think like you're basically,
when you're, what we're calling exploring
in this kind of sense is actually
this high dimensional exploration, exploitation actually.
It's the exploitation of interestingness,
which is our novelty, which are very principled
and they are information dense.
And so I think that the metaphor makes it sound
like something like to most people that it isn't,
it's actually just as principled as exploiting.
And it's actually a form of exploitation.
It's just a different kind of information
that's being exploited in this case.
Super helpful.
Thank you for refining that.
10-1, or a couple of things that sparked in me
when I was reading your book is like,
yeah, I think Paul Graham made it famous
that most startups look like toys at the beginning, right?
It's something really simple.
People make fun of it.
That's never going to become anything,
but they're following their interests, if you will.
So just like, again, pulling from startups,
pulling from biology, it's really interesting to see
how much this seems to tie together.
One thing I'd love to get your perspective on
is how you think about intuition in this space.
Like it's following your intuition
and your gut the same as novelty.
And related to that, can we refine what is interesting
to us to become better and better, right?
So like if we're broadly saying follow something novel,
follow something interesting,
can we refine that compass somehow
to kind of give us a better idea
what the most opportune stepping stones are moving forward?
Yeah, so I think intuition is basically
the same as following interesting as I would say.
It's a principal thing to do for sure.
It's a scary thing because one reason
that we really like objectives
is because we can do an assessment
which can tell you whether you're actually improving
with respect to your objective or not.
We love that.
That I think of as a security blanket.
So it's like, your boss wants to know,
well, how do I know you're making progress
and you bet I've got a metric here?
I wrote my OKRs or something and here's a metric
and I can tell you they're making progress.
And so that's a security blanket.
It makes you feel like you're measuring something.
Intuition on the other hand is dangerous
and can't be measured in general.
And so people think of it as unprincipled.
It's like, well, let me just tell you
I just feel really good about this.
Will your boss accept that?
If you tell your boss,
well, I really feel like this is the right thing to do.
I can't measure it at all.
And a lot of people don't like that.
But the thing is, if you think about it,
intuition is a reflection of your life history.
It's not like you were just born yesterday
and you just have these random intuitions.
You built up those intuitions over an entire lifetime.
And so they really can compete with these metrics.
The metrics are ridiculously naive in some ways
because they're usually like one dimensional,
like something like speed or performance,
or it's very easy.
So I wonder sometimes like, okay, we're trying to innovate
because innovation is ambitious.
Like if we're not trying to innovate,
this might not be so true.
If we're just doing something modest,
but if we're trying to innovate,
we're in a company or something.
So it's something really ambitious.
Then like we say, well, okay, but we have to have a metric
and we're gonna follow this metric.
Well, but the thing is that like,
why do we have all these like high paid people to do that?
Because like the thing is like,
anybody can just measure this metric.
It's like, you know, how fast did it go?
How much energy did it consume?
How many people bought the product?
Like, I mean, like, you don't need a PhD like,
or like, you know, I don't need a business degree
to know these kinds of things.
Like anybody can measure and then it criticizes you.
It's like, oh, the metric didn't go up.
Like, well, why do we have these educated?
Like the reason you have education,
the reason that we invested in you for like 25, 30 years,
like a lot of people through public education.
I mean, I emphasize that
we're talking to millions of dollars
that probably been spent,
like to get you to where you are.
And it would basically saying, well, screw your intuitions.
We don't have any interest in them at all.
Like after investing all that time,
what the heck are we just building up?
Just so you can tell us whether the metric is going up
where you don't need any education at all
to be like in sixth grade education to do that.
It's in the intuitions that the value
of everything that you've ever experienced
are actually reflected, I think.
And so those are extremely valuable
and they relate to what you find interesting.
It's just that it's harder to justify them
in an objective manner,
but that's a reason to be skeptical about objectives,
not a reason to be skeptical about intuition.
I think almost every great insight that anybody's ever had
was because they had a good intuition.
It wasn't because like some metric was there.
That's where all the values coming from.
So certainly I endorse intuition
and think it's basically what you have a right to follow
and sort of the shock or the change
that this perspective gives you
is to be justified in doing it.
Like it's principle.
It's not like you're doing this like indulgence,
like you shouldn't really be doing it,
following your intuitions,
but hey, you've got a little time on the side,
so you just see what happens and peek ahead.
Like, no, you should be doing that.
It's completely principled.
I mean, assuming you're interested in something ambitious,
follow your interest in your intuition.
So for sure.
Okay, that was a long answer to the first part.
Oh, it's amazing.
Yeah, and just a refresh.
Like, can we hone that intuition
that North Star over time somehow?
Yeah, I mean, certainly, of course.
I think you can hone it.
You're just by living, you're updating your intuitions.
And in fact, like something I haven't really delved into yet,
which is that like what actually constitutes
interest or interestingness
is that a huge component of it is novelty.
I would say that like it's not the case
that everything that's novel is interesting.
Like there are some novel things that are not interesting,
but the other way around is always the case.
So basically everything that's interesting is novel.
Like if there's something that's not novel,
it's not interesting either.
You know, it's like, for example,
like cars were once interesting,
but they're not now, it's like the idea of a car.
You know, it's like, I tell you, like,
you know, I've got this cool thing, let's talk about it.
Like it's kind of like a box on wheels as it goes by itself.
It's like, can you imagine?
This is just not interesting at all.
Of course it was.
It was super interesting 100 years ago or something
and more than that.
Like so it changes with novelty.
Novelty is very instrumental.
And because of that, you have to,
if you're going to stay on the cutting edge of interestingness,
and this can be personal,
what you find interesting doesn't have to be
what I find interesting, but whatever it is,
you're gonna have to be very attuned to what's novel now
as opposed to what was novel 20 years ago.
And I think this is often why, you know,
people fall off their game who were like really astute
at a certain point in time,
because, you know, it's hard to keep on that cutting edge.
Because it basically requires you to constantly be absorbing
like what is at the cutting edge.
So you can judge what's novel now
as opposed to 20 years ago.
And that will feed into your intuitions, you know,
like understanding like the current churn of everything
and the richness of everything that's going on right now.
And of course it's not only about novelty,
like you can refine your sense of the interesting.
It might be with respect to a category
that you're interested in, like I'm interested in AI.
So, you know, I'm constantly like refining
what I think is interesting within AI.
You may be interested in something completely different,
but, you know, you'll become a connoisseur
the more you kind of consume and understand that area
and it'll be something I couldn't touch at all,
like from my experience.
So everybody has a unique intuition
that they're constantly refining
and probably on multiple different topics.
And by all means, like that's the way that you get good
at pursuing these stepping stones
and treasure hunting and so forth.
Have you found a way to spot those who are doing that?
Is there any way to sort of tell who sort of, you know,
I think you say in the book,
those who are like one in the shadows almost, right?
Like one step away from like that stepping stone.
Have you found a way to kind of tease that out of people
or spot that somehow?
If not, let's move on.
That was a unique question.
I like that question.
I haven't had that question very often.
So I think that would be worth thinking about actually,
like if someone just asked, I saw the chat just flew by,
I saw somebody asking something related
about how do you decide who's on my research team?
Well, if I could spot these properties, qualities,
then that would help me decide
who should be on my research team.
I mean, I want to acknowledge that this is always the case.
Like sometimes, you know, you can be useful
without being good at this.
Like that's true.
Like if I just give you an assignment
and it's very well-defined,
that's basically objective-based and it isn't deceptive.
Like it's basically not super ambitious.
Then you can just do that.
And that can be very useful for me,
for you, for everybody.
So it's not like everybody has to always,
and even on a research team, that's true.
Like sometimes, you know, if I'm being very visionary,
like maybe I don't want everyone
to be super visionary on the team,
because like we're just going to get into conflict.
Like they want to go this way, I want to go that way.
It's like, well, maybe I should just get people
who are more just want to follow instructions.
And so it's not always the case
that you want someone like this.
But nevertheless, I think the people who are going to shine
the most and be absolutely outstanding.
And it's certainly people we want to get into research
or any other innovative industries.
Like we want to identify them.
That's true, because it's kind of a tragedy
if there's somebody like that
and they basically can't get into school
or they can't get into the company or whatever it is,
because we don't know how to identify people like that.
So we do want to be able to find those people
and promote them and basically educate them
so that they have a chance to express those talents.
And so what is it that allows us to identify people like that?
And I think it's way, way far away
from current, you know, assessment techniques.
You know, what do we have now?
We have things like the SAT test grades, you know,
we have some things like an essay,
you send in an essay to get into college
and grad school has similar things like GRE.
And I think that's just not really that related
to what we should ask.
So what should we be asking?
I thought about this a bit.
I think these are kind of weird things,
but I would ask some questions of people.
The problem is honesty, but let's put honesty aside.
I'm not sure like what to do about the fact that we could lie.
But I'd like to ask people something like,
have you ever written like a story
without anybody telling you to do that?
Like when and how many and when did you start?
Have you ever written a program
that we weren't assigned to write?
Like how often did you do that?
What were they?
And like have you ever drawn a picture?
Like how often did you draw pictures during your childhood?
Like how long did that last?
Like were they pictures that people told you to draw?
And I think like if I could get some kind of like portfolio
like that, like I think you might be able to see
that there's a personality style or trait
just inclined towards exploration.
I think it's very important
that you're not driven by what other people told you to do
in some sense.
It's unfortunate that like the culture actually like
tries to make you do things that other people tell you to do.
So like this can be drowned out by that noise.
Like you might be like that as a person,
but like as soon as you got into kindergarten,
you know, now or the earliest grade,
you know, wherever you're from,
like now, you know, you start being acculturated
to just follow directions
because that's what you're rewarded for.
So now it's a little noisier.
It's harder for me to actually see that signal,
but I would hope maybe like the most kind of willing
to follow the interest in would have somehow found a way
around that, like maybe at home, they still did their thing.
Even though at school,
they're doing a bunch of boring nonsense.
And so, you know, I don't mean actually to totally dismiss
like doing boring nonsense.
Like you do need that to learn things.
So it's not like we should not have any kind of instruction,
but it's just that that's not going to help us detect
those kinds of people is the problem.
And so I think like that, yeah, we could,
if we could get portfolios like that,
I would love to just start a college
where that's like, that's how you get in, you know,
you send in your portfolio from age like three to 18
or something of just stuff you've done yourself
and some sort of motivation,
like why did you do these things?
And so we kind of find that explorer characteristic maybe.
I love that.
So we dance around it, I guess, a little bit
with a lot of these questions,
but like you're, no matter who you are,
you're like nested within a bunch of social structures, right?
Like you have your individual, you have your family,
you have your company, you know, on and on and on.
And it's one thing to adopt this for yourself, right?
I'm going to follow what's interesting to me
and that's exciting, but almost always
you have someone to report to, right?
You have a team around you.
And even just telling your family,
I don't really know what I'm working on,
but I think it's interesting.
Like it's socially awkward,
or at least it would feel so to me in a lot of ways.
So with like that setup, Ken, like how do you think about,
like there's individual change,
but then there's social change, there's organizational change.
How on earth do we start embedding some semblance
of like this thinking at the right time?
Like, you know, I would guess it starts at the individual,
but yeah, how do we build structures that allow,
whether you're a VC or a boss, you know,
Google's 20% time sort of comes up,
but maybe that's a stupid idea.
But like, anyway, talk to us a little bit about that,
like social organizational change
and how this might find its way into it.
Which you said about the awkwardness is totally true.
I mean, that was one of the reasons
that the artists respondents are strong,
because they did feel that this was, you know, socially,
you know, it's just a very awkward thing
to explain to your parents and things like that.
I think this does just pervade culture,
that it's something that, like the idea of doing things
because they're interesting,
is not something that's really respected in general,
up and down, like all hierarchies that we have.
Like institutionally, so this is now getting away
from just personal, institutionally,
this is like a serious problem, I think.
That like, if you, for example, apply,
and I know a lot about,
because I was a professor for 10 years,
so if you apply for a grant,
which is like you're saying, basically,
I want money to be able to pursue this research project.
And usually, like if you're in research university,
like you do that by asking some agency
in the United States would be like
the National Science Foundation or something like that,
for some money, basically, say, I wanna do this thing.
And what they want is basically objectives,
they wanna know, like, what is,
what are you gonna accomplish?
How are you gonna measure progress?
How are you gonna confirm that you're making progress?
Like they wanna know all this stuff,
which is totally contrary to what I'm saying.
And so this is like one of the worst places for this,
because this is definitely definitively a place,
which is supposed to be fostering innovation.
You know, like I could understand if it's like,
you know, this is like a restaurant
and we're trying to like get all our orders out,
but this is the NSF,
like we're actually trying to foster innovation.
And so like the, I think it's just a reflection of the fact
there's absolutely pervasive across culture
and across institutions,
even the institutions whose job it is
to foster innovation, which includes companies,
which includes like a lot of companies
have a little area of the company
that's supposed to be like where like innovation happens
or they have like a little lab or something.
Like they work very objectively,
generally speaking, all across.
And so this was actually a big motivation
for writing the book.
Like what the question you asked,
like it really was about the fact that I perceived
my co-author Joel Laman also perceived
that once we have this kind of revelation
that like this doesn't work,
even though it seems like intuitively,
most people think at first like,
oh, well, having an objective is helpful,
but once you realize it's actually not helpful,
then the next thing is like,
but like the whole society runs that way.
Like what the hell does that even mean?
Like I'll try and absorb,
like what does this actually mean
that everything runs this way
and it doesn't even make sense.
And I started to conclude that like,
there has to be social change,
you have to do something about this
to change the fact that like,
we run things in a way that it's like a complete delusion.
It's a security blanket, but it's not true.
And so we decided, Joel and I,
that like maybe like what you answered to the question,
the first answer to the question you're asking was,
we need to get the conversation started.
That was like answer number one.
Like the initial problem is,
there's no conversation,
which I find really interesting.
Like there's not like an anti-objective movement.
Like have you heard of that?
Like are there protesters on the street?
Like there's nobody cares about this one way or another.
It's so status quo
that like there's not even any controversy about it.
And that's like unusual for something
where I think it merits some degree of controversy.
And so we thought like,
we gotta at least start a conversation.
So that's why we decided to write the book
was so that there would be conversations
like the one we're having right now,
which is why I'm really happy to be in this conversation
because it's like totally was like what the book was for
is to provoke this kind of discussion
and have a chance to spread at least,
like that's step one, right?
Like as people should at least see
that there's two sides to the issue
and like think about it,
like what should we do about it?
And then beyond that though,
there's like what should we actually do?
What should we do to affect institutional change
in our culture?
And this pervades like everything back to the point
where you start like kindergarten, like I said,
like think about how objective like school is.
Like that's also messed up.
Like there should be some amount of rewarding of exploration,
which is just intrinsic to human nature
from like the moment you're born,
which has been just like completely sucked out of you
because of the way like the institutional structure works.
It's all totally objective.
And by the way, like problems like the fact
that we can't get kids to perform well in school
and stuff like that,
the solution to that because it's very ambitious.
Like if you want every student in the United States
to score 100 on every test,
that's an extremely ambitious goal.
It will also be subject to the paradox of objectives
or what I call the myth of the objective.
It will not be achieved through objective means
because we need to collect stepping stones
that don't look like everybody's scoring 100.
If we want to get to people scoring 100,
that's the only thing I know about how to do it.
And yet that's exactly the opposite of what we're doing.
Because basically assessment just pervades everything.
So now we're gonna have assessment for the schools,
for the students, every few months, every year.
Like it's like, it's just everything is about assessment
objectively along this like prescribed path.
And so to get away from this,
I think the answer is that at one level,
there should be some public discussion
or should be discussion like this.
But hopefully it will move to a higher level of discussion
where it's like big forums
with many, many people aware of it.
And then the other part of it is like
within the institutions themselves,
people have to push for the change, I think.
And that's obviously difficult.
Like you think of like, okay,
I run a lab at a company or something like that.
And we've been tasked with being innovative.
Like we're supposed to prevent disruption of what we do.
And we're also anticipate the future
so that we don't miss out on some opportunities.
So that's my job.
And so in theory, like I should be doing this like
following interesting is collecting stepping.
So I was like, that's what we should be doing.
But like the problem is that I answer to other people.
I answer to someone else at the company.
So it's probably a some high level executive.
So if I'm running the innovation,
answering to some executive somewhere near to the CEO.
And so now they are thinking in terms of like objectives.
I mean, they're like, okay,
you're running the innovation lab,
but we would like to see how that's impacting
the larger company.
We're not just saying you'd have fun after all, right?
Like you guys have a little fun for the next few months,
but then come back to us with some objective metrics.
And so now here's where the problem happens, right?
Like the person may be totally bought in,
like maybe they read the book.
I mean, ideally they read our book.
So they're like, oh, I totally buy all this philosophy,
but they've got this boss who doesn't know anything
about this, it doesn't care and wants to know,
what's the reassurance and the security blanket
that they're not just blowing money.
And I can understand.
I mean, I can empathize and relate to the idea
that like innovation lab is like a super expensive thing,
right?
Like you're paying like top level people like tons and tons
like high salaries over years.
And what the heck is the point?
Why am I doing this?
So of course I would like reassurance,
but the problem is that it's just reality must be accepted.
It doesn't work.
You know, you cannot cause people to be innovative
by forcing them to report back metrics every month.
And so it will just be antithetical to innovation.
And of course we'll end up destroying innovation lab.
And I've seen it happen.
I've seen it happen at companies.
I've been in industry now for a while.
It literally happens.
It's the same thing like NSF, like they report ultimately,
who does the NSF report to?
They report to the government.
They report to like the Senate, you know,
like the actual, like the people in power
have been elected officials.
Like those people want to see what is the point
of having NSF or spending taxpayer money.
Can you show me the metrics?
Like, and so NSF is like scrambling to come up
with metrics that show that this research has impacted.
That's why the researchers have to tell you
what the impact is going to be before they get the money.
And so it's all totally upside down.
It's the problems reporting through these hierarchies.
How can we buck this trend?
Like I think like the answer is that at the mid-level,
like if you are reporting to someone,
which almost everybody is reporting to someone,
then you're going to have to like explain it.
And that's another reason we wrote the book.
Like the book is supposed to be a weapon
so that you can actually fight.
It gives a lot of objective scientific advice.
I don't mean objective in the sense of falling objective.
I mean, like we've actually done experiments
to try to bolster the argument
so that you could have an argument that's plausible
with somebody if you really wanted to and convince them.
And it's not impossible.
Like I've gone to gatekeepers with this
and I've had discussions with them
and they have said that this changed their thinking.
But again, they usually answered somebody is the problem.
They're like, yeah, I mean, I talked to somebody.
He was almost a billion dollars of research money
that this guy was controlling.
And he said, you know, like we need to reorganize.
Like how should we do it?
You really wanted to talk.
But, you know, I do answer to this, you know, higher person.
And so is anything going to happen?
I don't know.
I expect not much is going to actually happen.
Just, it's just exciting, but I don't know what to do.
So a real fight has to happen, I think.
And it's really hard.
Because if you think about it,
it's so easy to not care about this
because it's just so, it's so intellectual.
It's like out there, it's not like, you know,
we're not talking about abortion here.
And we're talking about like, do you have an objective?
And it's just like, am I really going to fight about this?
Like with all the controversy in the world,
it's just really hard to get this going.
But I think we should, we should try.
A couple of things sparking me there, Ken,
where kind of this idea that your business model
or it takes on the business model of your capital provider.
Right?
So if you have someone that needs to, you know,
return a certain amount of money in three years,
like you're going to be on that timeline too,
whether you like it or not.
And it also strikes me like, if the collective,
we are able to do something like this,
it's so hard that it feels like this enormous advantage.
Right?
Like it's going to be hard enough to get it up
and going once, right?
With the right capital, with the right group,
with the right sponsors, et cetera, et cetera,
that having anybody replicate that feels
extraordinarily difficult,
which is the pain and also the opportunity, I guess.
Ken, Richard Hurd, who was the one
who originally introduced us, has a question.
So I'd love to turn it over to him really quickly.
Thank you.
Ken, I appreciate you doing this and Blas.
Thank you.
Ken, you know, I love your book.
And Mike, a couple of questions.
One, have you and Nassim Tlaib ever got together
and compared notes and thoughts and ideas?
No, I've never had any interaction with him at all.
Yeah, well, the reason I ask is your work
made me think of a couple of his books.
And an alternative title to your book
could be The White Swan,
because he wrote a book called The Black Swan,
which was all about looking for these random negative events,
right, and getting prepared for them.
And much for your book, I may,
would much rather go find a white swan
than a black swan any day of the week.
And I didn't know if you had compared
your thoughts on randomness,
because they do intersect, right?
He's looking at it more from a risk management perspective
and you're looking at it
from a opportunity creation perspective.
And the second is just more of an observation.
This reading your book caused me to reread
a book called By Randomness,
which is a litany of case studies of people
who become so focused on an objective,
they destroy their career.
They're so focused on, you know,
in this case, usually financial trading,
and there's all these novel things happening around them,
they're stepping stones all around them,
and they're ignoring them
because they're so focused on the objective
and they end up blowing up their career.
So I didn't know if you had read that
and had anything to add to that or comment about that,
but it did make me think about it.
So thank you.
Yes, thank you.
Great comments.
I like that white swan point actually,
maybe a better marketing angle for the book,
to be the white swan opposed to the black swan.
And, you know, I would love to talk to Tullab, I've never,
and I think we would have a very interesting conversation,
I imagine.
I don't know, he knows anything about me either,
but yeah, I see the connection there,
and it's a pretty interesting connection.
And I wonder what he would think about all this.
And the second point,
actually, yeah, could you just remind me
of that second point there?
Oops, you muted.
The second point was fooled by randomness, right?
I mean, these are people who become so objectively focused,
events that they're not even considering
that are happening right before their eyes.
Yeah.
You know, blow up their careers, right?
Yeah.
It really is, proves your point even more,
not that it needed additional proof,
but becoming so objective focused
is blinded these people to, and I say these people,
shoot, I've done it myself a million times,
it's not like I'm any different, right?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
That was more of the point.
Got it, yeah.
The great connection, actually, yeah, I haven't read that,
but I appreciate the connection there.
It sounds like a great story of sort of like the dangers,
you know, this is the thing that's not talked about
as much as just like, we're also worried about
the dangers of not having an objective metric.
What might happen, bad things could happen is really scary.
What about the dangers of having an objective?
You know, like, there's a lot of bad things
that can happen on the other side too,
which is-
That's what his book is about, exactly.
So I think it's definitely relevant,
and it tells a good cautionary tale on the other side.
And so one thing we focus a lot in this community,
and I guess the way I try to judge success in one small way
is like, integration of these ideas is really difficult, right?
It's one thing to understand it theoretically,
and that makes sense, and we nod our heads,
and this is great, but it's hard to kind of figure out
how you implement this in your own life.
And whether it's something you've changed,
or a behavior, or a way you approach problems,
or opportunities, or what you've seen other people do.
If you have any sort of like concrete examples
of this in action, just to drive the point home,
I think it'd be really helpful.
Yeah, so just, we should also make a distinction
that there's maybe advice or suggestions here
about institutional change,
and then there's sort of implications for your own life.
And I think both of them kind of deserve some attention.
And so now I'm gonna focus on your life,
because institutionally, I think actually maybe
you can be easier to talk about,
because you can see some serious flaws,
like what's going on institutionally.
Your life maybe is a little harder to talk about,
because it's so subjective and personal.
But you, I think the main thing is that
you need to start out by deciding
what your risk tolerance is.
Like, because at a personal level,
like if it's not institutional,
then like what I'm saying means that,
you have an opportunity to maybe achieve
some really remarkable things in your life,
if you're willing to kind of follow interestingness.
But the trade-off is that like you might fail.
And this is like a much less kind of guaranteed route
than just like, okay, I went to college,
I majored in accounting, and I became an accountant.
I'm not saying it's bad at all.
That's something that we know how to do.
And it's a path that's already been prescribed.
And so like if, so you first like,
you don't have to do this, it's personal.
And if you just wanna have a comfortable existence,
there's lots of things you can do
without trying to follow this.
But if you really wanna sort of like,
but I want to have discovery in my life,
like I want to explore,
maybe it's not just about professional also.
I think there are other aspects of life,
which is like personal fulfillment, even cliche.
I mean, love, love is a funny thing
because like there are a lot of quotes about love
that basically sound like they came out of a book
if you just take the word love out of it.
You know, it's like, you know,
the best way to find love is to stop trying to find it
or something like, it's like exactly the advice here.
And so, you know, just, you know,
pursue relationships that are interesting,
like don't worry about it.
And so I think at some levels,
like almost everybody wants to pursue that.
So certainly that is advice you can follow.
You know, be open to opportunities,
like don't worry so much
as you're gonna succeed at some particular threshold
that you're concerned with.
But in things that are like more like professional,
then, you know, you're getting into risks
where there are alternatives that are less risky,
so it can be troubling.
But with love, you don't have much of an alternative,
I think, like you just basically can't just define,
find a path that's defined for you to make that happen.
But something like, you know, making a lot of money is also,
like making a lot of money is a good example, actually.
Like, I mean, if you're talking like a billion dollars,
like it's completely different than like,
I want to make $100,000 a year.
Like I want to make $100,000 a year,
I think can be pursued objectively.
It's pretty clear there's a lot of stepping stones
that have already been defined and laid out for you.
There are many, more than one option.
So it's not like the one that's good for you
is necessarily the one for me,
but you can still probably identify ones
that are reasonable and realistic.
But okay, I want to make a billion dollars.
I mean, there are no stepping stones laid out for that.
Who knows what it is?
So like the way to get to making a billion dollars
is almost certainly not trying to make a billion dollars.
And so what should you be doing is, you know,
you should be doing things that are interesting to you.
And so like one thing you could do is,
well, I could try to maximize my salary.
Like, you know, like I'm not going to take
the unpaid internship if it's like,
how am I going to give it to be a billionaire
with an unpaid internship?
But of course that's like a ridiculous position.
Like it's actually what you probably should be doing.
Because it's actually interesting.
And it's almost certainly like the path of interestingness
will be the only path that can lead to billions.
But you have to remember again,
that the path of interestingness
is not a path to a particular thing.
So there's absolutely no reassurance
that doing something interesting
will lead to a billion dollars.
It will lead to something is the point.
Something remarkable if you're lucky.
But certainly you have no idea whether a billion dollars
is the thing at the end of that.
But the other side of it is,
if you did get to a billion dollars,
it's probably because you weren't being objective
at some point.
At some point you did follow the path of interestingness.
And you can see this in the biographies
of all billionaires like Steve Jobs or something.
Is it like he says things like this all the time.
He took this like calligraphy class.
He dropped out of college.
So he could sit in a calligraphy class
and just like hang out.
Well, what's the point of going into calligraphy class?
Like what the heck are you doing with your future there?
But then like that led to the whole font thing on the Mac
and everything and the Mac became very distinct
because of that.
And so like there's story after story after story.
Like there's a people like that like willing to take risks
because that's pretty scary.
I mean, I would never drop out of college and sit in,
I can't imagine myself being that brave.
I don't know what kind of mindset that is.
But that's like the kind of thing
that leads to really interesting stuff.
Just do stuff that's interesting.
Like why was he so passionately interested in calligraphy?
I have no idea.
Wasn't that interesting to me.
I kind of like fonts though, but not that much.
But so it's like this is like what you have to be willing
to do and it's your interestingness meter
that actually matters.
It's because it's personal to you.
So like what he would have liked is
that you cannot follow someone else's meter
because they'll do it better than you
and you're not as sensitive.
And it's the details that matter.
It's the richness.
It's not like the macro level big picture.
It's the little parts that really make you unique
and your sense of interestingness
and that just cannot be reproduced from someone else.
So that's why advice is not that helpful
on this kind of stuff.
It's like read every biography you want
of every famous person.
Like you can't just follow their template.
Like you have to do what's interesting to you.
And so that is hard to implement.
But I think there's some principles there.
Like for example, keep a repertoire around.
Like don't just have one thing
because it's just much more risky.
Like you can do that,
but you will probably go to disappointment
and then you'll hate it.
You'll hate the philosophy
and you'll sue me or something for telling you.
Like because you'll end up impoverished
and on the street or something.
Like that's not a good strategy.
So try to find a way to like have more than one ball
in the air at the same time that are interesting
and ideally get into a profession
that allows you to do that.
So you're not going bankrupt.
You know, I mean, these are kind of practical things,
but like, you know, I was a professor
that that's a great profession.
I'm not saying everybody here should become a professor,
but like it's one option.
Like it was one thing where, you know,
I can have several research projects.
Like if one fails, well, that's okay.
Like other ones succeeded.
It's like having a portfolio of investments.
Like you want to be in a position
where that's actually professionally expected
rather than like extremely risky to your whole livelihood,
you know, and your family is going to go broke.
And so a little thinking about that, which is practical
can I think can be useful
and it might mean there's some delayed gratification.
Like as you get yourself into a position
where that's actually more realistic,
it might take some years of something
like to get into that position.
You know, and there are rebellious type people
who like, you know, starting at age 15
just do whatever the hell they want.
You know, most of them are like, you know,
in trouble by the time they're like 25,
like that doesn't usually work.
Once in a while it works great, of course,
because like it's always somebody
who was willing to just follow the interestingness
who does the amazing thing.
That's always the case.
But of course, most people like that
will just end up at a dead end.
And you know, interestingness is not a guarantee of anything.
And so like, you know, you can be that way
and just be like screw them some do whatever I want,
but you have to understand
you're probably not going to be too happy a few years later.
So there are ways I think to integrate this
into your personal lifestyle,
you have to be realistic and understand
what the trade-offs are as with all risk.
You know, I think risk is something
people should be allowed to do
as long as they understand the risks that they're getting into.
A lot of the time I hear people complain
about things that they did
that led to less than they hoped they would.
And those complaints often feel a little hollow to me
if it's something where they should have understood the risk.
You know, like the complaint is generally like,
like, you know, it's like a lot of people complain
about like going to higher education or something
because like a lot of people can't get into higher ed
because it's super competitive.
Well, I mean, you probably, like I would go into it
but understanding I probably won't get into it.
You know, like if you thought that there's some guarantee,
like that's actually like you were not assessing risk
realistically when you, I'm not saying I don't feel sorry,
like if somebody was misled or something,
but like assessing risk is really the first thing.
And then, you know, if you feel like it's okay to take the risk,
you know, you want to become a movie star
so you move to Hollywood, you know,
I think it's fine as long as you understand
you're probably not going to be a movie star,
but you're willing to take that risk.
Super helpful, Ken.
Another book that had a great impression on me
is Robert Fritz's The Path of Least Resistance.
And the image I walked away from that book is like,
straight line is often not the most direct route
to something, right?
It's often like a spiral, right?
Kind of the way he talks about it
or at least the impression I got from it.
And anyway, we're at the top of the hour, Ken,
and I want to make sure, you know,
what we have a really interesting community here,
all sorts of backgrounds, all geographies,
how can we collectively help you?
Is it spreading the word?
Is it just instituting this in our lives?
Like, what is top of mind for you
and how might we be able to be useful to you in some way?
That's a good question.
Well, I mean, spreading the word is clearly useful.
I, you know, I sometimes wonder like how viral this idea is.
You know, I still don't know after years,
like exactly like what,
like if there had been a marketing team behind it
or something, like would the whole world know about this?
Or is it kind of just limited to certain kind of like
intellectual type of person or something?
Like what kind of person?
Because I feel like it just should be
going all over the place.
Like every time I experience people's reactions,
it's just overwhelmingly positive.
I actually thought that like when I wrote,
I thought it'd be controversial.
That's what I was expecting.
Like half the people would be like, this is garbage,
you know, like injectors are super important.
Because it seems like everybody's invested in objectives.
Like there's all these gatekeepers everywhere.
I thought they'd all be angry.
But that's not what I get.
Like it was not what I expected,
but I found that the gatekeepers are usually feeling better
after reading the book.
They're like, I hate my job.
Like I don't like what I do.
It's like, it seems to speak to something in human nature
that that's true.
There is of course some small percentage
that don't like it.
There's always gonna be that.
But that makes me wonder why then is it not spreading more?
And so anything that could help to get the word out,
like I don't care if people read the book,
it's more the message.
Like to get people to be aware,
especially at the institutional level.
Like that's desperately what I want it to battle.
But I think at the personal level,
it seems to also resonate and be helpful.
So it's definitely like, how can I get the message out?
Anything to get the message out is great for this, I think.
And I wasn't trying to make money by writing the book.
The book doesn't make me much money at all.
So it's really, I was just really interested
in getting this message out and trying to do that.
Other than that, you know, I would experiment
with institutional change if you are a gatekeeper.
That's really hard.
I recognize that.
And so I'm really interested in the actual attempts to do that.
I don't think there are a lot.
Like, although there's a lot of people who I know
have read the book and have expressed like,
you know, kind of deep interest in what its message says,
they don't necessarily really wreck the culture
where they are.
And it's just interesting if somebody would have the courage
to do that, what the story would be.
What would that actually look like?
I know a few, there's some very exceptional cases
where somebody like modeled their company
after the book or something.
It was usually very small startups or something like that.
Something like really big success stories like that.
So that would be very interesting.
And let's see, what else could be helpful is,
if you let me keep in touch, I guess, like, you know,
maybe things will, as I try to, you know,
get this idea more accepted and maybe have more success
than maybe I would want to touch base
and have more ideas for you.
Ken, that sounds great.
Thank you so much for your time, for the book,
for your perspectives.
Everyone who stayed on a few minutes later,
thank you so much.
Ken, and in that vein, if you're open to it,
we can share your email with this small group, right?
Not super broadly.
We don't want to flood you or anything like that,
but building up case studies,
seeing how people are using it in their lives,
I could imagine that would be interesting.
So maybe we do that as a next step here.
Sure, yeah, that'd be great.
Please do.
Amazing, amazing.
Okay, thank you so much, everyone.
Have a great day.
This is great.
Thank you.
Thank you so much, Ed.
Thanks for having me.
Thanks, guys.
Pleasure.
Thank you.
Thank you.
This was awesome.
