Lecture 4 Lessons of Love, Plato's Symposium
Having dragged you through fear and anger, you might be relieved to hear that now I'm
going to talk about love.
Love is usually discussed as the paradigm positive emotion.
But already in talking about fear and anger, I've cast some doubt about these distinctions
between positive and negative emotions, pointing out that fear, for example, is the most important
emotion we have, and pointing out that anger has certain kind of positive elements.
Well, with love, let me just point out the obvious, and that is that love isn't always
positive, isn't all positive, it has its downside, that love leads to jealousy, love
leads to anger, and even rage.
Love doesn't always work out, so love isn't all good things.
But let me also complicate the picture a little bit by pointing out that the word love, or
the word like love in other languages, is thoroughly political.
What I mean by that is, it's a word that we like to use.
Now, of course, one might say that about fear and anger too.
People don't like to admit that they're afraid.
People are unwilling to admit that they're angry.
But they're very happy to tell you that they're in love.
So what I mean by political here is that the word itself, the description of the emotion
as such, is something that plays an important part in our lives.
And one of the ideas that I've often pursued with reference to the English, American use
of the word love, is that it's so promiscuous.
We love talking about love, and we apply it to almost everything.
So people love their car, they love their cat, they love pizza, they love beer, as well
as they love their parents, they love their country, and, of course, they love their sweetie.
Now, that should raise our eyebrows, because what could all those things have in common?
What could loving pizza, and loving your country, and loving your sweetie, have in common?
Well, all this has been greatly confused, even restricting our attention to loving
your sweetie, romantic love, erotic love, the kind of love that we write about in great
literature.
Even if we restrict ourselves to that focus, we want to say it's a focus which has been
blurred for so many years, going back to ancient times, by people who write about love in a
way that we started by talking about as all good things.
Like for example, there's ancient and very important classical philosophers, the Beatles.
All you need is love.
Well, have you tried it?
Living on love alone, it doesn't work.
So I want to start by talking about love in the concrete.
Love as an emotion.
Now, love as an emotion is often quickly misunderstood, as love as a feeling.
And I want to raise the question, is there a feeling of love?
Well, certainly there's something like a feeling of love, in the same way that there
are feelings attached to anger, and feelings attached to fear, but I want to argue that
love isn't a feeling.
In fact, if I could reproduce in you, as I probably can by giving you, for example,
enough chocolate, the feeling of love, it doesn't follow that you're in love.
What you have is just a feeling.
Because the obvious thing about love, like fear and light anger, is love is an engagement
with the world.
And in this case, it's an engagement with one particular other person.
Now even here, we have to distinguish lots and lots of different kinds of love.
For example, the Greeks talked about the feeling of eros, where eros is what we would call erotic
love.
It involves sexuality, it involves sexual desire, and it involves wanting the person
in a fairly concrete, immediate physical way.
But they also talked about philia, which is typically translated as friendship, but it's
actually broader than friendship, because philia is the feeling you have for your friends,
indeed, but it's also the feeling you have for your parents and your children, and other
people who are close to you in your community.
And later on, the term came into play agape, or in Latin it was caritas, which refers to
a different kind of love altogether, and it refers to a kind of love which is the love
of humanity, it's a kind of ideal love, in fact over the course of history, it gets exaggerated
and idealized to the point where only God is really capable of this kind of love.
Now those different kinds of love, I think can be translated into a much more secular
picture of different kinds of love between people as well.
Let me back up a second and say one of the reasons why love is not just a feeling, it's
because love takes time.
Now that's an argument I made with fear and anger too, that it's not just an immediate
impulse, but it goes on for a while and possibly even decades, but with love it's a more important
point, because with love, it doesn't even make sense to talk about being in love for
10 minutes, it makes perfectly good sense to talk about being afraid for 10 minutes and
then you found out there wasn't a danger, or it makes perfectly good sense to say that
you're angry for 10 minutes, but then you got over it.
But if one of my students comes to me and says, since the beginning of this class I've
been in love, I know that he or she has misunderstood the word.
You can't be in love for 10 minutes.
Now come back to this because some people may say, you mean you don't believe in love
at first sight and all that, I do, but let me explain that later.
The important point is love takes time.
Love is not an emotion that simply stops and starts in a short span.
Love involves a process and love also involves a kind of story, and what kind of story we
tell is very important to the nature of love itself.
Let me give you an example.
Many of my students, and I remember I and myself at one time in my life, fall in love
and if you ask them to describe that, what they're going to talk about is the example
of excitement, the passion, the heat.
They're going to talk about the novelty of it, the danger of it, the sort of uncertainty
of it, which of course can be very unpleasant in its way too.
But this kind of love, and it is I think a kind of love, is wholly wrapped around this
sense of passion.
Now consider a different example.
I was at some highway diner some years ago, and as I was getting my breakfast, I remember
in walked a lovely couple.
They were probably in their late 70s or early 80s, and they were not holding hands, but
they were walking together in the way that very old couples do.
Until I imagined a story, I'm not a psychologist, I didn't go over and interview them, but I
imagined a story, and here's the story.
They had gone to elementary school together, they were raised in a small town, that they
started dating, hanging out we would say, in high school, and after a couple of years
of a fairly chaste relationship, or maybe not, they got married, and they've now been married
for, I imagined, say, 50 years.
They have quite several children, quite a few grandchildren, they've had their ups
and downs, but here they are after a lifetime together, and the question is, do they love
each other?
Well, it seemed to me the answer was obviously yes, you just watched how they behaved.
Truth is, they only made eye contact occasionally, wasn't much conversation, and as for the
question, did they feel that pulsating passion and excitement that the young couple I just
described had?
You would look at me and say, are you crazy?
First of all, they'd be dead in 10 minutes if they did feel that, because that's not
what their love was.
Now what I want you to think about is, here are two different paradigms of love, and now
that I'm closer to the older couple, that I was to the younger couple, of course there's
something in me that wants to say, of course, here's what love really is.
Love is living together for a long period of time, knowing each other so well, feeling
so intimate and so on, and at that point the sort of passion and the sex doesn't disappear,
but it sort of drifts to the background, because I talk to my students all the time, and I'm
well aware of how important it is to have this pulsating, passionate love as well, and
I refuse to choose.
There are different kinds of love, both within the realm of what I'm calling, in some sense,
broad sense, erotic love.
So there are different kinds of stories, and they dictate different meanings of the word
love.
But now speaking of stories, let me tell you a couple.
Here's the shortest love story I know.
It's very simple.
Girl meets girl, boy loses girl, boy gets girl.
There's a feminist version of this, which is girl meets boy, girl loses boy, girl says
just as well.
But the idea here is that here's a narrative, and it is a narrative, which of course gets
filled out in all sorts of ways in a great deal of popular movies and TV and novels,
and I just want to point out one interesting fact about it, that it ends where it ought
to begin.
That the boy and girl getting together is not the culmination of love, it's the start.
And all those novels dating back to the 18th century and so on, that end with the words
and they lived happily ever after, well those fairy tales, they end where love begins, which
points to something very interesting about our love narratives.
Take another story, this one much more concrete, and I won't bother telling it because you
all know it.
It's the story of Romeo and Juliet, as told anyway by Shakespeare.
And again, it's a story, a narrative of love, which has some very revealing attributes.
It's in many ways our favorite love story, but let me deflate it a bit.
First of all, Romeo and Juliet are very young, by most accounts they're 13 or 14 years old.
It's what we would call a teenage crush, or something like that.
But they're young and they're foolish, and it's important that there's a sense in which
this is their first love.
Now of course there's Rosalind in the background, but let's not worry about her.
The idea is that it's this first naive, youthful love that's the real thing.
I want to suggest Frank Sinatra had it much better when he pointed out that love is better
the second time around, and you think about Frank and you think the third and the fourth
and the fifth as well.
But the idea is, here's a standard love narrative, and it tells us in effect love is for the
very young.
What does that do for us folks who are no longer so young?
Second, who was the one young man in Verona that Juliet should not have paid attention
to?
And of course that's the setup of the whole play.
They are inappropriate for one another.
This is forbidden love.
This is love which is illicit.
And of course there have been some very great philosophers, I'll just mention one, C.S.
Lewis, who have turned that into a thesis that what we call romantic love is by its
very nature illicit.
And even, he takes it to an extreme and other people go along with him, it's sort of a death
wish because there is no possible happy ending for this kind of love.
And if you think about many of the great tragedies in Western history, Tristan and Azolda, they
end with death.
And of course Romeo and Juliet ends with death, and that's the third thing I want to point
out.
After three days they're dead, end of story.
I sometimes give an assignment to my undergraduate students and I say, okay, I want you to imagine
a magical cure or whatever, Romeo and Juliet live through the play.
And now it's 25 years later and they're in their condo in Genoa and I want you to write
the dialogue.
And most of my students find this a great giggle and once they start it gets pretty silly.
But of course the point is already made, that they had the advantage, that they didn't have
to worry about happily ever after.
Because the truth is that love and love relationships take some work, they take adjustment and that's
just what gets left out of our standard love stories.
So my complaint here is that on the one hand love is a narrative, it's a story.
But we use many of the wrong stories and so the question then is what kind of stories
are the right ones?
For an answer to that question I want to go back to one of the classic writings in the
Western tradition.
It's a dialogue by Plato, early dialogue, called the Symposium, which consists of basically
a bunch of speeches by some fairly drunk old Greeks who have just been to dinner and as
the dialogue opens we learn they've really had much too much to drink the night before
as well.
So to slow down their drinking they decide to talk about love.
And I'm going to pick three of the half dozen or so speeches that they talked about because
it seems to me they lay out a kind of story line or a series of story lines which are
very illuminating for our purposes.
And my favorite one is the one told by the playwright Aristophanes.
Now whether or not this is a real occasion we doubt, Aristophanes in fact had already
insulted the real Socrates by writing a very embarrassing play about him and I sometimes
think about this as Plato, who was Socrates' student, his revenge.
But anyway Aristophanes has a story which he tells in this Symposium which is classic.
It's very simple and you've all heard it whether or not you know where it comes from.
And it goes like this.
In really ancient times, long before the Greeks in history, human beings were a very different
kind of being than they now are.
They were to start with, twice as big, and they had two sets of arms, two sets of legs,
two heads and they were perfectly shaped which is to say in the Greek fashion they were spherical.
So they would bounce and roll around the world with a kind of joy.
What's more because they had two heads they were twice as smart.
Because they were twice as smart they were twice as arrogant.
Because they were twice as arrogant they had twice the amount of hubris, that kind of arrogance
against the gods.
And the main god Zeus was deeply offended by this and so he sent out a warning.
And his warning was, threw out a thunderbolt, a lot of thunderbolts, and he split them all
in two.
And warned them if they didn't mend their ways, he'd do it again.
But that's where it stops because all of us now have one head, two arms, two legs.
But what's more important is that we are no longer complete beings.
And our Staphonius story is that what love is all about, because this is a story about
the origin of love, what love is all about is somehow reconnecting with our other half.
And he says that if he gave these creatures, namely us, a choice of what they'd like more
than anything else, they would choose for Hephaistus, the blacksmith of the gods, to
literally weld us together body and soul.
Now it's a kind of beautiful picture, but I think it's also a profound picture and
I want to come back to it.
Unfortunately our Staphonius develops the hiccups and can continue his story.
So it's picked up by other speakers, and in particular by Socrates, who has by far the
longest speech in the dialogue, and the one that scholars quite rightly focus the most on.
Socrates' speech, to put it very simply, is in a theorization of love.
Now Eros, back in those days, was not a very exalted notion.
The great poet is Sappho, for example, wrote about Eros as a kind of misfortune, a kind
of disease, a kind of illness.
And so Sappho's poetry, what we have of it, says things like, oh goodness I've fallen
in love again, why does this always have to happen to me, quite the contrary of what people
would say today.
But Eros was not held in high esteem.
Plato, through Socrates, tries to turn that around.
And so what Socrates' speech does is it says that Eros can be understood in different ways.
That for a very young person, Eros is understood as just this desperate physical craving for
this other being.
But once that doesn't work out, then young person will probably find a physical craving
for another beautiful being.
And in each case, it will probably seem to him or her as if this other person is the
only one in the world.
But with a little wisdom, one learns that it's not a question whether it's this being
or that being, but there's something they have in common.
And that's what one loves.
Now what they have in common for Socrates and for Plato, his teacher, or sorry, his
student, what they have in common for Socrates is they're both beautiful.
And so Socrates comes up with the conclusion that what you really love in each of these
people and in any number of other people is beauty as such.
Now I don't want to take a big digression here to talk about Plato's philosophy, but
Plato's philosophy, among other things, believes in these ideal forms, which exist in some
sense independently of the particular things in the world they participate in.
So beauty is something that is not only in beautiful things, beautiful people, but beauty
is also something with an independent existence.
And so true love for Socrates is somehow seen through or seen beyond the particular people
to this ideal form itself.
And of course, you don't need much imagination here to see that that idea of seeing through
the other person to this ideal is something that can be picked up later on by Christians,
in particular by the medieval as a kind of way of understanding Christian love or agape,
which is the other person might be a kind of medium, but what you really love in the
other person is God.
Now, there's a sense in which you might say that's the culmination of the dialogue, but
that's not where Plato stops.
At the end, a character named Alcibiades, who is also a very real person.
In fact, he was a student of Socrates.
In fact, he was one of the bad boys of Athens, first because as a youth, he misbehaved in
all sorts of notorious ways.
He, for example, knocked the members off of all the statues in town, that sort of behavior.
But later on, much more seriously, he became a traitor against Athens twice, so the Greeks
hated him.
Here we have Plato making him a character in this symposium on love.
Now, what Alcibiades does, very interestingly, is he comes crashing into the party.
And he crashes into the party in a very disruptive and drunken way.
He throws himself down next to Socrates and starts abusing him, starts insulting him.
He says he has a face like a goat, which, if you've ever seen a bust of Socrates, is
kind of true.
He says that you corrupt the minds of the youth, which, if you know, the charges that
were labeled against Socrates, in fact, is a very dangerous accusation.
But the idea here is that what Alcibiades is doing is not giving a speech about love
as much as he's demonstrating it.
What's the demonstration?
Well, it's pretty clear.
Love is not love of this abstract ideal.
And love is not getting together with your other half.
But love is a kind of obsession, and it involves all sorts of hostility.
And no doubt, for the Greeks of the time, as for us today, we recognize that there's
real truth to this.
People are often the cruelest and the meanest to those that they love.
Now here's another story, one that we might not like, but it's certainly part of the
overall love narrative.
Now, what are we to make of all this?
Well, first, the point that I've already made, that there are different stories of
love, and with that, different ways of understanding the emotion of love.
But I want to pick out the one piece of it that I said I particularly admired.
And that's Aristophanes' talk, because it seems to me there's something very profound
in the insight, that love is a kind of reunification with our other half.
Now literally, of course, the story is nonsense.
It's not as if there is one other half somewhere wandering around, we go, match up.
I mean, the image that's used in this symposium is, if you slice an apple in half with a sharp
knife, take the two halves of the apple, slap them together, and they stick perfectly.
But of course, that's not who we are.
We've been raised in different households, in different circumstances, and often these
days in different cultures, different religions, and yet we meet and we fall in love.
So how do we fit together?
Well, here's the point.
The idea of fitting together, and we use phrases still, like we were made for each other.
The idea is that fitting together is what makes love, but it's not just fitting together
like the two halves of an apple.
It's something that takes a lot of work.
It takes a lot of adjustment.
And so the idea that Aristophanes is giving us is that love is a kind of fitting together.
And of course, there's another point here that he was not particularly making, but becomes
very apropos in contemporary culture.
And that is, none of us is just an individual.
Advertising the whole American ideology often tries to convince us of the opposite, that
we should ideally be independent beings.
What Aristophanes and the Greeks realized is that a person is necessarily dependent, and
in particular, you're dependent on the one you love.
Not just in sort of day-to-day routine ways like depending on somebody to make you breakfast
or depending on somebody to make an income, but rather, you're dependent on the other
person for your very identity.
And that to me is a devastating insight.
Now, it leaves open the question, why do you love other people?
And even in Plato, there's this debate that goes on.
Do you love someone because of their differences from you?
Or do you love someone because they're the same as you?
Of course, there's lots of research these days, and the answer seems to be both.
But what is interesting here is that we've been talking so far in these lectures about
an emotion as an engagement with the world.
And you might well read into that the idea that emotion is an engagement with the facts
of the world.
So you engage with something that's dangerous by having fear, or you engage with something
that's offensive or insulting by having anger.
But love points out something else, which applies to those emotions as well.
That love isn't just a matter of seeing facts in the world, or in particular seeing facts
in the other person.
But rather, we don't just discover or recognize qualities that are lovable, but we bestow
them to use a nice word that's been introduced in this conversation by Irving Singer.
To say that we bestow virtues is to say that it's not just a matter of discovering what
the other person is like, but in the love itself, you make the person much more valuable, much
more important to you than he or she already is.
Now some people have said of this, and of emotions in general, that these are delusions, or these
are falsifications, or these are distortions of the world.
But let me ask you, if you see the person that you love as the most beautiful person
in the world, is the fact that he or she, when a beauty contest, really of any relevance
whatsoever, is the fact that he or she is not objectively beautiful, whatever that means.
Really important?
What's important is that this is the most beautiful person in the world to you.
And that subject development is all important, not just for love, but for the other emotions
as well.
So in anger, we don't just see that someone has insulted us, but we can strew what's
been said as insulting.
And fear, we don't just recognize dangers, but sometimes we sort of interpret the world
in such a way that it becomes dangerous.
Now all this is to say that there's an enormous amount of choice in emotion.
And I haven't made this sort of front and center yet, but let me do it with love.
Because it seems to me that we often talk about love as we talk about other emotions,
in terms of something happening to us.
So one of the ancient images that we get actually from the Renaissance is cupid with
these little arrows sort of shooting at us, or there's all these stories about love potions
that make us fall in love.
And the idea is that love is something that happens.
I think that's just wrong.
Now I don't deny for a second that there might be immediate attraction.
And that's why I said at the beginning of the lecture that let me off the hook for a
moment, because I will defend love at first sight.
And this is where I want to defend it, namely, there's an initial attraction between two
people and one can say, honestly, I loved you from the first moment, I saw you.
But I don't know what circumstances would one say that.
If you go out a couple of times and you break up, it's utterly implausible.
You might say, well, I had this stupid crush on you, but boy, I got over that fast.
Or you might say, well, I was infatuated for a few weeks, but you know, you just weren't
the person I thought you were.
Now, hand, go fast forward 20 years.
Now you're happily married and together.
And at that point, you can honestly say, I loved you from the first moment I saw you.
Now what this is to say is, I started by saying love is a political word.
We use it only under certain kinds of circumstances.
We use it when we want to say, of this whole relationship, it has worked out.
Now where's the choice come in?
Well, the choice is that these things don't just work out, that there is this initial
moment of mutual attraction, one hopes.
And then one has to make a choice.
At my age, and I'm married happily, I walk into a room and I have this sudden immediate
attraction for some young woman across the room, and I immediately leave the room, because
I know this can only be trouble.
But if you're young and unattached, you very well might say, oh, here's an opportunity.
And so you make a choice.
In fact, make a whole series of choices.
You choose to meet the person, you choose to go out with the person, you choose to get
serious.
And you even choose, for example, to say, I love you, which the first time you say it
is a bombshell of a choice.
And we say, as if I love you is just an internal weather report, it's not.
It's actually a way of changing the situation, changing the world.
But it's a choice, and it's a choice that goes on.
Or you might say it's a series of choices, and love is, as a process, a series of choices.
There's a very good movie out recently, a movie called Closer, in which a young woman
named Natalie Portman, the actress is named Natalie Portman, is dumped by her husband,
played by Jude Law, and who leaves her for another woman.
And the Natalie Portman character turns to her husband very tearfully, has this wonderful
speech in which she says, I don't know when it was, but there had to be a moment.
A moment when you realized what was happening, and you could either walk away, or you could
go for it.
And all I don't know when that was, it had to be there, and I think she's exactly right.
And not just once, but seems to be all the way through.
When we fall in love, and I would add, when we have many emotions, there are these various
choice points, these various moments, at which we can walk away, or we can decide, let's
really get into it.
And I want to suggest, with love in particular, but with other emotions too, there are going
to be a lot more choices involved than we usually allow.
