Lecture 2, The Wrath of Achilles
I want to begin these lectures by talking about some individual emotions.
And I want to begin by talking about almost everyone's favorite emotion, anger.
Now by most favorite, I don't mean everyone loves to have it.
In fact, I think people enjoy anger more than they admit, but nevertheless, it's a favorite
emotion to talk about because it's very dangerous.
It's explosive.
It's also highly negative.
It's very hostile.
It seems to be out of control.
Think about the phrases we use.
One loses one's temper, or a person flies off the handle, or one goes ballistic.
Very telling.
And if you think about the picture of emotions this gives when it's generalized, it explains
an awful lot about why people tend to distrust and even dislike being emotional.
And let me start talking about anger by going way back in ancient history.
Because anger is the theme of one of the greatest books of all time, Homer's Iliad.
The Trojan War is in many ways caused by, and is a continuation of anger.
Menelaus is furious that Paris has stolen his wife.
But the Iliad itself is really about one little segment of that war, and it's about
the anger, or the wrath, or the rage, of one main character.
And that's Achilles.
Now let me add that the Greek word for rage here is the word menis, M-E-N-I-S.
And menis is distinctive because it is appropriate primarily for the gods.
It's Zeus who mainly feels rage.
And consequently, rage is a kind of cosmic force.
It's not just an emotion.
But let me turn to the Iliad and read you some rather striking passages.
This is when Achilles has just had his slave girl taken away from him by Agamemnon, who
is the leader of the Greeks.
And Achilles is furious.
So he begins with a speech in which he humiliates Agamemnon.
You bloated drunk with dogs eyes and a rabbit's heart.
You've never had the guts to buckle on armor in battle or come out with the best fighting
Greeks.
At that point, the argument escalates.
And Achilles grabs the scepter, which in Greek lore is the instrument that one holds
on to to give one the right to speak in public, in an assembly, for example.
And he says, by this scepter I swear when every last Greek desperately misses me, your
remorse won't do any good then.
When Hector the man-killer swats you down like flies, and you'll eat your heart out
because you failed to honor the best Greek of all.
Well, the war goes on.
Achilles sits out.
And indeed, as Homer tells us, the Greeks have incalculable pain, and they pitch countless
souls and left their bodies to rot his feasts for dogs and birds as Zeus's will was done.
But Achilles gets back into the battle, and he does so when his best friend, Patroclus,
is wearing his armor and is killed by Hector, the hero of the Trojans.
And Achilles is grief-stricken.
He goes to the funeral, and he quickly casts on the pyre four high-necked horses and nine
dogs once fed under the prince's table.
He cuts the throats of two and casts them on, and twelve Trojans, two, of good families,
slashing them with bronze in a vengeful spirit.
Then he kindled the fire and led its iron will rage, and with a groan he called his beloved
friend's name.
Now Achilles goes out in a rage, and of course he slaughters Hector, and afterwards he does
the unthinkable.
He drags Hector's body behind him in his chariot, as we're told, seven times around
the city of Troy.
And this seems to us to be a very example of barbarism, but let's slow down.
First, let's remember that this is a warrior culture, and this is a war.
And let's also understand the nature of this primitive Greek society.
It's what you might call an honor society, a society in which honor is everything.
And in that context one wonders, was Achilles really acting irrationally?
Was he really losing control, or was he taking control?
I would say that Achilles acts irrationally, not when he goes out in a rage to defend his
friend and kill Hector, but he's irrational when he spites the gods and commits the unthinkable
sin of dragging Hector and his body around the city.
So in the context of the society, one wants to say, it's not clear that the emotion of
rage is necessarily explosive or necessarily irrational, but it fits in in an important
way.
Now, let's fast forward and make a fast contrast.
The contrast that I want to talk about is something that is familiar to all of you,
at least if you live within 50 miles of a major metropolitan area.
And that's road rage.
What is road rage?
Well, many of you have probably experienced it, and you've certainly seen it.
Road rage is losing control.
It is becoming very dangerous in a 3 to 6 thousand pound vehicle that can go very fast.
It is clearly hostile.
And what's more, it is straightforwardly irrational.
It's not as if getting angry will get you ahead any faster.
And we've all had the experience of being stuck in traffic, and of course the person
in front of you is just as stuck as you are, but you are so angry with that person.
You're not moving that what you know full well, that there's no place to go, doesn't
slow you down at all.
But you're furious at that person, and we've seen people who do utterly irrational things,
either ram the car or sort of make a quick detour around them, and in fact not make things
better for themselves at all.
But again, I want to look at the culture, because what is road rage about?
Well one thing you might point out is that it's a product of our being isolated in these
vehicles, with no way of communicating with our fellow human beings.
Now forget about cell phones, because you're not calling the person in the car next to you.
But the truth is, as philosopher John Searle has pointed out, that when you sort of deprive
a person of all means, of civilized communication, and reduce all exchange to something as simple
and crude as leaning on the horn, well of course you're going to get barbarity.
Add to that the fact that we're all in a hurry, that our time is precious, that we expect
to be somewhere and we're not getting there, and we're impatient.
These are all cultural features one can easily imagine, and on vacation occasionally experience,
what it would be like otherwise.
But put that combination together, of being in a hurry and unable to move, isolated, and
it becomes lethal.
Now add to that the increased frustration of contemporary advertising.
If you watch TV, you've all seen these ads, which always consist of some fancy, high-powered
car being driven along some beautiful country road, often by the coast, and no one else
is on the road, there are no speed limits, and maybe a little warning sign, professional
driver on closed course and all that stuff.
But basically the idea is, at the same time that you're stuck in traffic, and you bought
that very same car, you're thinking, okay, this is what it's supposed to be, well there's
a sense in which our culture creates road rage.
Now in discussions of anger, very often the emphasis is on a certain picture of anger.
One example of it is in Daniel Goldman's book on emotional intelligence, he presents
instances of anger, which are in fact lethal, often resulting in murders.
But anger is described there as an emotion that is brief, negative, irrational, typically
violent.
And I want to argue that this picture is wrong, or at least it's unfair, that there's a lot
more to anger than this standard psychological portrait would allow.
With that in mind, I want to turn to a philosopher who's going to appear again and again and
again in these lectures, and that is Aristotle, because Aristotle wrote at some length about
anger, and he wrote about anger in a very interesting way.
Contemporary psychology puts a good deal of emphasis on the idea, for example, that anger
is a kind of physiological reaction, and I'll talk about that in a minute, that anger consists
of certain kinds of feelings.
When Aristotle writes about anger, he doesn't talk about physiology virtually at all.
In one of his books he mentioned something about the blood boiling around the heart,
which I guess is good physiology for the time, but that's about it.
And he doesn't talk much about feelings, in fact he doesn't really talk about feelings
at all.
But rather what he talks about is the occasion that sparks anger, that anger is a response
to an insult or a slight to oneself or to one of one's friends, which propels us to
a kind of vengeance to getting even.
And what's more what Aristotle says is that anger isn't always wrong, quite to the contrary.
Anger sometimes is exactly the right response.
Now that assumes that it's the right response in the right occasion to the right degree
aimed towards the right person.
But in that case, he says, one would be a fool not to get angry.
So not only is angry not always wrong, but sometimes it is obligatory, which is to say
that anger need not be negative at all.
It often is, and it often has very bad consequences.
But sometimes anger is right on the button.
Give an example, in the 1970s when the feminist movement was really gaining steam, especially
in the United States.
One of the things that a great many feminists said and became an important part of the culture
was that women had to learn to express their anger.
And it's not just a question of expression, but women had to realize that they were angry.
And they had to realize that they had a lot to be angry about.
And in fact, it was this righteous anger that propelled the feminist movement, not that
there was a lot of other sorts of things going on as well, of course.
But anger here was the right response to a kind of oppression.
And one might add to this in contemporary psychological research.
We assume, as this example suggests, that anger tends to lead to violence, or at least
to some sort of aggressive behavior.
In fact, more than three-quarters of angry expressions are non-aggressive.
Anger in the feminist movement, for example, didn't just result in a few occasional acts
directed against men or whatever, but it resulted in a lot of good conversations between couples
about duties and rights and obligations and positions and employment.
It leads to a lot of very positive encounters as well.
It's not just about violence.
And another thing, when we talk about anger as this sort of irrational explosion leading
to violence, the assumption is that consequences are sort of out of the picture.
One doesn't think about them.
And it's true that one of the features of anger, which is very interesting, is that
anger tends to be somewhat absolutist, that it only sees itself.
But the truth is that every action has a kind of reaction.
And so anger immediately spurs anticipation of the consequences of anger.
That's why, even though you might say, I'm so mad I want to kill them, you don't.
You don't even think seriously about that.
What you do is you immediately anticipate what the consequences of killing your boss
or this fellow in the bar might be, and suddenly it just becomes a metaphor.
Now in contemporary psychology, the way anger is now generally talked about has to do with
a very important concept that we're going to be using throughout the lectures.
That is the concept of a basic emotion.
And anger is one of the obvious candidates for a basic emotion.
Fear, we'll say, is another.
A basic emotion is one that is physiologically hardwired.
That's a metaphor, but we can spell it out.
It has to do with a certain neurological, hormonal, muscular syndrome that gets triggered
by a certain kind of event.
And what follows is more or less automatic.
So when you get angry, the idea is something triggers your anger.
It doesn't much for this purpose, matter what.
But something triggers your anger.
And what happens is there's this syndrome of symptoms and displays that are characteristic
of anger.
And psychologists who talk about basic emotions have focused on one thing in particular, and
that is the face.
And the idea is when you get angry, among other things, you show a characteristic facial
expression and one that can be recognized by anyone else as the expression of anger.
And Paul Ekman, who has done more to sort of forward this theory than anyone else, has
done lots of research around the globe and more or less established that this idea that
anger is a universal, that is basic emotion, is in fact the case that everyone shows the
same symptoms and everyone recognizes the same symptoms.
Now as opposed to this picture of anger as a very brief explosive emotion that involves
a kind of neurological syndrome, one can also talk in a different way as Aristotle
did or as Freud did.
And what's fascinating here is that in many ways, long term anger, and by long term we're
talking certainly more than a few seconds, but long term anger is a kind of process which
is not always readily recognizable.
If you think getting angry is something, well of course you know you're angry, well maybe
that's true for these short bursts that people are talking about.
But when you're talking about long term anger, people are angry at their parents for their
whole lifetime.
People who are angry with their spouse for weeks on end.
People who are angry with their children often refuse to recognize this.
And if you ask such people, well are you angry, and even are you angry about such and such?
They will say in all honesty, no, or gee I don't think so.
In fact as Dr. Freud points out at some length, that this I don't think so can be drawn out
through therapy and other things, conversation, and it turns out yeah I guess I've been angry
all along.
But anger isn't just a short emotion, it's a long term emotion.
Now this whole picture of anger as a kind of preset psychological syndrome that happens
spontaneously and very quickly ignores the most straightforward feature of emotion, which
Aristotle got exactly right.
That the emotion isn't about a neurological syndrome, whether talking primitive neurology
or primitive physiology as Aristotle would have known it, or the more sophisticated physiology
of the late 19th century, or even the very sophisticated neurophysiology of the 20th
and 21st centuries.
But anger is first and foremost, it is an engagement with the world, it is about something
that happens, and what's more we can specify with some detail as Aristotle did, what that
kind of thing is.
It's something about an offense, something about a slate, something about being wronged.
So anger isn't just physiology, and anger isn't just a reaction, but anger brings with
it a whole host of information about the world and what counts as this light, the sorts of
things that Homer was writing about.
A very different for example than the sorts of things that you would write if you were
talking about the politics of the United States Senate.
We're not talking about that same level of barbarity, what we're talking about is a very
sophisticated and sometimes intricate and subtle relationship between people.
So the picture I want to give is that anger isn't just that kind of explosive reaction,
but anger often is a process over time that involves lots of information and involves
an active engagement with the world.
With that in mind, I'd like to introduce a very different way of thinking about anger,
and this is something not even Aristotle would have dared suggest, but in contemporary
literature it's becoming more and more prominent, and I take my cue here from a philosopher
I very much admire, namely Jean-Paul Sartre, a great existentialist who died about twenty
years ago.
But in fact, the idea is that an emotion isn't something that just happens to us, or something
that happens inside of us, but rather an emotion, anger in particular, is something we do.
And what it is that we do is strategic, it's for a purpose, it's not just something that
happens, something that's hardwired, or something that evolution sets for us, but rather it
can be very immediate and personal and strategic in exactly the sense that you think I'm using
that term.
Let me give you an example.
I had a colleague, in fact anyone who's worked has probably had a colleague like this, who
used to find himself on the losing end of various arguments, and when he did, he would
raise himself up to full height, which in his case was actually fairly impressive, and
he would lean across the meeting table and stare down angrily at the person who had contradicted
him.
And to tell you the truth, most of us backed off, because not only do we recognize anger
when other people express it, but we also are intimidated, and sometimes we're terrified
of it.
And it's not that we thought that we were going to be physically violated, or even necessarily
insulted, but just anger itself can be terrifying.
And so what this fellow did was, he was using his anger to win the argument, and of course
he did this not just once, but many times over the years.
Now you might say, well, that doesn't show anything about anger, because you'd get the
same effect if you just pretended to be angry, right?
Well, no.
One of the things that Paul Ackman has shown very clearly is that when you try to feign
an emotion, you almost always get it wrong.
Even trained actors and actresses get it wrong.
And when they do get it right, if you watch them closely, they control their facial expression,
but not in that first fraction of a second, that if you're pretending to be angry, there's
a moment at which you're clearly not angry, and then you make yourself angry.
The truth is, the best way to pretend you're angry is to really make yourself angry.
And what this fellow learned over the years was how to make himself angry.
In fact, I would argue that he was dispositionally, temperamentally, a fairly angry person already,
but that of course made it easy.
But how did he get this way?
Well we talk rather loosely about temperament and psychological traits, and their debates
about whether someone is born that way, because we all know that babies are born, some are
pretty calm, some scream their head off from the first moment of life, so all that's kind
of true.
But there's another hypothesis, and let me give it to you.
Imagine this fellow as a baby, about two years old.
Now those of you who have or have had two-year-olds, now the two-year-olds are very good at one
thing in particular, and it's very important.
You've learned the existential word, no.
Two-year-olds throw temper tantrums, and in a temper tantrum, a baby will take what most
of us is an impossible posture, I mean typically rigid, bent over backwards, holding their
breath, every muscle is a tight knot, and they start turning blue, and starts to worry and
so on.
And the question is, how do you deal with this?
But one way is to put the kid in his crib, shut the door, and let him scream his head
off until he stops.
Another way, which I suspect is what happened to this fellow, is that the parents are intimidated,
they're scared, silly, and so what they do is they coddle the baby, they rock him, they
offer him his favorite treats, they say sweet things, they even make promises for the future.
And inside that baby's head, I imagine, there's a little light bulb that goes off.
Wow, I have to try this again, because what has happened is that he has learned that anger
gets him what he wants.
And so rather than the temperament being something that's already established, the temperament
is something that's cultivated over the years, with an eye to getting what one wants.
Now in what sense does this work?
Because okay, other people are intimidated by anger, we're pretty clear about that.
But I would say, in a much more profound way, we change ourselves through anger.
Now think about when anger occurs.
It's typically when we're frustrated, we can't do something, maybe we've been incompetent,
or maybe someone has insulted us and put us in a sort of humiliating position, and that's
when we get angry.
What good does that do you?
Well, a lot of good.
And even forgetting about the external implications and the effect it has on other people.
Think of the effect it has on you, because when you get angry, there's a sense in which
you elevate yourself into a very enviable, judgmental position.
Sort of like a magistrate in court.
So we're sort of down here, and here's the person who insulted you, and now suddenly
you're up here, passing judgment on this other person.
Now I was thinking about this for quite some time, years ago, when I discovered that somebody
beat me to it, in a very profound way.
One of my favorite philosophers, Lewis Carroll, in one of my favorite philosophy books, Alice
in Wonderland, makes basically the same observation.
There's a page there, which some of you might remember.
It's called the Mouse's Tail, it's a pun, but the print on the page sort of snakes down
like a mouse's tail.
And if your eyes are good, you can read the last refrain in the tale, which goes like this,
I'll be judge, I'll be jury, said cunning old fury, and I thought, wow, because that's
the thesis, that in anger what we do is we cast ourselves into a role, and it's a role
which makes us quite superior, at least for the purposes of the moment, and we can look
down on, judge the other person.
So you might say that what anger does here is it saves face.
Now there are better and worse ways of doing this, and so I would distinguish in general,
in fact for all emotions, between what you might call crude and refined anger.
Crude anger is the sort of thing that these psychologists are talking about in terms of
a brief irrational explosion.
It's usually pretty counterproductive.
My favorite literary example is Billy Budd, by Herman Melville.
Billy is a sort of exemplary human being, he's sweet and he's kind, he has no hostile
feelings at all, and he is driven basically to distraction by this evil ship captain,
who finally confronts Billy, who is uneducated, inarticulate, can't express his anger in any
other way, and so explodes and kills the captain, at which point he himself is hanged.
That's crude anger.
I want you to compare that with a well-known painting by Pablo Picasso, he used to hang
in New York until several years ago, called Guernica.
This was Picasso's expression of outrage at the bombing by the fascists of a small town
in northern Spain.
And it's a beautiful painting, a profound painting, a very moving painting.
And the truth is that Picasso expressed his anger, not by kicking the dog or by throwing
something at the neighbor, he expressed his anger through this high art, and that's what
refined passion, what refined anger is all about.
So anger, I want to say, is a strategy.
It's a strategy for changing the world, a strategy for changing oneself.
Now, does it follow that it's always the best strategy?
Clearly not.
Buddhism, for one example, Christianity for another, has recognized that anger is often
a self-defeating strategy, it's not the best strategy.
And so both of them say that a kind of peace of mind or a kind of forgiveness is much better.
I don't disagree with that, but it seems to me the traditional idea that anger is always
a negative emotion, that it's always irrational, that it is always violent in a sense, is wrong.
That anger is a perfectly appropriate emotion in some occasions, and so too I want to argue
that most of the emotions we're going to talk about are perfectly appropriate at least sometimes.
