Let me say something again about why so many of the emotions we've been talking about have
been so-called negative. It's because we're vulnerable. We're vulnerable to fortune. We're
vulnerable to fate. And of course, we're mortal. We get sick. We get hurt. This is one of the
reasons why some of the great philosophical movements in history, the Stoics, for example,
in ancient Greece and Rome, the Buddhists in ancient Asia encouraged us to cut our attachments
to the world, or at least minimize them in such a way that we were less vulnerable and
more resilient. In fact, most of us are unwilling to make that sacrifice because for us, attachments
and vulnerability are really what life is all about. Now, I'll be talking about positive
emotions later on in the course, but let me make just a couple of points to begin with.
Many of our positive emotions, and when you think about it, there are relatively few compared
with all the negative emotions. Most of our positive emotions have to do with such things as
relief, which means essentially being freed from certain kinds of worries and other negative
emotions. Another kind of interesting, but again, perhaps unfortunate, element of this is that we
are emotional, mainly with respect to change. And here there's a kind of asymmetry. The change
upward is usually much less effective and much less enduring than changes downward.
So for example, someone can make themselves quite unhappy, in fact, downright miserable
by talking themselves into it. Fast example, a person who starts worrying about his or her
marriage will affect the marriage in such a way that it will, in fact, start showing cracks and
flaws and problems. And one can actually destroy a marriage through the simple device of worrying
about whether it's any good or not. On the other hand, if you've been in a relationship that's a
little bit shaky, and you've tried to talk your way up and try to improve it, this in fact is a
very difficult thing to do. There's also a notion, which has been greatly explored just in the last
few years, of cheerfulness and in particular cheerfulness in America. And the question is
whether cheerfulness is some deep set attitude towards the nature of the world, a real engagement,
or rather it's a kind of social facade. And a good deal of the evidence points to
it's being a social facade. And finally, one last finding that I'm just going to throw out for now
and talk about later, is that it's been discovered by a number of researchers that our level of
well-being is remarkably constant. They've done studies of, for example, people who have won
lotteries, millions and millions of dollars. And while there's an initial sort of upsurge
of good feeling within a year or so, they're back to pretty much the level of well-being that they
were before. And they've studied also people who have had terrible accidents. They've become
paraplegics or some other terrible physical disability. And while, of course, there's a
period of depression, within a year or so, these people, too, are back towards their level of
happiness. Now, I want to say all this by way of a kind of introduction to the most negative of
negative emotions, at least as some people would think of it. And that is the emotion of grief.
Now, grief is negative for an obvious reason. Grief involves a grievous loss. Now, the loss
of a loved one is what I'm going to be talking about. I'll just really quickly make the point
that there are other kinds of grief as well. For example, it might be the case that a person is
grieving for the children that he or she never had, or you can think of someone who is grieving for
the life they might have led, but for some reason or other did not. But what I want to talk about is
a very straightforward and the most common notion of grief, and that is losing a loved one.
Now, what's interesting here is that grief is not just sadness. Grief is not, in other words,
a basic emotion. Nevertheless, grief is pretty clearly universal. All people die. All people lose
people who are close to them. And what's more, all people know that they're going to die. And
that's one of the interesting differences just to start with between, say, grief and sadness.
You can be sad about almost anything, or you can be sad about nothing. But grief has a very
particular kind of object. Grief is this serious loss. Grief, perhaps, is the start of all thinking
or all philosophy. When we look back at Neanderthal burial sites, we're now going back, oh, roughly 80 to
100,000 years. One of the things we find is evidence that the Neanderthals must have thought,
in whatever language or concepts they thought, about death and what happened after death.
There's a sense in which death is something that is so basic that all the other concepts of religion,
philosophy, astronomy are just clouded by contrast. There's also a kind of contrast that can be made,
not just with sadness, but with depression, because grief often leads to depression. In fact,
grief can often be conflated with depression. But even Sigmund Freud, who thought a lot about
both issues, said that even though a person who is grieving resembles all the features of
mental illness, we would never think of passing that person on to a physician. That's not what
they need, and that's not what grief is all about. In fact, one of the most interesting features of
grief, which sets it off from many emotions, is the fact that it is not only appropriate at times,
but sometimes it's downright obligatory. Let me explain what that means.
It's appropriate to grieve when you've lost someone close to you. In fact, if you've lost
someone close to you and you don't grieve your friends and possibly you yourself,
we'll start wondering what's wrong with you. It's obligatory in the sense that it's not
just something that it would be understandable for you to do, but it's something that you really
ought to do if you can imagine someone going to a funeral and they're surrounded by grieving people.
And death is right there. And they're just in a good mood and they're giggling away and telling
some off-color jokes. What they're doing is not just inappropriate, but it's downright unethical.
This idea that grief is something that's obligatory comes out when we think, for example,
how we would treat someone who lost someone very close to them, a spouse or a child.
And didn't grieve at all. But the way grief is often discussed as a painful emotion,
wouldn't it be good if someone could simply take a pill, and I'm sure there are many available,
that would just remove the grief, remove the pain. But most of us would consider that to be
an immoral thing to do because grief is not just a negative emotion. It's not just a painful emotion.
Grief is something that we ought to feel, at least under the right circumstances.
And that's what this lecture is going to be about, because the idea that grief is just a negative
emotion and just about a loss seems to me to be just playing wrong. That grief is a much richer
emotion than this, and it's much more important for our lives. There's a wonderful television
program on now, I guess, going on five, six years that I hope many of you have seen. It's called
Six Feet Under, and it really broke new ground, certainly in American television, by talking
every time about death. It's about a family who owns a funeral parlor and so on. And what it's
had to do, and what it's made us do, is to face up to questions about death and how we feel about
it and about grieving in all sorts of very interesting ways. One of the interesting ways
is the way that culture influences death, because if you look at the different funerals every week
and so on, it often has to do with people from different cultures or different subcultures.
And so you have hippie funerals, you have Hispanic funerals, you have things that would be very
hard to describe, like a hell's angel sorts of funerals, and it's very interesting how each of
these different groups deals with death. And so grief is all about death, but grief isn't just
about death, it's about a lot more besides. Now, when I first started thinking about grief years
ago, I was perplexed. And I was perplexed because it seemed to me that grief wasn't like other emotions.
When you get angry, you engage the world in a certain kind of way. You find something offensive,
or you find something frustrating, and you are motivated consequently to do something about it.
So as one of my favorite psychologists, Nico Freida, has argued for many years,
an emotion essentially involves what he calls an action tendency. So in anger,
we are tempted to do something, maybe not anything in particular, but we're tempted to do something.
But in grief, it seems to me people tend to do nothing.
They tend to withdraw, they sort of retreat to the rooms, they don't want to talk to people.
And it seemed to me that this was very much at odds with what the other emotions tended to do.
There was another problem, and that was that emotions we tend to think of as feelings.
And some of them are short feelings, they only last a couple seconds or a couple minutes.
Others are feelings that go on for a long time. I talked about long-term anger that may go on for
years. And of course, love is an emotion we like to think of as going on for decades.
But grief, and this I would say, like love, grief is a process. And people like Anna Kluber-Ross
have for years argued that there is a process of grief which involves some other things,
lots of other emotions. So part of the process of grief is denial. Part of the process of grief
is anger. And the question is, what do anger and denial have to do with this emotion called grief?
But that's why, even in the earlier lectures, I started to make the point that emotions are not
just feelings, they are not just states, but emotions are processes, and I would say this,
of all emotions, but especially of grief, and with it, I would say, of love. Because to say
that an emotion is a process is to say that it is something that changes with time, it develops,
that grief isn't something that happens all at once, and it's not something you can get
rid of just by taking a pill. But the process of working through grief, that's grief. And so to
think about grief as just a momentary feeling of some sort, it seems to me to be to misunderstand it.
And finally, one of the most perplexing things as a philosopher was, I was thinking,
well, emotions generally have to do with desires. So in anger, you want to punish someone.
In love, you want to caress someone. In jealousy, you want to protect your turf. In envy, you want
to take something. In shame, you want to hide. But what is the desire in grief? Again, thinking
about grief in particular as the grief at the loss of a loved one. Well, it would seem that what you
want in grief is the utterly impossible. What you would like is for the person who has died
to come back. And it's a very strange emotion indeed that has as its characteristic desire.
In fact, some people would say as its only characteristic desire, the desire for something
which is utterly impossible. Now grief, of course, triggers off thoughts. And some of these are
thoughts of the loved one. And I will talk about that at more length in a moment. But grief also has
the property of reminding us of our own mortality. And this is a point that's often made, but I
think it's often not appreciated for quite what it is. Because there's a sense in which this is a
kind of narcissism. Grief by its nature is about the loss of the other person. And yet, as soon as
we start feeling about our own death, then there's a sense in which we've lost that connection with
the other person. That we might recognize we're both mortal, fair enough. But insofar as you feel
death for yourself, that's a different kind of emotion. But let me take a moment and just talk
about this fear of death. Because it seems to me something fascinating, and it's also misunderstood.
Because many years ago, 2000 years ago to be exact, the Greek philosopher Epicurus
worried at length about the fear of death and came up with a rather uplifting solution.
He said, in a very short phrase, death is nothing. And because it's nothing, it's nothing to be afraid
of. You're alive, you're having experiences, you're having some pleasures. And then suddenly,
you're not there anymore. No more experiences, no more pleasures. So what's the problem?
Now to put this in context, this is in the early centuries of the Christian era. And like so much
of the Middle East at the time, this was a time of apocalyptic sensibilities. So people were walking
around absolutely terrified about the end of everything, about what would happen to them
afterwards, about the wrath of the gods, or God, depending on what religion you accepted.
And Epicurus's great sort of therapeutic contribution was to point out that all this
was completely unnecessary. Live your life, get what you can out of it. Now he's well known for
emphasizing pleasures, but I think to say he emphasized virtue would be more accurate. But
the idea is that death is nothing, don't be afraid. You find a very similar philosophy
contemporarily in the French philosophy of Jean-Paul Sartre. Again, it's you've got your life,
it's important what you do with it, but once you're dead, you're gone. That's the end of it.
But of course it's not that simple, because many people believe in some form of an afterlife.
Now what is an afterlife? Well, that of course varies. If you believe in the Christian afterlife,
it might be a very rich experiential eternity. If you believe in reincarnation as well, like many
Asian philosophies do, then reincarnation isn't quite so cheery. You come back as something else,
and possibly if you haven't been a nice person, something a little bit less desirable. But in
any case, death is not the end. Death is a gateway to some other existence.
My suggestion is that what most people are afraid of when they're afraid of death
is not what will happen to the afterlife, because most people seem to be of the opinion that they're
going to heaven. It's sort of like when you ask people, are you above average in terms of certain
kinds of skills? 80% will say yes. Well, my sense is that 80% at least of the people who think that
there's an afterlife also think that they're going for the good place, not the bad place.
But it seems to me that what death is about and what we are worried about is not death,
but dying. And so it has to do with the sort of getting sick, being in pain, degeneration
of being towards death. It also has to do with worrying about last moments. And this is a part
of Western literature that is often downplayed. But for example, in ancient life, in the LA again,
what you find is that people are very concerned with how they die. Or in cowboy westerns,
it is very important to die with your boots on. To die of the flu is kind of degrading. But to be
shot standing in your boots, that's okay. So the basic idea here is that the moment of death
itself is significant, not death. The ultimate of this, of course, is Gerd's great play,
Faust, which of course represents a good deal of Christian thinking. But Faust, of course,
has sold his soul to the devil. He's done all sorts of nasty exploits. But just at the last minute,
he kind of recants. And at that point, as the play puts it, the angels come down and take
his little worm of a soul and lift it off the heaven. But the idea that one's last moment
means more than, in a sense, one's whole life, that too is a very powerful reason for worrying
about death. But there's something else that goes on here too. And I think it's something that's
typically ignored in particularly Western conceptions of death. And that is that most of these
conceptions of death, as I've described them, are solipsistic. They're very individualistic.
But when I worry about death, that's not what I think about. When I worry about death, I think about
my family. I think about my wife in particular. I think about the people I'm going to leave behind.
In other words, fear of death is already social. It's not about a fear of nothingness,
because why fear nothingness? It's not a fear of the afterlife about which I have my doubts.
And it's not even a fear of dying, which I'm not looking forward to. But nevertheless,
I'll get through that. But there's something more profound about death, and that's social,
which brings me directly back to grief. Because when we talk about grief, we often talk about loss.
But we talk about a loss in a kind of isolated way. And the way we think about grief is often
someone grieves, they withdraw, it's a breakdown in their emotional stability in general.
And consequently, they are stuck with his impossible desire that the person come back to life.
And that, of course, is absurd. But now, once you introduce the social dimension of grief,
and there's a name for this, of course, it's called mourning, once you introduce the social
dimension of grief, then the whole picture takes on a different cast. And these sort of
worries that I used to have about grief being a breakdown in emotions and being devoid of action
tendencies, and involving an impossible desire, all that starts to resolve itself and in the
following way. Instead of being a breakdown of one's normal emotional life, one can think of
grief as a kind of culmination, a sad culmination to be sure, but a culmination of one's emotional
life so far. And are there action tendencies? Well, yes. Withdrawing is a powerful action tendency.
And as a philosopher, especially, I'm surprised I didn't realize this much earlier. But it's the
powerful action tendency of withdrawing to rethink, to recapture, to reformulate the very nature of
one's life. Because what happens when you lose someone who's very close to you is that your life
is, in an important sense, shattered. Because remember, when we talked about love, one of the
pieces I tried to defend is that love is coming to identify yourself and identify yourself with
and through the other person. And that's your new identity. Well, in grief, that identity has been
shattered. But then the action, and it's a very important action indeed, is to withdraw and try
and get oneself together and figure out, okay, now who am I? But as for this impossible desire,
the desire that the deceased come back to life, it seems to me that that has a very real and very
practical manifestation. And it has to do with the morning ritual. And of course, morning rituals
are very different in different societies. I don't mean to collapse them all together,
except to make the following point, that morning and morning rituals in our society
are incredibly impoverished. We don't really give much attention to death, or grief,
or their meaning. In most lines of work, if you have a death in the family, even someone fairly
close, you get two or three personal days to attend to the funeral and the legal matters.
And then you're expected to be back at work and sort of operating up the snuff. In other societies,
I think much more realistically, grief goes on a long time. In fact, some societies, and perhaps
this is overdoing it, in some societies, grief goes on for an entire lifetime. You never get over it.
You're not supposed to get over it. But several months ago, I was in New Zealand, a place I often
love to visit, and I was invited to a Maori funeral. Now the Maori's are the local Polynesians there.
They have a very rich established society. And one of the interesting things that I found was
that first of all, a funeral doesn't go on for an hour, and then everybody goes back to work.
To awake or whatever. But a funeral goes on for weeks. And what happens in the funeral is that
the person who is bereaved is not allowed to retreat to his or her room and spend time alone.
But rather, he or she is more or less forced to spend time with the group. And the idea is that
they are still part of this culture. And what's more, the loss that they suffered is part of the
culture too. And the whole set of ceremonies, which includes such fascinating wrinkles that are
sort of unimaginable to us, as different people sort of abusing the dead person for, say, having
cheated at cards in the last several months or whatever. But it's continuing the family, the
cultural life, as it's been. The point being to say that all this is not an individual loss.
All of this is a loss to the community as a whole. And that's exactly how it should be treated.
Well, when we're talking about mourning here, we're also talking about something else.
Because one of the things that goes along with grief, I would argue, is a continuation
of the relationship, a continuation of love. So this impossible desire for the return of
the deceased may in itself be nonsense. But it spells itself out as something very palpable
and very real. Think for a moment. Washington DC has all these monuments. There's the Washington
Monument and the Lincoln Memorial and the Jefferson Memorial and, of course, dozens or hundreds of
others, all dedicated to different people who have made their mark on American culture.
At my university, there are many buildings, which are named after people who have more or less
recently died by way of commemoration. What's that about? Well, the truth is that we don't
think of someone who's lost as just plain lost. We love them and we still love them.
In fact, I would suggest that grief is the continuation of love. You might say it's the
other side of it, that we love them when they're here and now we love them while they're gone.
And this commemorative impulse is a profound action tendency in itself
so that we want to do something to keep them alive. Now, for someone like me, I write books.
How do I do it? Well, I dedicate a book to my mother or to my father, both deceased.
I dedicate a book to my friends as a way of saying, I love you. In short, the idea that
grief is simply a breakdown, devoid of action and action possibilities, it seems to me just plain
wrong. And when you add the social dimension, which is to say that grief is not something that
affects just an individual, but affects a whole society, then of course, this complex of action
tendencies and keeping the person alive is all the more impressive. And it also throws into relief.
The problem with the American way of death, which is to sort of push it aside and not think about it
as much as possible, because the truth is that death is an essential part of our lives. Very
few of us are willing to make the sacrifices that the ancient Stoics and the ancient Buddhists made,
cutting attachments as much as possible. And even they, of course, didn't really do it,
because the truth is we realize that love and grief are just two sides of the same coin.
Now let me finish the lecture on a more joyful note, because grief, in some cultures,
also carries with it a certain amount of laughter and joy. An Irish wake is perhaps an excellent
example, but what it is is, first of all, a commemoration, a celebration of the person who's
just been lost, but perhaps more importantly, it is also a celebration of being alive.
In longer lectures, I will sometimes talk about grief and gratitude at the same time,
because it seems to me these are two importantly kindred emotions. And it seems to me that an
important aspect of grief is precisely appreciating what it is to be alive and what it is to be
together and to have been together. And so there's a sense in which it is not so much
a loss as much as it's a continuing gain.
