Lecture 5 We Are Not Alone, Compassion and Empathy
In the last lecture on love, I mentioned a third kind of love in addition to Eros and
Philia, called Agape in Greek or Caritas in Latin. I didn't say much about it except to contrast it
briefly with Eros. Eros is inherently sexual or erotic. Agape by contrast is not. I also
mentioned that Agape has been greatly idealized, much more than Eros has, and in much of Christian
thought. The idea is that Agape is a kind of love of humanity, which is so perfect that
ultimately it's available only to God. I don't want to talk about theology here, and I don't
understand God's emotions, as I don't think anyone does. But nevertheless, there's a concept of
Agape that is very secular and very familiar. And I want to spend most of my time talking about
the 18th century, when this notion of Agape became very prevalent and was established as, in many
people's minds, the foundation of ethics and morality. The concept that evolves then was the
concept of sympathy, or what we call compassion. Interesting enough, both words in both English
and at least in German have the same basic root. Sympathy means feeling with. Compassion,
or in German, mitleid, also means feeling with. The most important figures here, in fact,
turned to be two Scots and a Swiss. David Hume is perhaps the most famous philosopher of the bunch.
Jean-Jacques Rousseau is perhaps the most famous political philosopher of the bunch. But the one
I'm going to be emphasizing the most is actually best known as an economist, although he was also
an excellent moral philosopher. And that's Adam Smith, who is often called the father of modern
economics and the father of capitalism. Of course, one finds such views, the idea that something like
sympathy or compassion lies at the very heart of morality. Going back all the way in history to sort
of switch continents as well as millennia, the Confucian philosopher Mincius in the third or
fourth century BC already was emphasizing that human nature is, by its very nature, compassionate.
As he put it, there's no human being so coarse alive who doesn't see, for example,
a child falling in a well and feel moved to help. Well, maybe Mincius was a little bit optimistic,
but I think the idea, the compassion, is the very heart of morality, the very heart of ethics,
is absolutely right. That's a view that was challenged, of course, in the 19th century by
great many philosophers. And in the 20th century, people still have their doubts about it. In fact,
the very word compassion has inspired all sorts of interesting controversies up until the present.
I remember the 1980s in American politics, there were a good many conservatives who
decried and despised what they called compassion. And they called people who were overly compassionate,
liberal do-gooders. Interestingly enough, as we go to the end of the 20th century, what we find is
the phrase compassionate conservatism, about which I'm going to say virtually nothing, but it's very
interesting that just within the conservative movement, you have this radical shift in a period
of only a decade or so, from compassion as something which is suspicious, to compassion which is
something obviously desirable. Now, this idea of do-gooder is something that I want to talk
about as well, because there's an idea, and it certainly has a lot behind it, that compassionate
people often do more damage than good. Sometimes this is the product of an ideology which I don't
particularly accept, which is that ideally people should be selfish and just look out for themselves.
And then there's a picture that is wrongly attributed to Adam Smith, that that'll work out best for
everyone involved. On the other hand, I think it's true that people who are compassionate or
sympathetic in the wrong way often do cause a lot of damage. Back in the 19th century, this was
again a matter of considerable dispute. The German philosopher Schopenhauer, who was otherwise known
for his cranky pessimism, thought indeed that compassion, or sympathy, was the basic emotion
without which there could be no ethics, no morality. Friedrich Nietzsche, about whom I've
talked about extensively in another course, had the opposite view. He thought, like many
conservatives today, that do-goaters, people who were overwhelmed by what he called pity,
interestingly enough, a translation of the same word, mitleid from German, as opposed to compassion,
that people who expressed pity really did a lot of damage both to themselves and to the world.
Now, why is this all so important? Well, to put it in a certain context, in the 17th century there
was a reigning philosophy which sort of followed the tail end of the Renaissance, and basically
that philosophy was a philosophy of human nature. And in the words of Thomas Hobbes, perhaps its
most artful proponent, the philosophy was that people are basically, by nature, selfish. That
human society, as he put it, was in the state of nature, that is before the formation of society,
as such, a war of everyone against everyone. And consequently, human life was nasty, brutish,
and short. A wonderful phrase, diabolical, I'd say. And it's against this that Hume and Rousseau,
and Adam Smith and others, came up with a novel thesis, or at least a thesis that was novel at
the time. And that was, to put it quite simply, people are not selfish. And it's not to deny that
people have self-interest, or that they often act selfishly, but rather to sort of highlight
selfishness as the heart of human nature, and ignore sympathy as equally a part of human nature was
just overly pessimistic, overly cynical, and biologically just plain wrong. And so they developed
the idea of sympathy, and several other emotions, as what they called moral sentiments. And the idea
is that these lie at the very heart of human nature, and to understand how people behave, or why
people behave as they do, you have to understand both the fact that they are sometimes selfish,
but they are also moved by sympathy of other people with no self-interest at all.
Now the problem, in the 18th century, when Smith and Hume used the word sympathy,
this was an ambiguous term, and it was ambiguous in at least two different ways. First of all,
sympathy can be described as a disposition, and so one can be sympathetic, or one can be compassionate,
and this sort of says something about how they will behave in all sorts of situations.
On the other hand, they talked about sympathy as if it were an act of emotion, something that actually
moved you on particular occasions. And of course, this isn't the problem, because it might be that we
have a disposition to be compassionate, or sympathetic, and on those events when this is provoked,
or evoked, then we are compassionate. But there's another ambiguity which is much more serious.
And it's one that they had a hard time resolving, partly because they didn't have a word for it.
On the one hand, they used the word sympathy, much as we do, where sympathy is, I suppose the
phrase is, feeling sorry for someone else. So they're in pain, or they're suffering, or they're in bad
shape, and so we in some sense suffer with them. But that already suggests a kind of ambiguity,
because do we really suffer with them? I mean, if you've just been fired from your job,
and I have a lot of sympathy for you, but I've still got my job, is it plausible that what I feel
is as if I've just lost my job? Or if you've just broken your leg in a skiing accident,
and I'm there on the slopes looking down at you as you're writhing in pain.
I might be very sympathetic, but is it even plausible to suppose that suddenly my leg hurts
the way your leg does? Well, what was clearly at stake here was some different meaning of the
word sympathy. And so it's divided now into two, and we have two different concepts to talk about,
pretty much the same kind of phenomenon. First, there's sympathy properly speaking,
which is feeling sorry for someone. As it stands, that's going to turn out to be the least or less
interesting of the two meanings. The other is what we now call empathy. And empathy has the
interesting feature that it doesn't depend just on feeling sorry for someone's misfortunes,
but empathy has to do with what we call sharing an emotion, any emotion, with another person.
So if we empathize with someone, we might very well empathize with their joys.
A friend of mine has just won a big award, and I feel great for him, and that's empathy. It's not
sympathy, except in a very odd use, I might have mixed feelings, but empathy means that I share
whatever emotion he or she has. This is very much like a German concept that came into play,
basically in the 19th century, the concept of Verstain, which literally translated means
understanding. But in the context that's used here, it means empathy. I understand how you feel,
with the implication that I feel something like that too.
Now, there are lots of things that seem like empathy, or sympathy, but aren't. For example,
if an infant notices that its mother is very upset, the infant will get upset too.
But it's not as if the infant is being empathetic, and certainly not sympathetic,
because the infant doesn't have any concept of what the mother is feeling.
Now, I don't deny that it's a very real feeling on the part of the infant, but I want to say it's not
yet empathy, and I'll talk more about that in a while. There's another sense of empathy, which is
clearly not praiseworthy, and I think not what Adam Smith and David Hume had in mind.
And that is a kind of self-absorbed shared feeling, where you're fired from your job,
and I feel terrible, but I don't feel so much terrible for you. I think, gee, I might be fired
from my job, and so suddenly I start feeling sorry for myself, or you catch a bad flu,
and I seem to be sympathetic, but in fact what I'm worried about is my catching the flu.
So when what I'm worried about is myself, and not about you, I want to say that's not empathy,
even if there's a sense in which I'm feeling bad about the same thing that you're feeling bad about.
In the same way, shared feelings might not be a matter of empathy. Let's say, same skiing slope,
and in this case, we both break our legs. We're both writhing in pain. There's an obvious
sense, and we do share the feeling, but not because we empathize or sympathize with one another,
we just both have the same problem. And so too, if it's a case of straightforward emotion,
we've both been fired from our jobs, and we might very well commiserate, we might go out and have
a couple beers and talk about it and all that, but despite the fact that we're sharing feelings,
that's not empathy. Empathy is when I've suffered something, or you've suffered something,
and it's not the same thing. So there's a kind of transfer of emotion, and of course that's where
it gets rather mysterious. What does that mean? As I say, you break your leg, I sympathize with you,
I empathize with you, but I don't have the feeling of a broken leg. You've lost your job, I empathize
with you, I sympathize with you, but I don't have the feeling of having lost my job. So what does this
mean? And then of course, there's one last sort of false sense of empathy, and that's when I get
so upset when, for example, I visit you in the hospital and see how poorly you're doing,
that I can't stand to be around you. So you're upset, and I get upset, but it's clearly not
an empathetic sort of upset. It's rather, I just want to get away from you. And one of the unfortunate
things in the current economy, for example, is many people who lose their jobs or get divorced
find that instead of rallying around them and giving them support, their friends have this sort
of aversive reaction. And so people who have been fired or people who have been divorced often find
themselves very much alone. And that of course is a different kind of problem. I'm a sociologist,
so I'm not going to talk about that. But there's a general paradox that sort of resides here,
because I started by making the contrast between self-interest on the one hand and the idea that
people are naturally selfish, and the idea that people are sympathetic or compassionate, and
that that's part of their nature. But that presumes a very clear distinction, which I don't think is
there. Now there are philosophers who have made a great deal of that. Nietzsche in his early writing
certainly makes a great deal of it and talks about self-interest versus altruism. The philosopher
Ein Rand much more recently has in a rather, I would say, crude way, opposed selfishness on the
one hand and altruism, clearly favoring selfishness. But it seems to me that there's a real problem
here. And let me give an example from Adam Smith, or sort of an example from Adam Smith.
If you ask people, what do they really want appealing to their self-interest? They will often
tell you something that, for example, has to do with personal acquisition or possession. When I do
this with my business students, very often one of them will say something like, well, what I really
want is a really fast car, let's say a Porsche Carrera or something like that. And I say, oh,
that's good. What do you want that for? And they give me all this guff about, well, it's beautiful,
it's fast, it goes 190 miles an hour. And I remind them, you can't go more than 35 miles an hour in
Austin, even when it's not rush hour. And so they start thinking, well, what do I really want this
for? And eventually it comes out. Well, because people will think that I'm cool. No, I don't
tell them what people often think about Porsche owners. But what is clear here is that what they're
doing when they say, here's why I want what I want is because it will impress other people. Now,
that is very interesting because something that impresses other people will, in effect, please
them as well. Now, this is leaving aside questions of envy, which we'll get to in a future lecture.
But for the most part, what we want for ourselves isn't just selfish, but it in fact satisfies
other people's interest as well. What we want is to be respected. What we want is to have our behavior
approved of. What we want, at least in some cases, is love. And that kind of breaks down the distinction
between self-interest on the one hand and doing things for other people. So I want to say this
is a lot more complicated than at first it looks. Now, I've already raised the question about what
is it one feels when one sympathizes or empathizes with another person. Let me start with something
that's easy, although it's not quite an emotion yet. And that is sympathizing or empathizing
or understanding, having for stand, for another person's pain. Now, what's really interesting is
how far down the scale of other activity this goes, because when I look at a worm
on the sidewalk and it's been stepped on, but the half that's not squashed is still wriggling around.
There's a part of me that goes, ooh, and it's not discussed. I think it's genuine empathy. Now, do I
know how a worm feels? Or even as a quasi-scientist, do I have any idea that worms have feelings? Well,
it's hard to deny that worms seem to feel pain. And it seems to me that there's something that goes
wrong when people are taught in the name of behaviorism or in the name of some cruder philosophy
that animals don't feel pain. When a great philosopher like Descartes used to vivisect
live animals to see what made them tick, today we want to cringe and say, what must be wrong
with a philosophy if that could be one of its conclusions? So on the scale of pain, I want to say
we very often can feel empathy or sympathy, even for creatures who are totally different from us
and creatures whom we might very well hesitate to ascribe emotions at all. Well, what about emotions?
Now, in a previous lecture, I sort of flippantly mentioned feeling something like empathy for
animals that are rather primitive, insects, for example, or perhaps reptiles or amphibians.
Can they feel emotions? And more importantly, for this lecture, can we feel emotions on their
behalf? So when I see that a snake has been run over by a car, snakes are much more sophisticated
than worms, and they have nervous systems which are somewhat similar to ours, am I correct in saying
and feeling that the snake is in pain? Or if I watch a snake chase after a prey and it fails,
am I right in feeling something like empathy or sympathy for its frustration? And of course,
as we go up to, say, birds and mammals, we have very little hesitation in most of us at all,
again, unless we're in some ideological spell of behaviorism, for example. So one thing to say
here is that it looks like we do a lot of empathizing with creatures very different from ourselves.
But the question here is how do we do that? One accusation, of course, is that we're just
anthropomorphizing, we're treating them as if they were human. I think that's unfair. But in
order to sort of get at that, I want to say there are different levels in which you can empathize
or sympathize with another creature or another person. The lowest level, I think, is something
that psychologists now call emotional contagion. Now, emotional contagion is very primitive.
It's unthinking. It might even be hardwired. Some of the neurologists these days talk about
mirror neurons, which essentially mirror another creature or another person's activities.
This is what's going on in the infant when, for example, its mother is all upset and it gets
upset too. It's a kind of emotional contagion, and I think the sort of epidemic sort of implication
of that is perhaps unfortunate, but it also is revealing that you don't have to do much thinking
or understanding in order to share another person's emotions in this sense. But there's also a kind of
receptivity. And receptivity is more than simple emotional contagion, but it's less than sympathy
and empathy, as, for example, the great philosophers of the 18th century talked about it. Because what
they talked about, and I'll come back to this in a moment, is empathy, sympathy as a kind of
imaginative activity. Now, this is something we talk about all the time. We talk about putting
ourselves in the other person's shoes. We talk about imagining ourselves in their position.
But in fact, I want to say this is a very sophisticated activity. Receptivity is much more
primitive. No noddings. Very good feminist philosopher who's written extensively on education
and also on the notion of caring, which is akin to the emotions I'm talking about, has written,
I think quite wisely, that when a mother feels uncomfortable because she sees her baby who's
screaming and riding around because he or she is wet, it's not as if the mother asks herself,
how would I feel if I were a baby sitting around in a urine-soaked nappy? It's rather the mother
simply sees the baby and immediately is receptive to the baby's discomfort. And I think she's right
about this. And I think Adam Smith and David Hume are often wrong when they seem to think
that it's a very sophisticated act of imagination that goes into this kind of effort. Nevertheless,
they're right about a kind of sympathy or empathy, because very often it is imagination that's at
stake. That one does have to sort of think, what would it be like to be this other person?
What would it be like to have this happen to me? And especially when we're talking about cases which
people are very different, and let's not even talk about animals at this point, but people who are
in very different kinds of situations, someone who lives in poverty, I don't, someone who lives
under oppression, I don't, and I have to ask myself, what would it be like to have this happen to me?
And that takes imagination. It also takes work. And the work here is a kind of intellectual work.
And here's where we get back to the do-gooder idea, because there is a sense in which you can
sympathize or empathize with a person's suffering or a person's discomfort,
and not really understand what's about it all. So for example, some people would argue that when
you see someone who's in poverty, that just giving them money by itself won't do much good.
Now, again, forget about the sociology of this, but the idea is that what you have to understand is
what the person really needs, what the person really wants. Perhaps what he or she wants is a job.
Perhaps what he or she wants is respect. Perhaps what he or she wants is acknowledgement as a
fellow human being, as much as they want money, which can often be sort of condescending and even
cruel. So there's a sense in which one has to have knowledge of the other person or other creature
in order to do what's best for them. Here's an example from sort of animal behavior. Years ago,
there was a ruckus among the sort of animal rights people, because chickens were being raised in
these wire mesh cages. Now, forget about all the rest of the picture about food factories and so on.
But the claim was that wire mesh cages are a very cruel place to keep a chicken.
Now, if you think about yourself standing in a wire mesh cage without shoes or sandals or anything
else, it does sound fairly terrible. But if you actually ask a chicken what it prefers, and there
are ways of asking chickens what they prefer by giving them choices, it turns out that chickens
actually like wire mesh. That it's not a matter of suffering, but it's a matter on our part of
understanding what it is that the animals actually need. And of course, with other people, this is
also true. Now, if I try to empathize with an animal creature very different from myself, I often have
to do this kind of experimentation to see what it is they really want. In fact, for those of you who
have dogs and cats, it's very easy to sort of read our own feelings, emotions into them on the basis
of how we would feel in similar circumstances. But of course, this often fails. Dogs, for example,
like rules. Dogs like obeying orders. For most of us, certainly raised in this country,
the idea of simply rules and obedience is something that sounds sort of
antithetical to the true self. That's not the way dogs are. And any dog trainer will tell you
that a dog who is untrained is much less happy than a dog who is properly trained. Okay, but let's
leave the animals behind. I'm thinking, what is it for me to empathize with, say, the sufferings of
Joan of Arc centuries ago? She's a young girl. I'm not a young girl. She's French. I'm not French.
She is in a situation in which I cannot imagine myself. And of course, she comes from a poor,
basically peasant family. And so she's basically illiterate, uneducated, but highly religious,
all of which I have trouble imagining for myself. How would I go about empathizing with the suffering
of Joan of Arc? Well, I have to do a whole lot of reading is the short answer that I have to
understand the context. I have to understand something about how young girls feel. I have to
understand something about religious revelation. It's not that it's impossible, but it takes a lot
of work. Now, different kind of example. I wrote a book several years ago and did a course here
on the philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche. Now, Nietzsche is 19th century philosopher.
He's German. And those are slight differences from myself. I'm a 20th century American philosopher.
But nevertheless, there's enough about Nietzsche. First of all, the very idea of doing philosophy
and the background which I share in many ways with him and the worries which in many ways I share
with him that makes it much easier for me to understand what he's all about.
Then, the hardest case. There's empathizing with enemies. And this is perhaps the most important
thing that I'm going to worry about for this entire lecture, if not for the entire course.
Think about how Israelis and Palestinians can get along or even just work it out.
And the first thing that almost everyone agrees on is that they have to talk. But of course,
it's not just chatting about the weather in the Middle East. It's talking about their mutual
grievances, talking about how they feel sort of wronged by the other side, talking about history,
which conflicts in a very interesting way. But the first thing that this is all about
is about empathy. Because it's not just about, okay, here's my history and here's your history.
But it's about, okay, I understand something about what's going on in the Middle East.
Where you're coming from. And on the basis of that, maybe we can work something out.
So again, what we're talking about is empathy, sympathy. But it's no longer anything like
primitive, a matter of neurology, a matter of mere receptivity, but it's hard work. And yet,
I think most of us agree, it's the most important hard work that many people will ever do.
Finally, there's a presumption that Adam Smith shared with these other philosophers.
And it's that sympathy is part of human nature. It's a natural emotion. And I want to raise this
as a question. The question is, is it in fact natural? Some people have even suggested in
contemporary terms, that empathy is a basic emotion or sympathy is a basic emotion. It's
something that is somehow hardwired into us. On the other hand, there's lots of evidence
that sympathy and empathy are cultivated. They have to be taught. Now, some of the teaching
is pretty primitive. There have been quite a few experiments, many of them quite troubling,
many of them quite troubling with either infants or infant primates who have been raised
in inappropriate circumstances. In other words, raised without a mother or raised without a support
group. And one of the things that is becoming understood is that to be so deprived early
on in life is to blunt, among other things, your capacity to empathize with other people.
But let me end on a much happier note. I've been talking about Adam Smith periodically throughout
this lecture, who is, as I say, one of my favorite philosophers, as well as a great economist.
But let me talk about the economics for a moment. Because capitalism, the free market system,
is often described in Adam Smith's supposed words as if it is a system of selfishness.
The economist Thomas Sowell years ago raised the question for his students,
find me in the 500 so pages of Wealth of Nations, one reference that Adam Smith makes
that praises selfishness. And of course, the reason it's an interesting challenge is because
there are none. And we can understand that by understanding that Adam Smith did not have
this philosophy of selfishness. On the other hand, I want you to think about capitalism,
and I'm not going to defend capitalism in all of its forms. But it seems to me the following
is very revealing. You think about international relations for the most part, for much of human
history. And international relations for much of human history were dominated by warfare.
In warfare, the idea is to kill the other person. You don't try to understand him. You don't try
to understand his or her lot in life. You just try and wipe them out. And then of course, there's
religious missionary evangelicalism and so on, which of course is more prevalent in the so-called
Western religions. But let's not get into that. But again, it's not really a question of understanding
what the other person is feeling as much as convincing him or her of what you believe to be
true. Now compare that with the market. Because in the market, what you try to do is find customers.
How do you find customers? You find customers by looking at other people and asking,
what do they really want? How do they really feel? So it seems to me that right understanding
of Adam Smith is not that capitalism is based on selfishness and self-interest,
but rather capitalism, certainly at its best, is based on sympathy and empathy.
