The next half dozen or so lectures, I'd like to start bringing together some of the many
points that we've made in the last lectures on the individual emotions with an eye to
understanding what an emotion is and how emotions function their lives in a general way.
Now to do this, I'm going to start by exploding some myths and some misunderstandings that
I think we all carry around with us when we talk about emotions. Some of these are going
to be of a technical variety, but most are going to be pretty ordinary. In fact, one
of the disputes that I'd like to try and reconcile in the rest of these lectures is the dispute
that goes on between what we ordinarily think about emotions or what a lot of people these
days call folk psychology, and on the other hand, the sort of scientific image of emotions.
Folk psychology is dominated by what I would call ethical considerations, and I mean that
in a broad sort of way. Considerations of character, considerations of gossip, considerations
just about who you'd like to have as a friend or who you don't like. Science, on the other
hand, will have little to do with such questions, but rather it's worried about the facts and
how you measure the facts. So folk psychology tends to use precisely the language we've
been using so far, the language of emotion in general, the language of anger, fear, love,
shame, grief, and so on. Scientific psychology, on the other hand, is more worried about particular
phenomena. In the old days, this had to do with the kinds of bodily reactions that one
had when one got emotional, and these of course can be very carefully measured. Today, with
an enormous amount of sophistication, neurology has opened the doors to a new kind of understanding
of emotions. So now we have some very sophisticated machinery, FMRA machines and PET scans, which
can tell us in remarkable detail just what parts of the brain get excited or what parts
of the brain have increased blood flow in what kinds of emotional states and so on. But
all this is still very factual, and it all depends almost obsessively on the question
of measurement. But these two different visions, the folk psychological vision and the scientific
vision, are quite different and often quite opposed. And one of the things I'd like to
try to do is to say how they come together. Now, they're conflicts of another sort, and
I don't pretend that these exactly match up to the folk psychology image or the scientific
image. But one is between the idea, and this is a very common sense idea, that emotions
are feelings. By contrast, the picture I've tried to sneak into all of my analyses of
emotions so far, is that emotions aren't really feelings at all. They might involve some feelings,
but emotions are basically engagements with the world. And it's these engagements that
involve what we're calling emotional intelligence, because they're not just some engagement or
they're not blind. They're not crude. But they are sometimes very exquisite, with a lot of finesse
and a lot of subtlety. And that's the aspect of emotion that I really want to understand.
And there's one other question here. There's also a kind of dispute that's been going on for
thousands of years. And that is, to what extent we suffer from our emotions? To what extent they
render us victims? The original word for emotion, the word pathé, which is Greek, which Aristotle
essentially made up, means suffering. And we talk about the passion of Christ, meaning the
sufferings of Christ. And we talk about passions as something that is undergone, or passions
sweeping us away. But what I want to entertain is at least the idea that emotions are of a very
different sort. That emotions are things that we do. That emotions, as I said in one of the
early lectures, can be strategies, ways of manipulating the world, ways of cultivating
ourselves, ways of getting what we want. And this is a very different picture indeed.
If emotions are sufferings, people are not responsible. We feel sorry for them. We might try
to ease their suffering, but the question of responsibility, and especially the question
of blame, doesn't really enter in. On the other hand, if emotions are things that we do,
then there's a lot of room for talking about responsibility, and sometimes for talking about
blame. Now evidence for this in a perfectly ordinary sense goes along the lines of noticing
that when we talk about emotions, we don't just talk about emotions, we don't talk about emotions
as facts, but we evaluate them. And we evaluate them in sometimes some pretty harsh ways. We say
of someone, he's a fool to fall in love with her. Or we say of someone, he has no right to be angry.
Or we say of someone, there's no need for him to be ashamed. And these evaluations are not just
stating facts, but they're bringing in the whole nature of our way of viewing other people, our way
of judging character, our way of talking about responsibility, and so on. And built into each
one of these is something like, if he's foolish to fall in love with her, then he should not have
fallen in love with her. If he has no need to be ashamed, then he should not be ashamed.
And so the question is how this whole language of evaluation fits in with the psychology that
we're trying to develop. Folk psychology, as I mentioned, it's all running an intrinsic part of
it. Science, on the other hand, likes to think of itself as value free. And the question is whether
the scientific picture, therefore, can give us the whole picture. And what I'd like to do is start
with an example. I call it James and the Bear. Sounds like a children's story. But I have a very
particular James in mind. And that's the great philosopher, psychologist, William James, who
wrote at the end of the 19th century, beginning of the 20th. Because James in several of his most
famous essays on emotion, produces the following example. He describes himself walking through
the woods. And you have to think about the woods of New England, more than 100 years ago, when there
was still significant wildlife and so on. And James is walking through the woods and out from behind
a tree steps, an enormous black bear. Now, most of us, I think, would have the same kind of response
to the bear, namely fear. And James analyzes his reaction to seeing the bear in the following way.
First, of course, there's this very disturbing perception. He sees the bear. The perception,
in turn, causes in him a distinctive physiological response. And he can describe that response
in considerable detail. For example, hairs in the back of his head stand up. He suddenly feels weak
in the knees. He feels a bit drained. He feels a bit frozen. And of course, he has this very strong
impulse to run. That set of physiological responses, in turn, cause a set of sensations, namely the
feeling of the hair standing up behind your head, the feeling of feeling weak in the knees,
and other feelings, too. His analysis, then, is that the emotion, first of all, depends on a
physiological process, which is triggered by a disturbing perception. But it's the process itself
that's the core focus. But the emotion isn't just the physiological process. The emotion is the end
result, which is the feeling or the set of sensations. Now, in other essays, James sort of dismisses this
by way of talking about consciousness in general and feelings in particular, as what he calls
epiphenomena. And they are, to use an example I used in an earlier lecture, sort of like the
gas gauge on your car, which sort of shows you what's happening in your gas tank. But, of course,
you can't do anything with the gauge to fill the gas tank. It's a one-way causation.
The idea here is that the physiology registers in our mind as a feeling. But the feeling itself
really doesn't do any work. It's the physiology that does the work. Now, what's important about this
story, and it really has determined the sort of history of psychology ever since, is that James
shifts the attention in emotion to the physiological responses. And the feelings are, to be sure,
there. But the feelings themselves are not of great significance. Now, in one way, you might say,
what James is doing here is staying captive of a very old tradition in philosophy and psychology.
Psychology, I'm thinking of, goes back in particular to John Locke, the early empiricist,
who also treated all sorts of mental entities, and so on, as feelings, or more properly, as
sensations. But these sensations were, in a way, caused by the body, but they were kind of detached
and independent. And the whole idea of empiricism was that you understand everything by appeal to
experience, and namely, these sensations. But then there's a question of how you sort of explain
the sensations, because the odd things about feelings and sensations is you can't really describe them.
I mean, if I have a sensation of blue, I can say it's blue, but if you ask me, well, what does blue
look like, I'm really kind of stuck. And the problem with a lot of the feelings that James
talks about in emotions is, what does it look like, or what does it feel like? All I can say is,
well, it's the feeling I have when the hairs stick up behind my head, or something like that.
So what James is doing here, I think, because James himself is an empiricist,
is carrying on a tradition that goes back, at least to John Locke, and there are great many
other philosophers and psychologists in between, which sort of holds onto the idea that whenever
an emotion is, it must be a feeling, or a sense of sensations. But nevertheless, he has sort of
shifted the emphasis to the physiology, and that's what's important. Now, if we fast forward to
contemporary neurology, we find the same thesis being defended once again, this time by a very
sophisticated neurophysiologist named Tony de Massio, whom I've mentioned before, who says that
essentially the feeling involved in an emotion is the feeling of what's happening in the body,
but in this case, what's happening in the brain. James was talking primarily about what he called,
or what we call the autonomic nervous system. James referred to the viscera. So it's sort of
what has happened to your superficial body. And so it's the feelings of the hair in your head,
the feelings of a stomach tightening up or something. With de Massio, it's much more sophisticated,
and it says, no, it's the feeling of what happens in your brain, but it's the same thesis.
And it's a thesis I'd like to challenge, because it seems to me that it's a thesis that downplays
everything that's really important about emotions, because one can take James and take de Massio
and ask simply, what would happen if there were no feelings there? What if it were just the
neurological or just the physiological response? And that, in fact, is what Joe Ladoo, who also
have talked about, suggests that the emotion is the physiological response and consciousness,
the feeling is sort of secondary. Now, one thing to say is that James's theory was challenged,
seriously challenged, very soon after he came up with it. Cannon, who was a very famous physiologist,
biologist in his own right, suggested within a few years of James's theory that the truth is that
the number of physiological responses in the autonomic nervous system and consequently the
number of feelings that were possible as a result of that were quite limited. And if you think about
the number of emotions that we have, and even just a superficial list would go well into the hundreds,
you just don't have the physiological variability to capture that kind of variability in our
emotion repertoire. So that was kind of an early warning sign with the modern neurology, of course,
that's been corrected because there's plenty of possibilities in the brain. But right now,
I want to stick with the Jamesian theory, because it seems to me that it's vulnerable in all sorts
of interesting ways. First question is, what about these disturbing perceptions? These, sorry,
what about these disturbing sensations? The feeling of being flushed, the feeling of hair
standing up, the feeling of being weak in the knees or weak in the bowels, the feeling of being cold,
shivering. These are all, in my mind, very similar to the feelings one has when one catches the flu.
So if James is walking through the woods and spies the bear, and suddenly has this sort of onslaught
of these physiological responses, what's to prevent him from concluding, right plausibly,
that, oh my goodness, I've gotten the flu again? Well, it sounds kind of silly. But why? Because
what distinguishes the feelings of the flu from the feelings of fear? And the only self-serving
and question-begging answer is, well, because they're the feelings you have when you're afraid
as opposed to the feelings you have when you have the flu. But that's not really good enough.
Second query is even stranger and indulge me here. James walks through the woods, he sees the bear,
and he suddenly has this emotional reaction characterized by these physiological responses.
What emotion is he feeling? Now, presumably, what we'd say is, well, fear, of course, it's a bear.
But suppose James, who's not as far as I know, a particularly romantic person,
but suppose James came to the conclusion, oh my goodness, I'm in love again. Because after all,
think about when you were 13 or 14 and you fell in love for the first time. And what you had were
symptoms which, once again, were awfully flu-like. And of course, the side question is, why would we
think this is a good thing, much less celebrated as the high point of human life? But leave that aside.
The very question, why think that this emotion is fear as opposed to love or as opposed to any
number of other sorts of emotions is really pretty profound. Because there's nothing in the physiology.
There is nothing in the sensations that clues us in what particular emotion we're feeling.
And part of the explanation for this might be traced back to Cannon and his claim that there
aren't enough different physiological responses to explain the great variability of emotions.
But the most serious challenge here is what about the perception? Now, as James describes his fear
at seeing the bear, the perception, the disturbing perception of seeing the bear
only acts as a trigger. So it's as if someone pushed a button and then the physiological response
takes place and then the sensations follow. But what's the nature of the button? And the most
important realization here is what I've been saying covertly or long. And that is emotions,
whatever else they may be, are an engagement with the world. That's not to deny that there's a whole
lot of physiology going on. I have never for a second question the idea that the brain is always
operating in any mental activity. And it doesn't deny that there are feelings. We'll talk about
those feelings in a while. But the most important point is that an emotion is about the world.
It engages with the world. And that means it has what philosophers call intentionality.
And what's missing from this whole theory is any adequate concept of intentionality. Now,
one can sneak intentionality into the analysis, and this has been tried by great many of James's
fans, namely that the perception itself is about the world. But of course, the physiology is not,
and the feeling is not. So what James is doing here on this interpretation is misdescribing
his own feeling, that it's really the perception that's doing all the work and not the rest of it.
So what I want to suggest is that James has, in a way, set us off in the wrong path. That to
understand what an emotion is, isn't to understand the physiology of it, although, again, I don't want
to dismiss this. This is fascinating work that's being done. But to understand an emotion is,
first of all, to understand what our nature of engagement is. Now, the very idea of a feeling,
raises all sorts of intriguing problems. First of all, there's a problem that I'll describe
in the next couple of lectures, which is the problem of Cartesian privacy. And this has been an
enormous stumbling block in science. The most famous example of it, and the most enduring example,
was in the whole 50-year movement of behaviorism. Psychologists, quite rightly, thought of themselves
as scientists, and therefore thought of themselves as being capable of dealing only with measurable
facts. Well, you can measure physiological responses. You can put a skin thing on to find out what your
skin conductance is. You can certainly measure a person's pulse, a person's blood pressure,
and all of that. Those are facts. You can also determine the facts of a person's environment.
So the sort of orthodox behaviorists would very carefully lay out here are the conditions of
the situation, and here are the conditions of what they call the reinforcement and so on.
And here is the response, which could also be measured in various sorts of ways. But if you're
asking, well, how do you measure feelings? How do you measure consciousness? The answer is, well,
you can't. And for some good old philosophical reasons, I can't have anybody else's experience,
and they can't have mine. So what I feel, I can tell you, but of course I could be lying,
or I could be mistaken. And so there's this whole question about what psychology should be about.
And it's early in the 20th century, not surprising, that psychology turns from
being the study of the psyche, which is what the word means, to the study of behavior,
which is the way it's usually described still. But the problem here is, what do we do with these
inner feelings? Because we can't measure them, and so the question is, do we have a right to
talk about them at all? And what kind of feelings are we talking about? Because feelings are a very
broad word. On the one hand, I have a feeling when you drip cold water down the middle of my back.
I have a feeling when you step on my toe. But I also have a feeling when, for example,
I'm in a geometry class, and I say, that proof just doesn't feel right.
Or when I'm in a situation, and I say something feels out of place. In other words, feelings also
embrace what we often call intuitions. Intuitions, as opposed to mere sensations, can be very informed.
Intuitions can be very insightful. And so if you think about the range between feeling the cold
water run down your back, and for example, the feeling Einstein had when he did an early draft of
the special theory of relativity and said, that doesn't quite feel right. Feelings incurred
and compass, and a whole lot of territory. Now, what I'd like to say by way of a crude diagram is
that feelings is almost the entire realm of consciousness. Whereas emotions are a very specific
subset of those feelings. And what's more, they're not just feelings, but they're feelings plus a
whole lot. In fact, in a later lecture, I will argue that the feelings themselves are feelings of
feelings of our engagements in the world. They're not feelings plus engagements in the world.
Another problem here is that I've pointed out in several of the lectures that emotions tend to be
processes. And that is their flux. James himself caught this very nicely when he talked, he made
up the metaphor, in fact, of the stream of consciousness. And so you think about love,
and you think about grief, both emotions which involve lots of other emotions as well,
and all sorts of changes. And so the question is, well, what exactly is the love? What exactly is
the grief? Because the feeling theory, as it's been described, tied to a very particular set of
physiological responses, makes it sound as if an emotion is only going to be a very short duration
experience of a particular kind. Whereas these examples would suggest that an emotion is
something much more complicated. And also the idea, which cuts very deeply, is the idea that we tend
to think of emotions in terms of being discrete entities. We have words, anger, fear, love, shame,
jealousy. And so it's as if we were to think, well, there must be things in the mind
that correspond to those names. But one of the things we'll explore in the next quite a few
lectures is the way that these are not so discrete at all. In fact, language not only picks them out,
but language kind of carves them up. So one important wrinkle in all this is going to be
that the word we use in English for anger, and the word, for example, that the Hawaiians and
Polynesians in general use for anger, riri, might not in fact refer to the same emotion at all.
And the word we use for love, we like to think it's universal. But maybe it's not. Maybe it refers
to a very specific Western form of love. And in general, there might be words in languages, Japanese,
for example, that refer to emotions which are virtually wholly unknown to us. And consequently,
we might have words for emotions that don't refer to other experiences that people have.
And of course, put on top of this the idea, the old romantic idea, that everyone's emotions are
unique. So that my love, for example, is different from your love. And everyone's love is something
sweet generous. It's not like anyone else's. That of course shuts down conversation pretty fast,
but it also makes it impossible to understand how we would talk about these feelings that supposedly
constitute emotions. So to go back to this, what I want to suggest, and I'm only doing it very
briefly for now, is that emotions are very different from feelings. Or they may encompass
feelings, but they're much more than feelings. Emotions can be evaluated. Emotions fit into
our ethical life in a profound sort of way. Emotions are not just evaluations, but they're
also engagements, which is why when I talked in the last lecture, for example, I said that emotions
generally tend to be tied to action tendencies, because they're not simply ways of observing the
world. They're ways of acting in the world. And the distinction between an emotion and its expression
and the actions through which it is acted out, to me, are sort of negligible differences. That
it's all one phenomenon. And we're going to talk about that too. Finally, just a couple caveats.
It's often said that you can't really reproduce an emotion by understanding it. And this is put in
various ways, but it has a real punch to it. Because just to use an obvious example, I'm going to give a
lecture late in the series on laughter and humor. And I always feel very uncomfortable giving this
lecture, because every time I do, people think it's going to be really funny. But of course, the
truth is, lecturing about laughter doesn't in itself usually cause laughter. In fact, it's worse,
because in lecturing about laughter, among other things, we're going to be explaining some jokes.
And we all know that nothing is less funny than a joke explained. So don't expect to be
talking about emotions to necessarily produce the emotions. I hope you didn't get angry when I was
lecturing about anger. I hope you didn't get terrified when I was talking about fear. I don't
really care whether you fell in love when I was talking about love. But the basic idea is that
emotions and their descriptions are quite different. And we're going to have to talk about that
relationship. Secondly, it's often thought that talking about an emotion somehow diminishes it.
So that if I talk about my anger, that's a way of getting rid of it. Or in Aristotle's terms,
that's a way of catharting my anger, getting rid of it. But the truth is often the opposite.
Sometimes, if I'm angry for a bad reason, or unreasonably, I will talk about the anger and
the very act of talking about it makes me realize how unreasonable I've been. And the anger disappears.
But other times, if I'm righteously angry, I talk about my anger. And that talk actually
reminds me about how righteous I am, how correct I am. And as you start coming into the conversation
too, I'm encouraged. So reflecting on one's anger or talking about one's anger can actually increase
it. And of course, that's true with other emotions, love notoriously. The more you talk about love,
and the more you talk about why you love the person you love, the stronger it gets.
And finally, what I want to do is I want to talk about the way that we can cultivate emotions,
because that's really the upshot of this set of lectures. That it's one thing to understand
emotions, and that's a very important thing. But the understanding is a means to an end.
Because what we ultimately want to do is make ourselves better people. And my argument in
general from now on is going to be that it's only by understanding our emotions,
only by reflecting on our emotions that we can do that, that we can actually change our emotional
outlook on life.
