Lecture 14 Emotions as Judgments
How do you know what you feel?
How do you know what emotions you have?
In this lecture, what I'd like to do is to elaborate on what I've been calling emotional
intelligence, and in particular to say more about what it means for an emotion to involve
concepts and judgments and evaluations and appraisals.
To know how you feel, there's a picture which we often buy without thinking much about it,
and that is we introspect, we look inside, and by looking inside you can see a peculiar
feeling of one kind or another.
What I've been trying to do for the last few lectures is to dispel that notion and say
that no, that's not what an emotion is, and that's not how you know what you're feeling.
But rather, an emotion is characterized by a way of seeing the world, a way of engaging
with the world.
And so you know what you feel by seeing what the world is like, at least what the world
is like to you.
So you know you're angry because suddenly the other person looks to you offensive.
You know you're in love because the other person looks to you just lovely.
Emotions are constituted, I say, by judgments.
The shorthand slogan is emotions are judgments.
But what that means is something that has to be elaborated.
On the one hand it's very similar to the theory that was argued by the ancient Stoics.
Emotions are not just feelings or what they called first movements, but emotions are the
judgments we make about those first movements.
I would say the emotions are the judgments, the evaluative judgments we make about the
world.
Now what kind of judgments would these be?
Well judgment is often construed as something very deliberative, very reflective by philosophers
in particular.
So you make a judgment about something and you ponder it, you weigh sides, you think
about it.
But we also make judgments of a very different kind.
When someone does something that you find offensive, you make a moral judgment or a judgment
of personal worth that is more or less instantaneous, which is spontaneous, which is not simply
a matter of thinking, but almost a matter of seeing.
We also make aesthetic judgments.
Aesthetic judgments, seeing something as beautiful, seeing a sunset, a beautiful painting, listening
to a piece of music.
And perhaps most of the point, we're always making kinesthetic judgments.
Kinesthetic judgments are by their very nature unconscious, or that is not focused on, not
attended to.
Now there are exceptions.
For example, when you walk along you're making dozens, or who knows how to count, hundreds
of kinesthetic judgments about where you're putting your foot, about how far your step
is, about the solidity of the ground.
And this becomes obvious only when in some sense these kinesthetic judgments are thwarted
or broken down.
So if you've slipped on the ice recently, or you've slipped on a slippery floor, but
it's just been washed, suddenly you'll be very careful and you'll be actually raising
the consciousness and making fully aware these kinds of judgments.
But that's not how we normally operate.
And so too I want to say, when people criticize the idea that emotions are judgments or emotions
are cognitive, by saying that, no, because we don't think about it, we don't deliberate
most emotions, I want to say, no, you're misunderstanding what the idea of a judgment
is.
Judgment is a way of evaluating, appraising the world, and it can happen in a very basic
bodily way.
It doesn't have to be in any sense fully conscious or deliberate.
Now to say that emotions are constituted by judgments, and that's how we know what
we feel, is to understand how we distinguish, often more or less spontaneously, between
different kinds of emotions we have.
And not just gross differences, like the difference between anger and fear, or the
difference between love and hate, but even much more subtle differences.
And that's where William James kind of got stuck, because even if he was right, that
all emotions involve something like arousal, physiological disturbance.
He was certainly not right when he pretended, or assumed, that this was enough to distinguish
one emotion from another.
And again, it was his opposition, Cannon, the wisdom of the body fellow, who made this
point rather straightforwardly.
There just aren't enough feelings, enough physiological changes, to account for the
huge number of emotions that we discriminate in our ordinary behavior.
There was an experiment about 40 years ago, in 1962, by two Columbia psychologists named
Schachter and Singer, which attracted a lot of attention.
On the one hand, they sort of bought into James, insofar as they agreed, that an emotion
had to do with arousal.
But they didn't buy the problem, that what an emotion is, has to be more than just plain
arousal.
The idea was, that on the one hand, you could stimulate the arousal.
There are any number of ways of doing this.
They did what probably you couldn't do in an undergraduate class today.
They gave vitamin shots, so-called.
But it was actually shots of adrenaline, which got people kind of hepped up.
And then they put them in different situations.
And they found, not surprisingly, that people described their emotion on the basis of the
situation, and not just on the basis of the feelings that they had.
The feelings were the same across the board.
But of course, the situation made it into one emotion rather than another.
Now Schachter and Singer characterized this as the labeling of emotion.
And I think that is a kind of misunderstanding of the profundity of their own experiment.
Because what they really showed was that an emotion is not about the feeling, but an
emotion is about, and is recognized in terms of, the way it perceives the world.
So if you're in an offensive situation, you will interpret your arousal as anger.
If you're in a fearful situation, you'll identify your arousal as fear, and so on.
So what they supplied was a hint, which was picked up by lots of other philosophers, and
some psychologists already had the apparatus of appraisal on hand to characterize this.
But what became obvious is that it's the way of perceiving the world that distinguishes
the different emotions.
The feelings, in a sense, are secondary, and even James is willing to say that there are
emotions, for example, aesthetic emotions, where the feelings are virtually imperceptible.
So what I'd like to do for the rest of this lecture is to say something about how we make
these discriminations.
And as I say, I don't want to just stick with the gross discriminations between anger
and fear, say, but rather the really minute discriminations, because I think that's how
we operate, and these minute discriminations are the ones that are most important to us.
Take one very prominent emotion family that we've talked about several times, and you
might call it the anger family.
There are lots of members of the family, but I just want to pick out three, anger being
one of them, irritation being another, and indignation being a third.
What's the difference between them?
Well, some people have tried to make it out in terms of intensity.
Irritation is just like an itch.
Anger is more like a pain, and indignation is more like agony.
But if you think about it, that makes no sense whatsoever.
One can be very, very irritated.
One can be all hopped up, too much coffee, not enough sleep, and this can be a kind of
overwhelming experience at the time.
And indignation can be very cool and calm.
Intensity in that sense doesn't seem to have anything to do with it.
In other words, it's not about arousal.
But when you're irritated, you see a situation as bothersome, but it's not as if you find
it offensive, and you certainly don't take it all that personally, except that it annoys
you.
Whereas in anger, what you see is a situation, which is truly offensive, but personally offensive,
and it wouldn't have any moral weight.
And by contrast, what you perceive is a situation, which is not just personally infuriating,
but a situation which is morally infuriating.
So there's some principle at stake, there's something which is much more than your personal
dignity or status or anything of this sort.
So when somebody asks you, well, what are you feeling now?
And you say, I'm angry, no, I guess I'm just irritated.
What you're doing is making a fairly profound moral distinction.
You're distinguishing between something that just bothers you and something that is genuinely
offensive, and that's a very subtle but important distinction to make.
Now this sort of thing goes all the way through the emotional world.
Let me go back to one that I talked about several lectures ago, the difference between
embarrassment and shame, and the difference then again between shame and guilt and perhaps
remorse and regret.
Again, feeling, well, it'd be pretty hard to distinguish exactly what the difference
in feelings might be.
But if we're talking about a way of engaging with the world, we've already seen that embarrassment
is a kind of innocent emotion.
You're caught in an awkward situation.
So the perception is you see yourself in an awkward situation, you become very self-conscious
in that sense, but it's not as if you blame yourself for anything.
It's something you'd like to get out of as quickly as possible and perhaps forget about
as soon as possible.
But nevertheless, when you're embarrassed, you just find yourself in an awkward situation.
When you're ashamed by contrast, there's a lot of self-blame.
You realize that what you've done is you've let your fellows down or you've violated
some important custom.
And so it's a very different kind of judgment than the judgment that goes into embarrassment.
The differences between shame and guilt are more subtle still.
It has to do with the nature of the violation, whether you see yourself primarily in terms
of some group or whether you see yourself as an individual.
But the idea, again, is it's a way of judging, a way of engaging in the world.
In remorse, you judge yourself as having done something really seriously wrong, serious
enough to perhaps ruin your life.
In regret by contrast, you see the situation as fairly routine.
It's something you wish you hadn't done.
As I said before, it could even just be pro forma.
It's just seeing the world with a certain kind of obligation, which can be settled just
by writing a little note, I regret that I missed your party and so on.
So the idea here is that the judgments involved in embarrassment, shame, guilt remorse, regret
and other such emotions have to do with responsibility.
Now when you think about it, this is profound.
Because when we think about emotions as simple, when we think about emotions as just feelings,
the idea of their involving such as sophisticated concept as the concept of responsibility doesn't
seem to fit at all.
But if you understand emotions as very sophisticated and cultivated ways of grappling with the
world, then the idea that responsibility is an essential component is essential.
Let's try a different example.
Take another emotion family.
This one, hatred, contempt and resentment.
Now in a sense, we might say all these are very similar.
They all have to do with very negative or hostile attitudes towards another person.
And so you might say, well, their variations are the same.
In fact, we even sort of confuse and conflate the three.
People often say, I hate you and what they really mean is I resent you.
And the reason why they would say the one rather than the other is itself quite revealing
and I'll get to another moment.
But let's look at the sort of conceptual difference between the three.
If you have contempt for someone, you tend to look down on them.
Now there's a whole lot of images here and it has to do, for example, with the fact that
teachers like to stand while the students sit.
It has to do with looking down quite literally, magistrates, judges usually have the highest
chair in the courtroom.
So there's this sense of contempt, which has a kind of vertical dimension to it.
And it's quite simply looking down at another person.
We have a phrase, someone can be beneath contempt.
And that, of course, just exaggerates the up-down imagery even more.
In contempt, one sees oneself as superior to the other person.
Now contrast that with resentment.
And we talked about resentment at some length and I introduced Nietzsche's discussion of
resentment and how it influences Judeo-Christian morality and all of that.
But the basic image of resentment is just the opposite.
The basic image of resentment is looking up.
It is resenting someone who is superior.
Either they're more powerful or they're luckier or they have more status or power or clout.
And so the idea is that resentment also shares in this kind of vertical perception.
But it's looking at someone upward, seeing them as a superior.
And so the difference between resentment and contempt, to put it very simply, is the difference
between looking up and looking down.
Now what about hatred?
Well, one of the interesting things about hatred, and one of the reasons why it is often
considered the opposite of love, is that it's not really opposite at all.
Of course, hatred is negative whereas love is very positive.
But hatred is an emotion of equality.
If you want to do a sort of mythology of hatred, it always comes out to be something like the
Black Knight and the White Knight, or good versus evil.
But these things have equal status in some sense.
But it's not a fixed contest, it's not mere resentment, it's not mere contempt.
But there's a sense in which hatred is between equals.
So if I look at the triad again, hatred, two things, two people are equal.
Resentment, one is up, one is down.
Contempt, the other is up, the other is down.
The difference here is one of status.
Now how this works, of course, is very complicated in practice.
Because we've seen in our history, for example, people who are in the most powerful positions
in government, and perhaps in the most powerful position on earth, namely, President of the
United States, who is filled with resentment because he, and some days she, doesn't have
enough power, or finds that he or she is thwarted in some important goal.
We also find that people who are, in fact, bums, just riffraff, have contempt, sometimes
even for their betters.
In fact, one of my favorite old comedies, which I'll talk about in a future lecture,
The Three Stooges is all about what one wonderful philosopher calls upward contempt, a wonderful
notion.
But the Three Stooges are, as you all know, real losers, fools, and so on.
That's why they're Stooges.
But the attitude they have towards their betters, towards the rich, the wealthy, the powerful,
has to do with having contempt for them precisely because they are better.
So this is a very complicated set of judgments, but they have to do with status.
And just as we should be a little bit surprised that responsibility is a very sophisticated
kind of judgment which enters into different kinds of emotions, so too the idea of status,
which is also very sophisticated, has to do with the nature of the culture and all sorts
of things, that too is part of an emotional judgment.
I also distinguish what I call emotions, emotional judgments of distance.
In love, one holds the other as closely as possible.
It's an intimate emotion.
And the very nature of the emotion is to see the other person as so intimate.
In fact, I argued in the love lecture that see the other person as part of oneself.
On the other hand, there are emotions, contempt would be one example, where we want someone
as far away as possible.
We just don't want to be contaminated.
And then there are lots of emotions that I would say hold the other at arm's length.
So anger is like this.
Most cases of anger, you don't want the person to sort of walk out on you.
That's even more offensive.
You want the person there to be judged.
And you want the person there to be looked at abusingly.
You want the other person there to be possibly punished.
But you don't want them too close.
So the idea is that in anger, there's a certain kind of intermediary distance, which is part
of, again, the components of the emotion.
There are other ideas too here.
Here are judgments.
For example, there's a difference between what you might call activity and passivity
built into the emotion itself.
Best example perhaps is the most obvious one in anger.
That's a very active emotion.
When you're angry, it takes a lot of willpower not to express anything, not to do something.
And that of course is what we learn when we learn to control our anger.
But at the same time, think of an emotion like sadness.
In sadness, we don't have any such impulse to do something.
And of course in grief, which is a very complicated extension of sadness, in grief what we tend
to do is just withdraw from the world.
And we tend not to feel active, not want to do anything at all.
But this here is another component of emotions.
Now the point I want to make about all this is that emotions are judgments, but they're
not single judgments.
One of the embarrassing things we find if you look back at the great philosophers and
psychologists who tried to characterize something like emotions as judgments or emotions as
cognitions or emotions as ways of seeing the world is they often get a kind of reduction
of all of this that I'm talking about to a series of one-liners.
So Descartes, writing about love and hate, says that love is the desire to be closer
to the loved one.
And hate is the desire to be as far away as possible from the hated one.
Spinoza, another great philosopher writing about emotions, talks as if each emotion can
be characterized by such a simple notion of jealousy is sort of an attitude of fearing
the loss of the loved one and so on.
Other examples, Thomas Hobbes.
Great philosophers, but what they still don't grasp is the enormous complexity of emotions.
So let me make the following point.
That an emotion is constituted not just by a single judgment or a single dimension of
judgment, but an emotion is a complex of judgments.
So if you think of an emotion like anger, what you see is that on the one hand it is
a judgment of a relationship with another person.
That's why, for example, it is inappropriate at least to get angry with a child and it is
inappropriate in a very different sense to get angry with your boss.
At the same time, anger is the judgment of offensiveness and what that means, again,
is going to be very particular to the situation and the culture and so on.
Anger is also, as Aristotle pointed out, a kind of need to write a situation to sort
of put things back in balance, and that's where the idea of vengeance comes from, but
that too is very context dependent.
And what kind of judgment that I've left out, you may be wondering why, because it's
the most obvious one, is the judgment of whether something is good or bad, positive
or negative.
And one way to describe the difference between love and hate, notably, is to say that love
is positive and hatred is negative.
And I don't say that first because it's obvious and everyone who talks about emotions, no
matter how primitive, will talk about something like pleasure and pain.
So an emotion is negative if it is painful or unpleasant, an emotion is positive if it
is somehow pleasant.
Well I don't mention it too because I find the distinction itself simple-minded and that's
what the next lecture is actually going to be on.
But to extend this idea that an emotion has to do with multi-dimensional different kinds
of judgments, which all converge, finally gives me a way of talking about what we began
the series by introducing, and that is the idea of a basic emotion.
And let me just sort of reiterate, a basic emotion, according to a great many contemporary
psychologists and neurologists, is an emotion that is part of an essential set.
It's what, in old terms, we used to say, it's basic to human nature.
And what makes it basic to human nature is that it is hardwired in some sense, that it
involves neurology and the musculature and perhaps the hormones.
And basically, well, it is basic because it is the same in all human beings.
And throughout my discussions here, I've been debating whether or not that's actually
true, that maybe there are many more cultural variables than people who talk about basic
emotions would allow, take the two most basic emotions or the two most frequently discussed
basic emotions, anger and fear, and one finds, for example, in different cultures that people
are obviously afraid of different things and different kinds of things make them angry.
And they express anger and fear in different ways.
They have different display rules about how you express anger and fear.
So the idea here is that it won't do to simply talk about basic emotions in this way, but
there's a question about whether certain sorts of physiological responses and so on are in
some sense inbuilt and whether they characterize some essential set of emotions.
And again, looking back at the great philosophers and psychologists, everyone has their favorite
list of which ones are basic, which ones are most essential, which ones are elemental.
Descartes had a nice list of six, Spinoza had a list of three and so on.
But here's a very different kind of suggestion.
If I'm right that an emotion is constituted by very different kinds or dimensions of judgment,
that it looks as if you could make a chart, although I don't have the geometrical skill
to do that, you can make a chart of many dimensions which would form a kind of matrix.
So here's a tantalizing suggestion.
One can imagine this multi-dimensional matrix in which various judgments come together.
So we have a point on the matrix, a node, where for example, a certain judgment of status,
a certain judgment of responsibility, a certain judgment of distance, a certain judgment of
activity versus passivity, and something like a judgment of good-bad exists, and that's
an emotion.
And then there's another node in the emotion that has a slightly different configuration
of judgments.
Now one can imagine each node in this very complicated matrix as an emotion.
Which ones are basic?
And the beauty of this picture as abstract as it is is that there are no basic emotions.
There are emotions that are this configuration and emotions that are this configuration,
and then, because we only have so many words for emotions even in English, and then there
can be lots of nodes, configurations of judgments, for which we don't have names.
And what's more, there are going to be configurations and nodes in the matrix, which in fact we
don't even have emotions for, and yet they're possible emotions.
So when we look at other cultures, as we will in a future lecture, one of the things we'll
note is that they have combinations of judgments coming together to configure emotions that
are unfamiliar to us.
Or in certain kinds of instances, there will be configurations of emotions for which we
don't have proper names.
My favorite example is the emotion of Schadenfreude.
Schadenfreude is an emotion which we know well.
It's taking joy in another's misfortunes.
But interestingly, we only have the German name for it because we Americans, of course,
don't feel something like that.
But the idea here is there are no basic emotions.
There are only configurations of different kinds of judgments.
And as for the physiology, as for the arousal, as for the things that James and the contemporary
neurologists talk about, I'm not denying those for a second.
It's just since an emotion is identified in terms of the judgments that make it up, it
turns out that what we need to know in terms of knowing what we feel is going to be a function
not of arousal, not of neurology, but it's going to be a function of how we see ourselves
engaging in the world.
Now, two final things.
First, someone might accept virtually everything I've said, but say, well, but I haven't shown
that the emotions themselves are constituted by judgments.
What I have shown is that a precondition for having emotions, or at any rate a precondition
for identifying emotions, is that we have these sorts of judgments or these sorts of
beliefs.
I don't think that's right, but it's a debate that I don't think is very fruitful, because
what counts as a precondition for having an emotion and what counts as essential structure
of the emotion is a very hard difference to make out.
Second, and a much bigger point.
I started by beginning, I started by saying that an emotion is a lot like a kinesthetic
judgment, in that it's something that we make about our world and about our activity in
the world, but without thinking about it, without bringing it to consciousness.
But I don't want to leave it that consciousness is no part of the picture, quite the contrary,
that reflection, understanding our emotions, being aware of our emotions and what emotions
we have is a very important part of our emotional life.
And so in many of the lectures that to follow, what I want to argue is that reflection on
emotion is itself one of the most important aspects of human emotion.
