Lecture 22 Emotions Across Cultures – Differences
Last time we explored the sense in which emotions are, at least sometimes, universal, common
to all people, and not just all people, but of course, many animals too.
This is because emotions are, at least to some extent, biological phenomena, and brains,
nervous systems, are in many ways shared, and they cut across not only cultures, but
they cut across animal species as well.
But of course, this isn't the whole story.
There are only some emotions that can be called basic emotions that are so shared, both with
humans and animals.
There are great many other emotions that seem to be rather distinctively cultural.
For one thing, even when we're talking about a basic emotion, say something like anger
or fear, there are going to be cultural display rules about when and in what circumstances
it is appropriate to express those emotions.
There's a question too, whether it makes sense to talk about an emotion as such.
In other words, some core of emotion which then can be embellished or modified by culture.
What I'd like to argue in this lecture is that emotions are much more complicated than this.
That emotions do vary in a profound way from culture to culture, and that it's not just
a question of naming the same emotions in various cultures with different languages,
but rather every name is a kind of interpretation and builds into it a kind of general scheme
that characterizes that culture.
Now in terms of universality, one of the points that I tried to make last time was that it
doesn't have to be a product of biology or a product of evolution, that there may be
some features of human emotionality that simply follow from the fact that we live in common
conditions or what philosophers would refer to as the human condition.
For instance, we all know we're going to die, and that of course inspires one of our most
profound emotions.
We all are aware of the fact that we can get sick, that we're vulnerable, and this too
inspires profound emotions.
The idea of a basic emotion, the idea of an emotion which is simply a kind of neurological
syndrome and therefore is common to all humans and perhaps many creatures as well, is not
a complete concept because the truth is that there's a different concept of basic emotions
which I'd like to explore here and to put it very bluntly.
Instead of thinking about a basic emotion as something which is neurologically hardwired,
I'd like to ask the question, what if a basic emotion is one that is central to a certain
way of life?
And of course there's no guarantee that one way of life is going to be essentially like
any other.
So what I'm going to look at here are the differences between different emotions, different emotion
repertoires, different emotion expressions, different emotion causes, and so on.
In the first place, to make a general point, different cultures have different emotional
repertoires.
What that means is that if you were to list the emotions that make that society tick,
the ones that they talk most about, the ones they worry about, the ones that they express
and experience the most, what you'll find is that these are very different from society
to society.
Think about, for example, anger on, pick any American highway, but say anger on the Beltway
around Washington, or anger, road rage on Sturro Drive in Boston, or the same thing
in Southern California.
Now that's rather a distinctive phenomenon.
It's not something you find in cultures that don't have that kind of isolation, that kind
of hurry, that kind of emphasis on getting where you want to go.
But the contrary, that the emotion of anger, or road rage in particular, is something that
I think is rather distinctive to certain kinds of societies, and I want to come back to that
and talk about it more later.
There's also a question of comfort.
It might be that different societies nevertheless share the capacity for certain kinds of emotions,
but the role of those emotions and the way they're treated in the society can be very
different.
For example, a colleague of mine did a study, this is about 25 years ago, in which he studied
attitudes towards gratitude in different people, including American males, Israelis, and a
number of tribal people.
One might say here that among Israelis, and she was thinking about Israelis in the Kibbutzim,
and among many tribal people, gratitude is considered the glue that holds the society
together.
So it is very important to be indebted to other people, and there are all sorts of ways
of manufacturing debt, precisely so that people can have these sorts of ties.
On the other hand, in interviews with American males, most of them said that they found gratitude
more humiliating than even an emotion like fear.
Now you might say the emotion is the same in some sense, but nevertheless its meaning,
its significance, its place in the society is very different.
There are of course all sorts of nuances in both the expression and the having of emotion.
There are cases where, for example, one gets angry at a child, or gets angry at a boss,
gets angry at a dog, gets angry at a colleague, and one wants to say this isn't the same
emotion in every case at all, but its very much context bound.
And if someone wants to say yeah, but the underlying anger nevertheless has certain
sorts of central and essential features, well I want to say yes, but what's interesting
about it is the fact that it has these various nuances.
Of course the most obvious thing about the differences between emotions is causes.
I mentioned last time that Carol Tavers for one went through an account of different causes
of anger in different societies, or one could sort of pick any emotion here, and the idea
is that what causes someone to be angry, or jealous, or embarrassed, or ashamed is not
going to be the same from society to society, but quite the contrary.
It's going to depend on the particular cultures and customs of that society.
Expressions we've talked about that before.
Expressions are always modified by display rules, and even if people like Paul Eichmann
are right, and I think they are, that there's a certain kind of natural expression which
appears more or less instantaneously with certain sorts of emotions, what everyone learns
is how to cover up, whether that expression is appropriate or not, whether in fact the
expression is something that fits into social expectations or not.
So it's not just as if we express our emotions, but our expressions are always circumscribed
and shaped by the display rules that we accept.
There's also the meaning of emotion.
For example, in Tahiti, which I'll talk about in a second, anger is considered demonized.
It is something which leads people to go crazy, and there's an expression that is used in
much of the South Pacific, running a muck, where running a muck is quite literally going
crazy homicidal on the basis of anger.
That's very different, for example, from the idea that sort of grew up with feminism
in the 1970s, that anger is a perfectly righteous way of making your dissatisfactions with your
situation apparent.
And here we get into some really interesting territory.
It's not just as if we have different words in different languages to refer to the same
emotions.
What I'd like to suggest, and I'll work this out towards the end of the lecture, is that
the different verbal expressions we have for naming emotions are in fact different ways
of cutting up the emotional world, so that there's no reason to presume from the outset
that ire in Latin, or anger in English, or fury in some other language, are going to
refer to the same sort of phenomenon, that they may be similar, and of course that's
why we try to do a translation.
But nevertheless, I want to say that the relationship between words and language, on the one hand,
and emotions on the other, is much more complicated than we normally make it out to be.
And finally, this idea of language, it might be that language actually shapes the kind
of physiology of our emotions, and that again sounds strange because we tend to think of
language as something that comes on top of our emotional repertoire.
But what I'd like to argue is that language actually shapes the way we feel, and by shaping
the way we feel, it isn't just a kind of commentary or a sort of second level way of
relating to our emotions, but rather it sort of fills out what these emotions are going
to be.
Now let me sort of break the rest of the lecture into two parts.
Because on the one hand, I want to take an emotion which almost everyone would accept
as a basic emotion.
In other words, one which is neurologically hardwired, one which is shared by virtually
all people, and I'd like to make first the obvious point that this is not evenly distributed
even within our culture.
If you just think, for example, of the Scandinavian cultures in the central northwest, the sorts
of things that Garrison Keeler talks about, you think about the more Mediterranean cultures
say in South Florida, and while I don't want to be stereotyping, I mean it's a pretty obvious
point that the attitude towards anger and the expressions of anger are very different.
But let me get more exotic, because here are two societies that I've studied in some detail
where anger is for the most part unknown.
The first has to do with a tribe of Inuit, or we would say Eskimos, up in the Northwest
Territories.
They were studied by a woman named Jean Briggs some 25 years ago.
They were called the Eskimos, and I'm just going to call them Utku for simplicity because
I can't pronounce all of that, but basically the Utku Eskimos had the following characteristic.
They didn't get angry.
In fact, Jean Briggs' book is entitled Never in Anger.
Now, it caused quite a stir in the anthropological community when it came out, and the stir
was the idea that how can these people not get angry?
And the prejudice, of course, is that anger is a natural emotion, so that these people
must have been repressing it.
Were they repressing the emotion, or did they just not have it?
Well, of course, at this level of analysis, there's really not a whole lot to say, but
Jean Briggs did a much more extensive analysis, and what she did was she studied, among other
things, the whole language and the philosophy of this particular group of people, and she
came up with some pretty remarkable things.
First of all, the philosophy in general.
The Utku lived in the harshest environment that most of us can imagine.
Very cold, blizzards all the time, blinding blizzards in which one could easily lose one's
way and freeze to death.
In fact, the smart thing to do if you were caught in a blizzard was to just sit down
and wait it out, because if you tried to sort of find your way through, in all likelihood,
you'd be dead.
So the attitude among the Utku, with this very harsh terrain and these very harsh conditions
of nature, was essentially resignation.
Now in that context, it doesn't make a whole lot of sense to get angry.
I mean, Americans, for example, are very fond of getting angry at the weather if it doesn't
suit their purposes.
Planned for a picnic, it rains, and we get furious.
For the Utku, this doesn't make any sense.
And in fact, this generalizes to their attitude towards the fellow citizens as well, because
the truth is that there's not a whole lot you can do about what happens to you.
And the idea is that when you find yourself in conditions of adversity, the sorts of things
that would make us very angry, they rather say philosophically, there's no point in doing
this.
So the first point here is that if you look at the whole philosophy of the culture, rather
than just the superficial fact that they don't seem to get angry, something opens up, which
is very revealing.
And that is that anger is a part of a philosophical, intellectual, evaluative context, and it's
not just a matter of having an emotion or not having an emotion.
But Briggs went further than this, because one of the things she did, much in tune with
the times back in the 70s, was she did a real serious job of linguistic anthropology.
She studied the language, mastered it to a certain extent, and what she found out was
that there were words in Utku for basically anger, but they didn't mean what our words
anger would mean.
Rather the closest translation I can think of for the Utku word would be childishness.
And of course, the idea was that two-year-olds often got angry because they were frustrated
with their surroundings and so on, as two-year-olds would do everywhere.
But that two-year-old anger was considered nothing but a childish reaction, which had
to be sort of discouraged and ultimately sort of wiped out, because it was just inappropriate
for the society.
Now it's not that no one was ever childish.
There was one elderly fellow who in fact was a kind of senior in the group that Briggs
describes in some detail, who had a good deal of trouble controlling his temper, but for
just that reason he was considered something of an eccentric.
Or perhaps more to the point and a bit more embarrassing, the word childishness or anger
was often applied to let's just say white female Canadian anthropologists who, due to
their culture, did not learn the lessons of the typical Utku.
So here's a culture in which in fact anger is very rare.
And is it a matter of simple repression that they don't let themselves feel what they actually
feel?
Or is the emotion itself subject to a whole network of philosophical and ideological considerations
which minimize in this case the emotion in that society?
It's a fascinating question.
The second example, also exotic, but in terms of places to visit, it's one that I would
strongly prefer, has to do with the Polynesians of Tahiti and surrounding islands.
As you can tell, I'm a warm person, warm weather sort of person.
Islands were described back in the 18th century when Captain James Cook arrived there as people
who were very slow to anger and easily appeased.
And for those tourists who still go to Tahiti, and I'm thinking not so much of Papiete, which
is sort of I guess over-Gogand and has all the worst features of European culture now,
but the outer islands, what you notice again is that these are people who don't get angry.
Now why don't they get angry?
Well for one thing, because what they have at their disposal is a very lush environment,
that there's not much that can get in their way in terms of fulfilling the basic necessities
of life.
So the kinds of frustrations that we experience routinely is not something that they would
experience very often.
Now of course there are always other features, I mean there are foreign cultures that sort
of declare war on them and that's a much more complicated problem.
But the basic idea is that the Polynesians just live a life in which anger doesn't play
a central role.
But there's a twist to this story, that the Polynesians, as I mentioned a minute ago,
demonize anger.
As rare as it is, what they do is they think of it as something like the worst thing that
can happen to a person, it's almost like going spontaneously crazy.
So one might say in the language of an anthropologist who studied Polynesians in some detail that
what they do is they hypercognize anger, which is to say what they do is they talk about
it a whole lot, they just don't experience it very much.
And of course it's not hard to sort of draw the correlation between talking about it,
warning about it and so on, and in a way sort of minimizing the amount of anger that
they actually feel.
One can contrast that, for example with the United States.
In the United States we love talking about anger.
It is also hypercognized, but the idea here is that the hypercognition isn't so much
a damper on anger, as much as it's a kind of spur that what we do is we kind of talk
our way into getting angrier and angrier.
And of course if you look at any sort of mob group or political rally, what tends to happen
is that people are sort of constantly sort of kicking each other up in terms of increased
anger and so on.
So the point I want to make here is that here's an emotion which is supposed to be a basic
emotion.
It's supposed to consist primarily just in a hardwired syndrome, which presumably we
all in some sense share.
And nevertheless the manifestations of anger in all these different cultures is going to
turn out to be very different.
The next set of examples, however, gets a bit more exotic.
It also raises some even deeper questions about the nature of emotion and the relationship
between emotion and language.
I want to talk about two emotions that have been very much in the literature recently.
The first is a Japanese emotion, which is called AMI, AMAE.
It is an emotion which is said to be distinctively Japanese.
If I had to define it, the best I can do, and obviously this is borrowing from a lot
of secondary sources, it's something like indulgent interdependence.
Now to understand what this is about, again you have to understand not just the role of
a single emotion in an emotional repertoire, but what you have to understand is a whole
philosophical network that defines the society.
In Japan, unlike, for example, in the United States, the emphasis is on what I think we
could call interdependence, that people recognize that they are dependent on one another, that
they are linked to one another in essential ways, and the whole American idea of self-reliance
and independence and autonomy is actually quite foreign to them.
So within that context, one wants to say there is a kind of emphasis on interdependency,
but it also can be a kind of very emotional, nostalgic interdependency.
And so AMI is often described in terms of a kind of nostalgia.
And one of the ways I've often heard it presented is that one feels AMI, for example, thinking
about one's childhood relationships.
And that's not just nostalgia in our sense, I mean we can feel sad thinking about the
past, but it's something much more profound.
It has to do with the very nature of self-identity in these cultures.
The other example I'd want to bring up comes from an even more exotic source.
This is one that was discovered and explored by Catherine Lutz, an anthropologist who
studied the ifeluc in the New Guinea area.
And the emotion in question is something called phego.
Again, I don't make any commitment to the correct pronunciation.
But phego is also what we would consider a very odd mix of emotions.
On the one hand it has to do with a sense of the fragility of life.
It puts a great deal of emphasis on how much life consists of suffering.
That combines in turn with a kind of tenderness towards other people.
And so the overall sort of sensibility of phego is this kind of, what should we call
it?
Kind of sentimentality towards suffering and the rigors and difficulties of life.
Now of course what makes all this very controversial is that there are lots of researchers who
would say, look what you're talking about are just variations and nuances.
These are not unique emotions.
These are not different emotions from anything that we would feel.
In fact even the fact that I can describe them, for example, am I as sort of indulgent
interdependence, means that we already have the concepts to put these together.
And the fact that I can describe phego in terms of suffering, tenderness, fragility
of life and so on, means that again we already have the concepts.
But what I want to suggest is that how these things fit together and how they combine is
itself an important part of the question, what is it that makes up an emotion?
Now if you recall several lectures ago when I tried to analyze a number of familiar emotions
for us, one of the points that I kept making was that an emotion rarely consists of one
set of judgments or one way of looking at things.
That virtually every emotion consists of a kind of combination of different kind of perspectives
and so on, which leads to a kind of fascinating hypothesis and I put it this way.
We've been talking for most of this course as if emotions are in some sense discrete
entities.
So there's anger, there's fear, there's shame, there's embarrassment, and perhaps
now we can add there's am I and phego and other discrete emotions which we may or may
not experience.
But suppose you were to adopt the following sort of scenario, that in fact there are no
discrete emotions, there are no things, entities, called emotions.
Rather what we have is an emotional life.
That emotional life is a kind of flux in which all different kinds of outlooks, perspectives,
opinions and so on sort of work together and when we sort of pick out our emotions what
we're doing is not so much identifying that thing called anger or that thing called love
as much as what we're doing is we're kind of carving out a certain kind of space in
this flux and saying okay let's focus on that and what its implications are.
Now this was a suggestion that's been made in many different ways, in fact William James
in his stream of consciousness metaphor I think was on to it and I think a great many
other philosophers have also suggested that you know we talk too much in terms of atomistic
entities and in fact our emotional life is much more of a fluid, it's much more of something
that sort of goes on in different ways with different currents and so on.
If that's so then some interesting things follow, that the language we use to describe
our emotions isn't just naming particular emotions but rather the language we use to
describe our emotions is actually carving out a certain amount of space in our emotional
lives and sort of highlighting that and saying okay this is how you should understand me
now but it's not as if what you're doing is saying okay here's the distinct emotion as
opposed to certain other distinct emotions.
What this further means is that language and I've made this point before language is not
just a vehicle by which we name our emotions or we talk about them but language is a vehicle
by which we shape our emotions.
So what language one speaks and that includes both the language of the emotions themselves
also the language of the physiology of emotions, Tahitians for example talk about all emotions
centered in the stomach.
The Chinese have this concept of heart-mind and the idea is that's where all emotions
are based.
We of course have much more sense when we're not being overly romantic with the heart of
saying look emotions are in the brain but it seems to me that all of these variations
are themselves part of an overall picture in which what we're trying to do is conceptualize
something that is not easily conceptualized.
Identify precisely something that can't be identified overly precisely.
So my upshot when I talk about the cultural differences in emotions is not just the different
cultures have different emotions but the upshot is that in this sort of vast emotional complex
that in some sense we do share but obviously share in very different ways that the idea
of what it is to have an emotion is a much more dynamic process that has a lot more to
do with our philosophies, a lot more to do with our language, a lot more to do with our
culture than most of us would ever expect.
