These lectures are part of the Great Courses series they are produced by The Teaching Company.
The Great Courses cover a broad array of university level disciplines.
The lectures in each course are either 30 or 45 minutes long.
By listening for less than an hour a day, you can finish even the longest course in
just weeks.
Use our catalogue or website and imagine how much you could learn if you spent just
30 minutes a day for the next year in the best college classrooms in the world.
The lecturers are university professors carefully selected by The Teaching Company and its customers
for intellectual distinction and teaching excellence.
These lectures are titled The Passions, Philosophy and the Intelligence of Emotions, Part 1.
The lecturer is Professor Robert Solomon.
Professor Solomon is the Quincy Lee Centennial Professor of Business and Philosophy at the
University of Texas at Austin, where he has been teaching for over 30 years.
He received his undergraduate degree in molecular biology from the University of Pennsylvania
and his master's and doctoral degrees in philosophy and psychology from the University of Michigan.
Prior to taking his position at UT, Dr. Solomon taught at Princeton University and the University
of Pittsburgh.
He has held visiting appointments at the University of Pennsylvania, the University of Auckland
in New Zealand and Harvard University.
Professor Solomon is the recipient of several awards and honors including the Standard Oil
Outstanding Teaching Award, the Presidential Associates Teaching Award, the University
of Texas Research Institution Award, and the Academy of Distinguished Teachers Chad Oliver
Award.
Professor Solomon has published more than 100 articles and 30 books in philosophy and
psychology including About Love, From Hagel to Existentialism, Ethics and Excellence,
and Not Passion's Slave.
Professor Solomon prepared the course guide that comes with these lectures.
The course guide includes a detailed outline of each lecture, a glossary, a timeline, biographical
notes, and a bibliography.
To get the most out of this course, you may find it useful to follow along with the outlines
or review them before or after each lecture.
Chapter 1 Emotions as Engagements with the World
Hi, I'm Bob Solomon, I'm a philosopher, and this is a course of lectures on Emotional
Intelligence.
Now you might think, why is a philosopher talking about something so obviously psychological?
The short answer is, I've never really recognized the difference between the two.
That philosophy and psychology really only separated the beginning of the last century,
and philosophy has always needed and appealed to empirical psychology, as empirical psychology
has always needed to and referred to philosophy.
What's more, without the other, each one is incomplete.
Philosophers tend to be too abstract, to be ignorant or simply ignore the facts about
human behavior in favor of some abstract ideal.
Psychologists too often tend to have their nose in an experiment, or more generally insist
on science, when in fact what they do is primarily important because of its relationship
to ethics, the good life, living well.
Now why talk about Emotional Intelligence?
Well, I think the term itself, which was introduced into the American public by Daniel Goldman
in a popular book some years ago, is important primarily for its shock value.
Many of us who have been working on emotions for 30 and more years have always recognized
the intelligence of emotions.
But the phrase itself is something like business ethics, if you remember when that was introduced,
and the standard comment was, isn't that a contradiction in terms?
Well so too, emotional intelligence sounds like a contradiction in terms, because traditionally
on the one side there are emotions, or what used to be called the passions, and on the
other side there's reason, rationality, and intelligence.
And what these lectures are about is essentially getting rid of that dichotomy, getting rid
of that polarization, and saying no, emotions have their own intelligence, and that's what
this is all about.
Now you might think, well I already know about my emotions.
I mean after all, what is closer to us, what is more immediate, what is more obvious?
But Nietzsche said some years ago, quite rightly, that we are often most ignorant of what is
closest to us.
Combine that observation, which I think is basically right, with Socrates' classic injunction,
to know thyself, and philosophy runs into a big problem, because on the one hand here
is what is closest to us, and most us, and at the same time it is something which we
are kind of blissfully ignorant about.
Now these lectures are not going to be about exotic facts, so it's not like a series of
lectures, for example, on the history of China, where there's 5,000 years of things you don't
know, and things that are fascinating to learn.
Or the story of physics, where there are all these exotic experiments and observations
which are counterintuitive and sometimes don't even make sense to us.
Rather I'm going to be talking about something very ordinary.
What I want to ask you is to look at emotions, as I have, as something wondrous, something
mysterious, something exotic, as well as something dangerous, something profound, and something
valuable.
Now the history of philosophy is filled with the characterization of the subject as the
story of rationality and reason.
And I think this is incomplete.
In fact the best philosophers from Plato onward have always talked about the passions, have
always talked about the importance of emotions in human life.
But the contrary view, that we'd be better off without them, that we'd be better off
with what the Greeks used to call apateia, or apathy, freedom from the emotions, freedom
from the passions, or ataraxia, peace of mind, again a kind of emotionless state, is
something that I interpret as sort of zombie-like, something less than human.
In one of my favorite novels, Camus' novel, The Stranger, he introduces us to a character,
one or so, who is devoid of emotions.
When his mother dies, he feels no grief.
When he hangs out with pimps and criminals, he feels no moral disgust.
When he enters into a life-and-death situation, he feels no fear.
When he murders a man, he feels no guilt.
And when he meets a woman who is wonderful, he doesn't understand what love is.
This to me is a kind of ante-ideal, and obviously it was for Camus, too, because the prosecutor
in a case that this character ends up in says he looks inside this character and sees none
of those redeeming equalities that make a person human.
And there's a sense in which, as sympathetic as he might be, he's right.
Or closer to the late 20th century, there's Mr. Spock on Star Trek, or his replacement
character, Data, who has no emotions and consequently strikes this as being inhuman.
My favorite philosophers, by contrast, including Camus, the existentialists, are all for the
importance of passion.
Soren Kierkegaard, Danish philosopher, devout Christian, insists that the good life and
Christian dedication, in particular, is based on what he calls passionate inwardness.
It's all about passion, it's not about belief.
Or Nietzsche, whom I began by characterizing.
Nietzsche insists, too, that what characterizes the good life is passion.
And it seems to me there's a lot here.
But of course, just having passion isn't enough.
One can be mad in all sorts of interesting, but disastrous ways.
The important thing is to have passions with style, as Nietzsche says.
The important thing is to have passions that serve life and don't drag it down with their
stupidity, another line from Nietzsche.
Now in these lectures, I'm going to be talking about many great philosophers.
In particular, Aristotle, Nietzsche, William James, Sigmund Freud, John Paul Sart, and
that movement in philosophy called phenomenology, which is basically the study of experience.
But I'm also going to be talking about recent research in psychology.
And these two things are obviously at odds in a way, because the philosophers are talking
on the one hand about ethics and the good life.
And the psychologists are doing rock bottom science.
And the question is how the two can be combined.
But it seems to me they can be, and that's what these lectures are going to be about.
Now there's a sense in which talking about intelligence is already kind of nebulous.
What does it mean to say emotions are intelligent?
Well, to put the theory in a nutshell, to say emotions are intelligent is to say they're
a way of dealing with the world.
And to say they're intelligent in particular is to say that it's often a very effective
way of dealing with the world.
Some of this can be explained by a way of evolution, that our psychological repertoire,
that the very fact that we have emotions at all, and the fact that we have the emotions
we have, means that at least in the past, these have not been counterproductive, have
not led to our demise.
So evolution can explain something by way of why we have emotions and why we have the
emotions we have.
Much more I would say is the story of culture.
Emotions grow up with a culture, in fact culture is to a large extent defined by emotions and
emotion repertoires.
And culture determines also the kinds of emotions which are socially acceptable, the kinds of
emotions that are socially convenient, and the sorts of display rules about what sorts
of emotions we should show and what sorts of emotions we should hide.
And of course this personal experience.
Different people have different emotional temperaments, different people have different
emotional experiences, and to a large extent the emotions we have, the intelligence of
the emotions we have, have to do with ways of dealing with our personal experience.
So emotional intelligence, very simply defined, has to do with the way we engage in the world,
and emotions are going to be an important part of that picture.
Now the reigning question of the whole series is going to be the very philosophical sounding
question.
What is an emotion?
It's a question that was raised in just those terms by William James, the beginning of the
20th century, and the idea is that an emotion can be defined in terms of certain kinds of
components.
For example, an emotion might be defined in terms of physiology, an emotion might be
defined in terms of feeling, an emotion might be defined in terms of behavior, and so on.
But I want to begin by going beyond that and sort of just raise the question about what
a philosophical question is like to begin with.
Take a standard philosophical question, something that every undergraduate meets the first week
in a philosophy class.
Then like, how do we know the world exists?
Well, there are several responses to this.
The first is the common sense dismissive response, it's sort of like, are you kidding?
That is not a question, that's just a symptom of craziness, why ask such a thing?
Well obviously philosophy and for that matter science wouldn't get off the ground if we
simply dismissed all such questions.
The second approach is to say, well such questions raise issues which require careful investigation.
I mean after all, how do we know that there is a world?
We have experiences, do those experiences prove that the world exists?
Well obviously not because one can assume that we have the experience without assuming
that these experiences refer to anything.
And so philosophers for hundreds of years have looked very carefully at the apparatus
of knowledge, at the nature of experience and tried to figure out exactly what is the
way we know the world.
And science about the same time has looked very carefully too at first of all the physiology
of knowledge, but secondly larger questions that have to do with measurements that have
to do with observations that have to do with all sorts of new technologies which try to
explain what the details of knowledge and what the details of our knowledge of the world
are all about.
But there's a third response and the third response to me is the distinctively philosophical
response or some people might say it's a kind of spiritual or religious response.
And that is the question why is the world?
Why do we know anything is a kind of quasi theological question.
It sort of opens up our minds and it makes us ask the question, well yeah I mean why
is there a world?
Why do we exist?
And that introduces of course many of the great ideas of religion as well as philosophy.
So the question I want to ask what is an emotion is very much like that.
In the sense that I want you to sort of look at emotions with a kind of wonder.
Not just a kind of scientific curiosity although that will be implied all the way through,
but rather a kind of ethical, philosophical, religious, spiritual quest.
What is involved in our having emotions?
We can all imagine ourselves like Camus' character or ourselves as Mr. Spock being utterly
neutral towards the world, not caring about things, not having interests, much less not
being angry, not having any hate, but of course not falling in love either.
And we can imagine such a life, but it's not one that most of us will find very appealing.
So the question what is an emotion is for me going to be first of all a question of
ethics.
It's going to be a question of appreciating who we are and how we function in the world.
Now of course this is the only approach.
The second response or the second kind of response that I mentioned, the kind of scientific
analytic approach is also obviously going to be part of our query.
And to make this even more enticing, recent advances in science and in particular recent
advances in brain science make the question what is an emotion a particularly appealing
scientific question.
And consequently with the changes in neurology in the last hundred years or so, the question
has become from a very general matter of what is the physiology of emotion.
The fact that for example when you get afraid you get pale and the hairs on your neck stand
up on end or when you get angry you tend to get flushed and tense and all that to some
very sophisticated findings that have to do with the nature of the brain and various
brain pathways and of course we have all kinds of now really neat expensive machines to sort
of get pictures of the brain in its processing.
But what this also does is it leads to a certain kind of distortion and in many ways this is
going to be what these lectures are about.
Because very often the new technology and the new specialization refocuses and I would
say also tends to distort a certain kind of basic knowledge so that if we start talking
as William James started to do a hundred years ago or as many brilliant neurologists
are doing today about emotions just in terms of the mechanisms of the brain, what we're
going to miss is precisely those very old questions going back to the ancient Greeks
and back to the ancient Asians about what is the best way to live and how do emotions
fit into our life and we're going to lose that philosophical, spiritual dimension of
these questions.
So one of the things that I'm going to be wrestling with all the way through these lectures
is what many psychologists and neurologists today talk about in terms of basic emotions.
Now there are many meanings of that term and we'll talk about some of them as we go but
the term basic emotion in contemporary parlance refers to a kind of neat neurological package
and the idea is that by way of evolution and by virtue of contemporary neurology what
we find is that the emotions, certain kinds of emotions at least, are packages of neurology,
hormonal reactions, musculature so that when for example somebody has fear or anger which
are two of the sort of standard basic emotions, there's a kind of triggering off of a syndrome
that carries with it characteristic physiological responses including among other things facial
expressions. In fact one prominent contemporary psychologist has gone so far as to define
basic emotions in terms of characteristic facial expressions and when we sort of pursue
this it's really a kind of fascinating debate just in itself how the face can be so prominent
in terms of the evolution and the biology of emotions. But the basic idea here and one
that I dispute is that there are emotions and anger and fear are the two most frequent
examples in which you have really just a kind of neurological response and with this neurological
response as one contemporary neurologist puts it, consciousness, experience, feeling and
the rest of it is really just a kind of icing on the cake, it's secondary. And so what's
happened is that these emotions which I'm going to argue are really constitutive of
our lives, they really give life meaning are reduced to these neurological syndromes and
that to me is a drastically incomplete description. So in my review of the history of all this
as I say I'm going to be talking about a lot of philosophers, I'm going to be talking
about quite a bit of psychology but I'm going to focus on three historical periods as well
because in my mind a subject always has a history and it never occurs just in a vacuum
and so understanding the history is going to be an important part of what we're going
to be doing and I want to sort of delineate three important historical periods. First
is generally speaking the ancient world and what I've got in mind here in particular is
ancient Greece, Plato and Aristotle especially Aristotle and also that odd collection of
philosophers that followed Aristotle in fact spread over about 600 years of the ancient
world called the Stoics who had a good deal to say about emotions much of it fascinating.
I also want to talk about ancient Asia to a certain extent because even before Plato
and Aristotle and the Stoics in Asia there was a very rich philosophy of the emotions
because for one thing in Asia they've never had the kind of distinction that we've made
so vigorously in the West between the mind or the intelligence on the one hand and the
heart or the feelings on the other. In Chinese there's this notion of heart-mind that will
bring up again and again which basically says look this is all one package and what's more
it is a package which pretty much defines the personality and the nature of human existence.
In India in particular perhaps the oldest philosophy we have there's a distinction between what
they call bavas and rasas where a bava is something like a crude emotion the sort of
thing when you get outraged and you lose your temper and a rasa which is a kind of aesthetically
refined emotion and this distinction between what is crude and what is refined is going
to play a huge part in what I'm going to be talking about to take just one distinction
among many. We have the emotion of rage. Now rage I want to argue is about as crude as
an emotion can get. In fact I would say rage is very close to what psychologists call a
basic emotion. It is minimal in terms of intelligence, it is maximal in terms of its neurological
structure but rage can be refined, rage can be converted into something even beautiful
and that's what a rasa is. It's when you start with something which is crude and raw
and you refine it so that it becomes something quite sophisticated for example moral indignation
would be a rasa or to take a different kind of example lust would be a kind of bava crude
raw but lust can be aestheticized and refined so that it becomes something like love. And
so too in Chinese culture there's a concept of Qing and Qing on the one hand might be
translated loosely as emotions but it presents a very different picture of emotions than
our word emotion or our older word passions would characterize. So I'm going to spend
some time in the ancient world both east and west because it seems to me that part of what
we're trying to understand is something that philosophers and psychologists and I don't
distinguish the two until about the end of the 19th century philosophers and psychologists
have worked hard at understanding virtually since the beginning of self-examination. Another
period that I want to spend some time on is the 18th century. Now I'm not going to be
highlighting the particular history as much as I want to emphasize that in the 18th century
there's a kind of renaissance of emotion thinking that in the 18th century such philosophers
as David Hume and the great economist Adam Smith and the well-known Swiss philosopher
Jean-Jacques Rousseau put a kind of new emphasis on what they called the moral sentiments. And
this is very much in tune with what I want to talk about throughout this course even
if there's only one lecture on these guys as such. And that is in the 18th century suddenly
the whole weight of ethics and the whole idea of the good life once again returned to the
idea of certain kinds of feelings, certain kinds of emotions, much as it had back in
the ancient world with someone like Aristotle. And finally I want to spend quite a bit of
time talking about a very contemporary movement which I've talked about in these courses before
and that is the sort of twin movements of existentialism and phenomenology. Phenomenology
is a methodology, if you like, for exploring the nature of experience. And so phenomenology
as I would like to describe it is the exploration of emotional experience because in my mind
and what this course is going to be about is that emotional experience is not something
simple and merely physiological, but emotional experience is something extremely rich and
valuable and it includes all sorts of appraisals and evaluations of the world as well as a kind
of way of engaging with what the world is. And existentialism, of course, is a philosophy
which puts a very strong emphasis on the passions, on the emotions from Kierkegaard and Nietzsche
on to Jean-Paul Sartre with a number of very important figures in between, Martin Heidegger
for example, and what existentialism tends to emphasize is a dimension of emotions which
is often left out and that dimension is the dimension of responsibility. Now this sounds
rather odd just as the phrase emotional intelligence might at first sound very odd. Emotional responsibility,
what does that mean? Well we have this idea that goes back to ancient times that the emotions
happen to us, that the emotions are things that we suffer. In fact the very word passion
which is a word invented by Aristotle means essentially suffering. So we talk about the
passion of Christ and the passions are things that sweep us away as when we fall madly in
love. But there's another way of viewing all of this and that is that the passions are
not things that happen to us. Passions are fact things that we do. And Jean-Paul Sartre
perhaps more than anyone else has influenced my views on this. And the suggestion is that
you do your emotions. Your emotions are strategies. Your emotions are ways of dealing with the
world which aren't just sort of evolutionarily derived. But they are part of personal experience,
trial and error and there's things that we learn over the course of our lives. So looking
at the history of the subject and bringing this together with the contemporary psychological
research what I'd like to get is a coherent picture of what emotions are. And as I say
what I'd like to do is have you look at not just these great philosophers of the past
and not just this fascinating research in the present but I'd like you to practice phenomenology
during the course of these lectures. And that means look at yourself as I look at myself.
Why am I so interested in emotions? Well, I see no reason not to simply lay this on
the table. I am fascinated by emotions. I am terrified of emotions both my own and other
peoples and I've tried for my entire life to understand them and to understand why
we have them and what they mean. And to understand an emotion is not just to understand an exotic
being like understanding the way that spiders mate or something like that. To understand
your emotion is to get on top of it. It's to have a certain kind of control. And so one
of the things that emotional intelligence has to do with is not just the intelligence
in the emotions itself, which I'll talk about in detail, but it's also intelligence about
emotions. Because to understand an emotion is not to understand an exotic being as say
a commentator or an observer might understand something else foreign and exotic, but it's
to understand ourselves. And self understanding is the first step to personal control. It's
the first step to making emotion refined. It's the first step to sort of aestheticizing
emotion and making it significant and important in the way that we've been describing. Now
the lectures themselves are going to be divided in more or less three unequal parts. I want
to begin not by talking about emotion theory or the general question, what is an emotion?
Because the truth is, we don't understand enough about the details of emotions to sort
of derive a theory. I mean, if you ask most people what's an emotion, they'll say, oh,
it's a feeling. Or they'll say, oh, it's just getting upset. Or an emotion is a kind of
experience. Well, all that's kind of right. But it's to underappreciate the significance
and the complexity of emotion. So I want to start out with several lectures on particular
emotions. I want to start with the so-called basic emotions, anger and fear. But then I
want to talk about such things as love and compassion and shame and vengeance and grief.
Because talking about these particular emotions is going to give us insight into the complexity
and the importance and the role that these emotions play in our lives. The second part
is going to be essentially correcting certain kinds of misunderstandings of emotion. For
example, the rather innocent sounding claim that emotions are feelings. Well, that's
true. But it's also a very basic way of misunderstanding what emotions are all about. Or there's the
idea, much more sophisticated, that emotions are in the mind. And so to understand our
emotions, to tell us what our emotions are, we look inside. And I want to say this is
also a way of misunderstanding emotions. Most importantly, we have this idea that emotions
are, as I said, just irrational, sort of distorting ways of dealing with reality. And so in contrast,
I want to say, no, emotions are intelligent. And that's going to be the upshot of the second
part. And the third part, I'd like to say more about what it is about emotions that
make life worth living. So I want to talk about music. I want to talk about laughter.
And I want to talk about culture and the role that emotions have in different kinds
of cultures. Anyway, that's what we're going to be doing for the next 24 lectures. And
the idea is that throughout, I want you to come to appreciate your own emotions as something
not routine, but as something very much profound and the key to the meaning of life.
