Lecture 12 Are Emotions in the Mind
While I'm on a rampage here about metaphors, I want to describe and criticize perhaps the
most pervasive, most persuasive and most problematic metaphor in the whole discussion
of emotions, and that is to put it in obvious terms, the idea that emotions are in the mind.
Now bear with me because I'm going to try and make what I think to be a fairly profound
point and really reorient the whole way that we think about the mind and the body and the
emotions, and consequently, some of this is going to sound rather anti-intuitive and
will certainly sound a bit difficult.
Let me characterize it in terms of two philosophers who I think epitomize the two positions that
I'm going to be contrasting.
The first is the French philosopher René Descartes, whom I've mentioned quite a few
times and obviously in any philosophy course will be mentioned quite a few times.
The other is the contemporary existentialist Martin Heidegger, a notoriously difficult
philosopher in his own right, and I think difficult for precisely the same reason.
What Heidegger was trying to do was to reorient the way we experience the world and say that
the metaphors, which are mainly Cartesian, that is having to do with Descartes, Cartesian
metaphors really give us a false picture of our own experience.
Now you might think that we are closest and most immediately aware of our own experience,
and therefore we know that better than anything else.
But that in itself is a very Cartesian thesis, which has been cast into extreme doubt by
among other people, Sigmund Freud.
But let me say something about what this competition between Descartes and Heidegger
really amounts to.
Descartes is an epitome of a theoretician who captures our typical image of emotions being
in the mind.
It's Descartes who draws the contrast between mind and body in such a ferocious way, and
Cartesian dualism is a phrase often used to refer to just this kind of split.
And of course philosophers ever since have worried about how the mind is related to the
body since, if Descartes is right, there are two very different sorts of things.
Heidegger by contrast wants to argue for a kind of unified picture, something like the
Chinese, which he only came to know later in his life.
But the Chinese notion of heart-mind that I mentioned in the last lecture, where there
is no contrast between body and mind, but rather in Chinese it's simply one phenomenon.
And for many of us that's a difficult notion to grasp because we really do think and experience
our minds as something different from the body.
But let me throw this into perspective by pointing out that say even such a brilliant
philosopher as Aristotle, 2,500 years ago, would not have understood that distinction
at all.
Aristotle talked about what I suppose you could translate as the soul.
But the soul was nothing but the form of a being.
So animals had souls, but only in the sense that animals had a certain kind of form.
And people had souls, but only in the sense that people also had a certain kind of form.
And one could describe them as biological organisms and when you describe the form of
the biological organism, that's what you were describing as the soul.
The idea that the mind was something different would have been unfathomable.
Now that's not to say that Aristotle didn't believe in emotions, of course he did.
He talked at great length about fear and anger and the uses to which we put them and how
we behave when we have them.
So he clearly believed in the sorts of things that we describe as mental things.
But nevertheless the idea that the mind is one thing and in some sense contained within
the body is not something he would have understood.
Now how does this idea of in the mind develop?
Well as any profound idea, and it is a profound idea, it emerges only slowly and over time.
By the fourth century AD you have people like St. Augustine starting to talk about the soul.
But the soul in what is now a Christian concept.
The soul is something which is literally separate from the body.
And nevertheless even in Augustine it's clear that the notion of the mind as it emerges
later on is not yet fully formulated.
Augustine wrote in his confessions a great deal about himself and about his experience.
But interestingly like Aristotle he didn't have a distinctive notion of experience and
what I want you to think about is how curious that notion is.
How much intellectual work it took for humanity to be able to describe their experience as
opposed to for example their being in the world.
And that's what Heidegger wants to get back to.
That idea and of course this is all hyphenated or in German it's all collapsed into one
word.
But this idea of being in the world as something that can't be separated into a mind on the
one hand.
Experience a world outside of it.
But that of course is exactly what Cartesian dualism is about.
And it's from Descartes that a great deal of modern philosophy takes off because of
this problem.
Descartes as I said thought we knew the mind more immediately and better than anything else.
Because after all we are minds.
But then there's this world.
And it's a world we experience but we don't experience it immediately.
We experience it immediately.
In other words mediated by our senses, mediated by our thoughts and our ideas and our understanding.
And so there's a sense in which to know the world involves a kind of inference and it's
an inference from our own ideas, our impressions, our sensations to the existence of a world
which in some sense is like them.
So I experience the tree as green.
That is I experience my idea of the tree as green.
And so I infer that the tree in the real world is green too.
But philosophers have had a field day sort of putting a wedge between what I immediately
experience and what I infer to be true of the world.
And so the Cartesian dualism that we start with as common sensical as it sounds leads
very quickly to a kind of skepticism where we start asking questions like well do we
really know anything at all?
Is it possible that we just have ideas and there is no world?
And one philosopher at least comes up with an intriguing idea that well actually there
isn't a material world outside of us, there is no external world.
But rather it's just the ideas we have in our minds and how do we explain how they get
there?
Well God puts them there.
So the truth is that outside of us there's God and nothing else.
Now that's one of many variations on these themes but I raise them here only to point
out that from Cartesian dualism all sorts of difficult consequences and philosophical
quandaries emerge.
Now Descartes was wrong certainly about one thing and that is that we know our minds immediately
and consequently indubitably without a doubt.
We know what goes on in our own minds and of course the main person here to talk about
is Sigmund Freud.
Freud commenting on his place in history gave himself the rather exalted position of
delivering a kind of third blow to the concept of human dignity.
The first one was issued by Copernicus and Galileo who showed that the earth that we
stand on, that we live in is not the center of the universe.
The second one was Darwin who showed that there is nothing particularly unique about
the human species and the third one was delivered by Freud himself who argued that we don't even
know we are not masters of our own minds.
Now however you think about that particular bold claim there's something very right about
the idea that we can be wrong about what goes on in our minds and in particular with regard
to the emotions we can be wrong about what emotions we feel.
Now this wouldn't make any sense if emotions were as Descartes thought they were kind of
immediate experiences that are just describable as what they are but obviously the way we act,
the way we express our emotions, the way we understand our emotions all of this is much
more complex than the recognition of some little sensational atom in our minds and so
the point that Freud is making reduced to its more modest interpretation is that when
it comes to understanding our own emotions we are not necessarily in a privileged position.
Now it's true that often especially if you're by yourself or if you're rather undemonstrative
at the moment you know what you're feeling in a way that other people who either are
not present at all or not paying much attention will know about you but we've all been in
situations where someone will say to us why are you so angry and your response is I'm
not angry and of course then a little play unfolds and it turns out that we were just
wrong about what we felt.
How is that possible?
Well one of the things that Freud suggests is that what we misunderstand is the nature
of the emotion itself and Freud has rather intricate theory here where he says emotions
consist among other things of ideas they also consist of affects or feelings and when these
two split as they often do we get only a partial picture of what our emotion is and consequently
misdescribe it or a different way of thinking about all of this.
If an emotion is something in the mind then there's a quite literal interpretation of
what it is to express an emotion and the word itself sort of gives it to you.
To express an emotion is to push it out to sort of demonstrate it.
So on the one hand I have an emotion in me and on the other hand I demonstrate it to
the world in my behavior in what I say and so on.
Now this is again already problematic because one can ask the question well exactly what
is the relationship between the emotion that's private and inner and the expression which
is necessarily public and outer and of course writers have had a lot of fun sort of mixing
these things up for example Edgar Rice Burroughs the fellow who invented Tarzan in one of his
novels talks about a people who give exactly the opposite expressions to their emotions
than we do so if they're very happy they will act very upset and angry and if they are very
angry they will act very happy.
Does this make sense?
Well there's something about it that doesn't and nevertheless just thinking for a moment
we realize that there are cultural differences that sometimes look a lot like this for example
in Asia it's not uncommon to laugh when you're very embarrassed in fact some of the sorority
girls in my campus act much the same way and so one might ask well what is the relationship
between the emotion and expression but the one thing it's not is the relationship between
something inside and something outside.
Now once Descartes had sort of laid the groundwork for this position it was only a matter of
short time before philosophers rebelled and they saw that there was something just wrong
about all this and I'm going to mention three names before I finally get to Heidegger who
were instrumental in this rebellion and they're all very famous philosophers the first is
Immanuel Kant who found Cartesian dualism and the skepticism that it engendered just
intolerable and so dedicated a good part of his career to refuting it and showing how
it was wrong and consequently he made up the term which he simply borrowed from the Greek
that the world as we experience it is phenomenal it has to do with the world as we experience
it and it is not something other than our experience namely the world in itself.
Now this is a very complicated philosophy I won't try to explain it here except to point
out that this notion of a phenomenon which in Greek simply means something as it appears
becomes very central to philosophy from Kant on.
Hegel the second philosopher I want to mention has a book his first great book and I think
his greatest book which is called the phenomenology of spirit where phenomenology refers to the
study of phenomena.
Well the idea of that book like the idea in Kant that inspires it is that it doesn't make
sense to talk about our immediate experience being simply inside of us whereas the external
world is outside of us and somehow we infer or get to know the outside world on the basis
of the inside but rather the experience itself is phenomenological that is to say the experience
itself is of the world as we experience it and by the time we get to Hegel it doesn't
make sense to talk about things in themselves or something independent of experience.
So our experience is on the one hand ours on the other hand is an experience of the world
and what Kant and Hegel are both saying in various ways is it's a mistake to try and
separate the two.
Now all this comes together in a philosopher who sort of starts the 20th century in Europe
and that's a Czech German philosopher named Edmund Husserl who invented a discipline
which he called phenomenology of course borrowing the term from Hegel and ultimately from Kant
and ultimately from the Greeks.
But the idea of phenomenology is to describe our experience as it is but describing our
experience as it is is not just to describe something immediate but it's also to describe
the world and so there's this intricate relationship between experience but experience is necessarily
of the world and this is what Husserl refers to as intentionality and the claim is that
all of our experience that everything mental has an object, an object which is outside of
its independent of its in the world and this of course can include fantasy figures, objects
of fiction and so on but nevertheless it doesn't make sense to talk simply about the mind and
the contents of the mind because the mind always refers beyond itself to the world and
that's intentionality and that's the term I've been using of course to describe emotions
because my particular claim is all emotions are intentional, emotions in my phrase are
ways of engaging with the world.
They aren't just things that happen in the mind.
Well you can see where I'm going here because the idea this movement from Kant to Hegel
to Husserl all has to do with replacing the language of in the mind with a very different
kind of language in which we talk about our relationship to our engagement in the world
and that's where of course Heidegger comes in.
Heidegger was a student of Husserl.
He was also a very careful reader of both Kant and Hegel and Heidegger saw that this
whole idea of a Cartesian inner space of the mind is grotesquely mistaken.
He says rather wittily I think that Aristotle in the Greeks for example never had an experience
and by that he doesn't mean that they were simply unconscious all the time but rather
the idea is that Aristotle in particular didn't understand what he experienced as experience
and as I said before when you think about how we come to have the concept of experience
that is something going on in our minds as opposed to the world it's rather intriguing
how could we ever have gotten such an idea and as I say even when you trace through the
history of Christianity and the idea of the internal soul and all of that still one wants
to ask the same kind of question how did we ever get such an idea when you look at the
soul in ancient philosophy and even before the Greeks and for example ancient Egypt
the soul is always embodied it's not something separate and distinct but the soul is in one
sense or another the form of the body and Homer's Iliad for example or rather the Odyssey
it turns out that you know when for example we talk about the dead what we talk about
are shades or shadows where the shades or shadows have the same form as the living
person so there isn't a concept of the abstract immediate soul that Christianity comes to
talk about that Descartes tends to celebrate and again I want to appreciate this and philosopher
I'll again bring on the stage for a moment is Friedrich Nietzsche who while he is dead
said against Christianity a great many things it stands for has nothing but praise for what
it calls its spiritualization of our experience and what he means by that is among other things
the idea that somehow he has given us that that it has given us a kind of depth a kind
of profundity which the early Greeks whom he loved whom Nietzsche loved didn't have
so putting all this together in Heidegger who is also a very careful reader of Nietzsche
one gets this kind of unified sense of experience as a sense of being in the world again it's
a word which has to be understood not in terms of components but as a single idea and what
makes Heidegger particularly interesting in the context that we're talking about him now
is that Heidegger gave a very special place to what he called moods now the difference
between moods and emotions is itself an intriguing question let me deal with it very quickly by
saying the following whereas emotions all tend to have intentionality in a fairly straightforward
way so I'm in love with someone I'm angry at someone I'm envious of someone moods tend not
to have such distinctive objects which can give rise to the very fully claim that moods don't
have any objects at all and what I would want to argue is that's not true moods take as their
objects not particular persons or particular beings or particular situations moods take as
their objects the whole world and that's exactly what Heidegger had in mind so for Heidegger moods
are our way of being tuned into the world my version is it's our way of engaging with the
world but the idea of being tuned in in German is a very clever little pun because the word
for tuning is pretty much the same as the word for moods and Heidegger is picking up on this
but basically I would say that what a mood is what a mood takes as its object is the whole world
so another philosopher Wittgenstein who was often depressed said that a depressed man lives in a
depressed world and there's something very right about that when you think about it when you're down
when you're sad everything seems sad and when you're really joyful and happy it's as if everything
has a kind of sheen and a kind of glow to it when you're angry everything comes out sort of offensive
and when you're in love everything seems sort of lovable so this idea that a mood is what the world
is all about is a very profound insight in my mind and it's to say that moods have objects the object
is the world and what's more in certain kinds of emotions or moods the true nature of the world
is revealed to us now Heidegger thinks that the most prevalent mood in this case is the one that
he calls angst or anguish or anxiety and one can sort of question that rather dark vision of what
the world is really like but nevertheless the idea that moods give us profound insight into the world
seems to me is one of Heidegger's most important contributions but that combined with the idea
that we shouldn't talk about moods as something inside of us as something personal and private
but rather there's sort of this intricate relationship between ourselves and the world
and it doesn't make sense to break that into pieces it doesn't make sense to talk about moods
or emotions in the mind now the final act in this little play is by again John Paul Sartre
whom I've often mentioned because Sartre picks up from Husserl and Heidegger the idea of emotions
as a way of being in the world and gives it a unique twist because what he wants to say is that
what they've shown is that emotions aren't simply objects in the world that we somehow experience
in an odd way but emotions are rather our own actions that emotions are acts of consciousness acts of
consciousness in which we engage with the world with the particular objects of our emotions
or with the very general objects of our moods now this sort of leaves open the question well
what about all those things that say William James and Sigmund Freud were talking about
where obviously the body has a very important place in emotions too and Sartre doesn't ignore that
but incorporates it in his theory in an intriguing way he says that emotions are acts of a certain
sort acts in which we try to escape from a difficult situation now as so many theories of
emotion this I think points out an important truth of some emotions but ignores others one
of the examples that Sartre gives is the emotion of resentment and resentment of course is by its
very nature sort of a confrontation with a world which you find difficult and perhaps even oppressive
and he says that resentment is a kind of escape and it works in the following sort of way and he
goes back to Isop the ancient fabulist who tells a story that you all know about the fox and the
grapes and the fox tries to get the grapes and can't reach them he tries all of his foxy wiles
and can't figure out how to get the grapes and he finally turns away and discussed and says
they're probably sour anyhow now that little story captures a gem of an insight and that's how we
often act when we find ourselves in a situation that we can't get we want we can't control
and so what we do is we turn on the situation and we sort of reject it and I talked about
resentment as Nietzsche describes it for example in an earlier lecture but the idea that Sartre has
here is that resentment is an act by which we escape responsibility for a world which we find
too difficult now where does the body enter in well there is a kind of physiology of resentment
but as opposed to William James who Sartre talks about in some detail it's not that we have the
physiological response which gives rise to the sensations that are the emotion which in turn
perhaps give rise to the kind of behavior that characterize the emotion but rather it's the
all the other way around that what we start with is a recognition of the difficulty of the situation
and then we act in such a way as to change not only our behavior but to change our physiology
and so Sartre would say that James gets it backwards it's not the physiology that characterizes
and causes the emotion but rather the emotion creates the physiology so when you feel sad
and you have that kind of sinking feeling or when you feel angry and you have that aggressive feeling
these physiological experiences are consequent to the causes that sorry the the the effects of
the emotions themselves so Sartre rather intriguingly talks about magical transformations of the world
and that magical transformation includes a kind of magical or he even calls it an incantation of
the body so it's not that he ignores all this but rather basically an emotion is an act of
intentionality towards the world it's an act of engagement now with that we can start changing
our picture of the relationship between an emotion and an expression if you think of an infant
infants express their emotions and it would be very clumsy to say well what goes on is first
of all an emotion in the infant's mind and then it acts it out not just because infants obviously
don't deliberate and plan their expressions but rather because it's a very smooth sequence
that the emotion and the expression are essentially a single unit and what happens as we grow up
is not that we sort of separate the units but rather as we grow up what we learn to do is to
control our expression and with the expression the emotion so what we get to do and of course culture
helps a great deal here is what we get to do is we learn how to have emotions in a socially
acceptable way which may well be in certain contexts in certain cultures which may well be
not to act as if you have them at all but nevertheless what all this is trying to do
is to break down that idea of emotions in the mind as opposed to a concept of emotion which is
in some sense out there as an engagement with the world now all this leads to a very interesting
alternative account one thinks of anger for example and it's not just that you get angry
and at some point you express it but rather if I were to sort of diagram all this I would say
the anger itself is out there it's in social space maybe you haven't displayed enough that the other
person knows that it's there but the idea of an emotional expression is not just something that
sort of is the outward manifestation of something that's happening inward but rather the emotion
itself is something that's in space in social space it's between people in fact going back to
some examples that I gave in earlier lectures I would even argue that there's a politics of emotion
that emotions are not individual they are not just personal they are not private but almost
all emotions and I'll leave some room for some exceptions but almost all emotions have to do
with our relationships with other people and the emotions are part and parcel of those relationships
they are not individual and private experiences
