Lecture 3 It's Good to be Afraid
Fear is perhaps our most important emotion.
Imagine what life would be without it.
Now if you just think about it for a minute, you might think, that sounds pretty good.
I could talk to my boss, I could ask someone on a date, I could visit one of those dangerous
places in the world that I've always been afraid to go, but think for another minute.
Without fear, we'd subject ourselves to all sorts of dangers, to all sorts of really fatal
situations.
Just like imagine being without pain, again, first thought, that's great, my back ache
would go away, I wouldn't have any more headaches, it wouldn't hurt so much if I broke a limb
or whatever, but then you think for another minute and you think, if I didn't feel pain,
I could walk into a bus stop, my arm could be cut off, and I wouldn't even notice.
I could bleed to death.
There are all sorts of things that warn me that my body is about to undergo serious damage,
and without pain, I wouldn't know.
Well fear is like that too.
Fear is essential to tuning this into the world, and to alertness of dangers.
Tonio Demasio, who is one of the great neurologists of our time, has told us about one of his
patients, a very pretty but unfortunate young woman who is incapable of feeling fear.
She finds herself in all sorts of situations, the sorts of things that most young women
now are fully used to, have worked into their sort of habitual lives, but she doesn't notice
for example when some very manipulative con man approaches her, or when people who are
clearly psychopaths make her offers because she is so fearless.
She finds herself walking in dangerous places without fearing what most intelligent women,
or for that matter most intelligent men, would immediately fear as a dangerous place.
What fear does for us, as I say, is it tunes us into the world.
It tells us something about the world, and what it tells us is the world is dangerous.
Now fear is also one of the so-called basic emotions.
And just to repeat what I said in the last lecture, to say that it's a basic emotion
is to say that it's first of all universal, it's found in all human beings, but of course
fear is also found in a great many animals, in fact you can go pretty far down the phylogenetic
ladder, and you keep finding fear as an obvious emotion.
You walk in the room, turn on the lights, and the cockroaches scatter.
You walk into a pond, and the frog suddenly jumps in fear.
Now I'm not going to be too glib about attributing emotions to such animals, but it seems to
me that there is something like fear that's obvious in almost every living animal.
Plants I don't know.
Fear as a basic emotion is also a neurological syndrome.
And what that means is that it is whatever else it is, it involves certain kinds of basic,
virtually automatic reactions, which get triggered off, and once they get triggered off, there
are all sorts of characteristic behaviors and characteristic symptoms that go along with
them.
And again, if you just think about the last time you were afraid, you can imagine these
very easily.
If you are afraid, you tend to, for example, shiver.
If you are afraid, you tend to feel pale.
If you are afraid, you feel the hairs on the back of your neck stand up.
If you are afraid, you tend to feel, let's just call it, say, a little bit loose in the
bowels.
But in general, there are these physiological reactions.
And it's those reactions that characterize it as a basic emotion.
So, fear obviously has certain characteristic facial expressions.
It's pretty easy to come up with a basic fear face, even if you're drawing a happy face,
you can make fear with just a couple of lines.
And, of course, it's one of the things that actors and actresses try to perfect right
away.
If you can't show fear, you've obviously lost connection with one of the basic human emotions.
But the idea here is that fear is a basic emotion, which is to say that it's a neurological
syndrome.
It has certain characteristic involuntary reactions, and that's what makes it fear.
That's what distinguishes it, for example, from anger.
There are different kinds of reactions.
Now fear is, in fact, probably the most studied emotion in the lab.
First of all, it's easy to induce fear.
Anger, a little bit trickier.
But fear, for example, you just give an animal a shock, and with a couple of repetitions,
you induce fear in a rat, or fear in a dog.
If you have an undergraduate, you're more circumscribed by ethics, but it's pretty easy
to induce fear in an undergraduate.
You simply threaten them with humiliation in front of their peers, or you threaten their
grades.
But there are any number of ways in which fear can be readily instantiated.
That's important, because one of the dangers that I will often refer to in lectures is
we tend to infer from something we find out about one emotion to something we know about
emotions in general, and often the generalization doesn't work.
So the things about anger that I said last time, that I want to be very careful, we don't
too quickly generalize the characteristics of emotions in general.
And there are lots of things about fear, for example, their basic neurological structure
that I want to be very careful about generalizing too quickly.
But let me talk about that neurological structure, because as I said, fear is one of the most
studied emotions, and not just because it's easy to produce in the lab, but also because
our knowledge of what goes on in the brain is more thorough for this particular emotion
than for virtually any other.
Much of this research is due to a fellow in New York named Joseph LeDoux, who has, among
other things, pointed to one particular part of the lower brain, which seems to have a
very important place in the fear reaction.
It is called the amygdala, and I'm not going to go into any neurology here, but it's important
because it seems to be a kind of conduit of information from the world to a certain kind
of reaction, of what we call the fear reaction.
LeDoux talks about a certain cell assembly, which is triggered off by certain sorts of
themes from the environment.
This is very primitive, it is something that precedes any kind of real information or consciousness.
One way to think about it is the way that a person reacts, for example, if a dark shadow
crosses their path, or in fact not just human beings, of course, but there are lots of animals
who are clearly hardwired to react if a dark shadow goes overhead.
It might be a hawk, it might be an eagle, it might be some other predator, but the basic
idea is you don't expect a rabbit or a rat to stop and think about this stuff.
It is sort of immediate flow from the shadow and the inflow through the amygdala to a certain
kind of reaction.
This idea that we are built so that we respond to certain general themes is extremely important
and pretty obviously beneficial in terms of evolution.
The idea of reacting before we even know what we're reacting to is clearly important.
If you've walked down a dark street in a dangerous part of town, very often you'll find yourself
aware that something is wrong and feeling fear before you have any recognition whatsoever
of what it is that might be wrong, before you see a person, before you hear the footsteps,
before you sort of think about, okay, I'm in this bad part of town.
The idea is that there is a part of a brain, a part of us, that is evolved in such a way
as to allow for very fast escape behavior, or very fast freezing behavior, or perhaps
very fast aggressive behavior, but it happens so fast that it doesn't make, doesn't leave
time for much sort of knowledge about what's going on.
Now, in terms of evolutionary psychology, one can make the following point.
It's much better that we should so react before we know what's going on, than we should have
to process it, think it, and understand it, and then react.
It's pretty clear that a creature, a person who did that, would be wiped out long ago.
On the other hand, if we have these fast reactions before we even know what's going on, that is
an extremely important evolutionary feature, and of course, it's something that we see
in everyday life.
Many people panic, or many people show fear, even before they know what's going on.
You can walk into a room in which people are all kind of nervous, and before you have any
idea what's happening, you feel nervous too.
We'll talk about that later on, but the idea again is that the reaction takes place independently
of knowledge.
Now, what I've just said is, of course, fascinating and very important, but it's also very limited,
and it also has a problem attached to it, and the problem is that fear as a basic emotion
is also a motion in the larger sense, which I'm building towards, which is it's a way
of engaging in the world.
I started by saying, fear is recognizing that the environment is dangerous, but that's
not about something that's going on in your brain.
That's about recognizing something about the world, and I would say that fear, whatever
else it is, has to be something like the recognition of something dangerous in the world.
Now, Ladoo, when he draws out the consequences of what he's found out, disagrees.
He would say that fear is not necessarily conscious.
Fear doesn't necessarily even involve a feeling.
Sometimes it does, but you might think of fear as the feeling of fear as something like
the gauge on your car that tells you how much gas you have.
It doesn't have anything to do with putting gas in your tank.
It just lets you know that there is or is not gas in your tank, or you might think of
the bulb on a butterball turkey that when the turkey is done, it pops up.
But of course, the little bulb doesn't cook the turkey and has nothing to do with cooking
the turkey.
It simply lets you know what's going on.
And of course, people were cooking turkeys for many years before butterball invented
this little thing, and you can cook a turkey perfectly appropriate without it.
And what Ladoo is suggesting here is that fear, the full force of fear, can take place
without any necessary feeling, without any necessary consciousness, and certainly, as
I said a minute ago, without any real recognition about what's going on.
So you can be afraid, but you don't have to necessarily know what you're afraid of,
and in fact, you don't even have to necessarily know that you are afraid, nor do you even
have to feel anything in particular, although I think even Ladoo would admit that that would
be a pretty rare occurrence.
Put it into old philosophical language.
William James talks about the feeling as something like an epiphenomenon, and that's to say
very much what I said with the gas gauge and the butterball turkey example, and that is
that consciousness here is not essential to the emotion itself, but consciousness is kind
of an add-on, or to put it in the terms that Ladoo himself uses, consciousness or feeling,
that's the icing on the cake, but it's not the cake itself.
Now this obviously is going to cause me some real problems, because what I want to say
is that in all emotions are engagements with the world, and fear of course is no exception.
One might have precisely the physiological responses that Ladoo describes in such detail,
but I would say that's not yet fear, and it's not just a matter of the feeling, but it's
a matter of the engagement.
Now one thing here about this kind of discussion is that fear is often talked about, as we
mentioned about anger in the last lecture, as a very brief sort of physiological response,
but as we all know, fear can last a long time.
If you're afraid of an internal revenue audit, if you're afraid of strangers, if you're
afraid of your father, this is a fear that can last for many years, decades, a lifetime,
and it is highly implausible that anything like these particular brain reactions are
going on all that time.
So of fear we want to say, as of anger, that we want to understand not just these impulses
of fear as important as they might be, but we want to understand what long-term fear
is like.
Secondly, while it might be possible, in fact, we all know that it's possible to be afraid
of a dark shadow or something large coming towards you without any information at all,
it is impossible to use one example to be afraid of an internal revenue audit without
a whole lot of information.
I mean, first of all, you have to know what the internal revenue service is.
You have to know what an audit is.
You have to know why people would be audited, and you have to know what you have done that
might make you a candidate for an audit, and all this is assuming that you're completely
honest, you haven't made any mistakes, you haven't committed any fraud, but nevertheless,
you might be afraid here, but that fear embodies all kinds of information.
So quite to the contrary of the Ladoo analysis, I want to say some fears really do require
a good deal of knowledge about what's going on in the world.
To say this is to say that fear is not just the physiological reaction, but fear is the
overall engagement which involves physiology and feeling as well as a certain recognition
about the nature of the world, namely that it's dangerous.
The internal revenue service with regard to your personal interest is dangerous.
Now of course, you can be mistaken about this.
The rabbit can be mistaken about the shadow overhead.
It might not be a hawk at all.
It might be an airplane, it might be a cloud, it might just be some kind of other innocent
shadow.
Nevertheless, evolutionarily, as I said, it's probably good that it makes that mistake,
because better to make that mistake than the other one.
That is thinking there's no danger when in fact there is.
But of course, with the IRS audit, we can also make a mistake.
In fact, it might be that if you file a very simple return and it's very straightforward
and you don't have any problems with it, the odds of you being audited are very low.
You can also make a mistake in terms of imagination.
You can imagine that the IRS is auditing you when in fact they're not.
You can also exaggerate your fears.
You can think that in fact, the odds of my being audited are very high when in fact they're
very low.
And of course, there's even foolish fears.
I can worry about being audited by the IRS even though I haven't made any money and I
never filed a return and in fact I'm out of the system.
All of which is to say that there's this element of fear, which is not vertical, which is not
necessarily truth involving, but nevertheless our engagement with the world here involves
our imagining that the world is in fact like something or other which might be wrong for
any number of reasons, which leads us to a really serious question.
Because one of the distinctions which is typically made of fear as it's made of anger is the
distinction between rational and irrational fears.
Now, let me start this discussion by pointing out that most of our fears are rational.
That is to say, the world is in fact dangerous, that when you are afraid of what might happen
there is usually some good reason for it, whether or not it is ultimately mistaken, whether
or not you have imagined certain parts of it, whether or not you have exaggerated the fear
or even whether or not it's a foolish fear.
But most fears tend to be rational, that is they tend to be reasonable.
The world in fact is dangerous.
On the other hand, to talk about irrational fears is very tempting because it raises
all sorts of paradoxes and problems.
And here's why I wanted to start with that caveat, that most fears in fact are rational.
Because here's one of those cases of generalization that's very dangerous.
If you start with the idea that there are irrational fears, and talk about those as
I will in a moment, and then generalize from the idea of irrational fear to fear in general,
you might very well come up with the conclusion that fear is itself irrational, or more neutral
way of generalizing it, that fear has nothing to do with rationality, that it's simply
a matter of certain neurological processes and so on.
I want to say there are irrational fears, but they're the exception.
But they're a fascinating exception.
The most fascinating examples of these are phobias.
Now the characteristic of a phobia is that someone is obsessed with the idea of something
as dangerous, when in fact, and they know, it's not dangerous at all.
Now there are phobias in which people are just playing wrong, I mean they are afraid
of something, it's in fact not dangerous, but they believe it's dangerous, and that's
enough.
That's not the interesting case.
The interesting case is where someone is afraid of something, and they know full well that
it's nothing to be afraid of.
I'll take two examples.
There's arachnophobia, fear of spiders, and it's something I think most of us have a
little bit, and there may in fact be something hardwired about just the appearance of a spider
that may trigger off some responsiveness.
I don't know.
But in any case, people who have arachnophobia are not just worried about tarantulas which
look ferocious, and brown recluse spiders which in fact are very dangerous, but they're
afraid of any spider.
And it might be that they generalize from the idea that some spiders are dangerous to
the idea that all spiders are dangerous, but the interesting part is that many of them don't
even make that mistake.
Which rather, they look at this itsy-bitsy spider, and they know this is a very safe
spider.
It doesn't attack.
It in fact runs and hides whenever it can, and it does enormous environmental good by
eating little bugs and so on that sort of attack your plants.
And yet there's this fear, the fear reaction that will do describe so vividly having to
do with the amygdala and these sort of general sort of threatening gestures.
Okay.
How do we explain that?
Now a typical way of explaining it is something like this.
Someone will say, well, intellectually I know that the spider is not dangerous at all.
But emotionally I'm terrified.
Or take something else that affects a great many people.
Fear of flying.
Now as you know from any number of movies, Rain Man for example, these statistics on
flying, make flying even in this age of terrorism, the safest way to travel.
You are much more likely to be killed in your car on the way to the airport than you are
on any flight you take.
And people who have fear of flying know this.
And they might even be obsessed with finding out all the different safety features and
all the different protections that go into every flight.
And nevertheless they're terrified about getting on the plane.
What's that about?
And they might well tell you, well look intellectually I know flying is safe, I know it's much more
dangerous to drive to the airport, but emotionally I just can't get on the plane.
It's like I freeze up and I just panic.
Well what do we say about this?
It seems to me the description is wrong.
There are two levels of activity going on here.
But it's not between the intellectual and the emotional.
It's not between knowledge of the world and something which is just a kind of dumb physiological
reaction.
Although that is the way it's now typically analyzed.
Then on the one hand you have all this information.
But the information somehow doesn't connect with what Ladoo calls the low road of fear,
which is this triggering of this response, which has nothing to do with all that sophisticated
information you've gathered.
I suggest there are two levels going on, to be sure, and perhaps more.
But they're not levels that might be described as intellectual and emotional.
They're both intellectual, or let's say they both involve intelligence, and they're
both emotional.
To put it in a language that a great many psychologists would use these days, it's
two different levels of appraisal.
On the one hand, there's a very basic level of appraisal, like the shadow going over the
animal, which is something around here is dangerous.
On the other hand, there's a very well informed level of appraisal that involves all this
evidence and research and facts about spiders or facts about flying.
But it's not as if you've got an intellectual level and an emotional level, but rather it's
two different levels of what kind of information is being processed.
Now again, I think the important thing is not to generalize this too much, because in
most cases of fear in particular, these different levels, two or however many there might be,
all agree on the phobic case.
In the phobic case, what you find is that they don't, and that's what makes it so dramatic.
The fact that you can't control your phobic reaction has to do with the depth and profundity
of the one level of appraisal, as opposed to the kind of superficial and not really fully
believed other level, and we're going to have to talk about that a lot more.
But the idea here is that it's not as if it's intellect or intelligence versus emotion,
but rather an irrational emotion is a very convoluted and complex set of inner conflicts.
Now as we're talking about fear, it's important to point out that fear has a great many other
varieties.
One of them is panic.
And every once in a while, I've sort of slipped into talking about panic when I've been talking
about fear, but I think there's a real difference between the two, and it's a difference which
we also see in the case of anger, which I'll refer to in a moment.
And that is, fear involves real information about the world, and even if it's a very basic
fear, something that doesn't involve much information, it nevertheless has a real sense
of appraisal that the world is dangerous.
Panic on the other hand is, in an important sense, mindless.
The distinction I want to make here is between one kind of emotion, a full emotion, that
does engage with the world, and another one which is really like the emotions that Ladoo
and others have talked about, which are pretty much purely physiology.
Panic is for the most part pure physiology.
Rage, moving over to the anger side, is pure physiology too.
Many years ago, I was talking with a very wonderful neurophilosopher named Pat Churchland, who
suggested to me that all the things I was saying about anger and fear were really interesting,
but beside the point.
Because she, as a neurologist, could stimulate a rage reaction in a cat, for example, just
by stimulating a certain part of its brain.
And it would claws out, hair standing up, hissing, howling, all the rest of it, but
it wasn't engaging with the world at all.
It wasn't angry about anything.
I thought about that for a long time, and it led me to make this important distinction.
Yes, you can do that, and there is something you might call rage reaction, but that's not
anger.
And in the same way, I want to suggest, sure, there are certain kinds of stimulations of
the brain that cause a person to panic, but that's not the same thing as fear.
If you think about panicking, and I think most of us have panicked at one time or another,
in panic, you just run.
And ironically, if you watch a squirrel, for example, running in front of a car, you run
in exactly the wrong direction, because there's no information there, or utterly minimal information.
It's just something that sort of flashes that says, run, but that's about the extent of it.
So panic is opposed to fear, like rage as opposed to anger.
I want to suggest is a good example of how close we can come to the pure neurological
syndrome, and at the same time, appreciate how rare that is.
The Greek meaning of rage aside.
Rage is something that people very rarely fear, and when they do feel it, they really
need some sort of neuro-psychiatrist.
Panic is something that people pretty rarely feel, and when they do, I want to suggest
they probably need some kind of psychiatrist, but panic is different from fear.
Another example here is anxiety.
Anxiety is a fascinating emotion in its own right.
It's interesting because anxiety seems not to engage with the world the way fear does,
or if it does engage with the world, it engages in a very general sort of uninformed way.
When you feel anxious, now we do talk about feeling anxious about something, but when
you feel just plain anxious or have an anxiety attack, Dr. Freud would say, that's because
the anxiety, the feeling of fear, has been decoupled from all the information and the
engagement that's involved in the fear itself.
So anxiety is a variety of fear, but again, it's something that has to be talked about
in a very different kind of way, because it's not straightforwardly in engagement with
the world, but something else.
One more example, and that is horror.
Horror is a variation on fear too, but the difference is that in fear, part of the reaction
is needing to run or to behave in some sort of way, perhaps just freeze, or perhaps even
to fight back.
In horror, by contrast, there's a kind of different kind of reaction.
In horror, there is nothing to do.
At the same time, horror is obviously a very enticing emotion.
This is evidenced, for example, by the fact that people driving by an accident in the
highway almost inevitably slow down to observe, despite the fact that they know that what
they see might keep them awake for weeks, despite the fact that they know on some level
that they're obstructing traffic and probably making things harder for the people who are
trying to take care of the accident and so on, but there's something enticing about horror
that, again, makes it very different from fear.
However, there's a paradox of fear and a paradox of horror, and again, it's something
that Aristotle pointed out more than 2,000 years ago.
Aristotle asked the question, why do people go to see tragedies, plays like Oedipus, which
are just one depiction of horror after another?
And what people feel, among other things, is fear, but obviously they're pain and they're
anxious to see it.
Why?
Now, part of the answer is because of the quality of the play and the writing and the
acting and all that, that's not very interesting.
Why do people want to feel fear?
Why do they want to feel horror?
In modern day, the example would be people going to horror movies.
Now again, there's easy way of explaining some of this.
It's a chance for young women to sort of scream and cuddle up to their first dates and so
on, but the basic question still remains, why do people want to feel such feelings?
Or in real life, people go bungee jumping and all this other stuff that they have on
reality TV.
Why do they do that?
Well, Aristotle's answer was that such experiences give them a catharsis.
There's a sense in which it sort of empties them of other fears.
That's a hypothesis, which Freud, of course, plays with 2,000 years later that we're going
to have to talk about, but I want to leave it at that, that there is a paradox of fear
and horror, such that we talk about fear and certainly horror as, again, negative emotions,
but I want to raise the possibility that if we go out of our way to experience such things,
then maybe they're not so purely negative at all.
