Lecture 19 – Emotions and the Self
There's an implicit ingredient in the emotions that we've alluded to pretty much all the
way through these lectures, but we haven't talked about it as such. And that is the self.
Many years ago, when I just started thinking about all these matters, I put forward the
rather bold hypothesis that all emotions were ultimately about self-esteem. They maximized
it, they salvaged it, and so on. I gave it up because I became convinced over a short
period of time that the idea is too narcissistic, that it's not just about self-esteem, that
very often our emotions are about other people and about other people's well-being. And
so instead of the sort of narcissistic image of self-esteem, I broadened it. But I would
still say that all emotions are self-involved. And what that means is what I'd like to examine
in this lecture. There's also another feature of emotions that has, again, been throughout
the lectures, but I haven't focused on it as such. And that is the idea that emotions
are conscious. Now on the one hand, this is taken as a perfectly straightforward bit of
common sense. Emotions are feelings, we're aware of our emotions, and our emotions, if
we're to know them at all, must in some sense be present to consciousness. However, since
Sigmund Freud a hundred or so years ago, this has come into some debate. Because it's clear
that, according to Freud, at least some emotions are unconscious, and Freud himself worried
at some length how something can be an emotion, which means it's conscious, and at the same
time be unconscious. And that's a piece I'd like to settle out, too. Now there's an image
here, and it's an image which we've used several times in the last few lectures, especially,
and it's the image of reflection. And I made the point in the last lecture or so that when
we think about reflection, we shouldn't think about a kind of abstract or distant commentary
on what's going on in our emotional lives. And I used the analogy of a sportscaster up
in the booth reporting on what's going on in the field below. I don't think it's like
that at all, but nevertheless, there's a metaphor, and one finds it in other languages
beside English, and that is the metaphor of reflection by way of a kind of mirror image.
So, you might think of reflection in two different ways. On the one hand, there's reflection
in the sense of thinking, taking up the first person's standpoint, and thinking in particular
about oneself and one's activities and one's feelings. But there's another sense of reflection,
and that sense of reflection is you look in a mirror, and what you see is your reflection.
Now, there's a clear and obvious relationship between the two, because when you think about
yourself, it's very much like catching an image of yourself in something like the mind's
eye or a special kind of mirror. But it also points to two different ways of being conscious
of your emotions. One is through the usual first person route, so that as the person
that has the emotion, you might say, I have privileged access to that emotion itself.
On the other hand, we sometimes come to know our emotions, not through that sort of first
person privileged access, but we come to know our emotions by way of other people. So, someone
will say to you, why are you getting so angry? And my response is, I'm not getting angry,
and then they point out, well, listen to yourself. And so by observing my behavior, almost as
if I'm observing somebody else's behavior, I become aware of what emotion I'm undergoing.
Now, I want to break this into two pieces, because first I want to talk about the self,
and then I want to talk about consciousness. And of course, underline the entire lecture
is going to be the connection between the two, and the connection between the two is
self-consciousness.
Start with the self. It's been argued that all living things have a self. Lewis Thomas,
notable biologist of some years ago, once argued that even the lowest creatures have
a sense of self. He used as his example the not very exciting or entertaining animal or
being the slime mold. And the slime mold, he claimed, has a sense of self in that as
it grows, and it grows pretty much asexually, every once in a while it'll meet another piece
of itself. So it sort of grows, two pods or whatever you call them, come into contact,
and right away it recognizes this as part of itself. On the other hand, if a slime mold
meets another slime mold, it recognizes that this is not itself. Now, all this, of course,
is nothing to do with consciousness. It all has to do with chemical interactions and so
on, but the basic idea is that even such a simple creature recognizes the difference
between self and not self, and that's the basis of selfhood.
More recently, Tony DeMasio, the neuropsychiatrist that I've referred to several times in previous
lectures, has argued that there's a core sense of self, or what you might call a proto-self.
And again, it goes all the way down the animal kingdom, and virtually any living being has
this sense of self. Now, that makes the sense of self very primitive. It makes it really
not very different from saying that you're a coherent living thing. But of course, when
we talk about the self, we've got much more in mind than that. For one thing, our sense
of self is pretty thoroughly self-conscious, and what we have to understand is what that
means, because there's a debate going, and has been going now for 30, 40 years, about
whether, for example, animals, and I'm thinking now of so-called higher or intelligent animals,
are also self-conscious. Now, what's at stake here is really a huge theory
that we can't even go into, and that is the theory that self-consciousness presupposes
language, that only a creature who can speak, only a creature who can think, only a creature
who can articulate, only a creature that has certain kind of concepts, can be self-conscious.
I would say that can't be right. Dogs are obviously self-conscious in a number of ways.
Apes, and there have been lots of experiments to sort of test this out, apes are self-conscious,
and to the point where, for example, if you take a chimpanzee, and you put a dot on its
forehead, put it in front of a mirror, it'll look at itself, recognize itself, and it will
rub its forehead to try and get the dot off. Well, that's taken as a pretty paradigmatic
example of self-consciousness. But there is a sense in which, of course,
no animals are self-conscious in the way we are, precisely because there are forms of
self-consciousness, and this is what we're going to be worried about, forms of self-consciousness
that distinctively presuppose linguistic capacity, and not just linguistic capacity,
but a certain kind of language. It's a language, for example, that has to have some sort of
reflexive ability. You have to be able to refer back to yourself, and that requires
a vocabulary of a special sort. Not all language would have it.
Now, Sartre, Jean-Paul Sartre, in his early phenomenological work, pointed to two very
different kinds of consciousness. One is what he calls pre-reflective consciousness. It's
consciousness before self-awareness, and so he gives an example. The example is if I'm
running for a bus, and he asks, well, what is my experience at that particular time?
And I'm tempted to say, sort of informally, well, it's the experience of my running for
the bus. But Sartre would say, no. What you're experiencing at the time is the bus to be
overtaken. So you see the bus receding in the background, and you're trying very hard
to catch it, but all you're really aware of is the bus. Well, that's pre-reflective consciousness.
Now, interestingly enough, Sartre, in his essay on the emotions, insists that emotions are
like that. They're pre-reflective. They don't yet involve self or self-consciousness. Reflective
consciousness, by contrast, reflective consciousness is where the concept of self enters in. So
that's when I become aware of my doing something, my trying to catch the bus, my having a certain
emotion, and so on. And so at the heart of this theory is what you might call two different
levels of consciousness. There's consciousness plain and simple, and then there's self-consciousness,
which also is a reflection. It includes a concept of self. Now, I think this is too
simple, and one of the things I'd like to argue in this lecture is that that division
into two levels of consciousness, a sort of basic level, and then a higher level of self-consciousness
is too simple to capture all the complexities of the phenomenon. It's been repeated by a
great many other psychologists, philosophers ever since, and usually they have fairly vacuous
names like first order and second order consciousness, and so on. Sometimes more sophisticated jargon-filled
language, but I would argue that in every case, things are more complicated than that,
and that's what I'd like to point out. Now, one thing you might think about is that the
self enters into different emotions in different ways. Some emotions don't seem to involve
the self at all. For example, if I'm really angry at someone, or if I really hate someone,
or if I love someone, you might think, well, the emotion is all about them, so it doesn't
have anything to do with me. But from what I've said in previous lectures, this is pretty
obviously suspicious, because anger isn't just being angry at the other person. Anger
is being angry at the other person because he or she offended me. So, anger, despite
it seeming to be about the other person, in fact, is about a relationship. Hatred and
love, same sort of thing. Hatred takes as its object the other person, but nevertheless,
it's a relationship, and love is very similar. That's why the two are so often connected.
It's a different kind of relationship, the one's hostile, the other is tender, but the
idea is that love, to take the nice example, is about a relationship. It's about the two
of us and how we fit together and so on. So even though there's a sense in which my focus
might be on the other person, the emotion is about the two of us. There are other emotions
that are quite clearly about the self. And I'm talking, for example, about that whole
family of emotions that we talked about many lectures ago, that have to do with a direct
self-evaluation. So, for example, if I'm proud of myself for having accomplished something
significant, obviously it's myself that's the center of the emotion. David Hume caught
this back in the 18th century. He made an analysis of pride in a way the sort of main
piece of his whole thesis of emotions and said in a really complicated way that the
object of an emotion, although I didn't quite talk that way, but the idea that accompanies
every emotion is the idea of a self accomplishing something. And that gives rise to a second
idea, which is also about the self. And this isn't about the self accomplishing something,
but it's about the self as such. And I think there's a real insight here, although Hume
has got a little bit tangled in his methodology. And basically what it is, is if you do something
great, let's say you win a Nobel Prize or make it simpler, you win a spelling bee when
you're in elementary school. Well, it starts when you're proud of your accomplishment,
what you've just achieved. But then it's as if there's a spreading glow. And that
spreading glow comes to encompass your whole self. But the idea is that pride is an emotion
which in either of these two senses is about the self. And of course the same thing with
shame, embarrassment, guilt, remorse, where in one way or another you feel badly about
what you've done, or you feel awkward about being caught in a certain situation, but it's
very self directed. So in these emotions it looks as if the self is really the focus
of the whole emotion. But even if you look at the variety of examples I've just given,
the self can sometimes be an agent. For example, when you're feeling very aggressive and angry,
there's a very dynamic sense of selfhood there. And it's a self that does things. Or
you can see the self as a victim, for example, in embarrassment. You can see the self as
a beneficiary, for example, in gratitude. Or you can see the self as innocent. If you're
just sort of caught up in something which moves you, say embarrassment again, but nevertheless
you don't have a very active role. And of course there are a whole host of emotions that
involve being entangled with others. So part of my analysis of love some time ago was love
is an emotion in which the boundaries of the self kind of break down, in which you find
yourself merging or fusing with another person. And this is still about the self, but it's
a greatly enlarged and in many ways embellished notion of self. So all these are very different
senses of self, which raises a really interesting question. Is it the same self?
Now there's a concept of soul that has been around for many years. In fact, trace it back
to the Egyptians, I suppose, and perhaps before, where the idea is the soul is what holds all
this together. So you might say that the soul is the metaphysical nugget that has these
various properties, where the various properties are having the different emotions and different
kind of personality traits and all that. But of course, many people are dubious about
the soul. Or they've talked about the soul in much more fragmented ways. Or they've
talked about the soul in a much more purely metaphysical and sort of isolated way. So
if the soul is to survive the body, for example, you don't want it already encumbered with
all these sort of emotional attachments and so on. So the soul is considered as something
quite independent. But also, their philosophers, and I'm thinking of Nietzsche, for example,
who would say the very idea of the solar, he doesn't talk that much about soul, so the
very idea of the self is something which is more like a community, so that when I'm angry
and when I'm in love and when I'm jealous and when I'm embarrassed and when I'm proud,
these all point to distinctive notions of self. And so there's no reason to suppose that
all of these different selves are in fact the same. And sometimes, of course, if for
example, I have a love-hate relationship with someone, these different selves can even be
at war with one another. So the question I want to raise here, but I'm not going to
try and really answer it, is, is the self unified? Is the self singular? Is the self
what has these different emotions? Or is the object of all these different emotions? Or
is it something much more complicated and much harder to pin down? Many recent post-modernist
philosophers would clearly opt for the latter thesis. They would say the self, in fact, is
an illusion. It's a kind of creation we've made, but in fact it doesn't refer to anything
singular at all. With that, let me move to consciousness, because the idea of consciousness
often borrows from these various questions about the self or the soul, and it suggests
in a different way that the self, by way of consciousness, is divided. So Freud talks
about the conscious and the unconscious, and later on he talks about the three agencies,
the ego, the id, and the superego. And whatever terminology we're using here, and Freud has
quite a few, the idea is that the self is, again, not singular, or that what we generally
call consciousness has different components, different parts, a different topology he says.
So to talk about conscious and unconscious is in a kind of physicalistic way. To talk
about an idea, or an emotion, or a thought being potentially in one of two very different
places. And a good deal of his psychoanalysis is essentially trying to move this thought,
or this impulse, or this emotion, from one place, namely unconsciousness, into another,
namely making it conscious. He says, where there used to be id, let there be ego. And
the idea is that we're better off if things move out of the unconscious into consciousness.
Well, what does all this mean? Well, first of all, I want to make good the point that
I suggested before. I think the distinction between unconscious and conscious is too clean,
too neat. And of course, Freud himself saw this by introducing yet a third sort of level,
something he calls the pre-conscious. So an emotion, for example, can be conscious, which
means I'm fully aware of it, or it can be unconscious, which means it's repressed and
I can't get at it. But it can also be pre-conscious, which means I don't really notice it at the
time. But all I have to do is sort of turn my attention to it, and there it is. Jean-Paul
Sartre, who's usually a harsh critic of Freud, has a nice example of something that would
count as pre-conscious here. He says, suppose I'm sad. And we've all been in this situation
where you're sad, forget about what you're sad about, and suddenly an old friend comes
by. And suddenly you find yourself behaving very congenially, even a little bit joyfully,
and you sort of say hi to the friend, have a nice conversation, and Sartre puts it, my
sadness patiently waits on the sideline. Because as soon as you're finished with your friend,
there's the sadness again. Well, it's not as if you were aware of the sadness, certainly
not directly, as you were talking with your friend. But the sadness is always with you.
And the idea is that it's not exactly conscious, it's certainly not unconscious, something
Sartre doesn't believe in. But nevertheless, it's there in the background. So already we're
starting to see that you can't just talk about things being conscious or unconscious. And
in Sartre's terms, I wouldn't want to say everything is either reflective and self-conscious
or pre-reflective without a sense of self. So how should we talk about this? Well, one
thing I want to notice is the consciousness is, shall we call it a contrast term? So that
when I'm falling asleep at night, and my wife says to me, are you conscious? I know what
she's asking, she's really asking, am I asleep or not? And if I can answer, the answer is
probably, no, no, I'm conscious. On the other hand, somebody hits me on the head, and I
kind of fall down. And there the notion of conscious or unconscious means something quite
different. Or my students are sitting in class, and I see a sort of dazed look on one of
their faces. And I say, are you conscious? And, well, the answer might be no, but I mean
probably it's yes, but not conscious in the right sense. They're not paying attention.
And so too when we're talking about having an emotion, there are lots of different ways
of being conscious of your emotion. Now the sort of cheap bargain basement level of consciousness
here is something that you might simply call registering or something like having a sensation.
And in this sense, I think most creatures are conscious of their emotions if they have
emotions at all. I mean, certainly if we're talking about birds, dogs, other mammals,
there's a sense in which, yeah, I mean, they're clearly conscious because they clearly have
sensations, and they clearly have emotions, and those emotions affect their behavior.
But on the other hand, to notice your emotion, that's already somewhat reflective. For example,
I'm talking to someone, and I'm finding myself getting more and more upset. And what I notice
is that I'm getting upset. What I'm feeling exactly? Am I getting angry? Am I getting frustrated?
Am I feeling awkward? Am I being embarrassed or insulted? Well, none of that has quite
become obvious yet. But what I do is I notice that there's a change in my body. I notice
that I'm starting to act in a little strange way, and so I notice that I'm getting upset.
That's very different from, for example, becoming aware of what emotion it is that I have. So
when I label my emotion, and I say, that's anger, or this is a proof of your own insecurity,
or you are simply getting jealous of the fact that this person knows things that you don't,
then I become conscious in a much more sophisticated sense, because I'm articulating what I'm
realizing about the situation. That's different again than, for example, noticing what I'm
really angry about. And as I start to articulate what it is that I'm angry about, the self-consciousness
of the emotion, again, kind of shifts up another level. And of course, to notice and
to attend to an emotion is still not necessarily to understand it, but understanding has different
levels too. I can understand that I'm angry because this person's just getting me mad.
I can understand that I'm angry because he's challenging something that I firmly believe.
But there's another level of understanding, you might call it the Freudian level of understanding,
and that is where I understand the whole background of the anger. You understand that it's not
just about this one occasion, but this is the way I react to anybody who looks like that,
or anybody who talks like that, or perhaps this is the way I react to anyone who reminds
me of my father. And so there are different levels of consciousness here, and I don't
think we can simply leave it at saying, okay, there's consciousness, and then there's
non-consciousness, or there's reflection, and then there's not reflection. But what
I want to argue is that all this is very complicated in what you might think of as a sort of stack-like
way, that there are different levels of consciousness, and they perform different kinds of duties
in my becoming aware of myself. Now, there's a question that has often been raised, and
I raised it in an earlier lecture, whether being conscious of your emotion, being self-conscious,
being reflective, in some sense takes away from the emotion. It's a very common suspicion
that if you get angry, but you notice you're getting angry, you'll get less angry. Or if
you're in love, and you notice that you're in love, and you especially try to talk about
or analyze your love, it kind of kills the love. Well, from what I'm saying, I hope it's
becoming even more obvious that that just isn't true. That what happens when you pay
attention to your emotion? What happens when you start to reflect on the reasons for having
it, and what it's really about? That it's just as likely that the emotion is going to
intensify. And intensifying is a way of saying, well, I'm angry because this person said
something insulting to me, and now I think about it, and I realize this really was insulting,
and I get angrier. Or I think about my beloved, and I think about why I love her. And it seems
to me foolish to say that that sort of thinking will detract from the love, quite the contrary,
but that sort of thinking just makes me love her more. So I would say reflection in any
of these sort of levels can either augment or subtract from the emotion itself, but there's
no general rule that reflection and emotion are somehow at odds, which is a thesis that
Sartre tries to push on us. Sartre says that basically when an emotion becomes reflective,
since it's a strategy which has to be covert, that the reflection itself undermines the emotion.
Freud says something a little bit different, but it really comes to the same thing, that
an emotion is powerful so long as it's unconscious. And when you bring the emotion to consciousness
and you realize what it is, that you've got this emotion because your uncle abused you
or your uncle threatened to abuse you many years ago in your childhood, that once you
realize what it is, the emotion goes away. Well, one of the things we found with all
the child abuse trials and so on in the last 30 years is that exactly the opposite happens.
People might very well have sort of forgotten about the whole thing. Let's not even use
the loaded word repression. But when they are then reminded, here's what happened, and
they start to either relive or manufacture the feelings that are appropriate to that
sort of abuse, they get much more upset. So I want to make it a strong point that reflection
is part of the emotional process. And I'm going to come back to that in the next lecture
when I'm going to talk about the role of reflection and emotional experience in some
detail. But one last point for this lecture. I spoke at the end of the last lecture about
emotional integrity. And I said emotional integrity is a very important character virtue. It's
something that very few people actually achieve, although it's an ideal I think for everyone.
It doesn't consist of simple consistency. So if you just have one emotion, you hate
somebody very much, or you love somebody very much, or you're just thoroughly embarrassed
about yourself. That's not emotional integrity, even though there's a kind of singularity
there. Rather emotional integrity involves not just the coherence of your own emotions,
but it's the coherence of emotions with your values, the coherence of emotions with your
reflection. And so emotional integrity, that sense of wholeness that we want is something
that involves not just emotions as such, but it involves reflection. So when you think
to yourself, I'm angry, but I'm right to be angry. And this fits in with my values because
I don't think anyone should behave like that. Then that forms a kind of whole. On the other
hand, when you reflect on your emotion and you think, I'm angry, I shouldn't be angry.
This is just the child or this is a person who is just doing what he was doing. And you
get embarrassed about being angry, or you get ashamed of being angry. Then the reflection
and the emotion don't fit together at all. And that's a kind of lack of emotional integrity.
But ultimately emotional integrity is a kind of complexity because none of us has the emotions
that we really want to have all the time. All of us are critical enough for ourselves
to realize that we never quite fit with our own ego ideals. And so the idea is that emotional
integrity is not just getting this all to be coherent. So much is also learning to accept
the complexity that is what it is to be a human being.
