Lecture 11, Freud's catharsis, The Hydraulic Model
In the last lecture, I tried to explain why I think it won't do to try and understand
emotions as feelings. They are feelings in a very general sense, but of course feelings
can cover an entire range from mere sensations to very sophisticated intuitions. So to say
that emotions are feelings isn't yet to say very much about them. But of course we try
to say a great deal about emotions, and consequently we often have appeal to metaphors. Now let
me say something about metaphors in general, and that is to say that something is a metaphor
is not necessarily to dismiss it or demean it. Metaphors are shot through science, and
sometimes they're very good metaphors, sometimes they're not such good metaphors. We talk about
emotions, for example, in terms of colors. You think about the green of jealousy and envy,
the blue of the blues, various sorts of sadness, the red of exciting emotions like anger, or
we talk about emotions as animals. You talk about someone being a tiger or a pussycat,
and there's nothing wrong with this. They help us understand the sorts of things that
we're talking about, and they certainly give us a kind of category. But I want to talk
for the most part today about a single metaphor that has had enormous influence in the history
of understanding of emotions, and it's what I call the hydraulic metaphor. The name itself
really is drawn from Freud, but from a great many other people too. And hydraulics, if you recall,
has to do with the science of pressure and fluids. So you have hydraulic cylinders in your car,
which work by increasing pressure, and that makes something do something else. In talking about
emotions, you hear a great deal of talk about people exploding or bursting, and to the contrary,
we talk about people bottling up their emotion. These have to do with metaphors of heat and
pressure. Now, as I described those metaphors very briefly, you probably picked up on the fact that
they are particularly apt for something like anger, or perhaps hatred. But the first thing to say
about the hydraulic metaphor is it's not that broadly applicable. And so people who talk in
terms of the hydraulic metaphor, while they intend to talk about the whole range of emotions, often
end up talking really just about anger. But if you think, for example, of fear, fear hardly seems
like hydraulics, or love, one might talk about being filled with love. But that's not a very
convincing metaphor. And what that usually means is something like, I've got so much love, but it's
not in terms of pressure and so on. One can talk about being filled with joy. But again, it's not
very convincing in terms of this heat pressure sort of image. Jealousy envy, as I mentioned,
probably better understood in terms of turning colors. Shame, we often feel like we're shrinking
away from the world. And sadness often feels like a kind of emptiness. So just to start with, I want
to say, whatever application the hydraulic metaphor has, it seems to be fairly limited. It seems to be
particularly prone to anger. But it's not all that relevant to a great many other emotions.
Now the hydraulic metaphor has a very long history. Of course, it comes into its own,
roughly in the 17th and 18th centuries, when the whole science of physics starts coming into its
own. But one can trace it at least back to the Stoics. And that's back to basically 2000 years
ago. Because the Stoics talked rather clearly about what they call the first movements of motion,
or what they call the passions. And the first movements of a passion had to do with these
sort of physiological changes. And they talked about two in particular. They talked about the idea
of being sort of innervated and sort of emptied by something like sadness. So you had a sinking
feeling in your chest was the way they often described it. And in terms of the angry emotions,
you often did feel filled with something. But the Stoics made a very important point.
And that was these experiences of being filled and emptied were not themselves the passions.
The passions were the judgments that one made regarding these movements afterwards.
So anger isn't the feeling of being filled with something. Anger is rather what they call the
ascent or the affirmation of that experience. And being sad wasn't just feeling empty. But being
sadness was the judgment that this is the way one ought to feel. So for the Stoics, about whom
I will have more to say later, for the Stoics there were these two different components of a
passion. The first of which fit the hydraulic metaphor. But the second of which was something
quite independent, which we'll talk about in the next lecture. Moving on to the Medievals,
there was a medieval physiological theory of emotion, which also had to do with filling and
emptying and so on. It was the theory of the humors, blood and bile and phlegm. And these were not just
organic substances. These were, in fact, they doubled as a kind of psychological fluid.
And so to understand the emotions was to understand the balance and the amount of the fluids.
This tradition continues into the modern age. The two perhaps most important philosophers
that I've been mentioning so far, Descartes in France and David Hume in Scotland, both of
whom wrote extensively about the emotions, talked in terms of animal spirits, which were little
particles in the blood. And of course, this is, in Descartes' case, before Harvey's discovery of
the circulation of the blood. In fact, Descartes thought that that was a wrong theory, one of his
mistakes. But nevertheless, the idea that there was some sort of substance in the fluid of the blood,
which itself explained our emotional outlook, that was already part and parcel of the hydraulic
theory. But as I said, the hydraulic theory really had to depend on modern physics. And so it really
hits its full stride with Freud. Now again, let me sort of balance this with a kind of ancient
reference. Freud believed in something that he called psychic energy. Now psychic energy is
an interesting metaphor, because on the one hand, energy, I think at the beginning of the 20th century,
energy could be construed of as a kind of fluid. And it is something that can circulate. It is
something that can be directed. It is something that can increase and didn't decrease. It is
certainly something that has to do with such things as heat. And so Freud's theory of psychic energy
was really a theory about the brain. Now, they didn't know much about the brain in those days,
but Freud had a theory, which he published at the very end of the 19th century. And most people
don't know this. But he was in his early days trying to make psychology, not yet psychoanalysis,
into a science. And he thought that science had to be in some sense physical. And so he had a theory
which said essentially what he called the psychic apparatus was isomorphic, the same form as the
physiology of the brain. So if you look at a brain, and this is about as far as they went in those
days, if you look at a brain, it really does look very convoluted. And it's very clear that
something's going on in there. And what he said was going on was the movement of psychic energy.
And psychic energy can, accordingly, be sort of directed in various sorts of ways. And so the
key terms of Freudian psychoanalysis later became such terms as catharsis, which essentially is a
kind of emptying, or catharsis, a kind of filling, or a kind of sublimation, which essentially means
a kind of channeling. So you sort of direct your energy in one direction rather than another
direction. In the introduction to the interpretation of dreams, Freud has an image which he actually
draws for us, in which the psychic apparatus is represented as something that looks very much
like, if you remember back this far, an old boiler system with lots of pipes and so on,
and a main cauldron where things are sort of heated up. And the picture is that our psychic
energy can be directed in one way or another, or it can be sort of clamped down and controlled
all together. But of course, that's very dangerous because the whole system might explode. But the
idea basically is that emotions, in general, have to do with this image of heat and pressure.
And I said, I wanted to sort of balance this with an ancient view, and I want to look back to the
ancient Chinese, who many years ago, argued the concept of what they called qi. And of course,
if you study Chinese medicine and so on today, you're still sort of filled with qi. The idea is
that qi is roughly the equivalent of psychic energy. The Chinese don't have the same mind
body split that we have, so it's not so much psychic as opposed to physical. But nevertheless,
the idea is the same, because what Freud was trying to do also was to bring these together,
and to say that the hydraulic metaphor is literally true. It's not just a metaphor.
Now, it's not as if this metaphor has had it, and it's done an over with, because as advances in
neuroscience progressed over the course of the 20th century, the new neurology really made use of the
hydraulic theory in a fairly convincing way. For one thing, we have a literal equivalent of what
you might call the pipes of the system, and those are the neurons, the nerve cells, which
really do look like long little pipes, and these are connected to each other by synapses. And one
can, without much difficulty, just translate the sort of thing that Freud was talking about in terms
of the flow of psychic energy into the processes by which the neurons affect one another and so on.
And you put this all together, and what you get a picture is very much like the picture of the
hydraulic system that Freud described many years ago. Of course, now we know much more about it.
We know the mechanisms which make it work, but nevertheless, the hydraulic metaphor now seems
to be cached out. And there's another picture here, too, that enters in. This one pretty much at
the very end of the 20th century, but it's one with which I'm sure you're all quite familiar.
And that has to do with the whole movement with artificial intelligence and the idea that computers
represent, in some sense, the mind. This leads to the intriguing question whether computers can have
emotions or whether we could build a computer that would have emotions. I find this a fascinating
question indeed, but I tend to be an agnostic in terms of the answer. I'll tell you why.
30 years ago, one of my good friends who does a good deal of extensive computer research
predicted that computers would never be able to play chess, because chess required intuitive
insight and a sense of strategy that they just didn't know how to program. And of course,
just a few years ago, IBM Computer beat the best chess player in the world. So I tend to be agnostic
about what computers can or can be made to do. But the idea of computer as a model for emotions
is very tempting. Now, computer language, and I'm going to be very simple-minded here,
has to do with inputs and outputs and programs and databases and sort of
capacities and so on. And in many ways, these terms sound quite applicable to the mind.
One can also design programs, and of course now they have robots, which makes it much more intriguing,
design programs that really do look as if they are, in some sense, modeling emotions. Now,
whether or not computers can have emotions, I want to suggest that a good deal of artificial
intelligence can have something important to say about how emotions do work. Nevertheless,
there's still a problem here. And I don't mean the huge problem, the mind-body problem that
sort of looms in the background of all such discussions, but rather a much more specific problem.
And that is computers, like neurology, like Freud's hydraulic model,
like the Stoics movements, all are basically mechanisms. Now, mechanisms have certain sorts
of properties and not others. Mechanisms can be explained in causal terms. Mechanisms can be
accounted for in terms of how one part affects another part and so on. But what mechanisms
don't have is a sense of purpose. Now, what I'd like to argue in the next lecture or so
is that to understand emotions just as mechanisms, while completely agreeing that
emotions have underlying mechanisms, is not going to be adequate to understand them. And
let me put it in the following way. To think about emotions as mechanisms is to talk about
something happening in us. What happens in us is a set of processes over which we have little
control and of which it makes good sense to say that these things are happening to us.
And this in turn leads to a wide open area in which we can talk about emotions as excuses
and sort of wave responsibility for them. John Paul Sartre, one of my philosophical heroes,
has argued at great length about the phenomenon which he calls bad faith,
a kind of self-deception in which one fools oneself about oneself. In a little essay he
wrote on the emotions back in the 1930s, he argued explicitly against William James and also against
Sigmund Freud that their account of emotions was still too mechanical. And most important was
that it divorced the concept of emotion from the concept of the self. And so there's a very real
question. What do the emotions have to do with the self? In what sense can one take ownership of one's
own emotions? And Sartre, as you'll see in the next lecture, had a rather intriguing theory
about what that involved. But the essential point was that emotions are an aspect of the self.
And what that means is that you can't talk about them in merely mechanical terms. You can't talk
about them in terms of mere passivity. But what you have to talk about is something that you do.
Now, what alternatives are there to this theory that we've been talking about, this hydraulic
theory, this hydraulic metaphor? Well, let me suggest three of them. First, I would say that every
emotion involves desire. Now, the desires can be very varied. Anger, for example, is very clearly
a desire to get even, desire perhaps to hit or hurt someone, a desire to make things right.
Shame, by comparison, is a desire to do compensation or to sort of find yourself
back in the good graces of your fellows. Jealousy, the desire is to protect yourself,
to keep what you've got. Love, desire to be with the person you love, desire to caress, and so on.
But now, the interesting thing about desires is that desires, whatever else they are, are not
merely mechanisms. Desires are, by their very nature, purposive. And so to understand an emotion,
part of which is a desire, is to understand why an emotion tends to act in the way that the hydraulic
model predicts. Namely, it's not just a matter of pressure and the like, but rather it's a matter of
acting out the desires that are components of the emotion. So why are emotions so sometimes
intractable? Why do emotions sort of make us do things? Why do emotions have the expressions they do?
And I would say, very often, it's a matter of the expression of the desire which is part of their
nature. There's a more intriguing answer here, and I see it all the time in class, and I'll put it
in the following way. Students sometimes will excitedly raise their hands, and if they are
aggressive, they will often wave them in my face and try to get my attention. And I will call on them,
and interestingly enough, they'll find they have nothing to say. Now, it's not that they forgot.
I mean, these are young minds, they're still fairly agile, but they had this
sense that they had something important to say. The hand shot up, by the time they're
in college, it's pretty automatic, but when it came right down to it, there was nothing there.
Now, how do we explain this? Well, it seems to me that when one has an emotion and when one feels
compelled to sort of see it through, to express it, and so on. This is very much like the very
intelligent process of wanting to say something. Now, of course, what one says might not be very
intelligent at all, or in the case that I just cited, it might be vacuous or nothing at all.
But nevertheless, there is something in the experience of having something to say,
and I think all of us have had this experience in a conversation where you really just feel
compelled to sort of get into it, to say something, to relate your own experience on whatever it is
you're talking about. And what I suggest is that the nature of emotions in this sort of sense of
pressure is very much like having something to say. What's important about this explanation
is it very clearly moves the emotions into the realm of intelligence, and it doesn't talk about
mere mechanisms, but it talks in terms of what as a person you feel compelled to do.
And finally, there's a third intriguing sort of account here, and it has to do with what you
might call the pressures of narrative. I think most of us have had the experience of turning on
the TV or a radio and catching someone in the middle of a story or catching a program,
it just sort of partway in. And what's fascinating in my own case is how quickly I get caught up
in what's happening. And even though I've never seen these people before, I have no idea who they
are, but to just say a couple of things to indicate the situation they're in. And already I'm sort of
driven to see what happens. Now, very often, of course, I turn off the TV, it's not worth my time,
but that notion of a story to be pursued is something that's very important in understanding
where this sense of pressure comes from in emotions. Because narratives, to use the proper term,
narratives have their own logic, and a narrative has to be seen through in a certain kind of way.
Narratives are intelligent, that is, they are more or less intelligent, and they can be evaluated
according to whether they seem right or not. We've all seen movies, which are not very good,
and the reason they're not very good, among other things, might be that they just get the psychology
wrong. They get the emotions wrong. She marries the hero in the end, and our attitude is, she wouldn't
do that. I mean, she's been too upset with him, she's been too angry with him, she's even hated him,
he's ditched her, and it just doesn't make psychological sense. Now, all this is a function
of narrative. And what I want to suggest is that in the case of our own emotions, as well as
watching emotions on the screen and so on, that our emotions have a narrative,
and the narrative requires that they be carried out and expressed in certain kinds of ways.
So when I get angry, that feeling of pressure, which gets described in the hydraulic metaphor
as something physical, in fact is something very different. I get angry, and that means that I'm
already part of a situation with a logic. As Aristotle puts it so nicely, he says,
when I get angry, I have suffered a slight, or I see one of my friends has suffered a slight,
and the logic, the narrative of the situation demands that somehow I sort of see that through
by way of getting even, or a kind of revenge. If I fall in love, one doesn't just fall in love.
If falling in love, we're just having a warm, fuzzy feeling. Well, we could all enjoy it for as
long as it lasts. But of course, that has nothing to do with what love is. When you fall in love,
you immediately start picturing the future. You start asking yourself the question,
how will this work out? How could this work out? Does she love me too? And of course, you also
start manufacturing a history. And you think, well, all my life, I've been looking for a girl
just like this, or something like that. But the idea is that with emotions, we're always weaving
narratives. And it's not just that we're weaving narratives about the emotion, but that's what
the emotion is. Now, I sort of fudged on this a little bit earlier when I insisted that emotions
are processes. And that, of course, includes a lot of territory. They could be physiological
processes, but they could also be narrative processes. And what I want to suggest is that all
emotions, even the most short-lived, tend to involve stories. And those stories, to a large
extent, define what the emotion is. And so when we're trying to understand what we're trying to
capture with this hydraulic metaphor, the idea that emotions, in some sense, are pressuring us to do
things and express ourselves in certain sorts of ways, I suggest that an emphasis on desire,
a sort of focus on what it's like to have something to say, and most importantly,
this idea of narrative will take us a very long way. Now, this leaves us with an intriguing set
of questions. Because it's clear, at least in the case of anger, that the hydraulic metaphor
does describe something that we really experience. And we do think of ourselves as
filling up with something and possibly even exploding at a certain point. So how do we explain
the experience? And this is the intriguing question. Do we experience these metaphors
because they are accurate descriptions of our feelings? Or rather, do we think and describe
our feelings because we've got these metaphors? Now, this is going to be a major question when
we're talking about emotions in general. Because something I haven't talked much about, but is
going to tend to be very important. And that is, how much does language have to do with our
emotional experience? Now, the way we've been talking so far, and the way most people talk most
of the time, language simply describes what the experience is. We name our emotion, and when we
name our emotion, we can then go into details about exactly what it is we feel. But I want to
suggest something very different. And that is, the way we talk about our emotions has a lot to do
with the emotional experience itself. Now, just to get a beginning sort of hint on this,
other societies talk about the physical nature of emotion in very different ways. So for example,
in Tahiti, when they talk about anger, anger is based in the stomach. When the Chinese talk about
emotions in general, they have a concept which we might be good to employ, which is heart-mind.
And these are not to be separated, as we so often do, into the physical or the bodily or the merely
emotional, and then the mental, the intelligent. But rather, it's all a piece. And what I want to
suggest is that the experience we have of our emotions is often dictated by the language we
speak. So even just talking about, say, shame versus embarrassment, or talking about anger
versus resentment is already to sort of impose a kind of structure on our experience. And a question
which is intriguing and has intrigued philosophers for a very long time. To what extent, if you were
to remove the language, would our experiences remain the same? Unfortunately, since we are
linguistic creatures, since we can only communicate and analyze in terms of language,
it's an impossible question. What would it be like to have the emotions of a fox or the emotions of
a cat? And the truth is, we can't know, because cats and foxes don't describe their experience,
and so we have to say their experience is probably very different from ours. But to stick to the human,
what I want to suggest is that the hydraulic metaphor and other metaphors in which we talk
about emotions already color the kinds of experiences we have. And as you'll see in later
lectures, what I want to suggest is that the very nature of the emotions we have, more than anything
else, depends on the language in which we describe them.
