Lecture 23 Laughter and Music
I'd like to talk about two fascinating aspects of emotion, laughter and music.
They're both brilliant expressions, I think they're exemplary of emotional intelligence.
They're very different, of course, but the first thing to say about them is, neither
of them is an emotion as such, they're both expressions of emotion.
The second and I think more interesting thing to say about them is, they're two candidates
for universality, every culture that we've discovered has music, and of course everyone
laughs at these sometimes.
Third thing to say by way of introduction is that both laughter and music are best when
shared.
Laughter of course is very much a communal activity, and music in most societies is not
something you listen to in private on your headphones, but music is something that's
sung in common, it's something that's danced to in common, and it is often the lubricant
for social rituals.
So I'd like to talk about these in order, and I'd like to start with laughter.
I just flew in from Texas, and boy are my arms tired.
Now let me warn you, talking about humor is not the same thing as being funny.
So in what I'm going to say in the next 15 minutes, please don't expect to be amused,
but I hope it'll be interesting.
Now the first thing to say is that laughter is often an expression of joy and happiness,
but it's also the expression of much else.
It can be the expression of aggression.
In Texas I often run across types who have these hearty laughs, and it's basically not
funny, it's not friendly, but it's really a kind of intimidation.
There's also the kind of laughter that comes with being tickled if you remember when you
were a child, and if you remember as a child, being tickled was not funny.
So laughter can mean a lot of things.
In some societies, and in some sororities perhaps, laughter is an expression of embarrassment.
So I don't want to jump to the conclusion that laughter is always an expression of positive
emotion.
It's an expression, but it can be an expression of quite a few different emotions.
There's also a feature which many of you have probably noticed, that if you enter into,
let's say, a place where everyone is already laughing, let's say, a comedy club, you find
yourself perhaps already laughing before you've heard any joke.
It's just what psychologists would call emotional contagion, and it probably affects laughter
as much as it connects with anything else.
Also, while laughter is universal, it also has its local variants.
I gave a fascinating seminar several years ago out in Hawaii at the East West Center
with a wonderful woman named Cindy Ning, who is Chinese.
We gave a joint seminar on humor, and I gave, although I'm not much of a comedian, a whole
host of Western jokes, most of them are Australian jokes, pretty funny, pretty raunchy, and she
at the same time told a bunch of Chinese jokes, and of course the audience was quite mixed.
What was fascinating was that most of the Chinese didn't find the Australian humor at
all funny, and most of the Americans in the audience didn't find the Chinese jokes at
all funny.
On the one hand, they both have humor, but at the same time, humor is something which
is very localized.
The question I asked for many years was, what makes something funny?
Because it seemed to me that that was the way to get at what humor was all about.
So what makes something funny?
And I look back over the history of philosophy in particular, and I came up with a number
of theories which have been sort of categorized by a philosopher named John Morial, and he
listed three in particular.
First of all, there's what he called the superiority theory.
This was defended to a certain extent by Aristotle, but perhaps it was most straightforwardly
put by the philosopher Thomas Hobbes, who is otherwise known for his theory of the selfishness
of human nature.
And Hobbes talks about laughter as the roar of the victor.
And basically, the idea is that laughter is a put down, that what you do is you ridicule
people who are worse off than yourself.
And while we think of as Aristotle as something of a gentleman, nevertheless, Aristotle seemed
to think that humor, for the most part, was just this.
So he was an aristocrat, hung out with aristocrats, and laughing at people with infirmities, laughing
at people of lower classes, laughing at slaves, was a perfectly proper form of humor.
Of course, there's a kind of dangerous element that enters in here, which is it readily lends
itself to racist humor, and sexist humor, and so on.
And I'm sure we've all heard a lot of that.
But if you think of superiority theory as the right theory of humor, it should give us real
pause, because then laughter is no longer a very positive attribute.
It's not something that could count as a virtue.
It's really having fun at the expense of those who are less fortunate than yourself.
The second theory, which comes into play, well, mainly in the end of the 19th century,
but of course, it's been around for a lot longer, is due to Sigmund Freud, probably
more than anyone else.
And Freud, what happens when you laugh, is you give yourself a certain sort of release,
a release from things which have been repressed or supressed, things you're not supposed to
talk about, not supposed to laugh about.
So sex jokes are obviously central to what Freud talks about.
And they're also aggressive jokes, because we're not supposed to be aggressive.
So very often, surprisingly, a great deal of humor is very hostile, but not hostile in
a superiority sort of way.
It's hostile in the sense of it expresses some sort of covert desire to do damage, which
is released through the humor.
Freud also talked about wit.
Now wit often sort of moves over into the realm of release in this sense, because what
is often witty is often sort of sexual innuendo and so on.
But I want to talk about wit in a different way when I get to the third set of theories.
The third set of theories is sort of a grab bag set.
And it's intended that way, because it includes an enormous number of different kinds of humor.
It is been defended by such illustrious philosophers as Immanuel Kant, Arthur Schopenhauer, Sorin
Kierkegaard.
But the idea is that humor is basically a combination of two things, two or more things,
which are incongruous.
So what you get is the unexpected, and it's the unexpected that sort of makes you laugh.
Well this is true in particular of something like wit.
If you think of puns, for example, which Shakespeare wrongly called the lowest form of wit, there's
a sense in which a pun sort of plays on just the word structure and tries to say something
that's quite different but sometimes relevant to what is being literally intended.
But the idea of incongruity theory, while it's much more civilized theory than the superiority
theory or the relief theory, the problem with the incongruity theory is it just covers
too much.
There's all sorts of things that are incongruous in our life that are not necessarily funny.
Well all of this sort of puzzled me for a long time, because the first two theories,
the superiority theory and the relief theory, seemed to me to be not really capturing the
virtue of humor, and I think humor is virtuous.
The incongruity theory, on the other hand, just seemed much too vague to sort of explain
what humor was.
And as I started reading more, listening more, thinking more, I realized I had no idea what
made anything funny.
And to sort of make things all the more complicated, my favorite sort of humor, I confess, was
slapstick.
I was a great fan of the three stooges.
But then I had to ask, well, what's funny about somebody getting hit by a 2x4?
Or what's funny about one grown man hitting another man in the eyes with two outstretched
fingers?
Well, it seemed to me that I was getting into real trouble here, because slapstick, even
more than the superiority theory, seemed to turn on a kind of ridicule and violence that
was, again, not virtuous at all.
There's a variation on this theme, of course.
One of my friends in philosophy, Bill Miller, has called it upward contempt, which I find
particularly revealing if you think about some of the comedies that were made back in
the Depression and soon after.
That would include the three stooges.
It often consisted of people who were really down and out, really setting up and making
fun of people who were very well off.
But once again, even if the roles are reversed, there's a very real question about whether
this is anything virtuous.
So I was stuck about this for quite a few years, as have many other philosophers been.
And then I went to a psychology seminar.
And in the psychology seminar, which was quite fascinating, held in Salt Lake City, Utah,
actually, there were a number of presentations on laughter.
But they didn't talk at all about what's funny.
Rather, they had videotapes of mothers and their very young infants doing things like
playing peek-a-boo.
Now, I suppose you could do a stretch and say something like, well, peek-a-boo is the
incongruous or something like that.
But that seemed to me just plain wrong.
What was going on here was a brilliant exposition of the kind of bonding that takes place through
humor.
And that opened my eyes.
Because what makes something funny, I finally decided, is not so much the content of the
joke or the skit, but what makes something funny is the way it bonds people together.
Now, this isn't to say that humor doesn't count.
There's funny humor and there's not so funny humor.
Because it seemed to me that what ties the whole thing together, what explains the cultural
variations, what explains even such vicious humor as racist humor, is the fact that laughter
is a bonding mechanism.
And what is expressed is not so much the humor as much as the bond.
So with laughter, I want to say, it looks as if, for those of us who think in this very
sophisticated way, it looks as if laughter is all about what's funny.
But it seems to me what's funny is secondary.
What's primary is the way that it brings people together.
And that's why laughing in crowds, laughing in groups, even if the source of the humor
is trivial or nonsense, is a very powerful social connective.
Now on music.
Music too is universal, but music also has its local manifestations.
Many of you probably have tried to listen to Chinese opera or maybe Indonesian gamelan
music or years ago, perhaps, an Indian raga and couldn't make much sense of it.
And of course, when other cultures listen to American music, there's a kind of pause.
They don't know what's going on.
Even regionally, I confess I've lived in Texas now for quite some time.
But you know, when it comes down to it, I can't get country music.
I'm sorry.
I can appreciate some of the stars and all of that stuff.
But it's just not my music.
Music is something that's very personal.
And a lot of that personal has to do with what you are raised with, what you're used
to, what you find comfortable.
But music is spectacular in its form.
I'd like to start out with a couple of illustrations, because we often think of music as just background.
And of course, the prevalence of music and such, not to mention Walkman and so on, often
sort of lends that impression that music is something that just accompanies other sort
of things that we're doing.
But I'd like to give you four examples in which that's not the case.
For those of you who are just listening to this, I want you to imagine just a young
man and woman sort of looking escance at each other rather casually.
And I want you to think about the different tone, the different expectations that are
set up by four different sort of music tracks.
First one I would describe as Romantic.
Second one is a rather heavy percussion piece.
And I would suggest it connotes a kind of sexual tension.
Third piece I would describe as a bit frivolous.
And if you were seeing this at the beginning of a movie, you would probably expect a comedy
to follow.
But in any case, something that would be pretty lighthearted.
And last but not least, I think of this as a kind of suspense track.
Whatever is about to happen is probably not very good.
Now the point I want to make with all this is that music isn't just an accompaniment.
And it doesn't just set a mood, but more than that, it actually determines the very nature
of what's going on.
The otherwise cranky philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer really loved music in the arts.
And he thought that while the other arts represented what he called the will, music was a direct
expression of it, indicating that it really sort of set the tone for our entire lives.
Nietzsche, who of course read a lot of Schopenhauer, was also a great musical enthusiast.
And what he said was, at one point, without music life would be a mistake.
But what neither Nietzsche nor Schopenhauer really picked up on was the social dimension
of music.
They assumed it, but they didn't highlight it.
But if you think about the way most people in most cultures for most of history have
listened to music, or rather have performed music, what you see is that it's almost always
a social activity.
This is something which has been hidden from us, first because today so many people have
music just in their earphones, and it's theirs and theirs alone.
And secondly, even if you think about the last couple hundred years of concert performances
and so on in the United States, music is something that people sort of sit quietly and listen
to.
But in most cultures, music has been part of dance, it's been part of religious ritual,
there have been work songs, there have been all sorts of ways in which music is part of
life, and a definitive part of life.
Now I say this because I think it's very important to make the point that I started with, and
that is that music, like laughter, is something that's typically shared.
It's a social activity, it is something that breeds solidarity.
And the question I'd like to sort of pursue for the rest of the lecture is, how does it
do this?
Now the first thing to say is, if you think back to that little percussion piece that
I played, it does it through rhythm, and this is perhaps the most immediately accessible
of all the various elements of music that people pick up on.
Rhythm can be rather slow, plodding, and that gives a certain sort of impression.
On the other hand, rhythm can be rather violent, can be very heavy, very sexual, very sweaty,
and this is something that most people can pick up on.
There's also melody.
Now melody is much more interesting in terms of cultural variability.
There are different kinds of scales that different societies use, and for many Western listeners,
the kinds of scales that they use, for example, in Asia, sound very odd, whereas Asians listening
to American music might very well think this is rather impoverished.
There's also the structure of a piece, and just to be very simple about it, think about
the difference between a simple song, or a round, or not so simple, a piece that's performed
in counterpoint.
There's the texture of music that has a lot to do with, among other things, its instrumentation
and its composition.
There's the performance of a piece.
One can think, for example, of some pieces by Bach, which were performed some years
ago by a jazz group called the Swingel Singers, or I heard a very interesting reggae version
of Hala Ghandi, a Degila, some months ago.
I mean, the style of the performance makes a huge difference, too.
And you put these elements together, and what you start to see is how music sort of gets
the sort of power that it does.
But what does music do?
Why does it affect us so much?
This is a question that Schopenhauer only answers in a very abstract way.
And I think we can get much closer to the mark if we try and think of what does music actually
do?
Good deal of what I've been talking about in the past has been the way emotions sort
of has its physiological components.
Now, this is going to raise a problem for me, because I think also emotions are defined
by their conceptual components, and I'll get to that in a moment.
But in terms of music, what you find is that there is a kind of direct connection, and
perhaps this is what Schopenhauer was referring to, between what you might call the physiology
of the music and our own physiology.
So there are certain sounds, for example, think of the high-pitched screech in a movie
like Psycho, or think of the rumbling undertone in a movie like Jaws.
And these are things that we don't have to think about, but the hit is quite directly
and viscerally.
There's also a kind of imitation factor here, that there are many instruments that sound
like the human voice.
And of course, this human voice, when it's singing, also can imitate all different sorts
of things that we recognize in real life, for example, screams.
For example, lullabies, and all those noises that people make that have real emotional significance.
So sometimes, theorists have said, music expresses emotion because what it does is it imitates
emotion.
But of course, that's not enough, because music expresses emotion in other ways, too.
And the question is, what are those?
Now here, we get into some really lively debates that are still going on.
Because on the one hand, we want to say that a piece of music is, let's say, sad.
But what is it in the music that's sad?
Because the music, in one sense, is just a bunch of notes.
Or some people would even bring it beyond that and say, the music is just a score, which
is then performed in various ways.
So what is it for the music to be sad?
Well, one obvious answer is, the music is sad if it arouses in the listener a feeling
of sadness.
Another answer, very different, is that the piece of music is sad if it was sadness that
the author or composer was expressing when he or she composed it.
But of course, we can all think of cases where someone might have a perfectly giddy attitude
towards life and yet compose, say, a requiem or some sort of tragedy which doesn't express
that sadness at all, yet the music might still be sad.
And when we're listening to a piece and it arouses sadness in it, does that say something
about the music being sad?
Or quite the contrary, I often listen to the blues.
The blues are, by the very nature, sad.
But the truth is, most of the time I listen to the blues, I'm in a pretty good mood.
So in what sense, then, can we talk about the blues themselves being sad?
Well, if music is typically shared, then one suggestion is that it's not about the music
and it's not about the effect the music has on the listener as such, but rather it's all
about the context.
So the context here might be, say, soundtrack for a movie.
And then what's going on in the movie is going to sort of set the stage for the music which
in turn is going to define what the movie is really about.
But all of this is a kind of a tangle.
And the reason it's a problem for me is because, as I said, the theory that I've been developing
over the course of these lectures, the whole theory of emotional intelligence, is that
what music is is essentially a kind of way of grappling, a way of engaging with the world.
But here's a problem.
Music doesn't seem to do that.
Now of course, there's music that does.
If, for example, we're talking about much contemporary music, much popular music, music
with words, then someone's singing about love, or someone's singing about betrayal, or someone's
singing about how much they love their country.
And then of course, the attachment to the world is pretty straightforward.
The music attaches to the world through the words.
Or there's program music, context music, there's opera, in which what you've got is an explicit
story being laid out.
And in that case, of course, again, it's pretty obvious how the music engages with the world
through the story.
But the problem comes in when we're talking about pure music.
Now I would question how much pure music there really is in the world, whether there's music
which can be utterly taken out of context, which has no words and no associations.
And people who talk about this usually talk about it in the classical Western concert setting,
when you're just presented with a piece of music.
But even then, it seems to me that associations are going to be all over the place.
Think for example, the first time you heard a piece.
That sometimes sets up a powerful association with what the piece means.
Or there's been a lot of interesting research in recent years about why people seem so attached
to the music they listen to when they're teenagers.
Well it seems there's a special age of life somewhere in adolescence when people are particularly
receptive to music.
And what they hear when they're 14, 16, 18 is something they carry with them for the
rest of their lives.
What I find is that the music of the 60s, giving away something about myself, has a special
kind of resonance.
For my father's generation, it was the big band era.
And in general, for the kids I teach today, it's a kind of music which often I can't
even listen to.
But that's what sort of sets the pattern for them in terms of musical meaning.
So even pure music, so to speak, it seems to me is loaded with associations, personal
associations, temporal associations, and so on.
But all of this is to say that music expresses a good deal about emotion precisely because
it is so close and personal to us.
It is not just an art.
It is not just a skill.
It is not just something that we happily have accompanying us in our shopping in the supermarket.
But rather, music really says something very basic about who we are.
