Lecture 7 – Nasty – Iago's Envy – A Fellow's Jealousy
In this lecture, I'd like to talk about two upsetting emotions. Envy and Jealousy.
The first, I guess, might be best represented by Iago, the character in the play Othello,
who is often depicted as sort of plotting off in the wings and looking at the protagonist
of the play, namely Othello, with great envy. Othello himself, by contrast, is ripped apart
by jealousy, and the fact that he is the protagonist, the fact that he occupies center stage for
almost every scene that he appears in, that's already indicative of a difference between
the two. Now, what envy and jealousy have in common is, of course, a great deal. They're
both incredibly hostile, negative emotions, but they're also, I would add, double-edged
emotions because they both tend, while aiming at this sort of comeuppance or bringing down
the other person, they tend to bring oneself down as well as evidenced by the fact that
both Iago and Othello end up badly. Envy, of course, is historically listed as one of
the seven deadly sins. Now, with many of the seven deadly sins, I would raise some serious
questions. In the last lecture, I talked about pride, and pride is rather dubious as a sin,
especially if you compare it, for example, to ancient philosophy and Aristotle, where it's
talked about not as a vice or as a sin, but quite the contrary. It's talked about as an obvious virtue.
Anger, well, I talked about anger, but I didn't really talk about anger as a sin, quite the
contrary. It seems to me all this talk about anger as a negative emotion is, at least to some extent,
misplaced. And again, referring to Aristotle, anger is sometimes righteous. One can be dead on.
There are cases where, you want to say, it's even foolish not to get angry. But with envy,
I think the seven sinners have a point. There, when Pope Gregory listed envy as one of the seven
sins, it's very hard to raise a defense of envy and to say, no, it's sometimes a virtue, or at
least it's not always a vice, because envy does seem to be wrong at its very heart. Now, a good
deal of the seven deadly sins has to do with the notion of corruption of the self. Now, of course,
in Christian theology, what corrupts the self or what damages the soul is a great many things.
But the way we're talking now, I think what's important is to understand that envy isn't just
bad because God disapproves of it, or it makes ourselves look bad in the eyes of God, but just
in purely secular terms, envy is corrosive. It is corrupting of the self and in many different
ways. Just to start, we often talk about the opposite of love. And according to the standard
formula, the opposite emotion of love is hate. Well, I don't think so. In fact, hate and love
have an awful lot in common, which is one of the reasons why it often flip flops between the two.
You love someone and you hate them, and you love someone, and they seem to go hand in hand. In fact,
it's very hard to love someone all the time without on occasion hating them as well. But what if the
opposite of love weren't hate, but let's say indifference? Well, that's the difference between
having very strong fond affection for a person on the one hand, feeling nothing at all. It seems to
me that's more of an opposition than love and hate. Or, to get to the point, it seems to me one
thing you might throw against love is envy. Because love, as I described in a previous lecture,
has a lot to do with a sense of weaness, togetherness, a sense of unity, even in the very strong
metaphysical sense that Aristophanes defends, that love is the completion of a prior whole. But what
envy does is it separates us. That when you envy someone, what you do is you push them away. You
stand at a distance. You disapprove of them. And so, Iago's position on stage, as I mentioned,
is often slinking off into the wings, away from the rest of the action, looking at a fellow from a
distance. So, just to start, envy is opposed to love in a radical way. Now, there's a question
about what envy is about. What I've suggested, but only suggested so far in the earlier lectures,
is that every emotion is essentially an engagement with the world. Or, to put it in
semi-philosophical terms, it has an object or an intentional object. It's about something. But then,
here we get into an interesting question. What is the something that envy is about? Is it about
the other person? Well, it's not just about the other person. I might envy someone in a great
many ways. They're richer than I am. They're more powerful than I am. They're much better looking
than I am. They're younger and healthier than I am. But, nevertheless, what I envy is not them as
such. What I envy is their wealth, their power, their looks, their age, their health, and so on. So,
one might say that what I envy is the property or the possession of the other. And that's very
different. But, of course, it's not just envying that, because I don't envy wealth in general. I don't
envy health in general. What I envy is that person's wealth, that person's health. So, right away,
there's a kind of question about what is it that won envies? And this is by no means a trivial
question, because a lot of it has to do with the very personal nature of envy. That it's not
just I want wealth and he has it, but I envy his wealth and my attitude towards him is defined
that way. Now, one of the reasons why envy is corrupting, why it's so corrosive, is because in a
straightforward sense, it's illegitimate. If you win the prize, which I, in fact, had earned,
I don't envy you. I will certainly have negative response to you. I might be angry with you. I
might be any number of things, including jealous. But I'm not envious. Why? Because I have no right
to that. If I envy you because you're younger and healthier than I am, there's a sense in which I
don't deserve youth and health. Maybe because I'm not taking care of myself. Or maybe I've had my youth
and now I'm past it, so this is just the way life is. But in any case, one doesn't say that I'm
envious of something that I deserve. What one envies is something that one doesn't deserve. And this
is going to be one of the sharp contrasts with jealousy. Because in jealousy, you want what the
other person has, perhaps. But there's also a sense in which it's yours. And you deserve it. And
that's what I want to come back to. So envy to start with is corrosive because it's antithetical to
love. And for that matter, friendships and any other close relationship, it separates people. It
sort of brings them back into themselves in a particularly insidious way. It is very personal
and hostile. And it's illegitimate because there's a sense in which what you envy, you don't deserve.
You have no right to it. However, there were some important studies done. And these were in the sort
of heyday of 20th century capitalism, when people would go way out on a limb to defend not just
capitalism, but along with it some rather dubious psychological properties, for example, selfishness.
But envy was at that point, so the high praise too. And then the following way,
think about a lot of advertisements that you see on television or here on the radio.
And a lot of them are sort of comparisons or contrasts between you and your neighbor or between
the person on the screen and his or her neighbor. So in the old days, 1950s, when advertising was
much cruder than it is now, one housewife would envy the other housewife's spick and span floor.
Or she would envy the other housewife's ability to put together a chocolate cake in a matter of
half an hour or something like that. And all this was with the intention of using envy to get people
to want things. Now, of course, it wasn't a matter of wanting things that they didn't necessarily
deserve. I don't know who would deserve a chocolate cake or who wouldn't. Or who would deserve a clean
floor or who wouldn't. But presumably, you would get this by working at it or by doing something.
But what this did was it raised the status of envy from a straightforward vice and something
corrupting to something that acted as a kind of engine of capitalism, something that pushed
consumerism. And it was on the basis of invidious comparisons between what we have and what the
other person has that consumerism was put forward. There was a German philosopher and Helbert Schuch
who defended exactly this thesis at great German length. But the idea was that envy
is important for capitalism. It's not a vice, but it's something that we should encourage.
Now, of course, this points to something else that's very problematic about envy.
Not only does it destroy relationships and put other people in a distance,
but what it also does is it makes us unhappy with what we have. So it's not as if one just sort of
has dirty floors. And it's not as if one simply has an older car. But it's rather that we are made
to want things just on the basis of these invidious comparisons because our neighbor has it.
So it sets up this kind of conflict, but it also sets up a kind of dissatisfaction.
And I still hear people all the time saying, what capitalism depends on is dissatisfaction.
That capitalism is always about growth and wanting more. There's an old blind and a great
Humphrey Bogart movie, Key Largo, in which Eregi Robinson plays with a sort of gangster.
And Bogart turns to Robinson at one point and he says, you know what you want out of life,
Rocco? And Rocco says, eh, what do I want out of life? And Bogart says, you know what you want.
You want more. And Rocco, Robinson's eyes light up. And he says, that's it, more. I want more.
Well, that's what comes of all this. It's not being satisfied with what one has.
People are often talking about the problems with contemporary capitalism in terms of greed.
But greed and envy here kind of go hand in hand. And one of the questions I always have is,
these guys who have, you know, so many billions of dollars, I have no idea what it would be like
to have a billion dollars, but these guys who have so many billions of dollars and they break laws
and even act grotesquely in other countries just to get another billion dollars,
don't they have any sense of enough? So this whole idea that capitalism is all about more and it's
all about invidious comparisons with others seems to me to be something very dangerous.
The engine Talmud, I think, gets it right, that the rich man is the one who's satisfied with
what he has. And that's exactly what envy goes against. Now, a philosopher named Jerome New,
who's written very nicely on these topics, sort of goes against Shuq and this idea of envy as the
engine of consumerism, and says that what Shuq fails to do is to distinguish two very different
things. There's envy, which really does have to do with wanting something that the other person
wants, perhaps in the spirit of competition or in some other, not particularly unhealthy way,
and what New calls malicious envy. And unfortunately, this is a distinction which is not always seen
through. And so healthy competition often becomes malicious envy, when, for example, in a race,
someone is not so concerned with improving his or her time running faster as much as he's
concerned or she's concerned with slowing down the other person, which leads, of course,
to cheating and all kinds of behavior which are quite antithetical to good sportsmanship.
But the idea in general is envy understood in this malicious way, which is where it always
tends to go. Envy understood in this malicious way is not only antithetical to relationships
and self-corrosive and antithetical to being satisfied, but it also sets us up in such a way
that we are destroying the very context in which we live. Now, in terms of this, there's another
emotion, which is sort of natural successor to envy. And that's the horrible emotion of spite.
Envy wants what it doesn't deserve, but actually, quite typically, it doesn't do much about it.
Spite, by contrast, does something. And the attitude in spite is something like, if I can't have it,
no one will have it. Or the sort of phrase that sometimes I remember as a child, somebody used
to talk about, cutting off your nose to spite your face. It's a, when you think about it,
it's a really horrible image. But the idea is that you are so envious, you are so down on the
other person for having what you want, that you'd rather destroy the thing itself and possibly both
of you than have the status quo remain as it is. So with spite, we've really hit the bottom.
Spite is the sort of outer edge of envy. It is where envy as a vice, envy as corrosive,
becomes most explicit. So let's turn to jealousy. What about Othello?
Now, the first thing to say about Othello, of course, is he's a dupe. He's being fooled. He's
being played through the entire play by Iago. And of course, his wife, Desdemona. How does one
feel about Desdemona? I mean, she's presented as this lovely young woman who's totally in love with
her warrior hero husband. And so when he finally strangles her at the end of the play, we are
rightly horrified as he is too. But this is the upshot of his jealousy due to clues that have been
planned by Iago all the way through the play. But what is jealousy? Well, first of all, I suggested
a little bit earlier. The difference between envy and jealousy is that whereas in envy,
one does not have a right to what one wants. And jealousy one does. Well, I can make that a
little bit stronger. In jealousy, it's not just that one has a right, but there's a sense of which
one already has it. So jealousy has often been interpreted, for example, by Jerome New, but
also by Freud and some of his associates. Jealousy has been interpreted as the fear of loss. It's
not the loss itself, but it's the fear of loss. Now, if you think about Othello, this makes perfectly
good sense. Othello is already married to Desdemona. In the relevant sense, he already has her. And
what's more, he has her love. So his jealousy is not wanting something that he doesn't deserve.
Quite the contrary. What he wants to do is to keep something which he fears he's losing.
In fact, he's not. But of course, with all emotions, there's always that possibility of being wrong.
Now, jealousy is often talked about, typically talked about, in the context of sex and fidelity,
for fairly obvious reasons. That's what goes into the best stories. But of course, one can be jealous
of all sorts of things. One of the stories that New tells in a very Freudian vein
is the following, a very simple story. If you have two children playing together,
or for that matter, I can attest, if you have two dogs playing together, and there's a toy
that's sort of being left alone, which belongs, in fact, to one of the children or to one of the
dogs, both children will sort of ignore it for a certain amount of time, showing no interest.
But if one, the one who does not own it, goes for it, suddenly there's a ruckus.
And the ruckus is, the jealousy here has been stimulated by a sense of ownership
that has been violated. And the fact that one isn't using the toy or playing with the toy at the time
doesn't seem to be relevant to the case. And of course, when we're talking about sex and fidelity,
one of the sort of interesting side lights of love, I would say it's one of the sort
of corruptions of love that the logician, game theorist John Elster talks about,
is what he calls love by peak. And it's something that comes from some of the French moralists
of the 18th century. But of course, it goes way beyond that. And love by peak is when there's no
interest in, let's say, the fair Donzel, who was off to the side until one of the male protagonists
shows an interest. And then suddenly the other male protagonist also shows an interest.
And it's not that either of them loves her. It's rather that the competition between the two of
them is such. Now, what this suggests is that jealousy is in many ways not a matter of love or
affection or desire or one, but jealousy is a sense of competition. Now, just in terms of sort of
simple literary plots, I want you to think, jealousy, I mean, most of the emotions we've
talked about so far have been sort of two-party emotions, or perhaps in some cases, one-party
emotions with a social context. So I'm angry at someone, I'm afraid, of something or someone.
I love someone or some, I love someone in the context of a larger society.
But jealousy is different in a very interesting way. Jealousy is a threesome. So in romantic
stories, we always have the love triangle. It's not between two people, but it's always about
the love of a person with a rival. And I've seen argued, and I agree with this, that it's actually
a foursome, that it's not just the love of a person with a rival, but it's also in a social context.
So there's this ancient notion of the cuckold, for example, in Italian dramas,
where the cuckold is a cuckold, not just by virtue of the fact that his love or spouse is
being taken away by another, but in terms of his embarrassment and humiliation in the larger society.
So jealousy is very clearly a social emotion in that sense.
Now, there's an interesting question, which we've sort of raised all the way through these lectures,
about whether this emotion, jealousy, is natural or not. When David Hume and Adam Smith and Jean
Jacques Rousseau talked about the moral sentiments of empathy and sympathy, they made it quite clear
that they thought these were natural sentiments. Now, of course, their notion of natural was pretty
wild and wooly. It wasn't very well tied down, as was centuries before when Aristotle talked about
things being natural virtues. It was sort of like, well, this is something that people have
just by their natures. But by the 20th century, the idea of something being natural had become
much more sophisticated. And so the question becomes, is an emotion like jealousy inherited
that is genetic? Is it a product of evolution? Or is it something that's learned? And I want to
suggest, for personal reasons, among others, that this is a very lively and important debate.
And I'll tell you why. Because back in the 1960s, when I was sort of young and vigorous and liberal
and all the rest of it, many of us had the idea that jealousy was a corrupt emotion. Why? Because,
as I've already suggested, jealousy implies something like possession, a right to someone.
And we all made the very good liberal point that no one has the right to anybody else,
that nobody possesses another person. And this involves not just themselves as part of a
relationship as in marriage, which of course was in its dark days in the 1960s. But it also
involved even things like sexuality. And the argument was that people shouldn't care about
whether their lover has other lovers. People shouldn't care about sex between strangers or
anything else. Now, of course, let me say very quickly, these are the days before AIDS. Let me
say equally quickly that all this, not coincidentally, was consequent to the discovery of
effective, inexpensive birth control. Okay, that's a partial sociological explanation. But what I find
much more interesting is the very idea that jealousy has such, and of course this extended,
to things like consumer goods too. But jealousy as such was inappropriate. And it was illegitimate
because no one owned anything. And no one had a right to anything, especially to another person.
So, well, history proved us wrong, as it turns out. Now, jealousy is back with a vengeance.
But nevertheless, the debate continues. And the question is, is jealousy a natural emotion
in now this very strong contemporary sense? Is jealousy something that is inherited genetically?
Is it a product of evolution or not? And of course, we're not just talking about jealousy
in the human species. But what we're also talking about here is jealousy as something which is
gender specific or sex specific. So that we all would recognize the kind of truism platitude
that men are jealous in different ways than women are jealous. In fact, there are several
best sellers over the past decade or so, which really depend wholly on this point. And there's
sort of derivative point that men and women don't know how to talk to each other because they don't
have to understand each other and so on. And part of that has to do with the different conceptions
of jealousy that they have. And the way this is typically put with more or less political
obnoxiousness is that men tend to be sexually jealous, whereas women tend to be jealous of
things like time and attention and so on. And all this can be explained and of course has been
explained by appeal to the facts about child rearing and relationships and so on. Now here,
I'm just sort of edging into a huge topic, which I just want to touch. But I think it's worthwhile
to bring in at this point since we've talked about natural versus cultivated emotions on several
occasions. There is a movement in about 1970, which was pushed by a very important biologist
named E. O. Wilson called sociobiology. And sociobiology was the thesis, which on the face of it is
very plausible in the sort of wake of Darwin, the thesis that different psychological features
of human beings evolved according to evolution. And these are very much akin to the evolution of
similar features in what you might call the lower animals. And so that such traits as being selfish
or being caring to one's kin or caring to one's offspring, these are things that can be explained
very clearly through sociobiology, through evolution, because these are of advantage to
not just the individual, but to the species as a whole. And of course, there are huge arguments
about how that works. But sociobiology is in a way ancient history by contemporary standards.
It's been replaced by something which is equally controversial, but based on an equally plausible
idea. And that idea is evolutionary psychology. And to put it in a nutshell, evolutionary psychology
is the idea that at least some psychological traits of human beings are not just a byproduct,
are not just happenstance, but at least some psychological traits are part of the evolutionary
story. Now, of course, this raises huge questions. I want to sort of focus in on one emotion in
particular as one particular such feature. And that's jealousy. One of my colleagues, in fact,
a former student named David Bus has risen to considerable prominence on the thesis that
jealousy in particular is a product of evolution. And also, that not just jealousy as a human feature,
but the particular differences in jealousy between males and females. Very much along the lines that
I described a moment ago. But this raises some huge questions, which I just want to add to the
conversation without trying to answer them here. And they have to do with whether a particular
emotion, say jealousy, can be, as they say, selected for. Because there's an assumption that now
everyone in the wake of Darwin accepts. And that is that if we've got a psychological feature,
and especially if it turns out to be universal, which itself is a controversy,
but if we find it everywhere, then the question is, there must be some explanation,
so what is it? And evolution is obviously one of the candidates. Nevertheless, it's perfectly
possible that jealousy is a byproduct of some other general feature, or it's an application
of something else that may or may not be the product of evolution. And the whole question
about whether it is inherited as such and determined just by our genes, or whether it is,
in some sense, determined by our culture and the way we're raised, is just that debate we were having
back in the 1960s. Now, my own view of this, which doesn't really solve the problem,
but sort of says where I think it's going, is that I think the whole idea of genetic
determination is wrong. That in fact, any feature of human beings or any feature of any organism
has to do with the relationship between the organism and its environment, which means the
genes by themselves don't determine anything. But what genes do is, in the context of an
environment, then they have great power, but part of that environment, of course, is society.
So whether jealousy is a natural emotion or not, I don't know.
