Lecture 20, What is Emotional Experience?
One of our first intuitions when talking about emotions is that emotions are feelings.
We've been talking about that since roughly the first lecture.
But feelings is a funny term. It takes in a huge amount of territory.
Sensations are feelings. Headaches are feelings. A sore thumb is a feeling. Toothache is a feeling.
Intuitions are sort of feelings. So Einstein had a feeling that special theory of relativity
was plausible. Or a mathematician looks at a proof and has a feeling that something's wrong.
And then of course there are all those feelings that we call emotions.
So one of the questions is, how do you distinguish an emotional feeling from
all those other kinds of feelings? But the word feelings has other problems too.
For one thing, feelings are often thought to be ineffable. In other words, not describable,
not articulable. And so we get comments like, well, you have to feel it to know it.
Or say speaking of love. When you're in love you'll know it, but I can't explain it to you.
You have to be in love to understand it. Well, this idea that feelings are ineffable,
that feelings are indescribable. Say you're trying to describe to someone, okay, here's what
green looks like. And let's say you're talking to a person who's colorblind. What would you say?
Well, you have to see it. You have to experience it to understand it.
But on the other hand, emotions are clearly not ineffable. That emotions can be articulated.
Emotions can be described in some detail. And that was the original impetus for my
developing a theory which says in effect, emotions are a kind of judgment. Because judgments right
from the start are articulable, explicable, describable. But feelings have another problem too.
Feelings are private. There's a sense in which nobody can have another person's feeling.
And undergraduates in philosophy always have a wonderful time arguing,
how do I know that what I call green isn't what you see as red? And you sort of go
through it and say, well, I use the one word, use the other word. And of course we agree on
things because every time I see green, you see red and we agree. Okay, that's the color it is
with different words. But this privacy of emotion also, or the privacy of feelings,
has a serious consequence. And that is, again, we're not quite sure how to talk about it.
And if we're talking about, say, a science of emotion or a science of feeling,
right away, we have no place to turn. Which is why the psychology of behaviorism, which
pretty much ruled psychology for almost 50 years, got such a good head start because they made the
pretty clear point that since emotions or sense feelings were private, since they could not be
publicly observed, they couldn't be part of experiments, they couldn't be part of demonstrations,
and so they just abandoned such talk altogether. Well, again, I think this was premature,
unnecessary. But nevertheless, one is challenged. What is an emotion? And what is feeling? And while
I gave up for a long time and said, no, the emotion was just basically the judgment.
I've come back over the years and accepted what I take to be the obvious that emotions
involve feelings too. But how do we talk about them? So I don't want to talk about feelings
because that word is now so used, so overused, not to mention the sort of theme of so many very bad
songs that I'd like to sort of junk it in favor of a much broader notion. And that is the idea
of an emotional experience because I would want to hold that a good part of emotions, maybe not
all emotions, but a good part of emotions has to do with a certain kind of experience, emotional
experience. And so what this lecture is going to be about is what is that? Now, again, common sense
would suggest that each emotion has its own distinctive experience. So there's an experience
of anger, there's an experience of jealousy, there's an experience of sadness, and so on.
William James, 110, 15 years ago, took on this problem and tried to say, okay, how can we pin
down the experience or how can we pin down the feeling that is characteristic of an emotion?
And he gave the theory, which we've described in a bit of detail, and that is that an emotion
is a feeling which is consequent to a certain kind of bodily disturbance. The bodily disturbance
is concrete and specifiable. So the sensations that make up the emotion can be specified too.
So when you get flushed, for example, if you're embarrassed, or if you feel the hairs on the
back of your neck stand up because you're afraid, we can say, oh, that's the feeling you get when
you get flushed when your blood is circulating through the capillaries of your face, or that is
the feeling you get when the hairs stand up in the back of your neck. So feeling is no longer
mysterious. Feeling is no longer ineffable, can always be described in terms of, oh, that's the
way you feel when such and such physiological occurrence happens. And feeling is no longer
non-scientific. And William James here, I think, gets credit, among other things, for being
one of the first truly scientific psychologists to talk about emotions.
The problem was to talk about sensations here is still a bit like talking about
seeing green, and the problems that I just mentioned that accompany that. How do I know
that what flushing feels to you is like what flushing feels to me? How do I know that the
feeling of the hair standing on the back of your neck is to you what it is to me? Even
allowing for the obvious individual differences. But nevertheless, is it the same kind of feeling?
So he hasn't quite answered that question, but I think there's a more serious problem.
And I've mentioned this in other contexts talking about a different phenomenon.
But James seems to still think that the feelings or the sensations of an emotion
are something pretty straightforward, and they're basically all consequent to a certain kind of
physiological response. And what I suggested before, and now I want to sort of push a little bit,
is the idea that what James is talking about is really a variety of physiological responses,
and consequently a variety of different kinds of sensations, not just different sensations
with different physiological responses, but different kinds of sensations with different
kinds of physiological responses. Point I made earlier was that, for example, James often talks,
and mainly talks, about the physiological responses of the autonomic nervous system.
Now these are characteristic in certain sorts of ways. For example, they are non-voluntary.
They literally get triggered off. So when, say you're getting afraid, and you feel your heart
beating faster, and your breath becomes intense, intensified, that's kind of beyond your control.
And what's more, it has the feeling of something happening to you, which of course is where a
lot of that sense of passivity in emotions comes from. But also, there's something else that's
going on, and James makes a big deal of this. He says you're also tightening your muscles in certain
kind of characteristic ways. Now this, again, falls into a number of different dimensions.
One of the sets of muscles that you exercise when you're feeling an emotion are your facial muscles,
and of course there is now a huge industry in psychology led most prominently by Paul Ekman
out in California. And for the last 30 years or so, Ekman has been studying with exquisite
specificity the various kinds of facial expressions that one makes to different sorts of emotions.
Now I don't want to go into that research right now except to make an obvious point.
When you tense the muscles of your face in these characteristic ways, it feels differently to you.
That's not to say that you can say, okay, what I'm doing now is I'm flexing this muscle and this
muscle and this muscle, or this set of muscles in conjunction. Because the truth is, most people
don't know much about what's going on in their own body or even what they're doing. You've probably
all noticed that some people, somebody will comment to you, what's that funny look on your face?
And your response is, what funny look? Because you weren't aware of making a face at all.
Or someone will say, I want you to tell me when your heart starts beating faster. People in
experiments, for example, who are sort of put in a state of mild fear and they're being monitored
will often get it wrong. They'll say, oh, my heart's beating a lot faster now
because they're feeling afraid. Whereas the physiology is pretty straightforward.
It's not beating harder at all. So we want to be very careful about asking people about this stuff
because very often they're not in a position to know what's happening. Nevertheless, what goes on
when you tense your face, when you make a grimace, or when you give a smile, or when you're frowning
in some sort of disgust or potential anger. These all are feelings. And here's what I want to suggest.
That in addition to the sort of autonomic responses which have their own characteristic
feelings, they're also these sort of muscular responses which have their feelings too.
And so when we talk about emotional experience, we're right away talking about a very rich tapestry
of different kinds of experiences. And to think that it all comes down to something like
feeling flushed or the hairs in the back of your neck standing up is just much too simple.
But of course, facial muscles are just one set of muscles. That's where a lot of the research
in the last several years has gone. But something that's equally obvious. And that is that when you
have most emotions, you prepare for action. A state which the Dutch psychologist Niko Freide
refers to as action readiness. Now action readiness isn't yet full blown action that may or may not
follow. Action preparedness, action readiness, is not necessarily goal oriented, although goals
will also follow. So if you get angry and you tense your fists, one can make the argument that you
are preparing to punch someone. But of course, most of us are pretty civilized. We don't punch
anybody. In fact, we don't even need to punch anything. But nevertheless, it's a gesture of
action preparedness or action readiness. And of course, we feel it. It is a set of distinctive
sensations. And that set of sensations is again, another component of what we're calling emotional
experience overall. But also, there is emotional posture. Now you've all done this sort of experiment.
You're feeling kind of down about things. And somebody says to you, oh, come on, keep your chin
up. And maybe you do it. And lifting your chin has a kind of surprising effect. That suddenly you feel,
you feel better about the world. That's part of your experience too. And it's sort of like the
Jamesian experiment I suggested the other lecture when I said, James says sort of hallmark card like,
if you smile, you'll feel better. Well, so too, if you lift your chin, you feel better. It changes
your stature in the world, not just for people who are watching you, but it changes your sense of
yourself. And so too, they teach military personnel, stand with your chest out, like you're proud,
shoulders back. Why? I mean, the truth is, you actually breathe better, yoga instructors tell me
anyway, that if you don't keep your stomach in, but you breathe with your stomach, that you have a
much fuller breath and so on. And that might make you feel very different again. Nevertheless,
there's something about the kind of military type posture that makes us feel differently,
because it enters into our overall emotional experience. There's also what people refer to as
kinesthetics, which is not just a question of posture, but it's a question of how we move.
So just again, refer to the obvious. Somebody who's sad will walk slowly and kind of deliberately
but aimlessly. Somebody who's angry or all worked up about a project will often walk fast,
and you can tell from their gait what kind of mood, what kind of emotion they're feeling. But
again, I'm not thinking right now about the behavior as much as I'm thinking that all behavior
has its effects in our consciousness. All behavior is something we also experience.
And so the idea of facial movement, the idea of preparing for action, the idea of posture,
the idea of things like gait and how you hold yourself, all of this is part of that sort of
general experience we refer to as the experience of anger or the experience of sadness or the
experience of love. And then of course there are gestures. Now gestures go beyond action preparedness
or action readiness. Gestures are, in a sense, actions on their own. But what distinguishes
gestures from a lot of these other things I'm talking about is gestures by their very nature
have a meaning. And here we enter into a whole new realm, because the meaning of a gesture
is part of the experience. So if you, I'll make this as planned as I can, if you shake your
fist at someone, right? I mean it's not just the feeling of the muscle guillature that you feel as
part of your experience, but it's the significance of the gesture as well. So experience isn't just
sensations of a very broad variety. Experience is largely focused on meaning, and gesture is
perhaps the smallest physical element of meaning. But of course an emotion isn't just a set of feelings,
and that's why for many years I sort of dismissed feelings as being relatively unimportant in
emotion. Instead what I emphasized were judgments, evaluations, or what psychologists call appraisals.
And we very often will think, well judgments and appraisals, that's not part of experience,
that's something we do. So maybe it's the background of experience, or maybe it causes us to have
certain experiences, but judgments and appraisals themselves are not experiential.
Well I don't want to get into a quibble about this, but let me say the obvious.
When you have an emotion, you judge or appraise the world, or language I'd rather use now is,
when you have an emotion, you are engaged with the world. So what you experience is the world.
Now the connection between what you experience in your own body, so to speak, your various
muscular movements and your autonomic nervous system responses and so on, and what you experience
in the world, is a very intricate connection. And it's not as if there's just the one on the one
hand and the other on the other hand. But let me talk about them separately for a second.
Because part of your emotional experience is going to be something like how you perceive the world.
So if I'm angry, an important part of my experience, and I used to think the essential part of my
experience, is the fact that I see this other person as offensive. Or when I'm in love,
I see this other person, my beloved, as wonderful. And that's an experience. Now again we get back
to the kind of behaviorist complaint, and that is how can this be scientific? Because maybe I'm the
only one who sees my beloved as wonderful. That it's not an objective fact at all. It can't
be tested in any way. Nevertheless, notice we're dealing with a very odd kind of combination here
between my attitude on the one hand and the way the world is on the other. Philosophers have
worried about this for centuries. And the question is, is this subjective or is it objective? And
from my phenomenological background, what I want to say is, question doesn't mean anything.
That the connection here between my perception, my engagement, and the facts I find in the world
is not something that can be sort of carved apart and say, here's the attitude and here's the facts.
But rather, I see the beauty or the wonderfulness of my beloved as a clear fact about her. Maybe
not a fact that's shared by anybody else. But nevertheless, it is an essential part of my emotional
experience. So the point I'm making here is that an emotional experience is just to start with.
Extremely complex. Complex first, in that it combines all these different kinds of sensations
and responses to my various muscle movements, my various nervous system reactions, and so on.
And it also involves the way I engage, the way I perceive the world. So part of my experience
is certainly going to be how I see the world in a particular emotion. When I'm embarrassed,
I perceive myself, I experience myself as being in a kind of very awkward situation.
When I feel guilty, I perceive myself as somebody who in some sense is flawed,
someone who has wronged, somebody who has disgraced himself. When I am jealous, I see the world as
threatening. I see myself as about to lose someone I love or something I love. Now these are experiences
and they're very rich experiences, but they all sort of fit together together with the bodily
responses and provide what seems to be at the time a unified emotional experience.
I asked about the connection between the bodily experiences and the sort of engagements with the
world. One hint here is that when I'm feeling, for example, a certain kind of action preparedness
and let's make it a nice action. So I'm looking at my beloved and what I really want to do is
I just want to hug her. So not surprising, my body is essentially making pre-movements
in the direction of doing just that. But I'm doing just that because she seems to me
so huggable. Now one way to think about this is that the action preparedness here
is sort of based on the way I perceive the world. These are not too disconnected things.
If I'm angry at someone and I would really love to punch them out, assuming they're not too big and
all that, but I feel myself sort of tensing up in my fists and so on, that action preparedness
is directly connected with the way I see the world, namely I see this other person as to be
punished. So there is a connection here between these two seemingly different elements, the sensations
that James talks about in the body and the engagement with the world that I talked about
under the general rubric of intentionality and they're not separate, they're not opposed,
they're not different sorts of things, but the one is connected to the other.
Now there's more to say here. For example, my emotional experience, well we might talk about it
in a very momentary episodic way. Emotions I pointed out are processes that take place over time.
Emotions involve time. Perhaps the most dramatic illustration is somebody who has suffered from
a trauma and of course the worst kinds are things like post-traumatic stress syndrome
and things like that. Now what happens there is that the emotional experience I have at any given
time is not just confined to that particular time, but it always has a kind of emotional
background. So that when I get angry, I'm not just getting angry on this occasion at that person
for doing this, but when I get angry there's a sense in which my whole background of anger,
other times I've gotten angry, the habits I've developed over time, the ways in which I have
become thin-skinned and easily offended. All that is part of the experience too. So you might say
no experience is just what it is. Every experience is kind of both loaded down with and pregnant with
temporal considerations. So there's a sense in which when I'm in love, Freud's right. I'm not just
in love with you now, but what I'm in love with is a whole history. Perhaps if Freud's right,
going back to my mother or if Freud's sort of right, it's just going back to say other people
I've dated or other people I've fallen in love with. But the love is never something that is
simply in itself. And I think people are asking something unreasonable when they say things like,
I just want you to love me for myself because there's a sense in which nobody ever loves anyone
just for themselves. There's a sense in which a person always represents something that is much
larger than themselves. And in particular, they represent something that might be part of a person's
life before they ever came on the scene. So part of the emotional experience then has to do with
memory. It has to do with anticipations and expectations. It has to do with the whole
background of other emotional experiences. And trauma is exceptional here because trauma,
first of all, is an overwhelming emotional experience. One that a person has a very
hard time handling. And so it might even be in Freud's terms repressed. But nevertheless,
it's going to have effects, which are going to deeply influence every emotional experience a
person has until they finally somehow get cured. One of the most fascinating parts of this whole
topic is something I've been working on for years. And I still haven't pinned it down as much as I'd
like to. And I've talked to all sorts of friends in psychiatry and neurology and asking them,
you know, what do you call these things? Because they clearly exist. And it was first discovered
in one sense by a neurologist, a neuropsychiatrist named Wilder Penfield. Oh, must be now 40 years
ago. And these were in the early days of brain surgery. And he was sort of poking around in
people's brains. And one of the odd things about brain surgery, at least some brain surgery is
that the patient is awake. It's very important to have them conscious so you can sort of monitor
what's going on. And he was poking in different people's brains. And one of the things he found
was, if he would poke a particular spot, that a person would describe feeling of immense comfort,
or immense familiarity, or perhaps great discomfort, or fear to the point of paranoia,
but not about anything in particular. And of course, Dr. Freud, long before this,
described anxiety as an emotion, which was not about anything in particular,
or it might have been about something particular, but what it was about was repressed. So that as
far as the experience was concerned, was it was just being anxious. Now, I've thought about this
quite a bit, because I'm interested in what happens when emotions don't have particular objects.
So here's an example that doesn't have anything to do with neurology, or it may have to do with
neurology, but we haven't quite got it down yet. And it's the experience of what we call deja vu.
Now, this is a phrase which is often abused. I'd make a wrong turn on the highway. I have to turn
around, make a U turn. I come back across the same path I've just been. And I say, well, this is an
experience of deja vu. Well, yeah, that's a little joke, but it's not serious.
Deja vu, literally speaking, is when I have an experience of having been someplace before,
or having done something before. And it's just a matter of plain and obvious fact
that I've never been here before. I've never done this before. And it's a kind of a spooky
experience. I mean, I have dreams all the time in which I appear in buildings, and they feel like
home. And I wake up and I think of what the building was, and there's no time I've ever lived
any such place. Well, deja vu is what I call a frame experience. Now, what is a frame experience?
A frame experience is, you might think, just what it says, a frame in the sense that it's a kind of
experience, but it doesn't have a content. Now, in this, you might say it's a little bit like a mood,
because a mood is also kind of a frame. And there's no particular content to it. So if I'm
in a bad mood, I get mad at anything that comes along. Or if I'm in a joyful mood, almost anything
that happens makes me happy. But frame experiences, as I'm describing them now, it's not just to have
an indeterminate content or a varied content, but frame experiences as such don't have a content.
They're really just, like Walter Pranfield's patient. It's a feeling of comfort, but about
nothing in particular. And what I would suggest is that such frame experiences are part of virtually
all of our emotions too. That they never happen in isolation. What happens, of course, is as soon as
you have something like your frame experience, as when you have a mood, you wait away, look around
for something to sort of fill it in. So you feel very comfortable. So even if it's just,
I feel comfortable in the hospital, I feel comfortable with this doctor, you find something
to be comfortable about. But nevertheless, the frame experience itself is, it seems to me,
a very important dimension of emotional experience. Finally, there's a question about thoughts and
reflections. And I made a comment in the last lecture that I thought it was very important to
realize that thoughts and reflections are not something over and above or separate from
emotion, but they're part of the emotions themselves. And let me make the same point now
about emotional experience. We often think of thoughts as something that are not particularly
experiential. But of course, you do experience your thoughts. And sometimes, I know if you're
particularly sort of literal minded, I sometimes see my thoughts sort of passing through my experience
almost like the sort of streaming head on a video or something like that. I actually see the thoughts.
But I'm not just talking about seeing them in this sort of rather hypervisual way,
but there's a sense in which thinking, having thoughts, reflecting, reflecting on my own emotions
is part of the experience itself. So when I talked about reflection and the emotion
sort of teaming up and working together, I mean that quite literally, and I mean it literally
particularly in the sense of having an experience. When I'm ashamed of having gotten angry, that
amalgam is a very peculiar way of actually feeling. It's a very peculiar kind of experience.
And one last point here. We often talk about emotional intensity, where the idea of intensity
is that an emotion can be a very strong emotion or it can be very weak emotion. This is often
thought to be simply a kind of physiological measure. So the idea here is that what happens
is that when you are very angry, suddenly you get much more excited and so on. And I want to
suggest something very different. That getting very angry is rather having a different kind
of emotional experience. And the way I would characterize the difference, when you get very
angry, it's because what you are angry about seems very important to you. In other words,
it's another phenomenon that depends on the emotional experience and not just on the physiology.
To be sure, the physiology here will probably go along with the experience and even become part
of the experience. But intensity isn't just a matter of more blood flow, more hormones,
and so on. The intensity is a product of the engagement with the world, which is what the
emotional experience is ultimately all about.
