These lectures are part of the Great Courses series they are produced by The Teaching Company.
These lectures are titled The Passions, Philosophy and the Intelligence of Emotions, Part 2.
Chapter 13 How Emotions Are Intelligent
So, emotions aren't just feelings, they're not hydraulic mechanisms, and they're not in the mind.
So what are they?
I think it's time to sort of come face to face with the main thesis of the course, and that is that emotions have intelligence.
Now, in the last lecture I said a little something about moods, largely with reference to Heidegger,
but our impression of moods is often rather flighty and transient.
A mood seems sort of like internal weather. We think of a mood as passing.
So, today is sunny, but probability of clouds.
And so, I'm in a good mood, but there's always the likelihood that I'll fall into a bad mood.
But Heidegger obviously doesn't mean the term that way, and neither do I.
But moods are not just passing and transient, but moods are profound.
And it might be that some moods only last a short time, but there's a more profound sense in which moods last even a lifetime.
That people have what we call temperaments, but temperaments aren't just behavioral patterns.
Temperaments are ways of engaging with the world, so some people are very intense in their engagement with the world.
Some people are very relaxed. Some people have a great sense of humor towards the world.
And some people are, seems, chronically angry.
And these aren't just passing phases, but rather they have to do with the very nature of the engagement.
Heidegger also says that it's the nature of moods to give us deep insight into the nature of the world.
And this thesis can be sort of echoed in one of the contemporary neurologists that I've mentioned elsewhere in the series,
namely Tony DeMascio, who has argued that without emotions, without that kind of engagement with the world,
there is no such thing as, for example, rational decision-making.
Because what emotions and moods give us is, you might say, the meaning of the world, or the concerns we have with the world.
They give us an interest in the world, or to use an overly-used philosophical term, they provide salience to our decisions.
So the idea of emotional intelligence is, first and foremost, the following idea.
That emotions are engagements with the world that give us insight into the nature of the world.
Now, that's not to say that emotions can't go wrong. Of course they do.
Just as intelligence, say, in the military-political sense, can often be false intelligence
and give us very wrong ideas about what's going on in the world and what we should do in preparation.
But, nevertheless, that's not to deny that intelligence is intelligence.
It has to do with concepts and understanding. It has to do with insight and sort of working engagement.
And to talk this way is not to talk the language of mechanisms, but something else.
Well, that something else has an old name. Again, it goes back to Aristotle.
And the word here is teleology, purposiveness.
And if you think that mechanism is opposed to teleology, or to talk about emotions as mechanisms,
is antithetical to talking about emotions as purposive, as engagements, then I think we've got a problem.
Because one thing that's been obvious for a very long time, and this goes back, among other things, to manual Kant's work,
and that is that mechanism and teleology can be two different ways of talking about one in the same system.
So some people seem to think there's a deep problem with the idea that the mechanism of emotions is the brain, which is mechanical.
But that's not really a problem at all, because when we talk about human behavior and human experience,
we're not talking about mechanism as such, but neither are we denying mechanism, because these two things go together in a very nifty way.
I'll give you a simple example.
One might explain how the heart works by explaining that the heart is made of a certain kind of muscle.
It is innervated in a certain kind of way by nerves, and the stimulation of the nerves stimulates the muscles and the muscles contract.
That is a causal account, a mechanical account of how the heart works.
If you're a heart surgeon or a cardiologist, that's what mainly concerns you, because very often what you're doing is operating with or operating on the mechanism of the heart.
But on the other hand, there's a perfectly legitimate sense in which the function or the purpose of the heart is to pump blood around the body.
That's a teleological explanation, and it doesn't in any way undermine or challenge the mechanical causal explanation, but rather it supplements it.
These are complementary accounts.
And so too, I'd like to say that when we talk about the neurology of the emotions, which is a fascinating subject, which I haven't delved in in any depth whatsoever,
but we can talk about that, and at the same time talk about the intentionality of emotions, the way in which emotions are insightful, intelligent, and engaging,
and there's no problem, no contradiction at all.
Now, what emotions are has a lot to do with intentionality.
Many years ago, a young, then young, analytic philosopher at Oxford named Tony Kenney grappled with this question of intentionality with regard to emotions,
and came up with a very good theory, but also it's a theory which presents us with certain kinds of problems.
And it's a theory which tries to make the distinction between what emotions are and what feelings are,
especially the feelings of the sort discussed by William James, the sensations that come out of physiological changes in the body and so on.
And Kenney's way of talking about this was to say that there are certain kinds of feelings, sensations, which don't have intentionality,
but then there are certain kinds of feelings, namely the emotions, which necessarily have intentionality.
Now, the problem is how you explain what intentionality is and the difference between intentional feelings and unintentional feelings without begging the question.
But that's a sort of distant philosophical question.
What I want to focus on is the idea of intentionality as Kenney defends it, because it seems to me it's a very central concept to what we're going to be talking about.
Kenney says that every emotion or every type of emotion has its own particular formal object.
I asked a question in an earlier lecture, how we distinguish various emotions from one another.
And I raised the question, could it be on the basis of feelings in the Jamesian sense, namely the sensations one has when one has that emotion?
And the answer, I think, is basically no, which isn't to say that there might not be such differences.
But most of us, I think, don't notice them and even if we pay attention, we have trouble spelling out what they are.
But if you ask me the difference between, say, hating someone and loving someone, I don't have any hesitation at all.
When you hate someone, you have some very negative feelings towards them.
When you love someone, you have very positive feelings towards them.
Or the difference between shame and embarrassment. We talked about that several lectures ago.
In embarrassment, you wave responsibility.
In embarrassment, you don't see yourself as being responsible for the awkward situation you find yourself in.
In shame, by contrast, what you do is you take responsibility for the awkward situation.
Now, Kenney calls these formal objects, and the term, again, goes way back in philosophy,
because what it does is it characterizes the necessary conditions for an emotion being an emotion of a certain kind.
One of the problems that had been pointed out at some length with regard to the Jamesian analysis of emotion
was the fact that while it seemed to give a general characterization of what it was to have an emotion,
namely that the body was aroused in certain sorts of ways and there were certain sorts of feelings that went along with it,
it really gave us virtually no way of distinguishing one emotion from the other.
And one of the most famous objections to James by Cannon, which I mentioned before, has to do with the idea
that while it might give a kind of general kind of emotion, it doesn't give us anything like the specificity,
which obviously we use all the time to distinguish any one of hundreds of different emotions to ourselves or to someone else.
But of course, once you start talking about formal objects, once you start talking in terms of intentionality,
then the nature of the differences becomes quite clear.
And it has to do not with the mechanism, not with the neurology, not with the physiology,
but it has to do with the nature of the kind of engagement that it involves.
So one of the major methods that philosophers have used now for some 50 years in understanding emotions
is what's called conceptual analysis, because what I'm talking about in terms of formal objects
might very easily be translated in terms of the concepts that a particular emotion applies to the world.
For example, when you're angry, you find something offensive.
When you are in love, you find someone lovable.
When you are ashamed, you find something blameworthy in yourself.
And so by analyzing the concepts, what you understand is what the formal objects are,
and when you understand what the formal objects are, you understand the nature of emotions.
Now, one of the problems that we often face in talking about emotions is when emotions are described as feelings.
There's really no sense in which a feeling can be right or wrong or warranted or unwarranted.
And yet one of the most obvious things about emotions is that we talk about them in these evaluative terms all the time.
So you get angry at someone for doing something.
I get angry at John for stealing my car or taking my car without permission.
And you point out to me that my car is still sitting in the driveway, nobody's touched it, and suddenly the end of my anger.
Now, I might have some physiological reactions that follow, but nevertheless, the anger is about a situation in the world,
namely that John stole my car.
Turns out that's not the situation at all, and so my anger is wrong.
And the idea of anger being wrong implies that it could also be right.
And to say that it could be either right or wrong is already to give it a kind of intelligence,
a kind of evaluative nature that mere feelings don't have.
If I have a headache, it's not a question of whether I'm right to have it or not, or whether I have a right to have it,
but I just have a headache.
That's just a fact about me.
But when I'm angry, there's a claim about the world, and therefore such a thing is getting the claim right or wrong.
And also it's not just a question of right or wrong, true or false, but also warranted or unwarranted.
So I might be very angry at John for walking away with my pen.
And you might point out to me, well, it's true that he walked away with your pen,
but you know, we scholars just automatically sort of pocket pens and pencils all the time because that's what we do,
and certainly there's no reason to get so angry at him.
So I've got the fact right, but there's no warrant.
There is no good reason to get that angry in this situation.
The Saristotle says quite rightly that wisdom is getting angry at the right person,
in the right situation, in the right way, to the right degree, and it'd be foolish in some cases, not to.
But motions are intelligent in the sense that they can get the world right,
and because they can get the world right, they can also, of course, get the world wrong.
And of course, it's famous how wrong they can be.
Emotions tend to be fairly narrow-minded, or one psychologist says, emotions tend to be fairly absolute.
So when you're angry, you really don't see the virtues of the person you're angry with,
or when you're in love, you have a great deal of trouble seeing the person's faults and flaws.
When you're embarrassed, that's not a good time for you to sort of try and sing your own praises.
The idea is that an emotion can get the world right, but in such a narrow way that it ignores the larger picture.
And that's one of the reasons why moods are important, because moods tend to sort of take in that larger picture.
It could also be that we have emotions about things that don't exist at all.
For example, I go to the movies and I am very moved by the situation of the hero and the heroine,
or I read a book and I am full in love with one of the people in the book,
or I read, let's take a good example, I take Sherlock Holmes and I get caught up in the crime that he's trying to solve,
even though there was no crime, and there's no such person as Sherlock Holmes,
and the whole story was invented by a guy named Arthur Conan Doyle, and I know all this, but nevertheless I can get caught up in it.
Now, does this make the emotions less real? That's an interesting question we're going to have to talk about.
But to put it very simply for the moment, I would say, no.
The kind of fear I have when I feel fear for the sake of the character in the movie,
or the kind of love I feel for the character, not the actress, but the character in a movie,
or the kind of anger I feel at the indignity suffered by the person in the book.
That's real fear, real love, real anger.
And the fact that the object happens to be fictitious or made up, and I know that,
doesn't seem to make a difference to the nature of the emotion itself.
Now, we talked about this very early on when I talked about the paradox of horror in Aristotle,
because Aristotle had to face this question, too.
How is it that we get caught up in tragedy?
And I'm not talking here about real tragedy, I'm talking about the kind that you put on the stage.
Oedipus is, as far as we know, a made up character.
In any case, the story is a made up story.
And Sophocles, among many versions, tells it particularly well.
And we know it's made up, and yet we get caught up.
How is that possible?
Well, apart from the question, how is it possible?
Let's start with the idea that we really do get caught up.
We really do get emotional.
Emotional emotions can be about non-existent, made up fictional stories,
as well as about things that happen in real life.
Now, to sort of recap so far, what I'm saying is that emotional intelligence has to do with the fact
that emotions involve concepts and evaluations, or what psychologists these days generally call appraisal.
They're not just feelings, they're not just reactions to the world, or reactions to things happening in the world,
but they are acts of consciousness in which we take things in, understand things,
appraise things, evaluate things in a certain kind of way.
Now, let me say now, and I'll follow this up later, by saying that this can happen on many different levels.
There is, of course, a fully conscious, deliberative, aware level in which one actually sits down and evaluates the situation,
and perhaps even runs through its various components to see how one ought to feel about it.
But, of course, this is just one kind of evaluation or appraisal, and there are many others.
When someone says something insulting to me, I usually don't have to step back and think about it
and say, well, gee, should I consider this an insult or not? What did the person mean by that?
Most of the time, most insults are sufficiently straightforward, so right away, I just hear it as an insult, period.
But there are also what you might call subconscious or subliminal appraisals,
and some psychologists have done this in great detail.
I think they mistakenly think that because the appraisals are subliminal that they aren't really appraisals at all,
but they're just physiological responses of one sort or another.
But I think there is a level in which the body responds in an evaluating, appraising sort of way,
which does deserve to be called appraisal, and so also involves a kind of intelligence.
Sometimes this is very crude, and perhaps the crudest example is that when I take a bite out of, let's say, a bad oyster,
and I immediately spit it out, you might say, well, this is the intelligence of the body, or what Cannon himself many years ago called the wisdom of the body,
that the body has a way of controlling its balance and its status by reading and understanding the things that happen to it,
the things that it ingests, and so on, in such a way as to maintain a certain kind of balance.
So this appraisal I'm talking about, or this evaluation, can take place on many different levels,
from a highly cognitive, complex, deliberative level down to a very basic, almost purely bodily level.
Nevertheless, I want to say it all has to do with intelligence.
It is a way of engaging the world, a way of sort of looking at things as acceptable, unacceptable, warranted, unwarranted, and so on,
and this is, I think, a profound meaning of the term, intelligence with regard to emotion.
But of course, it goes much further than this, because one of the interesting things about our emotional lives is that we don't just evaluate things,
and we don't just perceive properties of things, but rather, we actually constitute the world as it is.
Now, this is part of what I mean by engagement.
It's part of what Heidegger means when he talks about moods sort of tuning us into the world.
But it's not just a matter of recognizing that things are valuable or not valuable, or dangerous or not dangerous,
but rather, it's a matter of actually shaping our experience in certain sorts of ways.
Now, philosophers, Abert Camus, for example, talked with some distance about the concept of the world,
you might call it the scientific concept of the world, in which everything is seen just objectively, just in terms of the facts.
What this does is it deprives our experience of most of its valuable components.
Our reading of the world is not just about information.
Our reading of the world is about concerns and interests and caring.
So, we constitute the world according to our interests, and we constitute the world as having properties,
which maybe in itself, whatever that means, it wouldn't have.
The most famous and now trite example is caught up in the phrase, beauty is in the eye of the beholder.
And when I talked about love, I talked about this, because the question is, a lover sees the beloved as the most beautiful,
most wonderful person in the world, or something like that.
And the question is, is that right?
And one can imagine two lovers who are particularly homely, and the one lover thinks of the other lover,
the most beautiful person in the world, and are they wrong?
Well, you want to say, it's none of my business.
It's not subject to objective evaluation, but rather the one lover sees the other, constitutes the other,
bestows the other with beauty.
And it's not a question of right or wrong.
And of course, this is a general question that might apply to the question of fiction and fantasy objects and so on.
But one bestows properties on the object of one's emotion.
And I think it's only a cynic who will say that this is a distortion of reality.
I mean, undistorted reality, in this sense, would be of no interest to us whatsoever.
Reality is defined by our interests and by the emotions which we use to constitute it.
Love is constituted, in particular, by bestowing all sorts of virtues to the beloved.
Something Stendhal sort of captures when he talks about crystallization,
that the more you love someone, the more you supposedly find, but in fact bestow them with all sorts of virtues.
And so too, our aesthetic view of the world.
Seeing the world is beautiful.
I mean, what's beautiful about a sunset?
I mean, after all, a sunset is just the refraction of light at a certain time of day.
Why should we think it's beautiful?
But of course, we're postcards from around the world that tell us over and over and over again,
this is really beautiful.
Learn to see it this way.
And if you don't see it that way, you're not just a cynic.
There's a sense in which you're blind.
And all this involves intelligence.
Intelligence, again, means not deliberating, not necessarily thinking,
but intelligence involves the use of concepts to understand the world,
including aesthetic concepts of various sorts.
Now, I haven't said much about Daniel Goldman's book, Emotional Intelligence.
Let me just say again how deeply indebted we all are for his having put emotions on the map
and sort of made the point, which he made very well, that we are all, in fact,
defined by not only our intellectual intelligence, but also by our emotional intelligence.
Goldman got the idea, he's not a researcher himself, from two psychologists named Salavy and Meyer,
who in turn, I think, got the idea from Aristotle.
But the idea is that emotions are intelligent and in many different ways.
Now, Goldman himself talks primarily about intelligence in terms of control.
So he talks about the ability to delay gratification.
He talks about impulse control so that someone who gets angry doesn't just fly off the handle
and commit a violent act.
And obviously, all this is important and well-meaning,
but I don't think it gets to the heart of what emotional intelligence really is.
Emotional intelligence, as I understand it, is intelligence in the emotions,
not just regarding the emotions, and I want to come back to that point in a moment.
But even in Salavy and Meyer, the concept of emotional intelligence, I think, tries to do much too much,
because what they're pointing to is something very important,
and that is that emotions are not just brute feelings, emotions are not just physiological reactions,
but they involve what I'm calling engagements of the world in all sorts of different ways.
And in particular, they distinguish four different ways in which emotions are intelligent,
or in which we are intelligent with regard to our emotions.
The first is a kind of intelligence in simply perceiving our emotions as what they are,
recognizing what state one is in.
Now, this is perhaps more complicated than it sounds,
because first of all, it depends upon what culture and what language you're involved in.
What I recognize as my anger in English in America might be thought of in a very different way
if I were talking about, say, certain kind of cultures where anger is much less prevalent than it is in America,
or it would be a very different kind of perception of what I'm feeling if I were in China speaking Chinese.
But the first idea is that emotional intelligence has to do with the perception and recognition of one's own emotions.
The second notion of emotional intelligence here is how we use our emotions,
and in particular how we use our emotions in rationality, in decision-making, in making plans, and so on.
And obviously, there are better, worse ways of doing this.
This refers back to the Demacio experiments and observations that I made just at the beginning of this lecture,
where he talks about how people who are somehow emotionally deprived can't make rational decisions,
because they can't use their emotions, if they have them at all, in making the decisions.
And what that does is it doesn't just make us slightly irrational, it makes us non-rational,
because rationality presupposes using our emotions in an intelligent way.
The third way of emotional intelligence has to do with understanding one's emotions.
Now, understanding emotions is very different from correctly identifying it, but understand why one is angry,
to understand why one has fallen in love, a question I think we often too rarely ask,
to understand why we are so easily embarrassed or why we feel guilty.
This is a profound kind of understanding the sort of thing that Freud talks about.
It too is an aspect, according to Salve and Meyer, of emotional intelligence.
And finally, there's the question that Goldman talks about primarily,
and that is what they call managing one's emotions, controlling them.
And so intelligence in emotions, according to Salve and Meyer, and consequently to Goldman and others,
has to do with these four very different dimensions.
And the question I want to ask is whether, first of all, all of these really ought to be called emotional intelligence.
And secondly, whether they all refer to anything like the same thing.
Now, Howard Gardner many years ago did some very important work on the nature of intelligence,
and he was rightly critical of the IQ tests on which so much of our educational system depends.
And he pointed out that there are actually many kinds of intelligence,
and the number keeps changing as people sort of refine the list,
but basically there are lots of kinds of intelligence.
There's a kind of mechanical intelligence, there's a kind of social intelligence,
there's a diplomatic intelligence, and so on.
But intelligence is not a single concept, and it certainly can't be measured in a single exam,
but there are many different kinds of intelligence.
And to that we now want to add emotional intelligence.
But then I want to raise the same kind of question.
Are all these different things, perceiving our emotions, using our emotions, understanding our emotions,
managing emotions, are they all the same sort of thing, and I want to say, no they're not.
So just as Gardner argued with Gardner of Intelligence in general,
that there are many different kinds of intelligence.
I'd want to argue with regard to emotional intelligence,
there are many different kinds of emotional intelligence.
Nevertheless, there's a core, and the core is what I'm calling intelligence in the emotions.
And that has to do with the fact that the emotions involve using concepts,
engaging in the world in a more or less intelligent way,
getting it right, being fair.
All this is what goes into emotional intelligence.
Of course, it also involves control, and use, and understanding.
But the basic idea is that emotions are intelligent because there are ways of perceiving,
evaluating, appraising, and understanding the world.
And that alone is enough to make them very important to us.
