Lecture 8 – Nastier, Resentment and Vengeance
With some apologies, I'd like to continue our discussion of the downward spiral of emotions.
That is very negative emotions in a straightforward way.
Resentment and vengeance, like envy and jealousy, are double-edged emotions.
The Chinese have an old saying, if you're out for vengeance, dig two graves.
That's a warning.
Because these emotions not only destroy the person that they are aimed at, they also destroy
the person who has them.
Now you might ask at this point, and I certainly do, why are we talking so much about negative
emotions?
Why not positive emotions, like joy?
Well the sad truth is that emotions are most prominent with the frustrations of life, and
in particular with frustrations with other people.
That's what brings a great many of them out.
We'll talk about the positive emotions later on.
But to start with, we have to begin by understanding that life is frustrating, life is difficult,
and other people are often frustrating and difficult too.
Vengeance is a fascinating emotion.
To begin with, it is an extremely intelligent emotion.
There are emotions, as Nietzsche said, which drag us down with their stupidity, but resentment
doesn't really fit that bill at all.
Resentment is clever.
If you think about our best social critics, think about a great many novelists, think
about a great many people who have an articulate voice in public life, and whatever else one
might say about them, they're often filled with vengeance, and resentment is very clearly
their modus operandi.
You might also notice that vengeance and resentment are difficult to express.
Vengeance, of course, is elaborated over a long period of time.
We'll talk about that in a moment.
But resentment by its very nature seems unable to express itself in a very effective way.
Remember I talked about Iago, who is a sort of representative of envy, always talking
from the side of the stage and plotting, but for the most part, not making his knowledge,
his emotions very clear to the rest of the characters, until of course the end.
But you think about the way we talk about resentment.
Resentment simmers.
Resentment stews.
Resentment percolates.
It's not an emotion that bubbles up and expresses itself very easily.
And part of the reason is because resentment is an emotion of impotence.
It starts out from the very perspective that there's not much it can do about its frustrations
in the world.
That's one of the reasons why resentment so readily gives way to one of my favorite emotions,
the emotion of Schadenfreude.
Interestingly enough, we don't have a good English word for it.
But Schadenfreude is taking joy in other people's suffering.
Why would we do that?
Because we think in some sense they deserve to suffer.
Why don't we cause them to suffer ourselves?
Because we don't have the power.
So if you resent someone and suddenly they find themselves in a scandal or in an awkward
situation, we find ourselves enjoying it.
But there's a sense in which it's a pathetic emotion.
It's a pathetic emotion is because we leave things up to the fates and we enjoy what happens
to others despite the fact that we would like to bring about their downfall ourselves.
Now this very bleak picture of resentment has to do with the very nature of the emotion
itself.
Nietzsche, who is perhaps the most articulate analysis of this particular emotion, talked
about it at great length not just as a vicious emotion with which he was very concerned and
I would add, which he felt very much himself.
It's often been said, it's not a particularly interesting insight, that Nietzsche himself
wrote about resentment so much precisely because Nietzsche himself was such a deeply
resentful person.
But of course it wasn't just talking about his own resentment.
What he was talking about was the resentment that was built into the whole of Western morality,
the Judeo-Christian morality in particular.
And it's worth rehearsing some of his arguments, which I know some of you have heard before,
because they exemplify what a powerful emotion this can be.
Nietzsche's analysis of resentment is a quasi-historical analysis.
What he asks is, what are the origins of the Judeo-Christian tradition?
What is the origin of what we call morality?
And it's all well and good to say, well, God gave us morality in the Ten Commandments
and all that.
But of course Nietzsche, who is very much a humanist in these matters, wants to know
why we should believe such a story and why we should think that morality comes down to
us from on high.
Because Nietzsche has an underlying supposition, which he defends through most of his philosophy.
And that is that human behavior, for the most part, is pretty selfish.
It is not particularly obedient.
And the question is, why should we believe a set of commandments which is handed down
to us by someone who is not even human?
And his answer is, because that's exactly what we really want.
Because we are incapable of handling the world on our own.
What we would love to have is a rationalization.
What better rationalization could there be than a set of commandments which come down
to us from on high, which tell us, in effect, not to do the sorts of things we find ourselves
incapable of doing anyway?
So if you think about the New Testament and many of the things that are said there, I
say such things as wealth is essentially evil or the root of all evil.
It says that power is not necessarily a good thing, and it promises, sort of as an afterthought,
the meek, the unpowerful, shown here at the earth.
Years later the phrase came into being, ignorance is bliss.
So it's good not to be educated.
It's good not to know too much.
Now what does all this point to?
And I would say it points to the emotion of resentment.
We have students periodically who come into the university, and they're fascinated for
whatever reason with, say, mathematics.
And they take the first calculus class, and they do pretty poorly in it.
When they started the course, they were crowing about how mathematics is the sign of a true
intellect and only people who are really smart can do mathematics.
But after a couple failed tests, you hear the same students walking around complaining
that mathematics is just for airheads, it has nothing to do with reality, and so on.
And this is a nice illustration of resentment.
If you think about those Judeo-Christian values, values of humility, values of enforced poverty,
what you come up with, and you start to see that there's a kind of double think that's
going on here.
On the one hand, people want wealth, I don't think there's too much question about that.
People want power, not too much question about that either.
But most people can have wealth or power.
And so when they turn and they essentially put the values upside down on their head,
what Nietzsche rather fancifully calls the transvaluation of values, suddenly those good
things like wealth and power become bad things, or in his language, they become evil.
And consequently what we do is we turn the world around so that now the old values become
anti-values and the lack of those things becomes virtue.
Now what's interesting about this is it's a powerful device for reasserting one's own
status.
We saw with other emotions, anger for example, how it can take a position in which one has
been offended, insulted, humiliated, and through this device of getting angry, putting oneself
in a superior, and I describe it there as a magistrate-type position, by putting oneself
in this sort of superior position, one compensates for the fact that one has been humiliated.
Well in resentment even more so, the things you can't have in life by being resentful,
and being particularly resentful of those who do have them, what you do is you turn the
whole value system upside down, and you now make it sound as if you're luckily not to
have those things.
It's good that you're poor, it's good that you're not that smart.
And one thinks for example about American television, okay some cheap examples.
There was a program which most of you remember, this is probably now 20, 30 years ago, called
Dallas.
Dallas was a program that depicted some very rich Texans, and what was interesting about
the program was they were always miserable.
And there were several other shows that followed in quick succession, and we still have them
around, but the basic lesson is the rich are not always so well off, in fact they have
more problems because of their wealth than we have as average citizens.
That's resentment too.
The idea is always, you take what you don't have, and you turn it upside down so that
you feel self-righteous precisely because you don't have it.
Now this is one of the reasons why, I said, resentment is one of the most clever emotions,
because it takes cleverness to be able to do this.
And when Nietzsche talks about the history of morality, and the history of today and
Christian tradition, what he's talking about for the most part is precisely this kind of
cleverness.
He even calls it brilliance, but it's brilliance by the way of a kind of retribution, a kind
of revenge.
So you might ask, well, then what's wrong with resentment if it puts us in this kind
of superior position?
And there are a number of answers, not all of them equally satisfactory.
Nietzsche seems to think that being resentful is by its very nature being filled with self-deception
and being hypocritical.
I don't think that's quite right because one can think of many instances in which people
are resentful and fully aware of the fact that that's exactly what they are.
It's also a nasty emotion, but nasty emotions, particularly in someone like Nietzsche, aren't
necessarily an argument in self.
What seems to be really important is the fact that resentment is always an expression of
weakness.
Now one can say weakness is just a fact, that's our lives.
We are all vulnerable, we are all limited in our capacity, so recognizing our weakness
is really just an aspect of recognizing what one's life is about.
Well, maybe not for Nietzsche, Nietzsche has this sort of morality of strength which I've
talked about elsewhere.
But nevertheless, one wants to say the fact that resentment is an emotion of the weak
is not in itself an argument.
However, the fact that it is based on a kind of impotence does produce a kind of problem.
And that is that resentment, like envy, with which it has much in common, gets stuck.
That there's a sense in which one finds oneself incapable of accepting one's life and what
one has as is.
One sort of brings in invidious comparisons with others who have more, and consequently
one is sort of stuck in this position of bitterness.
And that's a problem.
But the overall view of resentment that I want to present here is first that it seems
to me to be a quite natural emotion, not natural in the strong sense that it's a basic emotion
or anything like that, but quite natural in the fact that it follows from the fact that
we live in a world with other people, it is not an equal world, other people are more
powerful than we are, other people have things that we want, and also people are also unfair
to us.
So to end this on a more positive note, it seems to me that one of the virtues of resentment
is that it is a recognition not just of impotence or inferiority, but resentment can be a keen
recognition of the nature of oppression.
So going back to a previous lecture, I mentioned that women at the beginning of the women's
liberation movement were very struck when they were encouraged to be angry, and they
had a lot to be angry about.
And what they were angry about was, to a large extent, oppression.
Now I won't go into the details of that, but what that means is that their sense of themselves
was that they had been put in an inferior position, and even the fact that they're in
a inferior position made it harder for them to speak out.
And yet what the feminist movement did, I think, is that it really changed the whole
society for the better.
So resentment, it's a negative emotion, it has all sorts of destructive capacities, and
nevertheless there are certain circumstances, when we're really talking about oppression
and so on, that it can be extremely valuable.
Now talking about oppression and these sorts of negative circumstances leads us naturally
into vengeance.
Now vengeance has a very bad reputation, not just in this society, but in many societies.
Vengeance is considered the most violent of emotions.
It's considered the most dangerous of emotions.
It's also considered the fastest escalated of emotions, so that it really never comes
to a stop.
And I want to challenge all of this, because it seems to me vengeance plays a very important
role in our lives.
In fact, many years ago, Susan Jacoby, a very good journalist who has written a great deal
on questions about peace and so on since, wrote a book on vengeance which she called
Wild Justice, and her basic theme in that book was something that I think we should
take very seriously.
And she said, to deny our sense of vengeance, to repress it, we'll have as negative consequences
for our society, as the repression of sexuality had for the Victorians.
Now that's a pretty wild claim, but I think it's basically right.
First thing to say is that vengeance is quite satisfying, something that most of us would
rather not admit to ourselves.
A fellow named Arthur Lelyveld wrote years ago, there is no denying the aesthetic satisfaction,
the sense of poetic justice, that pleasures is when evildoers get the comeuppance they
deserve.
The impulse to punish is primarily an impulse to even the score.
That satisfaction is heightened when it becomes impossible to measure out punishment in exact
proportion to the size and shape of the wrong that has been done.
Measure for measure, lex talionis.
Now this picture of vengeance sort of goes against a lot of the sort of common ideas
about vengeance.
For example, the idea that vengeance is unending, that vengeance leads to what are often called
vendetta, or feuds, and they're always escalating and going out of hand.
But the logic of vengeance, if I can call it that, is that vengeance tries to right
a wrong, and the logic of vengeance is that it is something that should fit the crime.
It is measure for measure, and the idea is that vengeance, properly applied, gives back
exactly what it got.
There's of course a very well known line in the Old Testament, in fact it occurs several
times, but it goes, an eye for an eye, tooth for a tooth, and so on.
And people are often reading that as if it's pretty barbaric actually, that it means if
you take out somebody's eye, then they get to take out your eye or something like that.
But I read that more as a limiting case, as a civilizing point, because it used to be
somebody offended you, and you wiped out their whole family, or someone wounded you, and
you killed them, and others along with them.
And what the Old Testament prescription is, is that when you seek justice, seek just that
amount of justice that is equivalent to the loss that you suffered.
And notice how quickly I've started talking about justice, and I think there's a good
reason for this, because I think vengeance and justice go hand in hand.
When you read Old Accounts of Justice, for example, again back in Homer's Iliad, the
word justice very clearly means retribution.
It's getting even, it's putting the world back in balance, but not in this enlightened
Old Testament way.
So when at one point Agamemnon talks about justice with reference to certain captured
Spartans, he talks about wiping them all out.
The Old Testament prescription here is a big improvement.
But again, the picture is that vengeance at its very heart is measure for measure.
It means putting out exactly what deserves to be put out and not a bit more.
Now the problem, of course, is these measurements are rather difficult.
So what you find is that someone will get even, and what they will do will be read as
not really getting even, but doing something more.
And that in turn inspires contra behavior, which in fact makes things even worse.
And typically vendettas or blood feuds are precisely those disagreements that get completely
out of hand.
But again, it seems to me that this is not the nature of vengeance so much as its distortion.
Justice, as I said, go hand in hand.
Now there's a distinction that a lot of very good philosophers make.
It goes back to Kant.
I'm thinking of the more contemporary philosopher Robert Nozick, but lots of people will make
the following sort of distinction.
Justice or more properly, retributive justice or retribution is a matter of reason, whereas
vengeance is an emotion.
But the truth is, it seems to me that we often misunderstand the notion of justice itself.
Much in line with what I've said in earlier lectures, it seems to me that justice isn't
an abstract scheme.
It's not a theory that gets imposed on human life, whether from God or from some philosopher
or anything else.
Justice begins with the heart.
Justice begins with certain sorts of attitudes towards other people, fairness of distribution,
but also fairness and punishment.
Justice is already an emotional schema, a personal emotional schema.
Vengeance, by contrast, is already something rational.
It has a logic built into it, as I've just been describing it.
It seems to me that when we're talking about vengeance and justice, it's not as many people
who testify in trials and so on are taught to say, I don't want vengeance, I want justice.
It seems to me that it's a bogus distinction, that the two often go together.
The claim is often that justice is by its very nature violent.
Of course, our literature makes this sort of probable.
You think about the early Clint Eastwood films, Dirty Harry and so on, and justice is always
just wiping the other guy out, no matter how much he deserves it.
Or you think about the Iliad again, I mean Achilles and Hector, I mean all of this is
about true violence.
But the fact is that vengeance is a very general human attribute.
It applies to all walks of life.
It has to do with, for example, you don't get invited to Sally's party, and in retaliation
what you do is you don't invite Sally to your party.
That is getting even, that is about vengeance.
We do this sort of thing all the time, and it is not bloodthirsty, it tends not necessarily
to escalate, but it seems to me it's part of human life which we would find almost imaginable
if it didn't exist.
Now there's an evolutionary story here, and I think it's quite interesting, because often
if we're in our sort of most pacifist moods, we have this idea if people could only get
along, if nobody would bother anybody else, if notions like punishment and vengeance just
didn't exist at all, well think about that.
There was a very good book written about 20 years ago by a man named Robert Axelrod called
The Evolution of Cooperation, and he made a very good point, and this is all sort of
game theoretical and so on which I will get into, but the idea basically is if we were
all pretty straightforward and honest and just did what we were supposed to do, yeah
the world would be great, but then a cheater appears, and cheaters will always appear,
who can take advantage of a system, and it's easy to imagine how one person starts to
cheat, and not only does he or she take advantage of the system, but he or she inspires other
people to cheat as well.
You get more cheaters, and after a while you don't have a system.
So evolution has taken place in such a way that we are not only endowed with all of our
kind of community and fellow feeling sorts of virtues, so that we get along, we cooperate,
obey the law, and so on, but also we have evolved in such a way that we have a kind of
immediate impulse to punish those who violate these rules.
So the idea that vengeance, among other things, but the idea of punishment in general, evolving
along with the human species just as a sheer matter of survival, is a pretty plausible argument
that we don't just grow up as benign creatures, we also grow up as punitive and vengeful
creatures. Without punishment, there would be no break on people who broke our laws.
Now I've just sort of drawn an equivalence between punishment and vengeance. Let me
spell that out a little bit, because vengeance isn't just punishment, because punishment
could be legalized or formalized in all sorts of ways, as it is in most legal ways.
Legalistic societies in such a way that has nothing to do with vengeance. But I think
if you look at what goes on in, for example, our own legal system, the emphasis on, for
example, victims' rights, the attention that is paid to the family of someone who has
been victimized. All this points to the fact that just legal remedies by themselves, by
WEV formula and sort of established law, aren't enough that we feel that something else has
to go in too. And of course at the extreme end of this is when the law breaks down and
you get into vigilante justice and so on. Now I'm not claiming that vigilante justice
is usually justice, but nevertheless I think you have to understand why this is such a
powerful impulse. In defending the death penalty some 20, 30 years ago, the Supreme Court even
sort of made precisely this point, that if the law doesn't satisfy what it quite rightly
called the sort of vengeful spirit of people who were seriously wronged, then all we can
expect in return is the arise of various vigilante groups and so on to take the law into their
own hands. So what I want to do here is I want to tie justice and retribution on the one
hand to vengeance on the other and say, these are not really contrasting notions that they
fit together in a very intricate way, that justice, if it's doing its job, is going to
in some sense express our sense of vengeance. On the other hand, vengeance, if it is really
rational, which I think it can be, is going to also be constitutive of justice. Now I
have to very quickly correct all this because I'm not defending vengeance. I want to say
that vengeance is a very natural, understandable human emotion. Nevertheless, I think vengeance
is rarely the best policy. As I suggested in an earlier lecture, it seems to me notions
like mercy and forgiveness come in here, but let me make an obvious point. The notions
of mercy and forgiveness are always responses to something, and in particular the responses
to this need for vengeance. If you had no desire for vengeance, no desire to get even,
there would be nothing to forgive. If you didn't have some legal apparatus that insisted
on punishment, then mercy would make no sense. And to show finally just how ingrained I think
all of this is in our minds, thinking of a movie, I think it's one of his best. Woody
Allen did a film years ago called Crimes and Misdemeanors. And in Crimes and Misdemeanors,
what he does is he has, I won't give you the whole plot, but basically a very established
doctor has his mistress murdered. And it's a play on Dostoevsky and crime and punishment
and how guilt is supposed to be this ultimate sort of redemption here. But at the end of
the movie, the doctor says to Woody, he says, you know, it's funny. For a while I really
felt badly about this, but now I'm kind of getting over it. And you walk out of that
film with such a sense of violation, because the truth is, if you think about most of the
films we see, they are about vengeance, whether it's violent vengeance or of the more sort
of socially acceptable kind. And we are so wedded to that idea of things working out
right, that things coming out balanced at the end, that when Woody Allen throws it in
our face and says, nope, I'm not going to give you that, we feel really dejected.
