Lecture 6, Noble or Deadly Sin, Pride and Shame
Pride is a very interesting emotion.
If you read Aristotle and he describes the various virtues, pride is one of the key virtues.
In fact, it's even been argued that pride is the key virtue.
What Aristotle called megaloseche, I suppose a little translation would be something like
the great soul man, but you can think of someone being full of himself.
That was a virtue.
And if you think back when we were talking about the Iliad in one of the first lectures,
you can't imagine Achilles or Hector or Agamemnon or any of these guys being humble or quiet
about their exploits, in fact their speeches throughout the Iliad in which Hector for example
is talking about how tough he is, how brave he is, how many people he's killed, and no
self-apology about it.
Fast forward about two centuries or two millennia or so.
And what you find is that by the Middle Ages, pride has become a sin.
In fact, not only a sin, but a deadly sin, and not only a deadly sin, but for example
in the sort of list of seven by Pope Gregory, it is the worst of the deadly sins.
Fast forward again to the 20th century.
And in the 1960s, you had a movement in the United States, black pride, and fast forward
a little bit again.
And now we have gay pride parades.
So if you look at this quick history, pride goes from being a key virtue, perhaps the
most important virtue, to the worst of the sins, or vices, and back to being something
of a virtue.
How do we explain this?
Well one way to get at it is to ask, what is pride in each of these cases the opposite
of?
Well for the ancients, think again about the Iliad and Achilles and those guys.
Pride is opposed to shame.
And shame is an emotion no one wants.
In shame, one tends to slink away.
In pride, by contrast, one stands up and proclaims one's greatness.
In the Middle Ages, on the other hand, pride is contrasted to humility.
So suddenly it becomes the wrong thing to do, to think too highly of yourself, because
under the auspices of Christianity and its theology, what you should do is you should
think of yourself as relatively unimportant, insignificant.
Now of course there's such a thing as false pride, very interesting concept, but it has
many different meanings.
First obvious understanding of false pride is to say, well it's pride based on false
suppositions, so that the facts which you are allegedly proud of turn out to be not the
case.
So if you imagine someone who is a pseudo-hector or a pseudo-Achilles, sort of bragging I've
just killed 500 Trojans, and it's not true, well that's an obvious interpretation of
false pride.
But there's also a kind of false pride that doesn't depend on having the facts wrong,
but they're things that one just shouldn't be proud of.
For example, I can easily imagine, in fact there probably are such things, a Ku Klux
Klan or a skinhead parades which proclaim pride in being a skinhead, and now it's
a case of false pride, because being a skinhead is not something that one ought to be proud
of.
But the concept of false pride is something to keep in mind, because it reminds us that
what pride is about is a very complicated set of moral, ethical, and evaluative judgments.
And that's probably what I want to talk about today.
Some obvious things, pride is self-referential.
Now anger, fear, even love are not particularly self-referential, although they obviously have
something to do with the self.
Fear is a danger to oneself, anger is oneself as being offended, love involves a relationship
with another person, and you can't just leave the self out of it.
But pride, unlike these other emotions, is immediately self-referential.
It is about the self.
Second, pride involves an evaluation.
Now it turns out to be positive evaluation, and for that reason pride is often referred
to as a positive emotion, more on that later.
But pride is a positive evaluation of oneself, or more particularly as we use the term an
evaluation of something that one has done.
You've done something good, you've done something praiseworthy.
And third, pride involves a kind of moral or ethical dimension.
So it's not just that one has won the race, but one is in some sense a better person from
having won the race.
And in any case, if you think about the religious context of the medieval notion, it involves
thinking rightly about oneself and one's place in the world.
Now the fact that pride is self-referential shouldn't blind us to the fact that pride is
also a social emotion.
So in that quick history I gave you, obviously the society, the culture in which the heroes
of the Iliad operated, and Aristotle, several centuries later, operated too, was a very
different kind of society than the society in medieval Christianity when we're talking
about pride as a deadly sin.
And that's different again from the kind of pride, the kind of culture that we're talking
about in the late 20th century.
And so one has to always bring in the social context to put it simply.
There are things that one could be proud of in the Middle Ages, which one would not be
proud of in the 19th century.
There are things that one could be proud of in the 8th or 12th century BC that one would
not be proud of in the 13th century.
So there's always going to be this social dimension.
Now the fact that there's a social dimension, the fact that involves self-reference and
moral or ethical appraisal, suggests that pride is not one of the basic emotions.
And even those psychologists and neurologists who defend the idea of basic emotions would
be perfectly willing to say that pride and its kindred emotions are not basic.
They are, as it's often put, higher cognitive functions, which means they involve much more
awareness of what's going on around you, of your society, of your culture, of your status.
And so in pride in particular, what you have to be aware of is what's approved of, what's
disapproved of, what's praised, what's not praised in one's own society.
Now, as I have suggested already, pride is a member of a family of emotions.
And what characterizes them all is that they are self-referential, they involve some form
of self-appraisal, and they have moral and ethical overtones, as well as being social
in their larger context.
One can list, just to begin with, shame, embarrassment, guilt, remorse, and regret.
All of these are about the self.
Now, interesting question here.
What do we mean by the self?
Well, that, of course, is cultural too, the Greek concept of the self and the medieval
concept of the self and the contemporary American concept of the self, those are very
different.
And one has to know, well, what do we mean here by the self?
And let me illustrate this by just pointing out some odd things about pride.
If I win, let's say a Nobel Prize, I can be very proud of myself.
But suppose my father or my son wins a Nobel Prize, I can be proud of them too.
Well, that doesn't sound very self-referential, but of course it is, because there's a question
of whether you can be proud of someone who has no relationship to you at all.
Just as we speak, Lance Armstrong has won his seventh Tour de France, a great victory
for anyone.
Lance Armstrong happens to be from my town, Austin, Texas.
And I have to say, I've been bursting with pride for the last few days on the basis of
that victory.
Well, I hate to say it, I can barely ride a bike anymore.
Certainly in terms of endurance, I mean, forget about riding a bike up the Pyrenees.
I couldn't ride up my street without getting winded.
In what sense do I have any right to be proud of Lance Armstrong?
Well, because he's from my town.
And it's not that I've been a big fan all along.
In fact, I didn't even know what the Tour de France was probably until he won, perhaps
the first or second time.
But there's a sense of identity here that's critical to pride, that obviously doesn't
depend on individual selfhood, narrowly construed.
And there's an interesting question.
To what extent can the self be extended here?
Or to what extent is the self extended in these various emotions?
Obviously, I can be ashamed of what my great grandparents did, even though I didn't do it.
I can be embarrassed by what one of my classmates does, even though I'm not him.
So the self here is somewhat flexible.
But at the same time, we want to say all these emotions, pride, shame, embarrassment, guilt,
and so on, are about the self.
Now, one can sort of think about this in a particularly odd way, and this is not very
different from my pride in Lance Armstrong's victory, by the sort of pride that encompasses
a city when, for example, their football team wins the championship, or when in a college,
the basketball team sort of wins the division.
And you have all these out of shape, often overweight, non-athletic people, many of whom
haven't even gone to the games, who are proud of their team.
And one has to ask, in what sense of pride?
Is this a kind of false pride, or is it that we don't quite understand what the self is?
That the self, in fact, is not just an isolated individual self, but for virtually all of us,
the self is a social self, and that's what defines it.
Now, let's talk about some of these other emotions, the ones that typically are called
negative emotions because they involve a negative appraisal of oneself.
Let's start with the pair, shame and embarrassment.
Interestingly enough, not all languages clearly distinguish these.
Sometimes they run together.
In our society, they're quite distinct.
And I think in our society, it's an interesting question.
What's the relationship?
Well, suppose I give you the following challenge.
Describe for me the feelings you have when you're ashamed, as opposed to when you're embarrassed.
Now, some of my students rise into this challenge.
We'll sort of close their eyes, and they'll try to think real hard.
What kind of feelings do they have in each of these states, which many of them, of course, often are?
And someone clever will say, well, when I'm embarrassed, I find myself getting all flushed
and sort of nervous, whereas when I'm ashamed, I feel kind of pale and I want to slink away.
And other students will disagree and say, no, no, it's just the opposite for me.
Now, I haven't done the physiological research here because I don't think it's particularly important.
The difference between shame and embarrassment has to do with the behavior and the context.
So there's embarrassment.
When, for example, one finds oneself in a very awkward situation, which one had no idea what he was getting into,
but here you are. You're in an awkward situation and you just want to get out of it.
That's very different from finding yourself in an awkward situation because of something you've done.
So you show up at a party and you're wearing the wrong clothes.
It's a black tie affair and you're just wearing your sort of shorts and sneakers.
And you're embarrassed.
But if the host has told you explicitly and on several occasions,
to do this is and the fact that you're expected to be dressed to the nines,
then you won't be just embarrassed.
You'll be ashamed, ashamed because you didn't listen, ashamed because you forgot,
or ashamed because you quite self-righteously decided to go against the flow.
But it's cause for shame.
So what that says is that the difference between shame and embarrassment has to do with something very sophisticated.
It has to do with the concept of responsibility.
Put it very simply, when you feel shame, it's because you take responsibility for something you've done.
When you're embarrassed, you find yourself caught in an awkward situation,
but you don't particularly blame yourself for having done anything.
Now what makes this even more intriguing is the fact that shame itself seems to be ambiguous.
In English, we just use really one word, shame and talk about being ashamed.
In French, there are two very distinctive terms.
On the one hand, there is the word aunt, H-O-N-T-E,
which refers to being caught up in a scandal or doing something that is against your position or breaking the rules.
On the other hand, there's a sense of poudre, which is more like our embarrassment.
Poudre is being caught naked.
Now of course, one can arrange to be caught naked by taking one's clothes off in public,
but poudre has a different kind of a meaning than aunt, which refers to having done something wrong.
So one can sort of think about this in terms of the story from Genesis, where Adam and Eve are expelled from Eden,
and at the time they find themselves naked and ashamed.
Well, interesting. Were they naked and ashamed or naked and embarrassed?
Were they ashamed because they did something wrong or were they just ashamed in the sense of being naked?
Well, interestingly enough, both are applicable.
They were ashamed because they broke God's commandment.
They were embarrassed or they felt this other kind of shame because they were naked, and of course they covered themselves up.
So the difference between shame and embarrassment, first of all, is very culturally significant,
and how that works as we use the terms has a lot to do with a very sophisticated term, namely the idea of being responsible or not.
Now the distinction between shame and guilt is also intriguing and intriguing for similar reasons.
There's been a lot of debate about whether these emotions are different or the same.
Freud and his psychoanalytic colleagues and their heirs have argued about this great deal,
tending to reduce shame to kind of guilt, as opposed, say, to certain anthropologists who tend to eliminate guilt and talk mainly about shame.
But before I get down to what the distinction is, I think, let me talk about guilt a little bit because there are also different kinds of guilt.
There's a sense of guilt, which is a legal concept.
So if you're found guilty by a judge and jury, there's a sense in which you are, in fact, guilty.
But as we all know, people are unfortunately found guilty with some frequency, who in fact are quite innocent of the crime.
And conversely, we can all think of cases in which a person has been found not guilty when we all know they're guilty as hell.
Well, that might be a product of the judicial system, again, beyond the scope of this course.
But nevertheless, it says that legal guilt has to be distinguished from some other kind of guilt.
Well, what are the kind of guilt?
Well, one way to talk about guilt is to talk about whether one did, in fact, do the deed in question.
So you might talk about guilt in a straightforwardly causal way.
Did you break the dish?
Well, yes, I did insofar as he threw me across the room and I hit the dish shelf and broke the dish.
So causally, you're guilty of breaking the dish.
But I don't think we'd blame you for breaking the dish, because there was a sense in which it was just your body that sort of made contact with the dish and shattered it.
That's also not what we normally refer to as guilt.
When we talk about guilt, what we tend to talk about is moral guilt.
And again, like the rest of the family, guilt has built into it certain kind of ethical and moral expectations.
So the idea here is that moral guilt is to be distinguished both from legal guilt and from a kind of causal guilt.
And what distinguishes moral guilt in particular is a feeling of guilt.
If you think about the novel The Stranger by Camus, the odd character there is causally guilty of committing a crime.
He pulled the trigger.
He is found legally guilty.
But what's striking about the novel is he has no feeling of guilt, as he doesn't have much feeling about anything.
Now, guilt has to do with, as I've been suggesting, having done something wrong.
But that's not quite enough.
And one can think, for example, of all those cases that Freud talked about in great detail about neurotic guilt.
Because it seems that we can often feel guilty despite the fact that we know full well we've done nothing wrong.
Going to a family gathering, well, we'd like to sort of play it up as one of the great occasions in life, probably is.
But nevertheless, going to a family gathering is almost always an occasion for guilt.
And sometimes it's because we've done something wrong, in fact.
But more often you're just made to feel guilty by who you are.
And that's very curious.
Or another kind of anomaly here is what's called survivor guilt.
One of the things we find very upsetting is that in interviews, for example, of disasters, calamities,
for example, the horrible tsunami that hit in South Asia in 2004,
or after the Holocaust when people sort of emerged as survivors from the camps,
is that in addition to everything else they might have felt, sadness, grief, relief,
they also felt guilty.
Why did they feel guilty?
Because they survived and the others hadn't.
Which, again, throws into question the very basic claim that guilt has to do with having done something wrong,
because these people didn't do anything wrong at all.
They just survived.
Now, the contrast between guilt and shame can be sort of made on something like this basis.
The guilt generally involves having done something wrong with these interesting exceptions.
Shame, by contrast, doesn't seem to have to do with having done something wrong,
but it rather has to do with being a certain kind of person.
So one of the features of different kinds of societies,
according to anthropologists who have been writing about this for many decades,
is that some societies tend to be shame societies.
Some societies tend to be guilt societies.
What's the difference here?
Well, in both cases, it often turns on having done something wrong.
In both cases, it often turns on something like violating the authorities in question of the culture,
whether they're written or unwritten rules, whether it's violating the law,
or simply violating local custom, but we can talk about shame and guilt in both cases.
But what's then is the difference?
Well, I want to suggest something like the following.
The difference between guilt societies and shame societies turns on the kind of culture it is.
There are tribal cultures.
Now, by tribal, let me emphasize, I do not mean primitive.
Japan is a tribal culture.
And what makes it tribal, despite the fact that it is very technologically sophisticated
and very politically sophisticated and very intellectually sophisticated,
what makes it tribal is a certain sense of camaraderie, of togetherness, of community.
In distinction from, American society writ large.
There are communities in America,
but nevertheless, Americans tend to think of themselves as individuals.
And this is an enormous difference.
So my way of understanding shame is something like
not just having a flawed character, which is still too individualistic,
but shame is letting the others down.
So if I'm Japanese and I do something shameful,
what that means is that I've shamed not just myself,
but what I've shamed is my society.
Or to take a different kind of tribal culture,
the Mallory's in New Zealand.
There's a sense in which if one of the young men in the tribe commits a crime,
everyone shares in it and everyone pays for it
and everyone insists on having a hand in redemption or whatever it is to make things better.
Guilt societies, on the other hand, tend to be individualistic.
So where do we talk about guilt most often in our history?
Well, it turns out in the context of Christianity and in the context of sin
and all those affiliated concepts like redemption and grace and forgiveness and so on.
But the idea is that guilt is something you feel just as an individual.
And I expressed real hesitation about buying into the usual interpretation
that guilt is having done something wrong.
But guilt is rather feeling guilty as an individual.
Or in Christian culture, feeling guilty as an individual before God.
So it's God who's judging you, not the rest of society.
And it's not that you've let your fellows down, which may or may not be the case,
but it's rather something about you as an individual.
Interesting way in which all this sort of comes into a fascinating focus
is the story in Huckleberry Finn, where Huck is helping his friend Jim escape.
And as a member of his culture, what he feels is deep hesitation
for having violated the customs, which is that Jim is property
and he has essentially stolen property.
At the same time as a human being, he sort of empathizes with Jim
and shares his desire for freedom.
And so there's an interesting conflict between guilt and shame here
within not just a society, but within a single young, uneducated boy,
which sort of throws into an interesting contrast
the difference between the kinds of things that we're now worried about.
So what I find fascinating about this whole family
is the fact that it does involve self-appraisal,
often of a highly charged ethical or moral sort
that it almost always brings in culture and society in a huge variety of ways.
It also brings in the notion of responsibility, which we haven't really talked about
because in fear, it's not so much a question of responsibility.
In anger, perhaps, responsibility is involved, but it's the other person's responsibility.
There are responsibilities attached to love, but love isn't itself about responsibility.
Compassion might lead to feeling responsible, but it's not itself about responsibility.
But this family of emotions, pride, shame, embarrassment, guilt, and so on,
are all about responsibility.
With that in mind, let me briefly talk about remorse and regret.
Regret is sort of a pro forma emotion.
Now, of course, it can be deep.
One can regret one's wanton childhood.
One can regret a decision one made to get married or not to get married
or to pursue a degree or not to pursue a degree.
But regret tends to be personal but not particularly moral.
And I say it's sort of pro forma insofar as you write out a card saying,
I regret that I can't make your party when in fact you have no feelings about it at all.
You never intended to go to the party in the first place.
You don't like the people who are giving it, but that sort of counts as regret.
Remorse, by contrast, has to do with being deeply concerned about having done something wrong.
And in that, it becomes a very important element in the concept of character, of justice,
and of being a good human.
Because if I had to describe what evil is, evil isn't just disastrous things happening
or causing disastrous things to happen.
People talk about earthquakes as evil. I don't think that makes much sense.
We talk about people being evil.
But what makes them evil isn't just the fact that they cause horrible things to happen.
What makes them evil is the fact that they don't show remorse.
And so I think we're quite right in judging people much more harshly when they commit a crime.
And they don't admit remorse or show remorse than if they do.
Because, again, this whole family of emotions is all about ethics and place in society.
And to think that it's just an emotion or just a feeling, it seems to me to not understand what emotions are about.
