Lecture 21 Emotions Across Cultures, Universals
Deep down, it said, all people are alike.
What that refers to in its usual interpretation is that in terms of basic emotions, we're
all the same, that our languages might be different, cultures might be different, religious
beliefs might be different, and the way we think might be different.
But emotionally, we're all the same.
Now, this has a certain sort of plausibility.
When we look, for example, at videos from distant lands and we see kids at play sort
of shouting with joy, or we look at the aftermath of a tragedy, again, someplace in the far-flung
world, and people are grieving for lost ones, or we see a picture of someone who is just
really angry, shaking their fists, yelling, and we recognize it immediately.
Now, in an extensive set of research experiments, observations, Paul Ekman, whom I mentioned
in the last lecture, who studies faces and facial expressions, did a kind of worldwide
study, and not just with Americans and Europeans and accessible Latin Americans, such.
But he visited tribes that had been isolated from what we call Western culture for their
entire existence, had never, in many cases, seen a Westerner.
And he found that they had the same facial expressions, and they recognized the same
facial expressions that we did.
And he drew the conclusion that facial expressions, at least for some emotions, were universal.
And of course, that theory was augmented by a neurological, psychological theory, which
suggested that facial expressions, again, of some emotions, was a product of evolution,
because biologically set was neurologically hardwired.
And so, consequently, we were all the same.
Now, Ekman, as a psychologist, wasn't much to talk about emotional experience.
Nevertheless, he kind of assumed, presupposed, that a long with the faces went similarities
and experience as well.
From a different quarter, neurologists, who have started probing the brain in greater
and greater detail and with a lot more knowledge, have concluded that there are certain centers
of the brain, hypothalamus, amygdala, and so on, that are basic to emotions.
And so, since the presumption is that all human brains are more or less alike, that human
emotion must be universal as well.
Anybody who has a well-functioning brain is going to have basically the same emotional
responses, again, with certain kind of qualifications.
But nevertheless, the basic emotions, anger, fear, sadness, some sort of attachment, all
of these will be universal, everyone has them.
So deep down, we're all alike.
And what's more, one can add to this, that the human body, despite the remarkable variation
that we all enjoy, as for example, we're lying on a beach, watching the people go by,
or sitting in a train station, watching people rush for trains in different directions, despite
the amazing variability in body size, body shape, how well fit they are, how ill-fit
they are, nevertheless, the human body is pretty much the same.
That's why we have medicine, be a terrible thing if everybody's body was different,
and doctors had to sort of figure out from scratch, okay, what's wrong with this one?
I never saw this organ before.
So brains, bodies, faces, all of this is what we share in common, and the idea is that emotions,
or these certain emotions, are universal, everyone's got them.
Now, philosophers, long before any of this was taking place, had a concept, and it's
a concept that we've raised several times, it's the concept of human nature.
And of course, most philosophy through history, up until almost the 20th century, really didn't
know much about brains at all.
They knew something about bodies, although amazingly little when you think about the current
state of medicine, and of course, they observed each other's faces.
Nevertheless, they had a broader concept.
The concept of human nature said that people are basically born with an essential repertoire
of emotions and capacities.
Now, in philosophy, of course, the capacity that's celebrated the most is the one that
we call rationality.
That's not the particular focus of this lecture or this course.
But rationality is something that is, they say, peculiarly human.
And as we got more sophisticated over the years, people started seeing more and more
that what we call rationality is really the product of another more or less unique human
capacity, and that's the capacity for language.
And so the idea is that what makes all human beings the same is that we all have the capacity
for languages, and although the languages themselves may differ wildly from Chinese
to English, just to take an extreme example, nevertheless, the ability to speak a language
and the sort of readiness to learn languages is something that we all share in common.
Again, deep down in terms of basic capacities, human beings are the same.
But now there's an easy sort of trap to fall into, and that is identifying, on the one
hand, universality, the idea that all people are essentially the same, with biology.
These two things don't necessarily go together.
Something might be biological without, in fact, being universal.
And let me raise a very touchy and dangerous subject here.
It's the subject of race.
We know, for example, that different races have different, say, chemical sensitivities.
The Japanese can't digest milk.
There are certain people who have racially a kind of predisposition to, say, alcoholism.
So the fact that you are a human doesn't mean that you're like all other humans, because
there are significant differences between different races and perhaps different groups
that might make it biologically that you're the same, but there's no universality there.
And I want to sort of leave that an open question.
And of course, once we enter the gender question, which I always touch very carefully, again,
there are clear biological differences.
But it certainly doesn't turn out to be that everyone is the same, a matter of quite considerable
controversy of the past 30 years.
And the other way, too, the fact that something is universal doesn't mean that it's biological.
Because what philosophers have also talked about for quite a few centuries is what they
call the human condition.
Or the human condition is those features of the environment, those features of our biology,
those features of our condition, which are universal, but nevertheless, they're not
necessarily biological.
I'm thinking, for example, the fact that we all face dangers.
And since we all face dangers, we all probably experience some degree of fear.
We all get engaged in tasks, tasks of all sorts, whether it's hunting, whether it's
growing something, whether it's doing a crossword puzzle.
But if you do a task, you are prone to frustration and disappointment.
We're all subject to illness.
And we all know we're going to die.
Now, the last one, of course, is particularly interesting.
It's not that death is something peculiarly human.
Every biological creature dies at some point.
But human beings, it is often argued, are more or less unique, and they know they're
going to die.
And that knowledge, of course, gives rise, gives rise to all sorts of emotions.
Now, there's some question about whether other animals might have some premonition of death.
Elephants are often mentioned in this regard.
But that's sort of an interesting sideline.
The important point is there are various aspects of the human condition.
The fact that we need certain things, the fact that we do certain things, the fact that
we suffer certain things, the fact that we live in groups and families all give rise to
certain more or less universal situations, which in turn generate more or less universal
emotions, which might not be directly based on biology at all.
Of course, there's always the sense that all such matters depend ultimately on some
sort of biological trait, such as the fact that we need to eat, which is biological,
gives rise to the universality of looking for food.
But nevertheless, the universality we're talking about here is not particularly biological.
And one can imagine, for example, creating a creature from scratch that perhaps had the
same needs.
But now we're getting sort of off the track.
Important point is the human condition might explain universality, even if it isn't based
directly on some sort of biology, which raises, again, the whole question of evolution.
Because we often suspect that if something is a human trait, and especially if it's
a universal human trait, that it must have been in one of the pieces of jargon that's
grown up selected for.
The idea is that natural selection has somehow picked out those features, perhaps including
emotions, which are most valuable for our survival, or for our survival as a group.
But as I pointed out in a much earlier lecture, it's also possible that these things which
turn out to be so valuable for our survival, or valuable for holding groups together, might
be prior products of other aspects, which maybe can be explained by evolution.
For example, there's a good argument that something like aggressiveness is a product
of evolution because if we were simply tame and timid creatures, we'd be quickly devoured
by creatures who weren't so tame and timid.
But it doesn't follow that, for example, anger is something that was selected for.
But rather, anger might be just a byproduct of a general kind of aggressiveness and defensiveness,
which nevertheless serves as well.
Now the key to a lot of this talk about universality is what contemporary psychologists and neurologists
refer to as an affect program.
An affect program is, as I discussed in a very early lecture, an affect program is sort
of a syndrome of neurological, muscular, and hormonal reactions, which are coordinated,
or in a sort of popular parlance, hardwired, such that they're triggered by certain kinds
of events.
And once they trigger, then the sort of program takes place, and it's pretty much beyond
any voluntary control.
And this is not true of all emotions, it's true of what people call the basic emotions,
and we discussed some of those one by one in the early parts of the lectures, for example,
anger is such an affect program, a basic emotion, fear is an affect program, a basic emotion,
sadness, disgust, surprise are other candidates for basic emotions.
And the idea is all of these are essentially neurological syndromes, they are programmed
in a very straightforward sense that they're sort of set to go off all at once, and it
could be a sort of minimal stimulus, in fact it could be a full stimulus, or something
just like a shadow passing overhead that could set it off.
But first point to make here is that, of course, if there are such programs, and I have cast
a little bit of doubt on that, nevertheless they are, first of all, limited.
There's a very small number of emotions, and people argue about this, but usually the number
is somewhere between six and ten, but there are a small number of emotions that even provide
plausible candidates for these affect programs or basic emotions.
And the second thing is that even where there are arguably such programs, such as in anger
or fear, these are shaped by culture.
So Ekman who talks about such programs and talks about basic emotions, Ekman talks about
how also there are display rules, and display rules are essentially a kind of cultural overlay,
so that while he argues the fact that for the basic emotions, facial expressions are
more or less automatic.
They happen very fast, they happen involuntarily, and one, in fact, cannot control that initial
facial expression, which is why Ekman also specializes in such things as lie detection,
and he's been very good and trains many people in how to tell when somebody's lying just
by catching that fleeting expression that they make as they sort of prepare themselves to lie.
But of course, once somebody starts to lie, then what Ekman calls display rules kick in,
because people realize they have to have a certain kind of face, let's say a poker face,
or let's say they have to look relaxed, or they have to look ignorant, and people are
very good, some of them anyway, at learning these display rules and how you should look
in order to convey a certain kind of emotional facade.
But he says there's always that fraction of a second, and if you know what you're looking
for, you know exactly what the person is really experiencing, what the person is really feeling.
And so even with a basic emotion, something like anger or fear, on the one hand, there
may be this sort of immediate reaction, and you can usually tell, for example, if someone
is suddenly afraid, but if they're, let's say, macho, or if they have good reason not
to show fear in the circumstance, they will cover very quickly, and that has to do with
something they've learned, it's a display rule, it might be individual, but more likely,
it's cultural, it's something you learn by growing up in a society.
So there's a question, to what extent are even basic emotions, these affect programs,
simply the product of biology, neurology, and the rest, and to what extent are they the
product of culture? And temptation here is to say, well, they're both, that there's
a certain core which is biological, and then there's a kind of an overlay of cultural learning.
Peter Goldie, a very good English philosopher who studies and writes about the emotions,
calls this the avocado pair model of emotion. I think in American terms, we're more likely
to describe it as the peach model of emotion. But the idea is that there's this hard core
of neurological wiring, and then culture sort of puts this sort of soft fruity layer on
top of it. And it's kind of an attractive model, it turns out not to be right, because
first of all, we're not talking about a hard core, that the brain is in fact always growing
and changing, and especially if we're talking about, say, teenagers. It's not as if there's
a hard core of hardwired responses, but rather things are developing, new pathways are always
being opened up. So it's not as if culture is simply an embellishment, an overlay, but
culture actually affects the growth of the brain itself. But again, I'm getting a bit
off the track, because what I really want to talk about here is the general extent to
which an emotion is something biological, and therefore, usually, universal, and the
extent to which an emotion is a cultural product, and to that extent, variable between cultures,
languages, groups, and so on. Now my own view here is that you have to sort of adopt a
yin-yang attitude towards these things, that of course, every emotion involves the body
and presumably neurology in some yet to be specified way, and every emotion involves
culture, relationship with other people, engagement with the world, and as I've tried to make
clear in the last several lectures, this is a very complicated, intertwined relationship,
and it can't be easily separated into here the biological elements, and here the sort
of intentionality elements, or here the engagement with the world elements, but rather these
things go together in a very intricate way. And so the idea of yin-yang, that ancient Chinese
symbol that represents not just opposition and difference, but also a kind of mutual dependency
and intertwineness, that it seems to me like a good metaphor to understand what it is we're
talking about when we talk about the universality of emotions, or the specificity and provinciality
of emotions. Now there's a concept that philosophers have talked about for several hundred years,
and it's what they call the formal object of emotion, and basically the idea here, and
we've mentioned this once before, the idea is that every emotion can be characterized
in terms of a certain kind of object, and we're not yet talking about details, so we're
not yet talking about being angry at Sally because she offended me at the party, but we're
talking about the formal object of the emotion, and the formal object of the emotion of anger
is, one might say, offense, or the formal object of the emotion of fear is danger.
Now, of course, there are all sorts of variations and specificities here. I mean, one never
has simply a formal object, one always has an object with content, but the idea of a
formal object is a way of getting at that notion of the human condition, and what it
would be for an emotion to be universal, and one might say, well, even where the contents
of emotion vary from culture to culture, and the specificities, and the expression, and
the behavior that follows, what they all have in common is a formal object, so in every
society, if people get angry, they're angry because of offense, if people are afraid,
they're afraid because of danger, if people are sad, they're upset because of a loss,
if it's love, it's because something attracts them as being special or wonderful or something
like that. So, one can talk about formal objects here as a kind of philosophical way of talking
about the relationship between universality and particular emotion types, but this raises
some really interesting questions, and one of those questions is, does everyone have
the same formal objects? I mean, does everyone feel offense? Does everyone recognize danger?
I just suggested that, I said these are an aspect of the human condition, if you're involved
in tasks, you're going to get frustrated and probably blame something for the frustration,
and so you do have a sense of offense and anger. If you are in a society where you are
subject to dangers, whether it's from other people or natural critters or even just illness
and the sort of natural environment, you might say, okay, so you have this concept of danger
and so you feel fear. But again, what I talked about just a moment ago in terms of display
rules, which essentially control a person's behavior or through which a person can control
his or her own behavior, so too there's going to be variation in the sort of conception
of these formal objects. They might very well be different in different societies, and that's
something I want to talk about at some length, for the most part, in the next lecture. But
let me sort of outline the sort of dimensions of difference before I do that, because again,
yin and yang, there's a sense in which emotions are the same the world over, that everyone
gets emotional, except people who have extreme psychopathic conditions, and except perhaps
for extraterrestrials who don't experience emotions such as one sees on Star Trek. But
basically, all people have emotions, and there are going to be general classes of emotions
that we can expect that everyone will have. At the same time, there are going to be fascinating
emotional differences. And I know I'm engaged in discussions or arguments all the time about
whether emotions are universal or they're not. Are there unique emotions in some cultures
that are not experienced by those in other cultures? Or is it all the same emotions,
but we just call them by different things or we express them in different ways and so
on? And that's a fascinating conversation that I want to have with you, but the next
lecture. For now, what I'd like to do is just outline the various dimensions of difference.
Again, keeping in mind yin and yang, that all this presupposes what you might call a general
emotionality of human beings, but at the same time the idea that that emotionality has exactly
the same form, the same content, the same causal ideology in every culture is surely
mistaken. So, what are the differences? Well, we can start perhaps with one of the more
interesting ones and that is a difference in emotional repertoire. If you travel very
much, one of the things you've no doubt noticed traveling to other parts of the world, but
also traveling within this country, you go to a busy, hard driving city, New York City,
San Francisco, Chicago, and there's a certain kind of repertoire of emotions which is very
pronounced. Impatience, a certain amount of anger, a certain kind of driving ambition,
and you go to other parts of the country, more rural parts perhaps, or just places that
are kind of isolated from that kind of mentality, very often cities, but nevertheless they're
more, quote, laid back. And what you find is it's a very different kind of emotional
repertoire. There's not the hard drivingness, there's not the anger, there's not the sense
of frustration and impatience. Going overseas of course, and I don't want to stereotype
people, but I will because we all do, but if you sort of do a quick trip from some place
in Scandinavia down to almost any Mediterranean country, one of the first things you notice
is a change in emotional repertoire, that there's a real difference between the sort
of general behavior of the Scandinavians and the general behavior of the Mediterranean's,
and it's not just the weather, although that certainly is a factor, it's not racial, although
that may be a factor, but there's a difference in the cultures themselves, that on the one
hand there's a premium placed on a kind of getting along and congeniality, on the other
hand there's a kind of premium placed with sort of being very expressive and adamant
and energetic in your emotions, which is not to say that Mediterranean culture is any less
communal than Scandinavian culture, quite the contrary, but nevertheless it is almost
impossible to miss the fact that there are these very real cultural differences, or part
of the world I'm particularly fond of, you go down to Australia and New Zealand, and
of course people who have never been there think these are the same country just sort
of slightly separated by maybe two or three miles of water, well look at them at, not
the way it works, a thousand miles and more, but two very different cultures, one is basically
Scottish Irish immigrants who came there voluntarily, mainly for some of the same reasons that
people came to America in the early days, it's a very lush country, Australia by contrast,
as we all know was founded originally by convicts, it's a very harsh rugged country, and so Australians
are a lot more like Texans, whereas New Zealanders are much more like people from the UK, small
town UK, and so the differences you get are really interesting differences in emotional
repertoire, anyway enough of this for the moment, let's talk about something else, there
are also nuances in emotion families, so people talk for example about anger, rage, outrage,
fury, indignation, annoyance, and other emotions that we would sort of put in the anger family,
and you put fear, panic, horror, terror and so on in something like the fear family, but
of course there's a difference in the sort of emphasis on these different emotions even
within the families, so you might have a society which is very high on indignation, Washington
D.C. seems to be a society that's very high on indignation, as opposed to other societies
that are just pretty high on annoyance and irritation, there's not the moral judgment
involved, there's not so much at stake in terms of blaming people, they still exercise
that kind of emotion generally speaking, but it's quite different, then this difference
isn't the causes of emotion, and this is almost too obvious to say, but again the details
get pretty interesting, Carol Tavers, a very good psychologist who's written on cross-cultural
senses of anger, points out for example the different circumstances in different cultures
in which somebody, a husband might be prompted to anger at his wife and a visitor, and in
some societies it would simply be if they have coffee together, in other societies it
would be if they sleep together, in other societies it would be if they sleep together
without the husband's permission, or if they sleep together first with the husband's permission
but then they sort of sneak another one on the side, and the idea is that these are different
triggers of anger, and of course it's true of all the other emotions too, what makes
someone embarrassed in some culture might simply be that they are not fitting in with
a group, whereas in a good deal of America, at least according to the legend, people don't
feel embarrassed because they don't fit in, but people will feel embarrassed for example
if they show up at a party and one is wearing the same dress as another, or two people are
essentially in what looks like a uniform. So the causes of emotion are very different
from culture to culture. There's also the difference in expressions, and I already sort
of said this in a way when I talked about display rules, but even if it turns out that
Ekman is right, that there are certain initial expressions which are more or less hardwired
and universal, it turns out that in almost every culture there are ways of expressing
which are not to be easily shared with other cultures as well. There's the appropriate
action to follow, and the appropriate context. So Aristotle talks about it's appropriate
to get angry in certain sorts of circumstances, in fact it's obligatory to get angry in certain
sorts of circumstances. On the other hand there are societies where anger is verboten,
think about medieval Christian society for example, and the idea is that getting angry
is just inappropriate. There are no circumstances in which you are obliged or expected to get
angry. And then there is the most fascinating difference, and that is language, and I'm
just going to throw something out fairly quickly. And that is that language might shape emotion.
Now that sounds strange because we usually think of language as just naming emotion,
or we use language to understand our emotions. But there's a very different kind of concept,
I'm going to give it a fast name, social constructionism, which argues that cultures with languages
actually create emotions in some sense. That these are not natural phenomena, they aren't
basic emotions or affect programs. And even if there are physiological reactions, the
physiological reactions are the products, not the initial causes of the emotional differences
we see between societies. And that's what I'm going to talk about in the next lecture.
