Lecture 18 Emotions in Ethics
When I began to think about this course of lectures, I thought I divided into roughly
three different parts. The first part would talk about the particular emotions, anger,
fear, love, compassion, and so on, just so that we could all start on the same page, talk
about things that we knew something about, and essentially sort of say some I hope interesting
things about different particular emotions. In the second part, which I just completed,
what I had in mind was talking about the ways in which our thinking about emotions goes
wrong. We tend to think of them as passive when they're not. We tend to think of them
as ineffable or inarticulate or inexpressible, which they're not. We tend to think of them
as generally irrational, which they're not, or we think of them as mechanistic, which
they're not. This third part, however, I decided what I wanted to talk about was how emotions
enhance our lives, how they enrich it, and how we add to it in some very positive ways.
So to begin this, what I'd like to do is go back over some of the same territory that
we've covered in the past dozen and a half lectures or so, and talk about how emotions
work their way into ethics. Now, I've made a point throughout the lectures of talking
about some of the most important ethical philosophers in history, Aristotle, for example, the Stoics,
like Nietzsche, Buddhists, Adam Smith. But what I haven't done is talk about them in
terms of a systematic history. So while these are names that have come up in many of the
different lectures and I've said something about what they thought, what I haven't done
is trace the long history of Western and some Eastern ethics to sort of say how all these
people fit in. But let me start by making a simple point. If emotions are strategies,
as I just argued, then it's very important to evaluate the strategies and not just in
terms of wise and foolish or fair and unfair, but also evaluate the strategies in terms
of ethics. What are their goals? And while I talk about enhancing one's life, it's not
yet clear what that means. And so I'd like to sort of end this lecture and work towards
this result by talking about exactly what it means to enhance our lives and what emotions
do for our lives. But let me start out of sequence by going back just to the 18th century.
In the 18th century there was a rather raging debate between two philosophers who never
met and they, in fact, lived in different countries and at slightly different times.
But there are two famous philosophers that I've often talked about. The first is a Scott
named David Hume. And many philosophers today would say he's one of the most important of
the modern philosophers, meaning since essentially the Renaissance. The other is Emmanuel Kant,
who is clearly a rival for that particular position. And many philosophers would say
he's the greatest single philosopher since Plato and Aristotle. But their prestige and
their illustriousness is not the point. What I want to talk about is a debate they had
about ethics and about motivation. And let me start with Hume. Hume rather famously argued,
reason is and ought to be the slave of the passions and to try to do nothing other than
to be at their service. Now what he had in mind was that rationality isn't sufficient
to motivate anything. You can figure out what's right or wrong according to certain criteria.
You can figure out what's to your advantage or disadvantage. You can figure out what's
better for the whole society or what would harm society. But unless you've got a passion
or what Hume talked about here or unless you've got the right kind of sentiments or to put
it in more contemporary language, unless you care about something, rationality doesn't
have any grip. It doesn't have anything to work with. So he makes this outrageous statement
that ethics depends on emotion and not at all on reason. Reason can help you figure out
what to do once the emotions are in place. But reason itself doesn't have the power to
motivate. Emanuel Kant by contrast argues that reason must have this power because
Kant is someone who wants to make a firm distinction, as did Hume, between reason and the emotions.
And he wants to give to the reason all the powers it needs to operate autonomously, which
means it doesn't depend on how you feel. It doesn't depend on what you find to be beautiful
doesn't depend on whether you want to get along with other people. But ethics is a matter
of reason and reason alone, or what he calls pure practical reason. Now, I think both of
them, famous as they are, are wrong. And they're shown to be wrong by a contemporary neurologist
I've mentioned several times, Tony DeMascio, who in a striking set of observations argues
that even on the basic neurological level, that emotions and reason, or more properly,
emotions and reasoning are not antithetical, but rather reason, and he's talking about
for example, patients who have had damage to the amygdala and other parts of their brain
that control emotions, but nevertheless are left with their intellectual or cognitive
capacities perfectly intact, so they can do calculations, they can do mathematics, they
can understand all sorts of puzzles, but if they were to make a list, say of which restaurant
should I go to, or should I choose alternative A, or should I choose alternative B, they
have no way of making a decision. Why? Put it simply, because they don't care, because
they don't have the sense of the salience of the different options. And so what DeMascio
has shown, but of course he's not the only one, generations of philosophers have suggested
this too, is that the whole distinction between reason and the passions, or reason and emotion,
is misplaced, and the conflict between human con, which asks, is just emotion motivating,
or does reason have its own form of motivation, is misplaced. Now in terms of what we've
been talking about, we can understand a very different way of presenting misdispute, because
emotions have intelligence. If emotions consist to a large extent of evaluative judgments,
or what psychologists call appraisals, then it makes perfectly good sense to say that emotions
and reason here are cooperative, or perhaps not even cooperative as much as indistinguishable.
We can apply evaluations to the kinds of emotional judgments we make, and we've talked about
that, whether they're reasonable or unreasonable, whether they're warranted or unwarranted,
whether they're on target or off target, but we can also talk about them in terms of
being right or wrong, or appropriate or inappropriate, and that of course is the focus of ethics.
We've also talked about these emotional judgments, not just evaluating or appraising situations,
but actually bestowing value on things. So when I fall in love with someone, I don't
just discover their charms, I bestow them, and that's why we can say, if I love you,
you're beautiful. In fact, I could even say, although this wouldn't be very nice, that
you're beautiful because I love you. I don't just love you because you're beautiful. And
when you get angry, or when you hate someone, you bestow them with offensiveness or evil,
and you might in a very similar way say, you're evil because I hate you, and it's not just
I hate you because you're evil. So what this is to say is that ethics is already deeply
embedded in the very concept of ethics as such, and it's actually been that way for
a very long time, long before the dispute between cotton and hum. Let's go back then
to ancient times, and what I'm going to be thinking about in particular are the ancient
philosophers about whom I've discussed quite a bit, starting with Aristotle and the Stoics,
and further to the East, Confucius, and the Buddhists. Start with Aristotle, because Aristotle
gives us a view of ethics, which is very different from the view that's presupposed by both
Hume and Kant. Hume thinks that ethics basically has to do with what he calls utility, namely
how things turn out consequences, whether things turn out to be good or bad. He also
talks about the virtues, and I don't want to sort of sideline that because that's going
to be a very important part of the point I'm going to make about Aristotle, but the point
about the virtues isn't quite as important as the idea of motivation and consequences.
Whereas in Aristotle, what you get is a central focus on motivation, a central focus on what
he calls the virtues, and consequently a central focus on emotions, and as I've stressed in
the last several lectures, the cultivation of emotions. Interestingly enough, you find
the same kind of philosophy, obviously there are differences. If you go thousands and thousands
of miles to the East, to ancient China, just a couple of years earlier, and the philosophy
of Confucius, because Confucius too talked about the virtues, and he talked about being
what some people describe as the exemplary gentleman. Well, forget about the sexism of
that particular description, he was mainly talking about men, but I think it can be generalized
in much the same way that I've just generalized Aristotle, that this is an ethics which focuses
not on the consequences of action, and focuses not on essentially the rationality of the action,
but rather focuses on the kind of person who would do such a thing. So again, the cultivation
of character is at the core of ethics, and the cultivation of character includes in particular
the cultivation of the right kinds of emotional responses. So Confucius, like Aristotle,
gives us lots of advice. Now it's done in that, to us, rather exotic Chinese style,
there's lots of talk about sages, and lots of talk about peoples and disciples, and so
on, and how you should follow masters, how you should follow princes, and so on. But
the basic idea is that you should model your life on the basis of people who are exemplary,
and exemplary here is a distinctively ethical notion. You should plan your life following
people who exemplify the virtues of humility, humanity, who know how to perform the right
rituals, and by that they don't mean simply doing the right things at the right time,
but a ritual is something that is already completely enveloped in emotion, in feeling,
in caring. So thinking about religious rituals, for example, it's not just a matter of lighting
a candle, or not just a matter of reading from Scripture, but to use a very common expression,
it's how heartfelt these activities are. And what you should do is you should follow
someone who does those things in such a heartfelt way. And of course ultimately Confucius is
talking to princes, to leaders, and the idea is that first you have to cultivate the leader,
or have the leader cultivate himself in his own virtues, and then everyone will follow
along. And this of course is distinction from Aristotle, because he doesn't talk so much
about following the leader, he lives in something of a democracy. Nevertheless, he talks again
and again about the importance of a good upbringing. So in a way, it's the same kind of philosophy,
but to put it in a nutshell, it's all about cultivating character, which is cultivating
emotions. And when you talk that way in terms of the virtues, in terms of character, something
very interesting happens to the debate between human con, which of course is pretty close
to contemporary. And that is, it loses its point. Because what you're talking about now,
as I say, is a kind of wedding, and a merger between the forces of rationality and seeing
something in the right way, and thinking it through, and having the right kinds of feelings.
Now the Stoics and the Buddhist, again going from one end of the earth to the other, have
a similar but at the same time very contrasting notion. The Stoics follow Aristotle, and they
borrow from him, at least to the extent that they see what we've been calling emotional
intelligence, but it turns out for them, emotional intelligence typically misfires.
Because they too want to say something like emotions or judgments. They're ways of understanding
ourselves and what we do in our virtues. But it turns out that emotions are, as I've said
in earlier lectures, emotions are basically mistakes, mistaken judgments. So for example,
when you get angry, it's because you think what's happened to you is significant. It's
important. But in the larger scheme of things, and the Stoics are always thinking in the
larger scheme of things, anything that happens to you is pretty unimportant. Even if you're
Seneca, who is a senator in Rome, what happens to you? Not important. Or Marcus Aurelius,
who is also a Stoic, who is the Emperor of the entire Roman Empire. We think the misfortunes
that we suffer and so on are significant, but they're not. So emotions are judgments,
evaluations of how things are, how the world is, how you stand in the world, but it turns
out most of them are mistakes. And so the ideal life is that you don't form attachments,
so you don't care about things too much. That's a very different conclusion than our
subtle comes to. But nevertheless, it's an essential part of the same history. And again,
it's looking at emotions and reason as very much in sync.
Buddhists, again, continuing this sort of Chinese version, Buddhism moved from India to China
long time ago. Buddhism also looks at emotions as in a way mistaken. And they don't say
get rid of all emotions, but certainly get rid of all those emotions which are agitations,
which interfere with your sense of tranquility or sense of peace existence. And so the idea
in Buddhism too is emotions are a form of intelligence. They're a way of seeing the
world, but they're mistaken.
Fast forward to the Middle Ages. The Middle Ages, of course, continue this philosophy.
Aquinas follows Aristotle in a great many ways. Not exactly his paganism, of course,
but many of the things that Aristotle talks about, including this emphasis on character
and the virtues. And so Aquinas too talks about the various virtues that make a good
person, but of course now the change is that many of these virtues have to do with religion
and faith in God. But also Aquinas talks about, as many of his predecessors had, about the
contrast of the virtues, namely the vices or what he called sins. Now for Aristotle,
the emphasis was on the virtues. And combined with the emphasis on the virtues was sort
of the other side, the ways in which the virtues can misfire and then they become vices.
But for Aquinas and many of the Christians, essential sins, especially the seven deadly
sins, was a focus of great attention and great concern. Now why? Or why are they sins? Well
one way to put it is they're particularly unpleasant. And this is certainly not enough
to understand why they should get a name like sin. It could be that they're bad strategies,
as I've argued, say for envy. But again, why not just say they're bad strategies? Well
of course, because there's a bigger picture at stake. These are in some sense offensive
to God. Now I suppose many of you might think, well why would God care? I mean okay, so you
have too much for dinner and you prove yourself to be a glutton. Does that turn God off? I
mean what sense does it make to talk about a God who is offended by something like that?
Or if somebody is envious, isn't that, as I said, their problem? Why should God care
about that? But of course the whole idea of the seven deadly sins is what makes them deadly,
what makes them mortal sins. It's precisely the fact that they are not so much offensive
to God as much as they neglect God. Pride, Pope Gregory says, is the worst of the seven
deadly sins? Why? Because it's thinking too much of yourself, putting yourself on too
high a pedestal, and consequently you don't see your own humility and insignificance before
God. So the basic idea of the seven deadly sins continues the idea of character and the
virtues, the merging of questions about emotions and questions about reason, and larger questions
about enhancing your life and sort of making, maximizing the best of your life, but with
a kind of twist. That for the medieval enhancing your life, maximizing your well-being really
has to do with pleasing God and showing proper faith.
Look forward again, now to the modern age, and now we're back to David Hume. But I want
to talk about David Hume's friend again, and that's the economist Adam Smith. Because
Adam Smith talks a lot about sympathy as does Hume, and that's the emotion above all that
lies at the very core of ethics. Interestingly enough, Kant talked about it too, but Kant
characteristic form, because he wants to say ethics depends on reason. Also was forced
to say that an emotion like compassion, or what he called sympathy, is beautiful, perhaps
admirable, okay, but it's not part of morality, it's not part of ethics as such. So what you
get with Smith and Hume is an emphasis on this particular emotion, or sentiment, which
they would claim lies at the very heart of ethics. But I've talked about that. Let me
talk about something else. Smith has a long discurses on the question of disgust. Now you
might think disgust, what kind of an ethics is that? But when you think about it, our
ethical vocabulary consists not just of words like good and bad, right and wrong, but our
ethical vocabulary consists to a large extent of words that sound more like emotional or
even physical reactions. So the word beautiful, or delicious, actually is an ethical way of
talking, or more to the point, disgust. Things disgust us if something is really immoral.
Something is really unethical. We see a scandal in the giant corporation in which thousands
of people lose their pensions or lose their jobs. And we don't just sort of say that's
immoral, we say that's disgusting. And so Smith took disgust, which is very distinctly
emotion, even a visceral emotion, and gives it a very high place in his ways of talking
about character and ethics. Or he talks about justice. Now justice is very often discussed,
particularly by contemporary philosophers. I'm thinking someone as illustrious as John
Rawls, who died just a couple years ago. And they talk about justice as the highest value
of institutions, or the highest goal of institutions. And justice is usually conceived of in terms
of a theory, theory about distribution, theory about punishment, theory about just desserts
and so on, who should get what and why. But what Adam Smith saw is something that Aristotle
had seen 2,000 years earlier. And that is that justice too starts with emotions. That
justice, as Adam Smith defines it, is our horror, our disgust at seeing another human
being ill-treated or harmed. And again, the idea is that for these philosophers, and the
ones I'm really defending, for these philosophers, emotions, or what they call sentiments, really
lie at the heart of ethics itself. So the history of ethics, I want to suggest, is really
the history of emotions, and attitudes towards emotions, and the cultivation of different
kinds of emotions for appropriate periods. So Aristotle, we don't expect to find a good
deal of piety, and worship, and faith, and awe at the core of his list of virtues. Whereas
Aquinas in the Middle Ages, we do. And in the modern period, the time of Adam Smith,
the time of David Hume, as society became more commercial, more industrialized, and in general
more secular, what we'd expect to find is that the key emotions, the key sentiments
that go into ethics, are going to be more the kinds of emotions that have to do with
getting along with people, and often, getting along, owning property, and such matters.
So the idea, again, is the history of ethics is ultimately, among other things, the history
of emotions. Now, that brings me to a very interesting chapter in the history of ethics.
Around the year 1900, people in philosophy became disheartened with ethics. Many of the
same debates were going over and over again, some of them since ancient times, and so they
kicked the whole discussion up to a different level, something called metaethics, namely,
a level above ethics. And the idea was that what we should be talking about is not what's
right or wrong, not what's good or bad, but rather, what's going on when we talk about
ethics? What's it all about? And here, emotions come in in a very different kind of way. One
of these philosophers, a well-known British philosopher, English philosopher named G. E.
Moore, suggested that the basis of ethics was intuition. And intuition was something
that couldn't really be defended or articulated, because the intuition was of what he called
an unnatural property, namely goodness. But G. E. Moore was fairly famous. He was part
of the Bloomsbury group, and one can kind of imagine this, that when someone disagreed
with one of his value judgments, he would give him a withering look. And that's the
problem with intuitionism, that on the one hand, it might be very secure and comfortable
in its intuitions, but the lack of articulation and argument often makes philosophers rather
suspicious. But following this sort of Morian intuitionism comes another movement which
particularly fascinates me. And I've only mentioned it in the past, but now let me put
it in its context. It's called a motivism. And not surprisingly, not coincidentally,
it almost exactly coincides with the movement called behaviorism and psychology. In behaviorism,
psychologists stop talking about emotions virtually altogether, because you weren't supposed
to talk about things like experience. You weren't supposed to talk about things that
were going on in the mind. You were mainly just supposed to talk about behavior. In philosophy,
about the same time, a motivist were arguing that ethics and ethical statements were nothing
but expressions of emotion. Now in the context of the times, what that did was it was a way
of saying ethics really is unimportant. And if you think about logical positivism of which
this was part, the whole idea is that philosophy should be a lot like science. And science too
doesn't have a lot to say about ethics. At least it didn't back then. And so the idea
of saying ethics is just an expression of emotion was a way of saying ethics doesn't
count. But now from our privileged retrospect, looking back over 40 years or so of very intense
and rich research on emotions, we can see what was going on in a very different way.
Instead of dismissing ethics because it was based on emotion, what the emotivists were
actually doing was cleaning a real insight. And the real insight was that emotions are
essential to ethics. And what's more, if you want to understand something like condemnation,
accusation of immorality, maybe where you should start is with an emotion like moral
indignation. And what is moral indignation? We talked about this a long time ago. Moral
indignation is not just being offended and certainly not being annoyed or irritated.
But moral indignation is being unhappy about a situation based on a moral principle. And
so once again, we come up with this interesting conclusion in the light of this history that
ethics essentially involves emotions, but not emotions in an unintelligent way because
moral indignation has a huge amount of intelligence. It includes a kind of mastery of morality,
whatever that happens to be in the particular society. It involves a mastery of principles.
It's not just a personal preference or a subjective take, but rather it is saying this violates
the principle that you shouldn't hurt people, you shouldn't exploit people, and so on.
So this idea of emotivism, while it attempted to be a dismissive gesture in the history
of ethics, turns out in fact to be recognizing exactly what we're talking about.
A couple other things that we should talk about here, but I think the main one is what
does reflection? What does articulation? What does the sort of meta-level recognition
of what's going on when we make ethical judgments? What does that have to do with it all? And
again I have to say this is something of enormous value. We tend to think of reflection as something
which is separated from the emotion. It's sort of like remembering an emotion once had,
when back there, and sort of evaluating it. But we also reflect while we're having emotions.
And since the emotions themselves are value judgments, and the reflection on emotion is
also a value judgment, these two things often interact, not just in a causal way, but in
a logical way. So what we think of our emotion also affects what that emotion is. So if I
find myself getting angry, or if I sort of work my way into a state of anger, and then
I realize what I'm doing and I get embarrassed, or I get ashamed of myself. It's not as if
the shame or the embarrassment and the anger exist on different levels, but actually they
combine to form a very curious amalgam of emotions. And reflection in general gives us
just that distance that I kind of alluded to in the last lecture, the distance from
which we can get the space to understand and consequently to change the emotion we have.
So a familiar piece of advice. If you're getting angry, count to 10. What does that do? It creates
that space, the space for reflection, during which you can start thinking about your anger
and the reasons why your anger in such a way as to actually correct the anger itself.
So, to put this in a nutshell, what I'm arguing here is a kind of synthesis between emotions
and reason in a very specific context, the context of ethics and the history of ethics.
And what I want to argue for here is something that I call emotional integrity, which is
not just a kind of single-minded focus on a single emotion or a single goal, or much
less a single mode of reasoning, but rather it has to do with the very nature of how we
think about our own life enhancement. And the most important point to finish with is
that that includes not just asking about questions, about how we can do well for ourselves or
how we can enhance our own lives, but it's partly the recognition that our lives consist
in part of values that are larger than us and other people who are in an essential way
part of us. And so the idea of emotional integrity has to do with putting our lives
together in a coherent whole in which talking about emotions and talking about reason is
just too much of an artificial bifurcation.
