These lectures are part of the Great Courses series.
They are produced by The Teaching Company.
The Great Courses cover a broad array of university-level disciplines.
The lectures in each course are either 30 or 45 minutes long.
By listening for less than an hour a day,
you can finish even the longest course in just weeks.
Browse our catalogue course.
Browse our catalogue or website and imagine how much you could learn
if you spent just 30 minutes a day for the next year
in the best college classrooms in the world.
The lecturers are university professors carefully selected by The Teaching Company
and its customers for intellectual distinction and teaching excellence.
These lectures are titled,
Foundations of Western Civilization, Part 1.
The lecturer is Dr. Thomas Noble.
Dr. Noble is the Robert M. Conway Director of the Medieval Institute
and Professor of History at the University of Notre Dame.
He assumed his current position in January of 2001
after teaching for 20 years at the University of Virginia
and for four years at Texas Tech University.
He earned his BA in history at Ohio University
and went on to earn his MA and PhD in medieval history at Michigan State University.
While completing his graduate studies,
Dr. Noble held a Fulbright Hayes Fellowship
and has since been awarded fellowships by the National Endowment for the Humanities,
Claire Hall at the University of Cambridge,
and the Netherlands Institute for Advanced Study.
He has twice won research grants from the American Philosophical Society.
In 1999, the University of Virginia presented Dr. Noble
with the Alumni Distinguished Professor Award,
the university's highest award for teaching excellence.
Dr. Noble has published over 30 articles and book chapters
and has authored and edited several books including The Republic of St. Peter.
He is the co-author of Western Civilization,
the Continuing Experiment,
one of the most widely used college textbooks in the country.
Professor Noble prepared the course guide that comes with these lectures.
The course guide includes a detailed outline of each lecture,
a timeline, a glossary, biographical sketches, maps, and an annotated bibliography.
To get the most out of this course,
you may find it useful to follow along with the outlines
or review them before or after each lecture.
