The next important point to make is the emergence very clearly of the idea of ethical monotheism.
A profound sense of social justice runs through the prophetic books.
This again, as we saw, is something that does not appear in Mesopotamia.
It is something that, as we saw, is hinted at, is hinted at in Middle Kingdom Egypt.
And in the ways that it works itself out in the Hebrew Bible, it is unprecedented.
There is the fundamental idea that God demands a particular kind of behavior as a guarantee
of His continuing benevolence.
Now we can see this in several quite vivid places.
For instance, the Decalogue, the Ten Commandments.
The first commandments tell the Hebrews how to behave with respect to their God, and the
rest of the commandments tell the Hebrews how to behave with respect to one another.
Honor God and honor Him alone, make no graven images, and keep His Sabbath holy.
And then honor your family, always it starts there, always it starts there.
Honor your family, and then don't lie, don't cheat, don't steal, don't covet.
Behave yourselves.
We find this same kind of thing worked out in Deuteronomy 6, the Shema.
Here, O Israel, the Lord your God is one, and Him alone shall you serve.
We find it in the great statement of the prophet Micah.
This alone, the Lord your God asks of you, that you do justice and walk humbly with your
God.
The last commandments and the first commandments.
The Hebrew legacy then is an enormously powerful one.
Philosophers and theologians, for example, have long acknowledged the importance of monotheism
in the Western tradition.
It makes a great difference if you imagine the world as ones, or if you imagine the world
as many.
Most peoples historically, in the West in particular, have called themselves, by reference
to the Hebrews, a new Israel, of claiming for themselves a unique relationship with God
like the one that the Hebrews enjoyed.
Historically, social justice has much more often been a religious than a secular phenomenon.
Think for example of abolition in the United States, something that rose in the Protestant
churches of New England.
And finally, and very richly, Western literature is inconceivable without its fundamental formative
text, the Bible.
You hear a quote, make a wager.
If you bet Shakespeare or the Bible, you'll rarely lose your bet.
Next time we turn to the peoples who conquered the Hebrews.
