Here's what you're supposed to think about this.
Remember this, do that.
This powerful sense of competition.
Very Greek, that.
Reflections on brains and brawn.
Kind of poor big dumb Lumox Achilles.
He never quite gets it.
And various other figures in the story are like that.
Wise old Nestor, the wise old man.
He's the one, when the going gets tough,
they always turn to, what do we do now?
The question of whether the kings are as smart as they ought to be,
as wise as they ought to be.
A great play, what is important in this great battle
playing out before the walls of Iliad?
Brains or brawn?
Respective obligations of the individual in the community.
The Iliad begins, sing, muse, Aida,
hence the name of a great opera.
Sing, muse, the wrath of Achilles, Pelouson.
The whole story is about whether Achilles' wrath
was justified or not.
He has been affronted, so he thinks,
he takes himself off from the battle.
The Greeks suffer and suffer and suffer,
and they go to him, won't you fight, won't you fight,
won't you fight, no.
And we are not presented with a story
as if Achilles is simply a bad guy.
He has a case, he has been affronted,
his honor has been damaged.
How can his honor be repaired and remedied
so that he might rejoin the battle?
Only when his great friend Patroclus is killed
does he go back, and then not because he owes anything
to the Greeks, but because he owes something
to the memory of his dead friend.
So we're beginning to see the struggles
of a political community.
What do I owe you?
What do you owe me?
What demands can I make on you?
What demands can you make on me?
What's the nature of authority?
Who participates?
The great, the powerful, the important, or ordinary people?
There's the one powerful scene in the Iliad
when Terzides, an ordinary soldier,
dares to speak in the presence of his betters
and gets flogged for it.
But in fact, in the new polis, it's going to be a world
where citizens do the talking,
and where they come increasingly to see
that they have no betters, they have equals,
and they will speak to them as equals.
We also see in this period powerful changes in warfare,
as these towns must attack their neighbors
or defend their neighbors,
they must mobilize the ordinary citizens,
they must mobilize the hoplite,
who now fights in a fay length,
Syria rose one after another of hoplite soldiers.
You cannot ask people to fight and bleed and die
for their city and deny them participation.
So the Greek world, Homer's world, provides us a vista
on Greek politics, on Greek religion,
and we'll turn to Greek religion in somewhat more detail
in a couple of later lectures,
and it opens up the dawning classical world,
the world of the polis, and it is to the two greatest
of the Greek polis, Sparta and Athens,
that we will turn in the next two lectures.
Thank you.
Lecture eight, the Greek polis, Sparta.
Hello again, and welcome to lecture number eight
in our series on the foundations of Western civilization.
The last time we talked about the Greek dark ages
and the Greek archaic period,
and perhaps you'll recall my saying that
during the archaic period or during the period
from about 800 to about 700 BC,
the first faint stirrings of the Greek polis,
the classic Greek political institution are visible.
In today's lecture, we're gonna talk in particular
about Sparta, in the next lecture,
we will talk in some detail about Athens.
So what we're gonna try to do is understand
the classical Greek polis.
The plural of that word, by the way, is polis, not polices.
We're gonna try to understand the polis as a political,
as a social, and as a cultural entity.
Today, and in this lecture, I'm sorry, and in the next one,
we'll speak in particular about the polis of Sparta
and then Athens as political and social entities,
and we'll then turn in a series of lectures
to the polis as a cultural phenomenon.
Now, a few very preliminary considerations
may help us to sort of enter on this discussion
of a polis and what a polis is and what it represents.
First of all, for example, physical characteristics.
What exactly was a polis?
We may think, well, it's a city,
that goes without saying, that's self-evident,
but it's not quite so simple.
We can express what a polis was by means of a formula.
We can say asti plus kora equals polis.
Now, what that means is this.
Asti is the Greek word for city proper,
and it actually refers to the urban core,
the urban center of the polis.
Kora is a Greek word that means region or district.
What this refers to is the agricultural hinterland
that surrounded a polis.
So a polis is always an urban core, asti,
and a rural hinterland, kora.
So for instance, in Athens, you have Athens
plus Attica makes the Athenian polis.
In Sparta, you have Sparta and Laconia,
which makes the Spartan polis.
So we always have to bear in mind
that there are these two elements
and that they have a very important symbiotic relationship.
Now, inside the urban area itself,
the polis of the Greek world had certain features in common.
There would be great variation,
but there were certain features in common.
An agorah, think of agoraphobia, the fear of public places.
Well, an agorah in a Greek city, in a Greek polis,
was the marketplace, an open market
that was, yes, where products were exchanged,
people bought things, people sold things,
but also where people encountered one another.
