That agenda was then, in a sense, forwarded on to the council.
The council is really the body that guarded the Scabarton system,
that really made it work.
The council consisted of the kings, the two kings,
five e-fors.
Now, I'll come back to these e-fors in just a second,
judicial officers, basically.
And then, all equals above the age of 60.
All equals above the age of 60.
Now, that's very important, and I want to explain that.
But a question may have come up in your mind right now.
And it is, this is the ancient world.
This is a long time ago.
Who in the world was 60?
Ah, good question.
Figuring life expectancy as an average of the ages at death
of all those persons who belong to a society will give you one number,
which starts in antiquity, for example, is a fairly low number,
probably in the high 20s.
And as we come forward in time, gradually moves.
For example, in the United States, it moves to a fairly high number.
In some parts of the undeveloped world today,
it remains a depressingly low number.
But if you reckon life expectancy at certain moments
in the lifespan, the numbers change pretty dramatically.
If you live to be 20 and you were male,
your expectation of life was very low.
It was easy to live.
Easy.
That's exaggeration.
It was likely it was possible to live well into your 60s.
If a woman lived to be 30 or into her early 30s,
she was very likely to live a long time.
Childbirth was the great killer of women in the pre-modern world.
The point is, of course,
that enormous numbers of babies and adolescents died.
These were societies which could not solve all of the problems
that occur at the moment of birth
and all of the problems associated with the diseases of youth
and adolescents.
That's where large numbers of people died.
So if you had a large number of people who died
at 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 50,
and you average it up, you get a small number.
You see?
If you put all of the ones in one category
and then think about the people in the other category,
you get a very different number.
So it's not so shocking that there were lots of men at Sparta
above the age of 60 to operate in the council.
Now, back in the day,
back to the age of 60 to operate in the council.
Now, back to Spartan politics.
All the equals could propose things
to a body made up of the king's, the e-force,
and the equals over 60.
They finally said yes or no.
Now, they didn't really have the initiative
in the legislative process.
All right?
That did come from the assembly of all the Spartans.
But they could stop things they didn't want.
That was their great power.
All right?
Now, once you had been a member of the Spartan system
to the age of 60,
you were not likely to go off on tangents.
You were not likely to have a lot of new ideas.
You were not likely to entertain happily new ideas.
Now, I mentioned e-force a moment ago.
Who are these e-force?
There were five of them.
The word basically means overseers, inspectors,
in a certain sense.
Their job was to assure that any law passed by the council
or any verdict passed by an Athenian law court
was in conformity with the laws of Sparta.
So here was yet another break on the system.
Here was another check on innovation.
There was also the cryptea.
The cryptea.
Think of the word crypt.
You see, secret.
A crypt is a secret place.
Cryptography is secret.
Writing, for example.
The cryptea was the Spartan secret police.
These were generally young men,
usually between about the ages of 18 and 20,
whose job it was to sort of go around
and in the first place, keep an eye on the helots.
But in the second place,
to snoop on ordinary Spartans
and just to make sure that they were behaving themselves.
That then was the basic Spartan constitution.
Now, it depended on a very curious,
very interesting,
a very rigid social system,
which we call the agage.
Now, the agage means the upbringing, the training,
the leading along, all right?
So this is the social system, the agage,
that generated the political system
of which we've just been speaking.
Babies were inspected at birth
and healthy ones were returned to their parents
to about the age of seven.
This occasions a pause.
The idea of exposing babies at birth.
The idea of infanticide.
Now, there are lots of famous instances in antiquity.
You may think just for a moment of the play,
Oedipus Rex.
Remember, Oedipus is displayed at a crossroads
and left there.
He's found and the story goes on.
In antiquity, exposing a baby was not actually infanticide.
Babies, just have to think of the familiar images from literature.
They were exposed in market squares.
They were put on the doorsteps of temples.
They were put at crossroads.
They were expected to be found.
Oedipus.
