class. So one of the things that Posistratus did was mildly to redistribute land. How many
times historically has land redistribution been a fundamental issue of people who are
or who see themselves as reformers? Posistratus did some other interesting things too. He
inaugurated a whole series of festivals at Athens, the great Panathenaic Festival about
which we'll have more to say in later lectures for instance. He initiated massive public
building projects in Athens. The first great set of public buildings in Athens were built
mainly in the time of Posistratus. Now he did this for a number of reasons. At one level
it was boosterism. He was really trying to make people proud of Athens. He wanted Athens
really to be something and to stand for something. That was important. He was trying in a certain
way to get people to focus their loyalty on the city and not on their particular class,
their particular economic group, their particular geographical area, their own partisan interests.
But there's another side to this. It has led some historians actually to speak of an Athenian
new deal. Somebody had to do the work of building all these buildings. And as you had this increasing
underclass and you couldn't redistribute enough land to take care of all of them, you could
put large numbers of them to work, basically at state pay to build these buildings. So these
then in the time of Posistratus and of his sons who came after him were some additional
measures that the Athenians envisioned as ways of sort of siphoning off some of the political
tension in the Athenian system. Eventually the Spartans allied themselves with a number
of Eupatrid families in Athens and threw out the Posistrated regime. The Spartans had had
enough of this regime. It looked a little bit too democratic to them. It looked a little
too unstable to them. It just might give other people, like members of the Peloponnesian
League for instance, funny ideas about politics. What the Spartans wanted is a nice, stable
Athens in the hands of a bunch of rich old men who wouldn't disturb the situation very
much. Well, there's a wonderful law of unintended consequences in politics. What happened is
a Eupatrid, a real blue blood, a man by the name of Cleisthenes, was elevated to power
and given the opportunity to make some new reforms. Well, Cleisthenes was on the outs
with a lot of the other Eupatrids. He really wanted to introduce some fairly moderate reforms.
They were going to block him at every step of the way. We've had enough of all this
reform business. We don't know anything more. So Cleisthenes was sort of drawn to do a great
deal more than sort of ever he would have dreamed probably at the beginning and certainly
a whole lot more than the Spartans ever envisioned when they thought they had thrown out exactly
people like this.
From Cleisthenes to Pericles, let us say then from about 510 BC down to about 450 BC, over
a period of about 60 years, two generations let's say, full democracy emerged in Athens.
We can say the Athenian democracy became as fully democratic as it would ever become.
How did that happen?
Well, Cleisthenes, as I've indicated, was very much disappointed with the Eupatrids. So he
turned to the Deimos. He turned to the Athenian people. He began to build the people into
the Athenian system in a much more decisive way than ever Solon had done. And even where
Paisistratus had done this emotionally, psychologically, and to a degree economically, Cleisthenes began
to do it institutionally. He began to build the Deimos into the system. He created, for
example, a new council of 500. Now it was divided up into groups of 50, which formed
a kind of a rotating executive committee that sat for a month at a time. The way he developed
this council is actually very, very complicated, but there's a very simple idea underlying
it. It's quite interesting. People then in Athens spoke of the plain, the coast, and
the hill. Now these were shorthands. The plain was the plain of Attica, the great farmland.
The coast meant the port, meant the merchants. The hill meant the uplands, the bad farmland.
What Cleisthenes did in a way was gerrymander the political structure of Athens so that he
took a group of people from the plain, a group from the coast, a group from the hill, and
made them one group. Then another group from the plain, and a group from the coast, and
another group from the hill, and made them one group. He made 10 such groups. And then
each of these groups could choose 50 members annually for the council. Now what he was
trying to do was break down local interests, break down family interests, break down occupational
interests, and make people cooperate, make them think about Athens. Posistratus member
had the idea of doing this by making Athens beautiful, make something you're really proud
of. Cleisthenes said, no, I got a different idea. I'm going to build an institution that
makes people cooperate. He opened virtually all offices to almost all men. Remember, Solon's
democracy, Solon's system of arraying political participation by wealth. Cleisthenes opened
up virtually the whole system to almost all men. There remained a few political disabilities.
We'll see one or two of them go away here in 10 or 20 years, or in just a couple of
minutes, depending on how you want to look at it. But essentially, men could now vote,
men could now hold office. Cleisthenes introduced something else very interesting too. One of
the most distinctive features of the Athenian system, ostracism. Now we know what ostracism
is. We ostracize somebody we don't like, and we won't talk to them and so on. Ostracism
worked a little differently in Athens. Ostraca is the Greek word for a potchard. Once a year,
the Athenians were bid and come to the Agora, and they could vote. They voted by writing
a name on a potchard. If a sufficient number, several thousand, if a sufficient number of
votes were cast, then the Athenian system of arraying political participation would be
