But not everything happened in Athens, or it was done by Athenians.
We don't know a lot about Herodotus.
He was very well educated, apparently.
He was very widely read.
He quotes Homer.
He also quotes the poet Hesiod, a little bit younger contemporary of Homer,
who wrote important poetic works.
What is, I think, most interesting and engaging about Herodotus?
And what I would challenge you to do or invite you to do, perhaps,
if you're wandering through a bookstore, wandering through a library,
take Herodotus down off the shelf, open it randomly, and read five pages.
You'll enjoy the five pages you just read.
You won't have much of a sense of how the whole work works,
but the point is that you'll enjoy those few pages.
Herodotus is a wonderful storyteller, and he is voraciously curious.
He's interested in everything.
Now, there are times when we might wish he'd spared us some of what he learned.
But in any case, there is this wonderful sense of wonder at the world around him.
Now, in order for him to explain the Persian Wars,
Herodotus felt that it was essential that he inform himself of the necessary background.
So he traveled very widely.
He traveled in Egypt.
He traveled in Mesopotamia.
He traveled throughout the Persian Empire.
He thought if the Greeks and the Persians are going to have this great war,
he needs to know something about these people and the world they lived in.
He traveled throughout the Greek world.
He constantly interviewed people.
He tells us again and again and again and again that he interviewed people.
And he actually here is very honest about these things.
He will say, when I was in a certain place, someone told me that.
Or he'll say, everyone there believes that.
This has sometimes been missed by people who read Herodotus.
They think he's sort of credulous and believes everything.
In fact, if you read him carefully, he's often saying,
well, someone told me this or all the people in that town believe that.
As if, in other words, to distance himself, what he's now telling you.
He's saying, this may not be true.
This is what they told me, but it may not be true.
So this is a very interesting and I think actually, Aristotle to the contrary,
a very honest component of his work.
In the end, Herodotus said you could really rely most on what you've seen with your own eyes.
That raised a very interesting question.
It is one that we will actually come back to a number of times in later lectures in this course.
Is it possible to write the history of the remote past?
It would for a very long time have been said no.
Because this Greek notion that only what I have seen with my own eyes and my authorized to write about was very powerful and very influential.
Well, if he wants to write about the Persian Wars, then you see, he had to travel through this world.
He wasn't content merely to kind of know about it at second or third hand or to read about it.
Why did he write?
Lots of people have been interested in things.
Lots of people have been engaged by things.
Lots of people have been fascinated in things over the years.
What prompted him to write about the Persian Wars?
Something struck him about those wars, and indeed it is something striking about those wars.
The Persian Empire, the mightiest empire the world had known, was defeated by the Greeks.
Now, if you're a betting person, and it were about the year 490 and the Persian Wars were about to unfold,
and somebody said, all right, get down your bet, you'd bet on the Persians.
Every sensible person would bet on the Persians.
You'd have lost your bet, but that would have been the only smart bet to make.
The Greeks won.
The Greeks won.
So Herodotus was fascinated by this.
How is it possible?
Now, we could say, couldn't one ask the question of how a bunch of haggling, quarreling,
arguing colonists on the east coast of North America could in the late 18th century have defeated the British Empire?
Hmm, I dare say we can, and we have asked that question.
Roll yourself back to 1776.
Who would you bet on?
Who would you bet on?
You'd bet on the British.
You'd lose, but that would be the smart bet.
Anyway, Herodotus was fascinated in this business of how it was that the Greeks were able to defeat the Persians.
Well, you figure this must have something to do with character.
It must have something to do with fundamental underlying issues.
Because on the face of it, the disparity in resources made it perfectly clear that the Greeks can't win, but they did.
So to understand character, he travels through the Persian Empire.
He interviews people.
He asks questions.
He reads books.
He visits sites.
It goes all over the world.
He has in mind a number of things, but in particular, he wants to know why did this war come about?
Why did it happen?
What caused this war to take place?
Now for Herodotus, the word historiae gives us our word history.
And the word storiae in the singular, historiae in the plural, in Greek, can simply mean story.
Any story we would tell a child, any story that we might read in the newspaper today could simply mean story.
But he can have some other registers of meaning.
For Herodotus, it meant researches, investigations.
So right away, that tells us something about history, that it's an investigation.
It's not merely telling a story.
It's investigating all of those things that would go into the story.
Herodotus took something of a dramatist's view of his task.
Now the dramatists, you may recall from our earlier discussion, would take particular incidents, particular scenes, particular moments, particular characters,
build a wonderful and interesting story around them, and then extract large realms of meaning from that event.
In other words, dramatists did not actually tell stories.
