that he had all the answers, that he had all of this knowledge. Point of fact, to Socrates,
he was wise only because he would admit that he didn't know very much. Now, this produced
something interesting and important, at least in our literary picture of Socrates, and that
is his method of demonstrating that other people didn't know very much either. We call
this the elincus. It is Socrates' elaborate and cunning and trenchant way of questioning
people until he had utterly befuddled them and demonstrated that in point of fact they
didn't really know what they pretended to know. Now, it's not hard to see why a person
like that was not especially popular with his contemporaries. Who among us would like
to bump into somebody in the grocery store who started asking us a lot of questions and
left us a blithering mass of confusion? This would not make us happy. And indeed Socrates
did not make his contemporaries happy. But the point is, it raises the question, did
he formulate a positive body of doctrine, or did he really poke holes in sort of what
was out there? Well, most of what we know about Socrates, as I indicated, comes from
his pupil Plato. Plato also, born in 429 BC, in the second year of the Peloponnesian war,
dying in 347 BC, the middle of the tumultuous fourth century. Plato was a consummate stylist.
He's a beautiful, beautiful writer, an engaging writer. There is something seductive about
reading Plato. He was a wide-ranging thinker. He was interested in an enormous array of
problems. He came from a wealthy and influential family. He had traveled widely. He devoted
most of his adult life to philosophy. Now, it's important to say he had the means to
do so. He had the means to do so. He was able to lead a kind of a leisure life. In about
385, he founded his academy, his school. And hence, people who study are ever after academics.
Plato could probably have had a distinguished public career in Athens. He probably could
have held high public office and won the esteem of his fellow citizens in that way. It appears
that he went off sort of to a private life of study because he was so disillusioned over
the death, the execution indeed, at the hands of the Athenian institutions of his master
Plato. And so, of his master Socrates, I'm sorry. And so, he tells us that he dedicated
his life to defending his master's teachings. We'll see as we go along here what we ought
to think about that proposition. Now, let's quickly review where philosophy had got itself
to at the moment when the Sophists were on the scene, when Socrates was on the scene,
when Plato was becoming disillusioned and withdrawing from public life. Change appears
to be a constant, stability is elusive. Everything around us seems to be changing all the time.
The senses are flawed. They are very flawed tools of perception. Language has severe limitations
as a tool of communication. Laws are mere human contrivances and not eternal verities,
eternal regulations. That's the past. That's where things stand. That's the problem that
you've got to solve or the series of problems. Now, all is not negative. All is not negative.
Because we can also say if all of that is the red ink in the ledger, we can put some black
ink in that ledger too. The Greeks had demonstrated in a very sophisticated way, in a very sophisticated
way indeed, that appearances could be deceiving. Now, this was not something which then caused
them to fly off in anguish at their inability to know anything. Socrates wasn't anguished,
Plato wasn't anguished as we'll see, but they did understand. They had come to understand
a profound way that world out there may not be as it seems. Therefore, we got some work
to do to figure out how it actually works. Second, and even more important, through its
elaboration of epistemology, through its elaboration of thinking about thinking, the Greeks built
into the Western tradition, an internal critique. The Western tradition is virtually unique
in providing positive doctrine and a large technical methodology for qualifying, analyzing,
questioning, exploring that doctrine. This is a remarkable achievement. This is a remarkable
achievement to spawn doctrine and all the tools to test it and possibly to prove it
wrong. This is quite remarkable, and that was there already by the time Socrates had
come on the scene. So Plato wants to defend his master's teachings. In a sense, in doing
this, he poses two big kinds of questions. What is the nature of knowledge, and what
means do we have of obtaining it? Alright, now we can see how that question is rooted
in the experience of 5th century Athens. Second, what is morality in the best form of human
life? How should we live? So there is a very powerful practical dimension to Plato's thinking.
Plato was a prolific writer. That's one of the interesting and challenging things about
him. You go stand before all of Plato's books and they make a pretty long shelf. That's
a lot of writing to get to grips with. His earliest works were in dialogue form, possibly
because this accorded with Socratic teaching. It may have been that he used the dialogue
because that's the way his master had taught, and if he wants to defend and to advance his
master's teaching, he'll do it sort of.
