I then have on that coin a character, an image, impressed by the die.
That is what character means.
So the idea of object in the real world in form is of original to copy.
The form exists in our mind.
Now think, think this is very clever.
He has gone back to those earlier Greek thinkers who have said, ratiosination, thought, mind
is actually the active energetic agent here.
But there are real things out there in the world, confusing and unalike and complex though
they may be, that conform in some sense, that conform in some sense to this idea that is
in our mind.
Now, such knowledge as we have of the form is true knowledge.
Everything else Plato says is mere opinion.
Plato spells this out for us as clearly as he ever does in the myth of the cave or the
allegory of the cave from his Republic.
Perhaps you've heard this story before, perhaps not, but it bears repeating.
Imagine a cave.
You have a group of people who are chained down in the cave and they are in a place of
relative darkness.
Behind them and perhaps above them there is a sort of a pathway, a passageway, a walkway.
In front of them there is a great wall.
Now up near that passageway, there is a fire, a light source, and up there various people
are moving back and forth and carrying various objects, and they are projecting onto this
wall in front of these people who are chained in the cave, images, but of course shadows.
This is Plato's image for the way we function in the real world.
We see shadows, we see hints, we see suggestions, we see intimations, but those people are up
there on the pathway.
They are carrying real things around.
Reality exists, but it is not in what we actually see around us.
This is not for fault of our knowledge, it's not for fault of our senses.
It's because the nature of reality in the world around us is as copy to original.
Plato has moved truth, he has moved reality to a transcendent realm.
He imagines for example that if a person were to come up out of the cave and actually to
see one of these things, one of these forms, for the first time, sort of really wouldn't
recognize it.
You wouldn't know what it was.
You'd never seen it that way before.
Platonisms are more familiar to us than we might think.
When St. Paul says, now we see as but through the glass darkly, then face to face.
That is pure Plato.
He's talking to his contemporaries in language they understand.
Here nothing is finally real or true.
There all is real and true.
Then we will understand, now we do not.
This is exactly the way Plato made his point.
So he has salvaged reality and he has salvaged our capacity to communicate something about
reality, but the price he paid for that was to move that reality to an abstract world,
to a transcendent world.
Now, for purposes of discussion, we could use a couple of examples.
We could go back to the chairs that I was talking about before.
You could take a shoe.
I mean, look at the shoe you're wearing now and think of the other shoes that you have
in your closet at home and think of the shoes that your husband or your wife, your partner,
your friend, your children have.
Think of the shoes that your friends have, lots of different things that we call shoes.
Some of them are boots.
You see, there are things we put on our feet.
You see?
Well, I could put boots on my feet.
I could put slippers on my feet.
I could put shoes on my feet.
What I have in mind to be silly but helpful is a notion of shoe-ness.
I have in mind a notion of shoe-ness.
I know what a kind of a shoe is, more or less.
Now, we could take something different if we want to come, for instance, to the question
of language.
Imagine love.
Think of a word like, look, seemingly unproblematic, not that love itself is not problematic, but
the word.
Did I say, I love my wife?
And I say, I love a good meal.
And I love the novels of a certain author.
And I love a nice bottle of wine.
And I love the Notre Dame football team.
Now, I dare say none of those statements occasioned any confusion.
You understood me.
But I suspect that, for example, the love I feel for my wife and the love I feel for
the Notre Dame football team are not the same thing.
They actually cause some trouble once in a while.
But that's quite a different matter indeed.
Presumably, my love for novels and my love for wine is rather different.
So what is this thing love?
Well, you see, I have a notion, as it were, let's be silly again, of loveless, of which
I see in the world many imperfect manifestations.
But there is finally this thing love.
It exists.
And I can communicate something about it.
Now, Plato speaks in various places of an immortal soul, which is eternal, which has
knowledge of the eternal, which has knowledge of the transcendent world.
And somehow it communicates that hint, that spark of knowledge to each person.
Because otherwise, you would certainly be asking yourself, how do I know anything about
this transcendent world?
Where do I get this idea of shoeness or chairness or loveless?
Where does it come from?
Well, it comes in some vague sense.
Plato is not very clear about this.
It comes in some vague sense through this world soul.
Now, in the Republic, Plato also reflects a bit on the human soul before it's imprisoned
in a body.
And on the kind of state that properly arrayed souls might produce.
So now, I turn to the question of what's the moral life?
Plato thinks a bit about the soul.
And he says that...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
