be feared, but to be embraced. We think of the apathy of the Stoic Sage.
Now we think of the word apathy, that's not a very pleasant word, we wouldn't want to
be called apathetic. Stoic apathy does not mean, I don't care. Stoic apathy means, I
am beyond all pain. I am unperturbed. I understand the way the world works. I have accepted it.
Suicide is even permitted curiously as a form of happiness. If the pain becomes too great,
we can escape. Stoicism taught that all visible differences in the world are illusory and accidental.
Everyone finally is like everyone else. We are all equally essentially. Oh, not by the way we
see ourselves out there in the world, but fundamentally, fundamentally, we are all alike.
Now let's turn for a moment to Epicureanism. Epicurus takes its name, Epicureanism takes its
name from Epicurus, who lives from 341 to 270 BC and who also taught in Athens. Epicureanism was
perhaps less influential in later years than Stoicism was, but it was very, very important in
antiquity. And we have to be very careful not to imagine, not to think, not to embrace the
caricature of Epicureanism. That is the common understanding of the common reaction to the
word itself. The aim of philosophy, according to the Epicureans, was happiness or pleasure.
Now that's old. That's exactly what Aristotle said. The point of living well is to be happy.
But this did not mean the hedonism that we often now associate wrongly with Epicureanism.
Drink and be merry for tomorrow you die. That is not ancient Epicureanism. Epicurus defined
happiness as an absence of pain from the body and of trouble from the soul. His philosophy was
austere in the extreme. Pleasure was equated with renunciation. Epicurus urged withdrawal from
the world, avoidance of stress, avoidance of anguish, avoidance of all those things, too much
food, too much love, whatever it might be that would bring you stress, that would bring you anguish.
It's sensible, the Epicureans taught, to desire only those things, only those things
in moderation that will bring happiness. Only those things that are attainable.
Don't go after things you can't get. It'll make you unhappy. It'll make too much stress.
Well, these Hellenistic philosophies were going to be influential for the Romans.
They were going to be influential for all of those who came after. Stoicism perhaps a bit more
than Epicureanism. The Hellenistic world again leaves us this fundamental foundational basis
for the spread of Greek culture. Now, on that foundation, things were built very largely
because the Romans conquered this Hellenistic world and conquered its culture. You may remember
in an earlier lecture, I spoke of captive Greece, taking her captor captive. This is the world
that the Romans captured. Tutte le strade portano aroma, say our Italian friends. All roads lead
to Rome. In our next lecture, we'll take us to the Eternal City.
Lecture 16, The Rise of Rome
Hello once again, and welcome to the sixteenth of our lectures in this series of lectures on
the foundations of Western civilization. The end of the last lecture, I mentioned that all roads
lead to Rome, and our road has now brought us to Rome, to Italy, and to history in the Western
Mediterranean region. The Romans have been central to the Western tradition in a variety of ways.
They have been remembered in a number of ways. That's important as we've been seeing, and they
did a number of very interesting things. The Romans created stable, efficient political institutions
that were admired and emulated for centuries. There was stability we saw in Sparta. Rome created
greater stability and perhaps a somewhat more admirable kind of stability. The Romans created
the most influential, secular legal system in the history of the world.
Roman law has been of enormous significance. The Romans were masters of what we might call
civil engineering. You know, you need water in a city in the nearest waters, 50 miles away. No
problem. You build an aqueduct. You have an enemy ensconced on a plateau, 1300 feet above sea level.
No problem. The Roman military engineers simply build a ramp and get you up there.
These were people with a remarkable sense of the real, of the practical, of the normal,
of the objective in the world around them. They saw problems. They thought about them a bit.
They solved them. For all of that, the Romans were in some ways unlikely players on the world stage.
After all, they come from the Western Mediterranean.
All of the action has been in the Eastern Mediterranean. They are on the west side of Italy,
facing west. Again, the action is in the Eastern Mediterranean. It is a curious phenomenon that
with one or two exceptions, Rome's great ports are on its western coast, facing, as it were,
in the wrong direction. The area where the Romans emerged, the plain of Laetium,
which gives its name to Latin, it is Lazio today, is in the center of the Italian peninsula,
but it's not a very big area. It didn't really provide the kind of foundation, the kind of basis
we might think, for people who would eventually build a world empire. If you ever have the opportunity
to fly into Fiumici, no airport, and it's a clear day, and you're sitting near a window,
