Lecture 17, The Roman Republic, Government, and Politics
Hello again and welcome to our series of lectures on foundations of western civilization. This
will be lecture number 17 and we're going to talk about the government and institutions
of the Roman Republic. Now you may recall that last time we put the Romans on the map quite
literally. We talked a little about the geography of Italy. We talked about who the Romans were,
the early Romans. We talked about their neighbors, the Etruscans, the Greeks to the south, and
so on. And we talked about the rather intense political and social turmoil that marked the
first couple of centuries of the history of the Roman people and how one result of that
turmoil was a situation where social and economic distinctions were to some degree effaced so
that all Romans could participate pretty much fully and equally in Roman political life.
What we want to turn to today then is the kind of government they created. We want to talk
a little bit about how that government actually worked, what the institutions were, what the
officers were. We want to talk a little bit about the social values that underlay that
government and finally we'll reflect a little on that government through the eyes of the
Greek historian Polybius. Now much that we say towards the end of this lecture will seem
very familiar because Thomas Jefferson knew Polybius and some of Polybius's ideas were
writ right into the American Constitution. Now the Roman government, like others, was
partly institutions, was partly ideologies, fundamental governing underlying ideas. It
was fundamentally social practices that evolved, that changed over time, and it was
fundamentally the product of historical experience. The Romans liked to think of themselves as
being sort of sturdy, stable, and unchanging. In fact, as we'll see in this and in subsequent
lectures, things changed a good deal. One of the things that's particularly interesting
to us about the Roman government is because of the nature of the information that survives
the sources. We know a great deal about it. We know far more about the Romans than we do,
for example, about the Greeks or indeed about any of the peoples whom we discussed in the
ancient Near East or the Egyptians, for example. All right then, the Roman Constitution in
the first place, then something about Roman society, then something about ideologies.
The Roman Constitution was in the first place led by a series of magistrates. Now when we
talk about the magistrates of the Roman Republic, there's two principles that we need to keep
in mind. The first of these is collegiality. They worked as a college of officers, as a
group of men, they were all men, bound together and in some ways required to cooperate with
each other to facilitate one another's work. We'll see some concrete examples of that in
just a second. In the second place, annuality. They were elected every year. All of the
Roman magistrates with one exception, one peculiar exception that we'll describe in a few
minutes, all of the Roman magistrates were elected annually. Now we have elections sort
of every four years or maybe local elections every two years. Imagine the Romans at election
every year. The highest magistrate of the Roman Republic was the consul, the consul.
Of these, there were two. They were elected annually. They convened the Roman voting
assemblies. That was one of their primary responsibilities. We'll talk about those voting
assemblies in a few minutes. They led the Roman army and ex-consuls automatically entered
the Roman Senate. We'll talk about the Roman Senate in a few moments, but for the moment,
let's just say the consuls are the chief executive officers of the Roman state.
Next, there were the preters. The preters were the judicial officers of the Roman state.
Originally, there were two of these. As Rome got larger, as its business grew more
complicated, the number of preters eventually expanded to as many as eight. They presided
in the courts. This was their fundamental day in and day out responsibility. They presided
in the Roman court. They weren't exactly judges in our sense of the term, but we might think
of them by analogy to judges. Perhaps in the long term, historically the most important
thing about the preters is that on taking office each year, they issued a preter's edict.
Now, this would be a basic statement of what their priorities would be, what their goals
would be, what the essential things that they would work on during their year in office would
be, but those preters' edicts gradually added together and built up the body of Roman law.
This is really a fundamental source for Roman law. Like the consuls, the preters entered
the Senate on conclusion of their year in office.
Next, there were officials called queestores. Now, the queestores were essentially the financial
officers of the Roman state. They received taxes. They received fines. When persons were
fined, for example, in courts of law, they received tributes, tributes paid to the Romans
by people whom they had conquered.
