In order basically to stress, in his own very troubled times, how magnificent the Romans
of old had been, how grand they were, how if only we now could recapture the world of
men like Cato.
So Cato was held up as a model.
But even in his own time, he was a man of enormous influence, not like so many Romans.
He lived through momentous times.
He was born in 234.
He died in 149 BC.
He fought in the Second Punic War.
He fought in the First Macedonian War.
He held the queester ship.
He held the consul ship.
And he held a censor ship.
In other words, he held all the highest offices of the Roman state.
He served many years in the Roman Senate.
But Cato was sort of an interesting and cantankerous character in lots of ways.
He affected a very rustic demeanor, in terms of his clothing and how he spoke and everything.
He wanted to avoid all pretense of sophistication.
He thought one of the things, particularly as he grew a bit older, that offended him about
Roman society was that people were taking on Greek customs and Greek manners and Greek
ways of doing it.
He wanted part of that.
He wanted to be a good, sturdy, traditional Roman.
Stand for the old manly Roman values.
That was what was important to Cato.
Now, Cato, among other things that he did, for example, he helped to pass a series of
sumptuary laws.
Now, sumptuary laws were passed at Rome to, for instance, in his case, to regulate the
cosmetics or jewelry that women could wear when they appeared in public.
He didn't want them sort of tarting themselves up too much.
He also passed a law aimed to keep philosophers.
Well, actually, that meant Greeks out of Rome.
He disliked alien influences.
He disliked foreigners.
He didn't like people sort of messing about with his beloved Roman values.
He wrote a book for his son, The Origins.
The Origins.
An interesting book, this.
It's the first history of Rome written in Latin.
Previous to this, the Romans had written in Greek.
We'll have more to say about this later on.
But Cato, in any case, wrote a history of Rome for his son, and he wrote it in Latin.
It's an interesting history.
It survives only in small fragments today, unfortunately.
It would be wonderful to have this book, but we don't.
We have only really quotations of it embedded in the writings of some later authors.
But it appears that rather than sort of telling his son, blow by blow, fact by fact, the rise
of the Roman people, what Cato did is tell his son stories about great Romans of old.
Again, you see the customs of our ancestors.
What would our ancestors have done?
How did they do things?
This was how Cato taught his son Roman history.
It was to put virtue on parade.
That's clearly what the book was designed to do.
He also wrote a book on agriculture, de agricultura, on the care of fields.
De agricultura, a sort of a manual of agriculture.
Over the long course of Roman history, several such manuals were written.
This also was in a way written for Cato's son.
Now his ideal, Cato's ideal, was the citizen farmer soldier.
Cato also taught his son a bit of law.
The idea being that you needed to know a certain amount of Roman law in order to take your
place in Roman society, in order to function in the Roman assemblies, in order to behave
as a citizen, taught him that a bit of Roman history, and taught him farming.
How do we do things now, law?
How have we always done things history?
What do we really do?
We're farmers.
There is Cato transmitting to his own son, and Cicero telling us about Cato transmitting
to his own son, the way the Roman system was meant to work, meant to work.
But as I think his attempt late in his life to ban Greeks shows pretty clearly, the current
was already against Cato.
The times were changing.
He couldn't stop.
He couldn't stop these Greek influences.
From their conquest of the South, and from their introduction into the Hellenistic world,
the conquest of the Greeks of Magna Graecia, and then of course, one after another, their
military campaigns in the Eastern Mediterranean, the Romans came into contact with the culture
of the Greeks in all imaginable ways.
Rome's earliest writings, as I mentioned a moment ago, were actually in Greek.
Greek was sort of the language in which you wrote if you expected to talk to anybody, if
you expected to have an audience, if you expected to reach anyone, and also if you wanted to
appear fashionable, cultivated.
High-born Romans began regulating to hire Greek tutors to instruct in their familia,
in their household.
We talked, for example, last time about the Greek historian Polybius, who had been captured
during the Macedonian wars and brought back to Rome.
He lived in the household of the Scipios.
One of the great families at Rome, you see, and he lived there, oh, he was a hostage, he
was a prisoner of war, yes, but in point of fact, he was really living in a very elegant
state of affairs, and it was very common for Roman families, not all of them had prisoners
of war, certainly not all of them had people as famous as Polybius living in their household,
but prominent Roman families began to hire Greek tutors.
And those Greek tutors, of course, would teach the children not only the Greek language,
but also the Greek literature, Greek values, much would creep in, you see, with the coming
of these Greek tutors.
That's what Cato didn't like.
That's the people Cato wanted out, you see, if he could possibly get rid of them.
