And then finally, Lyconides and Eucleo's daughter are married, and then the last moment
of the play, old Eucleo, the miser goes and gets the pot of gold and gives it to the young
people.
Well, the point is that the story is funny.
Oh, there may be a point or two in there about misers, and you know, if you're too greedy
and so forth, things won't come out well for you.
But the point is the play is merely meant to be funny.
It's meant to be entertaining.
You aren't uplifted by it, you're not taught any great philosophical principles by it.
So this is the kind of comedy that came to Rome, good, funny stuff.
Now that's true, but then there's a certain irony, because the second of the great Roman
comedians in the second century BC, Terence, Terentius, born about 190 BC, died in 159.
He died as a very young man.
Now he was also influenced by Greek comedy, but his plays are rather different.
First of all, they're written in an extraordinarily elegant, polished Latin.
Now, you may say, what's the point of mentioning that?
Well, the point of mentioning that precisely is that Latin has not actually been used as
a literary language very long, you see.
It has a long future in front of it, but Latin had not been being written for a long time.
Well, anyway, Terence writes beautiful Latin.
He writes very restrained comedy.
One can easily read all the way through one of his plays and not smile.
They're really not very funny.
Moreover, the plots tend to be incredibly intricate.
We can take any one of the stories, his play, the eunuch, for example, is a story of mistaken
identity and of love triangles and of elaborate and complicated plot twists.
It's very hard even to summarize the play.
I mean, one almost has to read it because at every moment something new happens and there's
new characters and different characters and so on.
Terence, not surprising, he was never as popular in antiquity as Plotus was.
Plotus was just a lot more fun.
He was just a lot more enjoyable.
But it's worth pointing out that the Romans refused to build a theater for a long time.
They thought that was just, you know, two Greeks, so the plays were just performed sort
of outdoors.
They finally did build one.
They built it without seats in the first instance.
If you're going to go to the theater, then by golly, you're going to stand up.
You're not going to sit down and enjoy yourself too much.
Again, the Romans sort of compromised with these sturdy old values and then the new things
that were coming in.
By the last decades of the Roman Republic, Greek influences and a growing Latin literary
maturity.
Both things important.
Greek literary influences, but also a growing Latin literary maturity and also a certain
sense of confidence.
The Romans had now been writing for a while.
They'd been writing in a number of genres for a while and they were getting better at
it.
It led, for example, to poetry of a very high order indeed.
Among the greatest of these, we might mention, for example, Catullus.
Catullus was born about 84 BC, died in 54, he had a very young man, only about 30.
He came from Verona in northern Italy.
He emulated Greek poets, he mastered poetic meters, he treated themes of love with sympathy
with emotion.
Let me just read two poems by Catullus that could stand for many others.
In his corpus, the eighth poem, Catullus has had a long-standing relationship with a woman
named Lesbia and here is Catullus, finally recognizing that things have gone sour.
Break off, fallen Catullus, time to cut losses.
Right day shone once, you followed a girl here and there, loved as no other, perhaps
shall be loved.
Then was the time of love's insouciance.
Your lust has her will matching.
Right day shone on both of you.
Now a woman is unwilling.
Follow suit, weak as you are, no chasing of mirages, no fallen love, a clean break, hard
against the past.
Not again, Lesbia, no more, Catullus is clear, he won't miss you.
He won't crave it, it's cold, but you will whine, you're ruined.
What will your life be?
Who will visit your room?
Who uncover that beauty?
Whom will you love?
Whose girl will you be?
Whom kiss?
Whose lips bite?
That's enough, break Catullus, against the past.
