Clearing pirates from the Mediterranean was a rather interesting command to get
because it was one that could be extended in principle almost endlessly. A
pirate is everything from, you know, a bandit to a merchant you don't like to
rebels in somebody else's political struggles to your actual enemy. There
was really no way of defining exactly who were these people that Pompey was
going to go and clear from the Mediterranean. He got himself in
principle almost an open-ended command. Well, subsequent Pompey also got armies
and was able to fight even in some other campaigns. Now close on Pompey's heels,
Pompey had taken the lesson, you got to get a military command, in his case he
got a navy. Close on his command, close on his heels, I'm sorry, was Julius Caesar.
Now Julius Caesar was born in 100 BC, he died in 44. Caesar's family situation,
his political background is actually kind of interesting. He comes from one of
the oldest families in Rome, one of the oldest, most distinguished families in
Rome, but a family which had been for a couple of centuries sort of on the
eclipse. They had not been providing officers regularly, had not been
providing consuls and so on. So Caesar sort of brings this family back into
prominence. Now Caesar was elected consul in the year 63 and then he began
maneuvering for a major military campaign. You may remember, we said in an
earlier lecture, that one of the stresses and strains that the creation of the
Roman Empire produced for the Roman Republic was a multiplication of
offices. So very often the consuls and sometimes even the preters, after their
period of service in office, would become a proconsul or a procreter and would
then get a military command and go off to one or another of the areas of the
Roman world where they might be expected to fight. So Caesar, his ambitions don't
stop with getting himself elected consul in 63. That normally, historically, in
the past would have been the pinnacle of a public career at Rome. Now it's a
springboard to get an army. Well, there is also, at the same time at Rome, a man
by the name of Crassus. Now Crassus was Crassus. He came from a kind of a lower
or middling family. He had going for him only this. He was the richest man in
Rome. He was the richest man in Rome. He had enormous money, but he had no
respectability. Remember, we talked about Altoritas, that eminence, that dignity of
great citizens. Crassus had none of that. Crassus had none of that at all. But
there's rather unsavory carry. He made a lot of his money, for example. Rome was
a city very largely built in wood. It's only from the time of Augustus Caesar,
we'll be talking about him in later lecture. We'll mention him at the end of
this lecture and talk about him in more detail in later lectures. It's from
Augustus' time on that much of Rome was rebuilt in stone and brick. Much of the
city was in wood. And as a result, buildings were frequently catching fire.
Crassus had a habit of hanging around at night and going up to buildings that were
on fire. And as people came running out, he'd buy the buildings. And then he'd
rebuild things and sell them at enormous profits and so on. Well, he wants office
and a military command simply to get legitimacy, to get a certain measure of
sort of credibility. Well, as a result, these three guys, Pompey, Caesar and
Crassus, sort of pooled their political resources, pooled their material resources
in 60 and formed what was called the first triumvirate. Crassus, as I said a
moment ago, he just wanted legitimacy. He wanted a military command that would
somehow give him a kind of an authenticity in Roman politics that he
otherwise lacked. Pompey wanted laws passed, providing pensions for his
veterans. Those soldiers who had worked with him during his campaigns against
the pirates. Caesar, as I mentioned a moment ago, just to repeat, wants a
military command. Actually, where he wants to go is Gaul. And we'll come back
to that in just a second. So these three guys pooled their political resources
in 60 BC. Now, a political deal like this, was it illegal? No. Was it
unusual? Yes. Was it unprecedented? Yes. And Cicero and others protested in
vain against this outrageous manipulation of the Roman system. They said,
you know, this is not the way the system's supposed to be. What's curious
here is these guys actually stayed on the right side of the law. They didn't
actually do anything illegal, but they certainly were manipulating the system.
And they were certainly manipulating it to serve their own purposes. Now,
Caesar got his command. He went off and spent eight years in Gaul, writing his
commentaries and sending them back. Virtually every student who's ever done
Latin in high school or in college has read some portion of Caesar's
commentaries on the Gaulic Wars, very often the first Latin text that a
Latin student encounters. But while Caesar was off in Gaul, Roman politics
changed pretty dramatically.
