Lecture 21, The Pax Romana
Hello and welcome to lecture number 21 in our series on the rise of Western civilization.
In this lecture, we're going to talk about the Augustan Principate, a regime introduced
by Augustus Caesar, more explanation about that in just a few minutes, and in the next
lecture, we're going to look at the Augustan Principate again.
This time, we'll talk about government, institutions, war, the empire.
Next time, we'll talk about Roman culture in what is called the Golden and the Silver
Ages.
They may recall that in our last lecture, we brought the curtain down on the Roman
Republic, the Roman Republic, that long and stable regime that had existed for some five
centuries.
And we saw that it collapsed amidst civil war, two long periods of civil war between
46, between 49 and 46 BC and other between 44 and 31 BC.
These had been preceded by civil insurrections in the 90s BC and again in the late 80s and
early 70s BC.
So a long and difficult period for Rome when, you may again remember my mentioning, a considerable
number of the leading members of the old ruling class had been killed off.
We also talked about political manipulation.
We also talked about military ambition.
So when in 31 BC, Octavian defeated Antony at the battle of action and achieved a supreme
position in the Roman world.
The question we have to ask ourselves is of what was he now in charge?
What had happened?
What was the state of the Roman world in 31 BC?
Well, moving very quickly, moving very deftly, Octavian who reigned from 31 BC until 14 AD
inaugurated a new regime at Rome that proved stable and that proved successful for some
two centuries.
These two centuries, more or less from 31 BC until 180 AD, we call the Pax Romana, the
Roman peace.
Now the brute reality of this period was that Octavian controlled Rome's armies.
That is the one underlying fact without which nothing else really makes sense.
But then we come to the genius of Octavian.
Instead of flaunting his military power, instead of ruling like a military dictator, instead
of putting his jackboots on the necks of the subjects throughout the empire, Octavian
in 27 BC made a great show of giving all his power and authority back to the Roman Senate.
Well one can easily imagine the Roman senators having been somewhat flummoxed at this particular
political show.
And so what they realized very, very quickly was that without Octavian all would be chaos.
Everything would descend into complete and utter anarchy.
And so what they did is made a grand show of systematically giving him back all of these
powers which he had as it were returned to them.
And they accorded him a number of honorific titles.
Chief among these was Augustus.
Now in Latin that means eminent, distinguished, particularly important.
And so we henceforth refer to Julius Caesar Octavianus, Octavian Caesar, as Augustus Caesar.
Now Augustus generally speaking referred to himself as prinkeps, we can hear the English
word prince hiding in there, first citizen, as the first citizen.
And so historians refer to his regime as the Augustan Principate, the time when Augustus
ruled as prinkeps and when those who came after him ruled also as prinkeps.
Now this was not entirely a novelty.
You may remember again, just a few lectures back, that we had talked about the prinkeps
Sanatius, the oldest member of the Senate, the prince of the Senate, the person who always
in the Roman Senate spoke first.
Surely that's the sort of thing that Augustus had in mind when he took for himself the title
prinkeps.
Now, central to this Augustan Principate were a couple of very simple, very basic policies.
First of all, Augustus generally held one or more of the old Republican magistracies.
He was sometimes consul and sometimes one or another of the other officers of the state,
but he permitted regular elections to be held so that other prominent citizens could be
elected to one or another of the old Republican magistrates, could be seen to have the kind
of power, the kind of authority, the kind of eminence, the kind of legitimacy that had
always attached to the holding of office in the Roman state.
Now there can be no question about the fact, power was in Augustus' hands, but he appeared
to share that power with others.
