He tells us something about their sense of destiny so
Venus has gone to her father and said you know Juno was stirring things up and making awful problems down there
Aren't you going to fulfill your promises?
Jupiter says to her fate remains unmoved for the Roman generations
You will witness Lavinium's rise her walls fulfill the promise you will bring to heaven lofty sold in the US
There has been no change in me. Whatever listen
To ease this care. I will prophesy a little. I will open the book of fate
Your son Aeneas will wage a mighty war in Italy beat down proud nations give his people laws
found for them a city
To these I set no bounds in space or time. They shall rule forever
Even bitter Juno whose fear now harries earth and sea in heaven will change to better councils and will cherish
The race that wears the toga Roman masters of all the world. It is
decreed
Thus Virgil on the Romans and thus that Roman sense and we'll come back to this in a later lecture
That the world would last exactly as long as wrong
It is decreed
Now not everything in Augustus this time was quite so serious and somber
For example the poet Ovid born in 43 BC died in 1880
Was learned it was accomplished was prolific. I
Emphasize again the technical mastery of these Augustan poets. I mean before they ever said anything
They were extremely gifted skillful writers or composers of poems now Ovid wrote love elegies the Amores the loves for which he's well known a
Didactic spoof the art of love. It's a sort of a seduction manual
It's kind of a manual on how a man might have his way with a lady and he wrote an epic scale encyclopedia of myth
Mythological tales the metamorphoses the great changes
There is in Ovid
Ovid a spirit of play
There's also a very powerful sense a sense of deep feeling. He betrays something else, too. He's immensely learned
Ovid knows a lot
But it is perhaps his feelings which are clearest you may recall that when we're talking about the Roman Republic and after I'd been stressing the
Sturdy manly values of the Roman Republic are then quoted Catullus for you. So here one of Ovid's poems
Maidens give ear and you shall hear. What is your chiefest duty?
Pray listen well, and I will tell you how to keep your beauty
Tis care that makes the barren earth produce the ripened grain tis care that brings tree fruit to birth with grafting much pain
Things that are cared for always, please and now each man's a dandy a
Girl must be as spruce as he and half her powder handy
So Ovid could be technically accomplished and a bit playful as well
Now he got a little bit too playful actually for a period of time Augustus ever stern Augustus exiled him from Rome
But eventually he came back and his poetry has survived as and light a delight and entertainment of the Western tradition ever since
a bit different is the elegant Horace
65 to 8 BC
Sage Urbane
Epicurean
He was prized in his own time. He's been prized ever since
He has been seen as perhaps the most technically accomplished of all the Roman poets
He was patronized by a man named Messinus
Messinus indeed who gives his name to patrons and to patronage throughout the Western tradition
Horace was one of those who flourished under Augustus one of those kind of people who's provided an opportunity in this particular regime
To do all that he was able to do he wrote odes. He wrote epodes. He wrote satires
He wrote letters. He wrote a treatise on poetry again a man of considerable learning of considerable breadth of
considerable ability
Here's a 17th century translation of one of the odes
All translations of course are in some ways interpretations
It wouldn't perhaps be entirely helpful for me to read you these poems in Latin
So the last time modern translations of Ovid and Virgil here is a 17th century translation of one of Horace's odes
Strive not look on away to know what end the gods above to me or thee will send
Nor with astrologers consult at all that thou mayest know what better can befall
Whether thou livest more winters or thy last be this which tyranny waves
against rocks do cast be wise
Drink free and in so short a space do not protracted hopes of life embrace
Whilst we are talking envious time doth slide this day's thine own the next may be denied
You note the Epicurean
tone there
Eat drink and be merry for tomorrow you die of the future who can say
Let's try the poets of the Golden Age
