Lecture 24, The Emergence of a Christian Church
Hello, and welcome to lecture number 24 in our series on the foundations of Western civilization.
Today we're going to talk about the emergence of a Christian church.
Last time we talked about Jesus and we talked about the New Testament documents that tell us about him.
And we noted a world of paradoxes, a paradox of a new movement emerging from rather small, backward, out-of-the-way place in the Roman world.
A new movement emerging in a world that had large numbers of movements, religious, philosophical, cultural, literary, and otherwise.
At the end of the lecture we noticed that Jesus himself, the great teacher, upset many of the conventional social values of his day, upset many of the conventional social expectations of his day.
So we were left with a sort of a paradox.
You know, if we were going to predict would this movement be successful, I think quite legitimately, quite honestly, most of us would say, no, this doesn't look like a winner.
This doesn't look like something that I would want to back.
And yet, the paradox is, 2,000 years later, we know that the movement was phenomenally successful.
So what I want to try to do in this lecture is talk a little bit about some of the reasons for that success.
How can we account for the success?
Now it must be acknowledged right away that a Christian believer could easily say it was the will of God, and that view must be respected.
But historians must work with humbler materials and humbler explanations.
We have to try to assemble the evidence that we have at our disposal and see what sense we can make of it, see what kinds of explanations we can offer.
This is not unlike what I was doing in the last lecture, when I said if we look at the Gospels as historical documents, and we critique them, we try to understand them as we would any other kind of historical documents.
Alright then, what kinds of things do we know, primarily about the 1st and 2nd centuries AD?
We will on many occasions in later lectures come back to the history of Christianity between about 200 AD and about 1600 AD.
But for now, we want to talk about basically the period of the 1st and the 2nd century.
What do we know, what happened, how can we explain it, and how did it contribute to the long term success of the Christian phenomenon?
Well first of all, of course there emerged a movement, so we might ask ourselves what sort of a movement did Jesus think he was founding?
Now, this particular matter is deeply controversial, and history can provide only some clues.
Here again, it's enough just to say, there are hundreds of Christian denominations and sects in the world today.
Each of them claiming some legitimate connection to the earliest days of Christianity and indeed to the life and times of Jesus Christ himself.
Now, on logical grounds, they can't all be right.
But it's not my place here to choose among them, to say well this one is right and this one is not right, this view is right, that view is not right.
Again, what I want to do is simply look at a few sources, a few kinds of evidence and say what do we know?
Well, if we start thinking about this movement and we start trying to imagine it as some kind of a permanent entity, something with durability.
We note some paradoxes. Jesus uses the word church twice.
The word appears both times in Matthew's Gospel, both times in the 16th chapter of Matthew's Gospel.
Now, it seems pretty clear that Jesus' use of the word church is not synonymous with his kingdom of God.
What we also know, however, is that by the second century, church was a name for an institution that had emerged because of the teachings of Jesus.
So, a question that each person, I suppose, who cares about this matter has to answer for himself or herself is whether this was this church of the second century, an institution foreseen by Jesus himself in the first.
There is no way on the basis of the historical record easily or concretely to answer that question, if one is completely honest.
Now, we do get some clues.
We get some clues from Jesus' earliest followers.
For example, after the resurrection, a group of about 120 men met to choose a successor to Judas, Judas' cariat, who had betrayed Jesus.
Now, this is interesting, significant revealing, perhaps, because it suggests a certain kind of corporate mentality, that there had been a body of 12, one of their number had fallen out, and then a larger group of people would have to sort of reassemble to bring the body of 12 back up to full numbers.
Thank you.
