But it's also important to say that if we dismiss that proposition, we must also dismiss
the proposition that the barbarians were nomads, that they were just kind of wandering around
and accidentally kind of wandered into the Roman Empire.
The archaeological record, and so far as we know it in detail, makes absolutely clear
that the barbarian peoples were settled agriculturalists.
When they moved, or when any large number of them moved, there had to be a reason for
it.
Often times those reasons are very difficult to discern, in a few instances we can discern
them pretty clearly.
But we cannot simply assign to migratory habits the reasons for barbarian encounters with
the Romans.
Okay, what's at stake in this discussion?
What matters?
Well, as we saw in our last lecture, Diocletian and Constantine addressed themselves to the
administration of the Roman Empire.
In the western half of that empire, in the year 300, let's say, there were several dozen
provinces under Roman administration.
By 600, by 700, in the west, that Roman Empire was gone, and in its place was a series of
barbarian kingdoms.
That's what's at stake.
That's what we have to explain.
We go from provinces to kingdoms, and these barbarian peoples are going to get us from
point A to point B.
Now, what we need to do as we go along here in our discussion is assess the relative roles
of the Romans and the barbarians in this process of transformation.
I insisted in the previous lecture on the fact that the Romans played an important role
in managing the transformation of their own world, not always with outcomes that they
could have predicted or would have desired, but nonetheless that the Romans played a fairly
important role in this long and complicated process.
Okay.
Now, I said a minute ago that if we were really going to try to understand the Roman encounter
with the barbarians, we'd have to do case study upon case study upon case study, and
we'd have to account for all the particular circumstances in each and every instance.
The point being, obviously, there was no single overall phenomenon that just as a handy-dandy
explanation works, but we don't have time for that, and I'm sure you don't have patience
for that.
So let's take one case study.
Let's talk about a people whom we call the Visigoths.
Now, we're fortunate in this instance.
We know quite a bit about them, and the case also is exemplary in a number of ways.
It shows a lot of the themes that I have been alluding to, a lot of themes that I want to
develop a little bit more as we move along here.
Okay.
What we'll be trying to do then is use the Visigoths to understand something of the dynamics
of the late Roman world, to understand something of the nature of relationships between the
Romans and the barbarian peoples.
Now, the people whom we later know as the Visigoths were a loose confederation of people.
Was there such a thing as a Visigoth?
The answer is almost certainly yes.
But the people we know as the Visigoths were made up of a whole lot of peoples, not all
of whom were Visigoths.
I hope that's reasonably clear.
All right.
These people, the people whom we call the Visigoths, were living along the central Danube in the
early 4th century.
They were living on the north side of the river.
They were living outside Roman territory.
The emperor Constantine made a treaty with them.
Remember, Constantine and his military reforms, making people federates, giving them a foetus,
making them federate peoples, allied peoples to Rome, you see, and assigning them responsibility
for serving as kind of frontier guards as he developed his defense in depth strategy for
the empire.
So, as early as about 325, the Visigoths are drawn up into that system.
They have a formal treaty with Rome.
They are assigned military responsibility for a stretch of the Danube, and they're dealing
not on equal terms, but on honorable terms with the Roman administration.
Now, in the 370s, so 40, 50 years into this period of having a treaty with the Romans,
some Visigoths began requesting permission from the Roman government to cross the Danube
and to enter the Balkans.
Why did they ask for permission?
They were being pressed very hard on their backside by the Huns.
Now, in this period, if there was a truly nomadic migratory, wandering, raiding people,
the Huns are it.
These are people who had sort of first emerged in sources in the Roman world in the very
early third century BC, AD, I'm sorry, and who had begun marching from sort of Central
Asia westward across the steppes.
These were indeed migratory people.
They are not a Germanic speaking people, and they are not one of the peoples actually that
will occupy our attention, particularly the rest of today or indeed even in future lectures.
But the Huns were pressing at this moment on the Visigoths, the Visigoths requested permission
from the Romans to cross the Danube and enter the frontier.
