Lecture 27, The Emergence of the Catholic Church
Hello again, and welcome to lecture number 27 in our series on the foundations of western civilization.
In this lecture, we're going to talk about the rise of the Catholic Church as an institutional structure,
as a body that had particular relationships with the Roman state,
and as a body which looked for a Catholic, a universal definition of certain of its essential and fundamental doctrines.
Now, in these lectures on late antiquity, we've been following along the model laid down by the 18th century historian Edward Gibbon,
as you'll perhaps remember. We talked about Rome's immoderate greatness, so we talked about the world of Diocletian and Constantine,
and the kinds of reforms which they attempted to introduce to solve some of Rome's serious problems.
We talked about barbarism when Gibbon turned to the external issues in Rome's eventual decline and fall, as he saw it,
and last time we talked then about the barbarians and their relations to the Roman state.
So we turn now in this lecture and the next one to Gibbon's second set of external forces, superstition.
Now, when Gibbon used the word superstition, he was from his sort of enlightened 18th century point of view.
Gibbon had begun as a Protestant, became Catholic, and then abandoned all religion.
And basically Gibbon's notion of superstition was that the sturdy ethical values and even political values,
and we might say religious values of the ancient world had somehow been jettisoned in late antiquity and substituted with forces with which he disapproved,
and so he labeled them superstition.
So we're using superstition rather notionally, kind of in your mind picture quotation marks around that word superstition.
All right, the rise of the Catholic Church.
Now, you may recall when we talked about the spread and the success of Christianity in the Roman world,
I had posed that as a kind of a series of questions or a series of paradoxes or a series of problems.
I said that it wasn't something that we would have predicted, something we would have expected.
And as we talked about various reasons why Christianity eventually proved successful in the Roman world,
one point on which I laid some stress was that it developed an institutional structure.
It developed a formal organization that its members had some sense of belonging to a community larger than their own local church,
that its officials had some sense of working together cooperatively, collegially with their fellows around the Mediterranean world.
Now what we want to do is really turn in a little bit more detail to the ongoing, to the growing historical elaboration of that institution.
Whatever else we might say about it, we may certainly say in comparison with the various pagan cults,
there is a vast chasm of difference on the level of organization and structure.
No pagan cult ever had anything like the organizational structure that the Catholic Church built up.
Now, as we move along, we're also going to want to talk about how this growing Catholic Church interacted with the Roman state.
We'll ask questions about whether this interaction was a good thing or a bad thing,
and we'll ask questions about whether this interaction helped or hindered the growing development of the Catholic Church.
And then finally, we'll reflect a little, I suppose, on this word Catholic.
What does this say? Universal. The Greek word, catholicos, you can make a Latin word out of that too, catholicus, is a word that means universal.
So how are we to understand universal or universality?
And how particularly are we going to understand that in a Roman world, which if you remember those moving lines from Virgil,
which I quoted a few lectures back, had its own ideas of universality.
First then, the Church as an institution.
The question we have before us is how did the primitive community, how did those primitive Christian communities, those early Christian communities,
the ones that a couple of lectures back I puzzled over when we try to tease hints out, especially of St. Paul's letters,
grow into a church with a massive and fully organized empire-wide institutional structure.
That's what we have to ask about.
Now, as is almost always the case, there are some very interesting hints hiding in language.
