In the languages of antiquity, but in particular in Greek, there were a couple of ways to talk
about the phenomenon which I am going to be describing here in the next few minutes.
We could use the Greek word ecclesia.
Now you can change the Greek case for Latin C's and it's still the word ecclesia, but
the word ecclesia.
Now if you stop and think about various modern languages, here is French Iglesias, here is
Spanish Iglesias, here is Italian Chiesa.
This word comes from the Greek chaleo, to call, eccaleo, to call out.
In a certain way in other words, ecclesia lays a certain stress on a gathered, a called community
of people.
There is another word, kyriakon.
Kyrios, in Greek, lord, ruler, exalted one.
Think of some other languages, think of English, church, think of German, kirke.
These words derive ultimately from the word kyriakon, which means a lord's house.
Can mean a temple, but eventually of course it can mean a church.
Something if you will, physical, tangible, sturdy, existing.
So we may think of the church then as something abstract, as a community of people whose bonds
are not visible, not evident, not obvious, or we may think of it as something sturdy,
stable, and solid, that building over there, that church over there, that structure over
there.
Now in a way what these two ways of thinking about church provide for us is a sort of a
creative tension that plays right down through the entire history of Christianity.
Now in the various churches, in the various towns of the Roman world, and you may recall
this again from our discussion of the rise and spread of Christianity, the key Christian
official was a bishop.
Now the bishops gradually became important personages in their towns.
Slowly but surely they came from higher and higher and higher social origins, and as the
Roman state became more intrusive as it commanded people's loyalties the less, the ecclesiastical
authorities were able to claim people's loyalties the more.
As populations began to reorient themselves a little bit in Christian directions then
not surprisingly they sought the advice but also the leadership of their Christian authorities.
Now think too about these bishops.
They wore distinctive clothing, just as for example the great Romans had worn distinctive
clothing or perhaps Romans who held particular offices wore stripes or bands on their toga
to designate for instance that they were of senatorial rank.
Bishops controlled important forms of patronage as the churches began to acquire property,
wealth, and so on.
The bishops controlled that wealth.
Bishops could intervene with public authorities to help people out who had gotten themselves
into legal scrapes of one kind or another.
And of course bishops as professional prayers also sort of managed patronage between this
world and the next.
So there were various ways in which we can actually see bishops maintaining roles that
key people in the Roman system had always played.
And gradually they are from the same elite families who had always ruled the Roman world.
So in a very interesting way here we see again this remarkable process of continuity and
change.
Much has changed and nothing has changed.
Now institutionally the key step is the emergence of the bishops of Rome when we call the popes.
Now papa was in antiquity in Latin or in Greek a term of endearment.
It is still the case today that the bishop of Rome is the official title of the person
we call the pope.
Pope is not an official title.
You don't do anything because you're pope.
You are pope because you're the bishop of Rome.
So in antiquity it was a term of endearment, papa, daddy, you see.
So our key issue is to see the emergence of the popes of the bishops of Rome to leadership
throughout the Christian community of the Mediterranean world.
How did this happen?
Well according to several basic principles and as a result of several basic historical
processes, principles first.
The notion of apostolic succession that there was a succession to the apostles, to the original
twelve apostles, they who at the end of Matthew's gospel had been commanded go forth and teach.
Their teaching office, their command, the command which they received to go and teach,
it was believed was handed on to successor after successor after successor.
Churches in antiquity for example kept long lists of their bishops and tried very hard
to prove and sometimes even to invent stories that their bishops reached back to one or
another of the apostles.
So important did the notion of apostolic succession seem to people.
And there are churches in the Mediterranean world that can as I say trace their lineage
from today right back to one of the apostles.
Rome was particularly important because it was doubly apostolic.
Peter and Paul.
