He wrote a great deal, as I mentioned a moment ago.
Let's be a bit reckless even, and just mention three of his books, and then just mention
a little bit about each of these three books, any one of which could easily be the subject
for a course of lectures almost as long as the one we're embarked on now.
Augustine's confessions chronicled his own conversion.
They stand as maybe the first true work of introspection, introspection in European literature.
They are much more personal than Marcus Aurelius' meditations, which I mentioned on an earlier
day.
Here Augustine bears his soul, bears his quest for God, in a quite remarkable way, and in
a language that is elegant, polished, refined, beautiful, moving.
His book on Christian doctrine was the first systematic exposition of how Christianity related
to classical learning.
He basically took the position that in order to read the great Christian text, you're going
to have to learn your Latin, perhaps your Greek as well, Augustine actually didn't have
very good Greek.
But you're going to have to learn your Latin, you're going to have to learn all the tricks
of the rhetorical arts, you better know some history, you better know lots of other things
as well, but then Augustine said, what we will do is spoil the Egyptians, we'll learn
all of these things, this metaphor being taken from the Hebrews leaving Egypt before
the Exodus, they would take with them only what they could use for the journey.
So you would pass through pagan antiquity and take only what you need as it were for
the Christian journey, but nonetheless you would take it, you wouldn't leave it beside,
you would take with you at least what you could use.
His city of God was a magnificent theology of history.
That was occasioned by the Gothic sack of Rome in 410, which was something that had
been profoundly distressing to large numbers of people.
But Augustine does something rather interesting here.
He says, you know, in the grand scheme of things Rome doesn't matter very much.
Now remember again those lines from Virgil, I place for them no end in space or time,
they will rule forever.
Nothing was more deeply embedded in the Roman psyche that the world would last as long as
Rome lasted.
Now Augustine says, well you know, now Rome really just isn't all that important, we just
don't really need to worry about Rome all that much because all of human history from
the creation of humankind until the last judgment is marching to, is marching to a final salvation
of the world, a final regeneration of the human race.
He used the images of the city of God and the city of man, the city of man, the world
of sinners, the world of ordinary people, the city of God, the world of the redeemed,
gradually the world of the redeemed would absolve all sinners.
You'll notice here that history is now linear.
We have again and again and again stressed the ancient view that history is cyclical,
that it repeats itself, for Augustine history marches in a direction to ultimate redemption.
The last of the Latin fathers was Pope Gregory I.
Now Gregory I, we met him, remember running the city of Rome after the absence of a Roman
government.
Gregory wrote biblical commentaries, he wrote letters, he wrote lives of saints and he wrote
a remarkable book called The Pastoral Rule which was not unlike Cicero's book on duties,
a manual of how to be a bishop, what kind of a person you ought to be to be a bishop
and what you ought to do if you're a bishop.
This book was profoundly influential for a very long time.
Now in the Eastern Mediterranean there were fathers too, we'll speak of them a bit more
briefly, but not to disdain them, rather only to signal that we have a much larger and more
complex phenomenon here to talk about, were we able to do so.
The so-called Cappadocian fathers, Basil the Great, 330 to 379, his brother Gregory of
Nissa, 330 again to 395, and Gregory Nazianzus, 329 to 389 were formidable biblical scholars,
were formidable spiritual writers, but they are perhaps most important to us because they
laid down many of the fundamental definitions in the great Trinitarian and Christological
battles, God is three in one, God is man and God, that we talked about a little bit in
this lecture and also in the preceding one.
Just like the younger contemporary John Chrysostom, John Golden throated, 347 to 407, was Patriarch
of Constantinople, he was a preacher of enormous skill and power, here was a man again who
knew his rhetorical arts.
Here was a person who wrote at great length on how the Christian may live the moral life
while still functioning in the world.
But here also was a man brave enough to take on the imperial court, he criticized them bitterly
for their immorality and for setting a bad example, he earned himself a couple of periods
of exile as a result of this, but the point is that he was taking the position that no
one should be exempt from criticism, not even the imperial court.
