Teotarec himself was an enormously gifted ruler.
He carried on wide arranging diplomatic relations in Western Europe with other Germanic kings.
He managed to attain a considerable degree of peace and order in Italy, as far as we
can tell.
Italy was quite prosperous really during his reign.
He didn't carry on sort of wars against the local Italian population.
But Teotarec had, again, some strikes against him.
He and his people were Aryans.
Now this was particularly difficult to be in Italy, where obviously the Pope was, and
to be representing the emperors.
Now the emperors in the East, as we've had occasion to see, may have tried from time
to time to find a formula to reconcile monophysites.
But by this time the emperors were having nothing to do with Aryanism, so this was dangerous
for Teotarec.
And then towards the last years of Teotarec's life, towards the last years of his reign,
Italy was marked by a series of plots and schemes and seditions and treasons.
And eventually the Emperor Justinian, after Teotarec died, sent his armies to Italy, and
they waged 20 years of war there, from 535 until 555.
Brutal wars, devastating wars for Italy.
Italy was won back, nominally, by the East Roman Empire, but was devastated in the process.
Anyway, there go the Ostrogoths.
But they give Visigoths the legacy of their defeat by the Franks in 507 at Vullet, when
they were driven over the Pyrenees.
We mentioned that, you may just remember in an earlier lecture on late antiquity.
And then their attack along at least the Mediterranean coast by Justinian, in the middle of the 6th
century, their Aryanism, they again were Aryans, although they converted to Catholicism in the
year 589, as a result of decisions made by a king and a church council.
And their political disunity, so they're attacked, they're beaten by the Franks, they're
attacked by the Romans, they are Aryans, and they are politically disunited.
In spite of all that, they persisted until 711, when finally Iberia was overrun by Berber
tribesmen, led by Arab commanders, who entered in the great expansion of the Islamic caliphate
early in the 8th century.
Now the Visigothic state was for all of that, one of considerable cultural achievements and
considerable artistic achievements, it produced a number of writers and thinkers of some note.
It was not devoid of interest, it was not devoid of success, but they never managed to overcome
political disunity on the one hand, and more powerful neighbors on the other, absent the
Visigoths.
The Lombards entered Italy in the winter of 568-69, in the wake of the Ostrogothic defeat.
Now there had actually been Lombard troops in the East Roman army that had fought against
the Ostrogoth, and as a result some of them may in a way have kind of scouted out the
area and thought, well this is a place that we can eventually take advantage of, and sure
enough they came in 568-69.
The Byzantines never really accepted them, they couldn't do much about them, but they
always regarded them as usurpers, they always regarded their position in Italy as irregular.
The Lombards had some other strikes against them, however, they, like so many of their
contemporaries, were also Aryans, and they seem not actually to have converted to Catholicism
in large numbers at any rate, until the very end of the 7th century.
The Lombards were a people of considerable gift in terms of law, their legal culture
was very high, but the Popes opposed them, the Byzantines opposed them, and the Popes
in particular opposed Lombard attempts to unify the Italian peninsula, quite regularly
or quite clearly, what the Popes were concerned about is that if the Lombards were able to
unify the Italian peninsula, then Rome would be either conquered or cut off, and in either
case the Popes were not particularly happy with that situation.
By the middle of the 8th century, the Popes turned to the Franks to the far north, invited
them to come into Italy, invited them to deal with the Lombard problem.
Charlemagne answered that, well, Charlemagne's father Pippin campaigned twice in Italy, attempted
to put the Lombards back in their box, but the Lombard sort of rose again after Pippin's
death.
Pippin's son, Charlemagne, came to Italy in 773, 774, defeated the last Lombard king,
and took the Lombard crown for himself, absent the Lombard.
So the future wasn't a very real way left, by default, to the Anglo-Saxons and to the
Franks.
Now, when we mentioned very briefly the British Isles in our lectures on late antiquity, we
said that the Romans had been pulling out of England between about 370 and about 410,
pulling their troops out to deploy them elsewhere in the empire.
