Now, over a long period of time, it may reach back as far as 400, but probably from about
450 to about 600, considerable numbers of people whom we look back on and call the Anglo-Saxons
began entering the British Isles.
Some came as peaceful settlers, some came as soldiers, some came as mercenary soldiers.
They came in a variety of different ways over a considerable period of time in groups of
varying size.
In other words, there was no Anglo-Saxon conquest of the British Isles.
We really shouldn't think of it that way.
These are peoples who basically came from the base of the Danish peninsula, Anglia,
the narrow land.
You see, they came from Saxony, northern Germany, but probably also some of them from further
to the west.
In other words, what we would think of perhaps as northern Holland to this day.
So the Anglo-Saxons come in and gradually built a number of very small political entities.
Which later English tradition remembers these as the kingdoms of the Heptarchy, of the seven
kingdoms.
Well, it's a charming legend and it's a useful way of thinking about early English history
because it implies, of course, that there was considerable political division.
There were lots of little entities.
There was almost never a moment when there were seven and only seven kingdoms inside
the British Isles.
The number was often 10, a dozen, quite a number of small kingdoms.
Some of these kingdoms, however, were notably more effective than others.
Those that were effective tended to have two particular qualities.
First, they were capable of letting.
Second, they had room for expansion.
Military expansion, of course, can be one important way of creating a kind of a social
dynamic that can weld a political entity together by giving a kind of a common focus to the
efforts to the energies of the people who live in it.
So for instance, in the first place Kent, the kingdom in the extreme southeast of England,
and then Northumbria, the kingdom in the extreme north of England, and then Wessex, the kingdom
in the southwest of England, and then Mercia, the kingdom in the middle of England, sort
of one after another, these various kingdoms would rise and would be perhaps the most prominent
among the English kingdoms.
But never, in the period we're talking about today, the only kingdom in England.
Now these kings learned some things.
They learned some things probably from their Frankish neighbors.
They learned some things from the Roman past, almost certainly here from books and possibly
from churchmen, certainly not from personal experience.
For instance, the kings learned how to rule.
They built impressive wooden halls and sat enthroned in these halls and ruled and made
decisions and held courts of law and so on.
Now not the great magnificent stone basilicas of the Mediterranean world, but impressive
wooden halls all the same.
They used sceptres, an abstract symbol of their power, an abstract symbol of their authority.
They issued coins.
They issued coins in their own name.
One of the most important marks of rulership of, well, sovereignty would be far too grand
a word to use, but something like that, something like the notion of individual autonomous rule.
They issued laws.
They issued laws in their own name.
Had the Romans taught the world, well, they issued laws.
They issued documents.
They issued various kinds of documents and their documents were hybrid.
That is to say, they owed something to native traditions of drawing up documents and making
agreements, but they also owed something to Roman forms of drawing up documents and making
agreements.
Now some of the historical sources for early Anglo-Saxon England speak of Brett Waldas.
Brett Waldas.
Now that word can mean broad wielders, somebody who wields authority broadly, or it can mean
Britain wielders, somebody who wields authority in Britain.
Scholars take the appearance of the term Brett Waldas to imply that there was already a kind
of a sense, an awareness of political unity long before it ever existed.
Now that's very important.
When one looks at some of these early writings and sees the word Brett Waldas attached to
a particular king, it doesn't really mean he was ruling all of England, but it means
that there was at least a vague sense that there was a certain kind of political hegemony
exercised by some people over others.
In the middle, well actually in the last part of the 8th century, King Opha of Mercia, who
reigned from 757 to 796, was the first king to call himself King of the English.
Now that's interesting.
It's revealing.
It's tantalizing.
It's tempting.
And it's confusing.
We don't really know what he meant by that.
What did it mean in the 8th century for him to call himself the King of the English?
Did it mean King of all the people who acknowledged him, King of the people who were called the
English, King of the people who lived in Anglalonde, in the land of England?
We don't really know for sure, but again it implies the faint emergence of an idea
of political unity, of political cohesion.
Long before such unity or cohesion actually exists.
Now these early Anglo-Saxon kings maintained very widespread commercial relations.
You can see this from the fantastic ship burial that was put in the earth almost certainly
in the late 6th, more like the early 7th century, and then unearthed in East Anglia and Eastern
England at Sutton Hoo in 1939.
