It was in this kind of thinking, in this kind of manipulation of the ideal of
St. Augustine, manipulation of the ideal of St. Augustine, that the idea of
Christendom was born, the idea of a uniform and universal and universalizing
Western civilization.
Now, just to conclude that point, that loops us back to the imperial
coronation, and we can say that as emperor, Charles really didn't act
differently, he didn't do much that was different than he had done as king.
His empires, we'll see in just a second, barely outlived him a generation.
So that's why from one point of view we can say, well gee, was that imperial
coronation such a big deal after all?
And the answer would have to be, well, probably not.
It is from the other point of view, from the ideological point of view,
from the conceptual point of view, from the birth of this Frankish new
Israel, this new chosen people, from the idea of the city of God come down on
earth and led by Charles the Great, this political Augustinism, this potent,
potent notion of Christendom.
In those respects, the coronation of Charlemagne was a decisive significance,
and we'll see this again and again and again in later lectures.
So his empire didn't even last a generation beyond him.
Why not?
Well, lots of reasons, I suppose.
We talked about the Roman world, internal and external.
So let's have a look at the carolingian empire and the fall of the carolingian
empire for external and internal reasons.
Let's start with the internal ones.
The internal factors, well, family rivalries among the sons, the grandsons,
the nephews, the great nephews, and so on of Charlemagne himself.
They simply tore the realm apart in a series of wars.
Now, these reached a culmination of sorts in the Treaty of Verdun in 843, which
created more or less stable foundations for the eventual emergence of France in
the West and Germany in the East.
But the fact is that one couldn't have seen that easily in the middle of the
ninth century.
The sheer complexity of the lands over which the carolingians ruled perhaps
indeed made their long-term unification impossible.
This sounds a little like Gibbons' immoderate greatness, doesn't it?
But I think we should be nevertheless impressed by what the carolingians did
achieve, all of those efforts in canon law, in secular law, in liturgy,
in monastic practice, and so on.
They did lay common foundations across much of Europe.
There was, over most of Europe, an absence of any unified tradition of rule.
The carolingians were building what had never existed before, and they built
well, but not durably.
Excerning factors, well, Viking, Muslim, and Magyar attacks that commenced in the
middle years of the ninth century, just as the Frankish world itself was being
torn apart in familial strife.
The militarization and localization of society that was the inevitable almost
response to these unpredictable attacks that forced people back on locally
available resources.
A great central state couldn't deal with lightning Viking attacks.
Here, here, here, here, here, here.
You never knew where they were coming or when they were coming.
So bombs between the center and the periphery, so lovingly and carefully built
by Pippin and Charles, were relaxed.
Still, a century of unified carolingian rule went very far towards stamping a
common historical and cultural imprint on Western Europe.
In many respects, the fact that we can, to this day, talk about a European culture,
a European tradition, owes much to the carolingians and their notion of Christendom,
their very conscious attempt to create what survived them.
It was also a brilliant period culturally called a Renaissance.
And we'll turn to that in the next lecture.
