Einhard knew that book, and he built up his picture of Charlemagne by modeling it on that.
Theologians in the Carolingian world debated a variety of the questions that were important
to them that came up in their day.
They debated, for example, the meaning of the sacrament of baptism.
This was a world where large numbers of people were being converted on frontier regions,
so they explored the subject of baptism, the sacrament of entry into the Christian community.
They debated the great problem of predestination, a problem that had been posed by St. Agatha
Augustine, and has been argued, in a sense, ever since, for the last 15 centuries in Christianity.
Quite simply, are all persons from before the beginning of time predestined either to salvation
or to condemnation?
Well, one might say, what's the problem?
Well, the problem is that if one posits an omniscient God, then one posits a God who
knows the outcome.
If God knows the outcome, has he willed it?
Or has he left humans with free will to do what they wish?
This has always been a very complex problem it was in the Carolingian world.
There were also debates over, for example, the question of religious art.
We saw that that was a problem that animated the Byzantines in this period.
This was a time also of staggering activity in other areas.
Between 768 and 855, 27 cathedrals, 417 monasteries, and more than 100 royal residences were built.
Now not a whole lot of that survives, because these buildings kept getting knocked down
and rebuilt, knocked down and rebuilt over and over again over a long period of time.
Another area of activity, the manuscript book.
Now I've suggested that there were large numbers of books copied, that's true.
But let's put some focus now on the fact that many of these Carolingian books had beautiful,
beautiful, beautiful paintings in them, and sometimes also ink, pen and ink drawings in
them.
These works of art, many of them produced at or for the Carolingian court, some of them
produced at great monasteries, are among the artistic treasures of the European past.
Most great art, most great painting from the early Middle Ages was not, you see, painted
on walls, and it certainly wasn't painted on panels and hung in the dining room.
Painting then tended to be in books.
Now these works could of course be produced for patrons almost anywhere, but here's another
place where we particularly see the hand of the Carolingian family itself.
Now many of these books were produced in Sceptoria, for example, at places like Tours, where
Alcuin was the abbot in the last eight years of his life.
Now a figure like the Adolf of Orleans is revealing of many of the trends of the age.
He was born in 750, he died in about 821.
He came to court as a theologian.
He was from the Spanish March from the south of France, his background was actually visigothic,
and he was given the charge of writing a great Frankish treatise against Byzantine views
on art.
He seems to have been the only significant Carolingian writer, for example, who knew
Hebrew, and therefore he could deal very intelligently with the Old Testament and with some of the
questions about the prohibition or the permission of art.
Charlemagne once used him as a missus in the south of France.
We talked about the misi dominici in our last lecture.
He was appointed Bishop of Orleans.
He issued very important legislation governing his diocese and reforming the clergy of his
diocese.
He almost single-handedly produced a spectacular edition of the Bible that remains to this
day a marvel of learning.
He was perhaps the finest poet of his age and a very fine poet with all.
Just outside Orleans, in the little town of Germany, he built a stunningly beautiful
chapel.
He had some architectural skills as well.
The adult may have been unusual, but versatility was a hallmark of this age.
For example, Rabanus Maurus, born in 776 or so, died in 856, was Alcuin's greatest pupil.
He was a key advisor to Charlemagne's heirs.
He was abbot of the great monastery of Fulda.
He was archbishop of the great sea of mice.
He was an accomplished poet.
He was a superb biblical scholar, and he was an encyclopedist in the tradition of Pliny
from antiquity.
Wrote a magnificent and lengthy encyclopedic work.
Hickmar of Rans was an archbishop, was advisor to kings, was an historian, was a theologian
of ability, and the greatest legal mind of the early Middle Ages.
So what this carolingian renaissance presents us with is both basics and more advanced scholars.
It created common foundations for the cultural life of Western Europe, and it built those
foundations on Catholic Christianity.
So the carolingian period was formative, politically, institutionally, economically,
governmentally, but also culturally, religiously, ethically, morally, and academically.
Here is the great foundation of the European tradition of Christendom.
