Now, a second element of the growth of the expansion of Europe in this period is technological
innovation and dissemination.
Talking a little, as we now will, about technology provides us with some interesting opportunities
to show how interrelated various phenomena may be.
Now, it's worth saying in the first place, the Romans were not terribly interested in
technological games.
There really was not much in the way of important technological achievement during the Roman
period.
The medieval period, on the other hand, was one that was fairly rich in technological
innovation, so that we were sometimes inclined to think of the Middle Ages as the Dark Ages
as having descended from the heights of classical antiquity.
Well, in part of that, if we were talking about technology, we'd have to flip the polarity
of that old equation and say, actually, the Middle Ages were rather cleverer.
Actually, the clearest indicator we have of medieval technology, of its application
and of its connection to this population increase that I just mentioned, is in the realm of
serial production.
Is in the realm of serial production.
Medieval people vastly expanded serial production.
How?
Indeed, they laid down most of the fundamental ways in which it is possible to get sort of
maximum serial production out of the soil before the modern advent of chemical fertilizers.
That has been the great change in modern times, not anything else fundamentally, not even,
for example, the use of motor driven tractors, that sort of thing.
Well, how?
How did medieval people increase serial production, which made it possible to feed a larger population
or a little hard to know which is the chicken and which is the egg, maybe the growing population
called forth necessity being mother to invention, called forth some innovations in how to enhance
the food supply.
A little hard to say again, which is the driving force here and which the consequence.
But anyway, well, a greater use of draft animals, excuse me, a greater use of horses as draft
animals.
A horse is significantly more efficient than an ox.
He does more work for no more food.
In fact, perhaps even a little bit less food.
He is stronger.
Thus, fields can be plowed larger fields can be plowed or fields can be plowed more times.
The soil can be turned more carefully.
But a horse requires very different harnessing than an ox.
And so we see, for example, from about the year 1000 or a little after the proliferation
of the horse collar.
In a sense, when a horse is pulling a plow or for that matter pulling a wagon, the horse
is driving a horse collar forward and it's the horse collar that's pulling the wagon
or pulling the plow.
If a horse were simply a harness the way an ox was with essential leather traces across
its, across its chest, it would immediately choke him.
He'd stop.
He couldn't work.
So new harnessing was required.
Now the hooves of horses are particularly sensitive and therefore they had to be shod.
This virtually universalized the use of the horseshoe in Europe.
Now this provided protection for a bit of traction as well, but fundamentally it provided
protection for the horses hooves, but it'll occur to you perhaps right away that if we're
going to shoe all of those horses, we're going to be involved in iron and we're going
to be involved in smithing.
You see?
We're, we're, we're now requiring certain other things to develop as for instance horse
harnessing and the use of horses as draft animals increases.
The new heavy wheeled plow with an iron plow share fits into this picture as well.
Now this type of plow appears actually to be an invention of the Slavic world.
It appears to have come into Western Europe in the Carolingian period.
In the Carolingian period, apparently it was used on, for instance, large estates on
the estates of the Carolingian family, on the estates of the greatest churches, the
greatest monasteries, but it wasn't widely used perhaps until the 11th century or so.
But it began finally to proliferate throughout Europe.
Now the heavy wheeled plow is important for several reasons.
Once again, we put horses in front of it.
It can do a lot of work.
A heavy iron plow share, a plow share can cut much more deeply into the soil than can
the older forms of the erratrum, the Roman scratch plow, which really didn't do much
more than sort of just disturb the surface.
The soils of Northern Europe are very good, but they're damp and they're heavy.
So the heavy wheeled plow is able to turn the soil, which aerates the soil.
This is also very important.
