300 years later, that event, and the death of the guy who was guarding the baggage, Protolandus,
the Count of the Breton March, he was a real person, has been turned into Charlemagne leading
a vast crusade against forces of Pinem Muslims, crude caricatures of Muslims actually in the
Song of Roland itself. But the point is that the story is a story of courage, of prowess,
of military valor, one swing of the sword and a hundred heads come off, these sort of
exaggerated kinds of things. These were sort of action movies for the Middle Ages, you
see, and probably appealed to about the same age group and largely once supposes to men.
The story is virtually without women. Great Roland, for example, of course, dies in the
story. His aphions bride simply drops dead when she hears this. That's her role in the
story. Women simply have no place in this story. Long, loving accounts of weapons. Sounds
like guys talking about their golf clubs. This is a poem full of what we might call medieval
guy stuff, you see, and this is the world of chivalry. This is the ethos of those who
fight. Now in later lectures, when we come, for example, to the Renaissance period, we'll
have occasion to revisit these governing classes and talk a little bit about the cultivated
gentleman. But for the High Middle Ages, the cultivated gentleman is not yet much in evidence.
It is the warrior cultivated by the chivalric ethos. Thus far then, those who fight. Now
those who pray. Fundamentally, we're talking here about the clergy of the medieval church.
I mean, in principle, everyone in the Middle Ages was supposed to pray. But we're talking
here about society's leaders. We're talking about the clergy. Now, inside the clergy,
of course, there were some fairly stiff quarrels over whether monks on the one hand or bishops
on the other were holier, were closer to God, and therefore ought to be the natural leaders
of the society. There were quite fierce debates about that subject. It's wise to say that
the clergy agreed that they should be in charge. They simply disagreed amongst themselves what
kinds of clergymen should actually be in charge. Now, if we start trying to grasp this clergy
from a number of different points of view, one thing we would notice right away is that
the clergy everywhere were increasingly aristocratic. More and more and more, the clergy is made
up of members of the aristocracy. Now, that didn't mean that there were not some opportunities
for what we would call social mobility, that some persons could not rise simply by dint
of talent up through the ranks of the clergy. That was always possible, but it was increasingly
less possible. Now, if you're thinking along with me here, you may notice that one reason
why we may notice a more aristocratic character to the clergy is all of those younger sons
of those noble families who are being sort of done out of secular careers by dint of
primogeniture and who may not wish to go off crusading or may not wish to go off to the
frontiers of Europe to seek their fortunes there. But an idea that we really should dispel,
though it's one that one does sometimes encounter, is that the clergy was somehow a dumping ground
for unwanted children. First of all, there was no reason why the clergy would have been
pleased to have people dumped on them. You see, if you stop and think about it, they
wouldn't have wanted the halt, the lame and the witness to have been dumped on them, but
they wouldn't even have wanted necessarily aristocratic boys to have been dumped on them.
Let's look at this the other way around. Clerical office in the Middle Ages brought
enormous prestige. It brought a secure life. It brought a good education. It brought a
decent diet. It brought, relatively speaking, a very nice place to live. This was a very
desirable career. This was a desirable life in almost every imaginable way. So it was
not the case that the clergy was full of the unwanted and the unloved. Rather, it was
itself a very competitive realm of experience. Now, we might say just to extend that point
a little bit that convents provided opportunities for women to live free of male domination.
One of the only places in medieval society where women governed other women was in a convent.
One of the only places where women could be assured of education was in a convent. One
of the only alternative, acceptable alternative lifestyles to marriage was a convent. So we
shouldn't imagine convents as places where all of the unwanted girls of medieval Europe
were dumped. This again was a place and convents were also often heavily aristocratic. This
was also a very desirable place to be, a desirable life to live.
