Welcome once again to our series of lectures on the foundations of western civilization.
This will be lecture number 36 and in this lecture and the next one we will explore several
central themes in medieval European political development.
This lecture will focus particularly on England and France while the next one will look at
Ireland, Iberia, Italy, Germany, and some other regions in Europe.
Now we've talked about the material conditions of life in high medieval Europe, we've talked
about the social conditions of life, so now we will be asking questions about how these
people organized themselves politically and institutionally.
Now in order to cover a lot of space and a lot of time, we're going to follow certain
basic themes, certain basic themes, four of them in particular, one of them for example
will be the failure, the development or the failure to develop the territorial integrity
of the state.
Where did these political entities actually wind up on the map?
A second theme that we'll follow is the elaboration or the failure to elaborate strong institutions
of central government.
Where did they merge?
Why did they merge?
Where did they not emerge?
Why not?
A third theme will be the expansion of governmental activity.
Now we can look at that in a couple of different ways.
One thing that we'll notice, not so much in this lecture as in the next one, is that
in the Celtic world and Scandinavian and the Slavic world considerable areas that were
not as it were on the map in the Carolingian period come on the map and of course remain
on the map until today.
So that's one way we can think about an expansion of government activity.
Another way we can think about the expansion of government activity is to talk about the
growing size, the growing complexity, the growing sophistication of governmental institutions
within particular states.
In other words, quite simply government became more present for more people more of the time.
And finally, though we'll say less about this subject than about the others, though it is
an important subject, is the question of changes in the social composition of the governing
classes.
All right, let's begin with England.
We left off with England some time ago when the small early Anglo-Saxon kingdoms were
just about to have a rather long and rather unhappy encounter with the Vikings.
We can pick up our story there and then take it through several conquests, through foreign
entanglements, through dynastic instability, in other words, through a lot of very difficult
challenges, which the English face, and yet will arrive at the end of the 13th century
at a fairly well-organized and governed state.
That must be said, England is relatively small and considerably more homogeneous than many
other European states.
It made political development, coherent political development, something less of a challenge
than elsewhere.
It doesn't make it easy and it didn't make it inevitable, but it made it somewhat easy
or.
We'll have occasion to see when we talk, for instance, about France or about Germany,
that complexity there was actually a considerable retarding factor in political development.
Well, the little kingdoms of the so-called Heptarchy often produced one leading member
but never really produced a national monarchy.
As the kingdoms of the Heptarchy succeeded one after another, England then encountered
the Vikings.
First in 793, when they attacked Lindisfarne Island, we mentioned that in an earlier lecture,
and then across most of the ninth century, there were sporadic attacks.
Now here, now there, quite unpredictable, damaging, but not decisive in their impact.
In 865, the so-called Great Army, having then defeated in France, crossed the channel, attacked
England and actually settled down to the business of conquering the country.
In these difficult circumstances, England found a very effective ruler, a very effective
king in Alfred the Great, who reigned from 871 until 899.
Alfred began in Wessex in the southwest of the country, a rally that by his death had
moved the Viking, mainly Danish, these Vikings that we're talking about are mainly Danes,
it had moved their frontier right up to the Thames Valley, in other words, most of southern
England had been liberated.
Over the course of the 10th century, Alfred's successors continued to move the frontier
farther and farther north into the Dane Law, the part of England that was under Scandinavian
control that was centered on the city of Jorvik.
We know that city is York today, it was Roman, Ibarachem.
Actually, York bears to this day a Viking name.
