Geneva was perhaps not yet quite ready for so strict a regime and Calvin and
Pharrell were chased out. Calvin went to Strasbourg and there he studied for a
period of time was much influenced by a man by the name of Martin Butzer. Butzer
was born in 1491, died in 1551, again a man who's you know what is that something
like 18 years older than Calvin. Butzer was a former Dominican. He later became a
significant leader in the Swiss reformed communities in the years right
after Zwingli's death. Now Butzer was an influential theologian particularly on
such things for instance as the doctrine of the Eucharist and Calvin learned a
good deal from him. In 1541 Pharrell and Calvin were called back to Geneva and
they were then able to institute their holy Commonwealth. They turned
Geneva into a very particular distinctive kind of place. Four groups of
people, pastors, doctors of the learned not the medical sort, elders and deacons
were assigned power in this new city. The supervision of public morality was
affected by a consistory. Now the consistory was in some ways the key
institution in the holy Commonwealth of Geneva. It was made up both of ministers
in the reformed church and of prominent laymen in the city and it really did
help to impose to shape to form this very, very strict regime that was
instituted in Geneva. Now it took maybe something like 10 years really to impose
this regime fully within the city. Now during these years when when the when
the holy Commonwealth was being instituted by Calvin and by Pharrell we
find a lot of extremely strict legislation being passed. Calvin himself
became a virtual dictator. Very harsh penalties were imposed for instance for
skipping church services if people were found out and about in public at the
time when at preaching time they could be rounded up and arrested. A person could
be executed in Geneva for saying that the Pope was a good man. Most ordinary human
pleasures singing and dancing for example were forbidden. These were satanic.
These were not godly. These were sinful. These were a waste of people's time. So
this regime that was instituted in Geneva was a strict one. All right but
Calvinism the reformed faith was something much more than a series of
restrictive practices imposed upon people in this particular town, Geneva. What
exactly was the Calvinist faith? How how may we try to capture a sense of
Calvin's actual teachings? Calvin began with the absolute sovereignty of God. He
reflected on various passages in the Old Testament that seemed to to create
such a chasm between God and man. So he began with the absolute sovereignty of
God and he moved on to what he called the radical depravity of man. The utter
sinfulness, the utter unworthiness of man. Now Calvin treated the the absolute
sovereignty of God even before the primacy of scripture in his institutes
of the Christian religion. In a certain sense this was the place you had to
start. Now we could say we could say that Calvin and the reform tradition begin
with God and argue over this chasm to man. Whereas in a certain sense in a
certain sense one could say that in the Catholic tradition one began with man
and argued one's way up to God. A certain way of thinking about the two
traditions. But whereas for the Catholic tradition there was a gap it was a
bridgeable gap. For Calvin perhaps that gap was never bridgeable. Now Calvin's
mature formulation of his reformed faith may be found in the 1539 and later
editions of his institutes. Now let's pause there. Remember the first edition
comes out when he's 25, 26 years old, something like that. The second
edition comes out when he's only 30. He's still a very young man to have written
so magisterial and important a book.
