It's sometimes been said that what the Institute of the Christian Religion did for Protestantism
was to confer upon it intellectual respectability.
What that means is that although Luther had, for example, written his catechisms, the greater
one has a broad presentation of his faith, the minor one, the lesser one as a teaching
device for ordinary people to be instructed in the Reformed faith.
Thus far, the Reformed tradition, the Protestant tradition generally did not have anything
that was, in a sense, an analog to Peter Lombard's four books of sentences produced
in the 12th century and for a long time essentially the textbook, if you like, of Catholic teaching
on a wide variety of subjects.
With Calvin's Institutes, Protestantism now had a book that laid out a systematic presentation
of the Protestant faith.
Of Christianity as professed by those people who were now being called Protestants.
So it's in that sense that one says that Calvin's Institutes confer intellectual respectability
on Protestantism.
Now the Institutes were built up systematically as a series of biblically grounded reflections
on the Ten Commandments, the Lord's Prayer, and the Apostles Creed.
Now it's interesting to note, it's interesting to note that Luther's Catechisms were built
up as systematic expositions of the Ten Commandments, the Lord's Prayer, and the Apostles Creed.
Now there were some fairly important differences between Luther's teachings and Calvin's teachings
to be sure, but their basic way of building up their ideas was much the same.
It sort of exists.
The basic architecture was similar, whereas the details differed a little bit.
Now in order to try to capture a sense of the Reformed faith as taught by Calvin, of
the doctrines as presented in the Institutes of the Christian Religion, build up, as I've
said, with a series of systematic biblically grounded reflections on the commandments,
our Father and the Apostles Creed, teachers have long adverted to a mnemonic device, the
tulip.
Now whether there's an irony that Holland became Calvinist and has lots of tulips, I really
am not quite sure.
I think that's just a sort of a happy accident.
But anyway, let me emphasize right away, if you take the Institutes of the Christian
Religion off the shelf, do it carefully, it's a big book.
If you take this book off the shelf, you won't find tulips in it.
This is a way that teachers reorganize the material there in order to try to make it
memorable in order to help people kind of fix in mind what some of Calvin's fundamental
ideas were.
All right, tulip, then, tea, total depravity.
Man is utterly sinful.
He is completely incapable of taking any steps to merit his own redemption.
He has no good in him.
You.
Unconditional election.
Those whom God elects to salvation are elected unconditionally, that is, their election is
not conditional on their mode of life, on, as we learned to say when we were talking
about Martin Luther, on their works.
Your election does not depend on anything that you do in the course of your life.
L.
Limited atonement.
Atonement, of course, has to do with the death of Christ on the cross.
For whom did Christ die?
To atone whose sins did Christ die?
To Calvin, Christ died for the elect.
Not for all humankind, for the elect.
Who are these elect?
We'll return to that in just a minute.
I, irresistible grace.
God's grace is irresistible for the elect who, therefore, once again, have no claim to merit.
Things you have done in your life, things you have done well in your life, do not give
you a claim upon grace.
Grace is not a reward for conduct.
P. Persistence in grace.
Grace cannot be lost or rejected by the elect.
If you are among the elect, grace is irresistible and grace is persistent.
