In the 17th century, French policy is most evident, for example, in the support given
to Protestant Sweden and to North German states in their battles during the so-called Thirty
Years' War in Germany against the Austrian Habsburgs.
Now, the French were Catholics.
You might have thought that they'd have lent support to the Catholic Habsburgs to suppress
Protestant Northern Germany.
Oh, no.
The French interest was to weaken the Habsburgs, so they lent support to Protestant enemies
in North Germany of Catholic Austria.
Likewise, for example, when the Netherlands rebelled against Spain, the Southern Netherlands,
you remember, were largely Catholic, generally loyal, basically what we think of as Belgium,
but the Northern Netherlands, what we think of today as Holland or the Netherlands strictly
speaking, were Calvinists.
They chafed under Spanish authority.
They rebelled against the Spanish, and the French assisted the Dutch.
Again, we might have thought, well, the Catholic French should have aided their Catholic Spanish
brethren, you know, to suppress these rebellious Calvinist Dutchmen.
No, no.
The French wanted to weaken the Spanish Habsburgs.
So we're beginning to see a kind of diplomacy that is based upon the very careful calculation
of interests.
Now, this can sometimes encounter the naivete of modern peoples.
There was, for example, this situation in recent times when Charles de Gaulle pulled
France out of NATO, and people said, you're abandoning your friends, and in his haughty
sort of way, de Gaulle says, France has no friends, France has interests.
Well, that kind of diplomacy, maybe we could call it Machiavellian, a kind of diplomacy
that simply grapples with the world the way it really is, and brutally, roughly, calculates
interests.
Now the Spanish, to be sure, saw themselves in some ways as the protectors and saviors
of Catholic Europe, you know, Catholic France opposed them mightily.
So for example, the Spanish put together a great naval force that fought and defeated
the Turks.
No small thing, this, at the Battle of Lepanto in the Eastern Mediterranean in 1571.
One of the sailors in those Spanish ships at Lepanto was a man named Miguel de Cervantes,
of whom we would hear something as an author later on, the author of Don Quixote.
In 1588, the Spanish launched the Invincible Armada, an enormous naval fleet designed
to conquer Protestant England and to restore the true faith there.
The Armada, for lots of reasons, which would be very interesting to pursue, though we haven't
time to do so here, was defeated.
But for the next several decades, over much of the globe, the Spanish and the English
navies combated each other.
The period also saw an escalation of colonial rivalries.
For example, by the time the 17th century dawns, both France and England begin to build
overseas empires in North America.
Now we saw before that they had made the first faint stirrings in this direction at the end
of the 15th century, but then for a long time were distracted by other concerns.
Now when the English and the French began to build their realms in North America, they
were looking for the northwest passage to Asia, trying to find a way to get to the east
by going west.
Partly they were entering lands that after all had been left free of the Spanish.
The Spanish had taken most of the southern regions of what would later become the United
States, had taken Central America, taken South America, the English and the French went north.
Partly also they were combating each other as religious rivals, the English Protestant,
the French Catholic.
The Dutch, once freed of Spanish dominance, began themselves to build a colonial regime.
The Dutch regime was built very much more like the Portuguese, however, than like the
Spanish.
That is to say, the Dutch created a series of trading stations in the Indian Ocean Basin
and in the South China Sea, and also eventually in the Americas.
Now the Dutch and the English, although both Protestant states, with natural foes we might
have thought, in France and in Spain, actually fought a bloody series of wars with one another,
occasioned by their competing economic interests around the world.
Now just very briefly we might say that at the end of the 17th century, the Russia of
Peter the Great began to enter the picture as another key player on the western, on the
European stage.
We don't really have time to pursue the ins and outs of Russian history here.
But let us say that by 1700, so we can just put Peter the Great and his Russia into the
picture, two great patterns are evident.
The first.
