No philosopher has influenced my thinking more than René Girard.
He showed me how I was caught up in meaningless status competitions, and how much I was driven
by desires that weren't even my own.
And I wasn't the only one.
Too many of my peers were miserable pursuing things not because they actually wanted them,
but because society told them to.
And sometimes, I look back and wonder how I ever functioned without Girard's ideas.
I see how swept up I was in vain pursuits, pointless social games, and status signaling,
which Girard exposed and rescued me from.
And if there were ever a set of ideas that radically changed my life, these would be it.
The journey of acquiring these ideas, however, was a long and painful struggle.
Girard's writing is hard to understand, his theories seem antiquated and abstract, and
his books jump from idea to idea without an apparent structure.
This is why the series exists.
Over the next seven lectures, we're going to cover the entirety of Girard's system
in a structured and understandable way, while exploring the relevance of his ideas for the
contemporary world.
My name is David Perrell, and I'm going to be moderating these lectures, which are
made possible by the generous grant of Tyler Cowan's Emergent Ventures Program.
As your host, I'll be listening and learning here with you.
And with that, I'd like to introduce our lecturer, Jonathan B.
Jonathan, I know you're busy.
Thanks for taking the time.
Thanks for having me.
If you're going to do all the hard work of setting up and I can just ramble on philosophy,
you can have me any time of the week.
Well, I'm glad you could be here.
And before you introduce us to Girard, I'd like to introduce you to our audience.
And I want to start with how we met.
I was hosting a philosophy discussion group in New York City.
And at the time, we were reading Augustine's City of God.
And I remember you being on the other side of the room, and you start sharing.
And I was so impressed with the rigor and the intensity of your discussion.
I was like, who is this guy?
And so we became fast friends.
I audited your philosophy class at Columbia.
Now we both live in Austin, Texas, where we must have dinner together two, three nights
a week.
And in that time, I've been very impressed.
And what stands out the most is just the discipline and the thoughtfulness that you bring to philosophy.
And what I would like to do now is talk a little bit about how you got here today.
So you were born in China, where you were raised between Beijing and later moved to
Vancouver, and you spent most of your formative years training in Olympiad math.
At 15, you won a Canadian gold medal in the Pascal mathematics competition.
At 17, you were an invitee to the Canadian mathematical Olympiad.
At 18, you were awarded a full ride scholarship at Columbia, where you studied computer science
as one of the top 20 Eggleston scholars in a class of over 2,000 people.
At 20, you finished your computer science degree.
And that's when you were introduced to Gerard.
And because of Gerard, you pursued a second degree in philosophy, where you focused on
continental social philosophy and Buddhist theory.
At 22, immediately after graduation, you started building a fintech startup with Joe
Lonsdale, which you've been working on for the past year.
Now, did I get that right?
Yeah, I think factually that is correct.
Although I don't know about the exact ages, I'm a bit worried that you've hyped me up
a bit too much.
Perhaps not unlike our equity markets, you've set me up so high that there's only one direction
that I can go from here and that's down.
Although in terms of the question of whether you miss anything, I think you did miss quite
a few important things to no fault of your own because no one gives introductions this
way that are relevant to my engagement with Gerard.
And those are all the personal failures and the suffering that I've had along the way
that really led me to Gerard.
I suspect this is probably a much broader point that when you give an introduction to a Gerardian
that you should highlight perhaps their failures just as much if not more than their successes
because it's often their failures that really drive them to Gerard.
I don't think Gerardian insights are rewarded, shall we say, in the victory of a triumph,
but you have to go out there and scavenge them from your fields of defeat.
And so it wasn't out of a mindset of achievement or even a leisurely strolling into Gerard
out of theoretical curiosity that I was acquainted with him, but I crawled to him out of a desperate
existential necessity.
So then how did you find your way to Gerard?
Yeah, well, like I mentioned, it's mostly personal suffering and strife, but maybe to
be a bit more specific, like many other teenagers, certainly ambitious teenagers, I was struggling
quite a bit in my first years at Columbia, not academically, not professionally, not socially,
but in a deep personal existential sense.
As a freshman at an elite college, I, if you'll excuse a funny metaphor, think you
kind of end up in a zoo with 2,000 other hyper conscious, status-oriented,
procedure-seeking teenagers.
And the one word that I think which captures the existential problem of such a community
well is hollowness.
And now this wasn't true for everyone, but most of us weren't really doing things, I
think, for their own sake, but out of what Gerard would call mimesis or natural capacity
and tendency to imitate others.
I mean, think about it like this, 2,000 of, allegedly, some of America's smartest and
most independent kids all end up after college wanting to go into four fields, finance, tech,
law, and then medicine.
And during college, we were supporting political causes we didn't care about to fly the right
colors.
We hung out with the right people, we wanted to see and dating the right person, and we
worked our asses off hustling for prestigious internships that a lot of us actually secretly
loathed.
And I think what made this all so much more perverse was that we had to lie to ourselves
to sustain these pursuits, that if we just squinted hard enough and intoxicated ourselves
in the equally drunken rhetoric of our peers, that we could fool ourselves into thinking
that this path of prestige is the right one for us to really be on.
And what was so existentially depressing, if you will, about such a life was not the
presence of wrong.
You know, we weren't being tortured, we weren't starving, but it's the absence of right.
That even the victories felt so hollow and meaningless, like getting a prestigious internship.
That was a one day or three day buzz that went away as fast as it came.
And I think these victories were so meaningless because they weren't out of our own genuine
desires, but a product of mimesis, what we felt like we had to do out of some kind of
social pressure.
And what was the wake up call for me was in my sophomore year, seeing where this path
of mimesis was leading me down towards.
I was talking with Dalt, some of them in alumni living and working in Manhattan, and these
were the guys who had made it, right?
They had the right postal code, they had the right job, they had a hot partner, but they
were fundamentally plagued with the same type of existential problems.
They were making money they didn't need to buy shit that they didn't want, to impress
people they didn't particularly like.
And in them, I saw the same despair and hollowness, but in some sense, just even worse because
it's developed a bit further out.
And how can you not be hollow when you're living life in such a way where you're motivated
not by a core, strong, impetus of genuine desire, but this external shell of social
expectation?
Yeah, I see this all over the place.
I see the influence of a medic theory in so many aspects of society.
You see it with people take out a loan to buy some fancy car and they don't have the
money to do it.
You see it in the way that management consultants, you'll be talking to them and they'll talk
about the director level title at the company as if that's the salvation that's going to
make them happy forever.
They get it now.
They're no happier once they get that, but the worst kind of mimetic competition that
I saw was in high school.
And there was this weird thing where the parents would be really competitive and conniving
over where their children would go to schools like a status competition among them.
And they wanted their kids to go to Ivy's, these prestigious schools and the trophy at
the end was those bumper stickers on the back of the Mercedes with the university logo.
And I saw how through mimesis that people had lost their own way and they weren't even
aware of the nature of their own desire.
And I think it's this lack of awareness that if you don't have a proper understanding of
these forces makes it so easily for us, especially in today's modern society, to get caught up
in these forces.
And I think throughout college, I started getting a more and more intimate awareness
of the logic behind all of these phenomena that you experienced, not because I was above
the fold.
If anything, I was so aware of it because I was the most guilty, I was the most mimetic
of them all.
And what was so frightening to me was the realization as a sophomore that I could live
my entire life like this, fundamentally not for myself.
I knew I had to change before it was too late.
And I knew that there was a point where it was going to be too late, where the ship was
going to get too much speed, where if you'll human another metaphor, the daggers too deep
in the old king's heart.
Fortunately, in the pits of mind despair, I was introduced to the work of René Girard.
And so Girard saved me.
And I really do mean that in a very literal sense of the term, in the same way that Virgil
saved Dante by exposing to him the manifestations and the mechanisms behind human evil, as well
as guiding his purging of more milder forms of perversion.
Now, Girard saved me by presenting to me a theory of human nature that explained the
true origin of desire and its terrifying consequences, if not directed properly.
He gave me a more accurate map with which I myself could slowly unravel and untangle
myself from the memetic web.
And with this lecture series, my hope is to be able to gift this map to you and our listeners
as well.
So Jonathan, I got to ask you, is the power of Girard's ideas that they're going to stop
making us be memetic?
Or do you still feel like you're still as prone to chasing prestige and envy as before?
Yeah, you're definitely right.
It's definitely the latter.
Girard's ideas do not work on us by magically making us stop being memetic and social creatures.
In the same environment, I would say I'm just as susceptible to memetic forces as I was
before.
But his theory does have practical personal benefits.
Let me explain with an analogy.
I think there was a military theorist by the name of John Boyd.
And he said something, I'm going to have to paraphrase here, I don't know the exact quote,
like superior fighter pilots use their superior judgment to make sure they get into situations
where they never have to use their superior skill.
And the idea under that line is that what's perhaps more important than the ability to
deal with that situation is the foresight and judgment to fundamentally not get into
those situations.
And I think the same is true for what Girard has done for me.
When I am, say, already deeply envious or deeply prideful, the battle is already lost.
There's nothing that understanding Girard and memetic theory rationally can do for me.
The medic theory, however, gives me a framework to avoid situations which inspire debilitating
envy, which ignites sort of unproductive pride.
It tells us what type of person to avoid and who to have close.
It teaches us how to construct a social environment that is relatively sober and how to identify
ones that are prone to memetic contagion.
Memetic theory does not give us the power to resist damaging instances of memesis in
the moment, but it does give us the foresight to avoid them altogether.
So do you think Girard is worthy of engagement because of how therapeutic he is, how he can
rescue us from suffering?
Yeah, I would say the answer is probably yes and no, but perhaps let me answer that with
an anecdote.
One of Girard's collaborators was asked that similar question that why he was a Girardian.
And he answered, because it's cheaper than psychoanalysis.
Now this is supposed to be humorous, and the literal and perhaps uninteresting interpretation
is that you don't have to pay anyone to study Girard's ideas, but it can still have a therapeutic
effect of solving your problems.
But there's a much more interesting reading, I think, that cheaper here means economic,
being able to explain a much more phenomenon with much less assumptions and not just personal
therapeutic phenomena, but social historical as well.
Take the example of Freud and psychoanalysis, if you're familiar with that.
He had this idea of the Oedipus complex, right, where the son is rivaled with the father
and he the son desires the mother.
That's a very heavy, heavy assumption that we all have this inbuilt desire to have sex
with mom.
And it can only explain one set of phenomena.
Girard's memetic theory takes the same example, but sees humans as naturally imitative and
desire as contagious between people, including between father and son.
And as a result, the medical theory can explain not only the Oedipus complex, but a much broader
set of psychological, social, historical phenomenon where people desire similar things and then
enter into rivalry.
Hence, memetic theory is cheaper than psychoanalysis, doing much more with much less.
So I think Girard, to answer your question directly now, is probably only so therapeutic
because he hits on fundamental truths of the human condition.
Truths which are overlooked, or perhaps even more provocatively, systematically hidden
by modernity.
And these truths help us not only understanding ourselves, but understanding the world and
even the trajectory of history.
I think Girard's ideas help us navigate the world and help us see opportunity where others
may see barren land and see danger where most people have already let their guard down.
Let me give you a direct example here that I prepared for later on, but I think it's
a very fitting example here.
And it'll go to show the unique predictive power of Girard's theory in the social world,
beyond just personal therapy, because I don't want us to trivialize memetic theory.
The example I'm going to give is quite timely.
It has to do with the relationship between China-America, the Sino-American relationship.
Against the crowd, Girard in 2007 anticipated the deterioration of the Sino-American relationship.
And you have to recall and remember how contrarian and unlikely such a prediction was in 2007.
I mean, remember that in the 2000s and certainly in the 90s, a dominant view was that China's
relationship with the West was only going to get better and better through economic
liberalization.
And I think such a view, which obviously seems hopelessly naive these days, was grounded
on two flawed premises that were accepted.
The first one was that China's rise would sort of lift the boats of the world economy
and make most people in the West richer through cheaper goods and therefore much happier.
Many people in the West would be happy with China's rise.
And the second point, the second assumption that this optimistic view was grounded on
was that the increasing similarity between China and the West would lead to political
harmony.
The idea went something like, you know, as Chinese people started watching Western movies,
as they started idolizing American sports, as they wanted to send their kids to Ivy
Leagues, that their values would be much closer aligned to that of the Americans and therefore
much less conflictual.
Now, Gerard's memetic understanding of human nature enabled him to see through the flaws
of both assumptions.
On the first point, we are not rational, utility maximizing creatures, but social creatures
prone to relativistic comparison.
For Gerard, America would be more unsettled, even if it were richer, but its gap between
China and closed down.
The absolute increase in goods mattered little to humans compared to a change in relativistic
social standing.
And on the second point, Gerard believes that its similarity, rather than difference,
that causes individuals and nations to enter into conflict.
Desiring a similar set of objects would open up the two nations to a larger surface area
of competition and therefore potential conflict and even violence.
And so, at the peak of Sino-American optimism in 2007, and this was right before 2008, where
the congeniality between the East and the West had never been greater, Gerard stood
against the crowd and warned us of such a conflict, a conflict that will come from the
very mechanism that most thought would establish peace, trade.
Let me read you a quote directly from Gerard.
A conflict between the United States and China will follow.
Everything is in place.
But it will not necessarily occur on the military level at first.
Trade can transform very quickly into war.
From this point of view, we can reasonably fear a major clash between China and the United
States in coming decades.
This looming conflict between the United States and China has nothing to do with a clash of
civilizations.
In fact, the dispute is between two forms of capitalism that are becoming more and more
similar.
End quote.
Of course, 15 years later, Gerard proves depressingly correct.
We are in the midst of this very trade war, and relationships have deteriorated beyond
what most could have possibly imagined in the 2000s.
So I hope this is a satisfying, albeit somewhat startling, answer to your question of why
Gerard is worth engaging.
Not only does he help us understand and I think manage the part of ourselves most important
but previously opaque to us, I think his theory also enables us to understand the world and
human society in a different and often much more predictive light.
But before we jump too far ahead, if it's okay with you, I'd like to give an overview
on the structure of these lecture series as a whole.
Please do.
Why don't you take the lead and I'll jump in with questions and comments.
Great.
I have two goals over the next seven lectures, one theoretical and one practical.
Theoretically, I aim to give you an encompassing overview of Gerard's entire theory, from his
psychology to his theology, from his theory on human evolution to predictions for apocalypse,
from readings on Greek literature to his critique of modern institutions.
I will present to you the entirety of Gerard's system.
Practically, I wish to show you how this theoretical system applies to your life in
modern society through bountiful historical and contemporary examples.
We're going to analyze through a Gerardian lens, of course, celebrity advertisement,
romantic relationships, ritual sacrifice, the relationship between COVID and social
unrest, the invention of coinage, social media, the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand,
the genesis of law, modern victimhood culture, the philosophical basis of innovation and
much, much more.
My goal is not to leave you stranded with sterile intellectual concepts, but to give
you a map with which you can identify the Gerardian forces animating our world and your
life in order to navigate its relatively choppy waters.
Now, I've prepared these lectures for a public audience at an intermediate undergraduate difficulty.
That is to say, it's not going to be a walk in the park, but no prerequisites are necessary
to understand these lectures.
Now, we are going to engage quite frequently with the Western philosophical canon, the
Hagels and Plato's and Rousseau's of the world.
We're also going to be engaged, perhaps even more frequently, with the world's literary
mythical canon, the Epic of Gilgamesh, the Hindu hymn to Purusha, the Iliad, the Odyssey,
Sophocles, Shakespeare, but rest assured, all of these, along with core Gerardian concepts,
will be properly contextualized and introduced.
There's no prerequisites for these series of lectures other than interest.
Now, specifically, the ordering of these lectures are such.
This lecture, lecture one, will give an overview of Gerard's life and his work.
It is a condensed summary of this entire lecture series for people who are short on time but
still want to get a brief taste of Gerard, if you will.
Now, moving on, lecture two and three, we're going to discuss Gerard's psychology.
Gerard focuses on, as you probably can already tell, the memetic parts of human nature, our
capacity and tendency towards imitation.
Now, with this psychological grounding, in lectures four to seven, we will dive into
Gerard's philosophy of history, which starts from the very beginning, man's evolution
from ape, and goes to the very end, our imminent apocalypse.
Gerard thinks the world is literally going to end very, very soon.
Now, given that we're going to be talking about such weighty concepts such as apocalypse,
the literal end of the world, I wanted to throw out a quick disclaimer here so that I don't
receive either undeserved credit or misdirected anger.
All of the ideas I'm about to share with you are not mine, but the most charitable reconstruction
to Gerard.
This is not me, but my interpretation of Gerard.
Now, I have many theological, methodological, psychological disagreements, strong points
of contention with Gerard, and I could do a whole lecture series just on my reasons for
those disagreements, but this is not interpreting B, it's interpreting Gerard.
I will present to you the most charitable interpretation of Gerard I can muster, even
if I privately disagree with him, some of them at least, because I've been taught in
a philosophical, pedagogical tradition that sees the lecture, me, not as a door-to-door
salesman of a single product, but as a wandering merchant with a whole caravan of goods.
I shouldn't be in the business of knocking down your door and shoving my single ideas
down your throat, regardless of what your needs are.
Instead, I should open up my little merchant caravan of ideas and try to argue the best
I can for each idea in my inventory for why they are attractive so that you, the listener,
can have the agency to make that decision.
But before I show you my Gerardian wear, so to speak, let me give you a brief introduction
about the man behind the theory.
On December 25, 1923, René Noël Theophile Gerard was born as the second of five children
to a Catholic, learned mother and an anticlerical archivist father in Avignon, France.
Gerard's father had served, he'd lost a brother, he'd been wounded himself in World
War I, and passed his views on the meaninglessness of conflict onto Gerard.
And I think this view was further corroborated as Gerard spent his formative adolescent years
in France under Nazi occupation.
Now, of course, as anyone in that place and that time period, the cruelty of the Nazis
left an imprint on Gerard.
But so did the cruelty of the French resistance.
You see, once they had been liberated by the Allies, the French resistance, now in control
of France, started scapegoating and persecuting anyone who had tangential affiliations to the
Nazis during the time of occupation.
Often these victims were innocent.
Many innocents, mostly women too vulnerable to defend themselves, were scapegoated by
the French mob, blamed for Nazi collaboration.
They were humiliated, dragged around on the street, and often killed without trial on
groundless accusations.
Let me read you of the vivid scenes depicted by Gerard's biographer.
Some of them were young mothers with no means of support, motivated by hunger and need rather
than by treason or even desire.
Some were unmarried schoolteachers who were forced to meet with German soldiers in their
homes.
Others were restless teenage girls who just flirted with the foreign soldiers.
One was a charwoman who cleaned the German military headquarters.
There were no trials, only stylized rituals of retribution, a shameful carnival that
often included stripping these women to their underwear and loading them onto trucks to drive
around the town.
They were exhibited to the sound of drum rolls shouting and cat calls, as if the trucks
were tumbles in 1789 the French Revolution had come alive again.
These scenes of innocence being scapegoated will leave a lasting imprint on Gerard and
be a common thread throughout his work, both the meanlessness, deceitfulness, and arbitrariness
of conflict, and the perennial need of troubled human societies to find innocent victims to
blame and murder for catharsis.
Now, Gerard's intellectual trajectory, on the other hand, could be described as anti-institutional
and unorthodox through and through.
He was always an outsider.
He was an outsider from the very beginning, unable to bear regular school.
He had to go to a private tutoring program, reading at his heart's content and not to
the dictates of any syllabus.
He was trained in Indiana University in history, but his generative curiosity soon overflowed
the boundaries of his diploma.
He made little contributions to history and was self-taught and an outsider in all the
major fields that he did actually contribute to.
First, he made his mark in literary theory by articulating the idea of memesis through
close readings of literature.
Next, he jumped disciplines into anthropology, where he shed light on the need for scapegoating,
and then he jumped disciplines once more to theology, mounting a serious defense for
Christianity.
Now, despite being accepted into the prestigious French Academy and holding professorships
at John Hopkins, Buffalo, and Stanford, Gerard still remains, to some extent, an outsider
in all of these disciplines.
The literary theorists have been with him for not respecting the methods and conventions
and fashions of the day.
The anthropologists distrust his liberal use of evidence and lack of field work, and even
parts of the Christian community have shunned him for his quite unorthodox reading of the
crucifixion.
So, the title of this lecture series is called Interpreting Gerard, Exigit of Apocalypse.
Why do you call him an exigit?
Why not philosopher or maybe something more provocative like prophet?
Yeah, yeah, well, that's a good question.
We're not in the business of drama here, so I think I skipped prophet, but mostly I
call him an exigit because that's what he called himself, and I wanted to have respect
for his self-conception.
You see, he explicitly, in interviews, rejected both terms, philosopher and prophet, and I
think it would just simply be too narrow to call him a literary theorist, an anthropologist,
or a theologian.
Now, an exigit is someone who performs exegesis, the interpretation of scripture.
And I think that is the most accurate way to understand Gerard's system and the vast
terrain that he is forced to traverse.
You know, he's less a careful analytical philosopher, but a visionary expanding and
articulating a moral insight informed by scripture through all of these domains.
I get a feeling that reading Gerard, for him, these vast domains weren't these divergent
disciplines, these separate buckets that he was dipping his toes into, but simply different
manifestations of the same core insight.
And I think Gerard's aim wasn't to revolutionize literary criticism, anthropology, or theology,
but to articulate what he conceived to be the core insight of Christianity.
Now that we have some context on Gerard the man, let's move on to the meat and bones,
the meat and potatoes of this lecture, which is a brief summary of Gerard's system.
I will attempt to give a reduced and simplistic summary of this entire lecture series, which
covers the entirety of memetic theory, sharing with you Gerard's key concepts and conclusions,
but probably not the full reasons and repercussions behind these conclusions.
Here I will trade precision for breadth.
Now for people who don't have the time for the full 10 plus hour lecture series, first
shame on you, but secondly, this could be a summary that should be sufficient for you
to get a taste of Gerard.
Now for those who are embarking on the full journey with us, I think this summary can be
a map for the expansive, tumultuous, and dizzying terrain ahead for you to gain your
sea legs and get an orientation of the landscape.
The best way for me to give you a taste of Gerard's system in one telling is to give
a comprehensive history of humanity, beginning from man's evolution from ape, all the way
to apocalypse.
I'll start by summarizing Gerard's psychology, how he thought humans were psychologically
different from animals, then I will articulate the problems this unique psychology created
for early human societies and their respective solutions.
And after that, I will detail how Christianity represents a meaningful rupture for Gerard
from these early societies.
And lastly, I will articulate how Christianity brought us all the way here to majority and
how it will imminently deliver us to violent apocalypse.
So let us begin with psychology.
Gerard's apocalyptic conclusions begin with a rather innocuous observation, mimesis.
What defined for Gerard are evolutionary breaking away from our great ape cousins is not reason,
it's not truth, it's mimesis, our gradually increasing capacity and tendency for imitation.
The best metaphor I can think of to explain mimesis is that of co-vibrating violin strings.
When you put two violin strings together in close proximity, as you flick one, a similar
frequency of vibrational translate to the other.
And I think in a like manner, Gerard identifies a species of human behavior, and here I use
behavior for the lack of a better word in the largest sense possible, actions, experiences,
judgments, intentions, that proceed also from copying an external instance of that behavior.
Now humans are social animals through and through, prone to this type of co-vibration.
Just as strings on a violin aren't independent, neither are we.
Mimesis is the fundamental capacity and tendency to gain access to the subjectivity of others,
as well as to reproduce objective cultural forms.
In other words, mimesis is what constitutes us as social beings, and makes us different
from other animals.
This tendency to ingest the behaviors and values what have you of those around us is
why perhaps prestige and recognition matter so much to us humans.
When a majority of a social group that you're immersed in believe something is good or beautiful
or believe something should be done in this way or that, we tend to slowly take on and
ingest those positions as well through mimesis.
And I think our everyday notions of prestige already have an understanding of mimesis.
When we say something is prestigious, we are perhaps also saying that on its own it
does not deserve the value we attribute to it, right?
When we call prestigious, Rolex, Harvard, Bentley, maybe not Cornell, but the other
actual prestigious things, partially what we're saying is that the value we attribute
to it is not fully accounted for by the objects themselves, but that there's some surplus
value where the object doesn't deserve.
Gerard would say that that surplus value does not come from the object, but our peers value
it and us ingesting their opinions through mimesis.
Now for Gerard, mimesis in everything, but everything to some degree is memetic.
The rush of adrenaline that infects you in a roaring and lively sporting stadium, the
tribalism of politics, the madness of cults and how they sustain each other's delusions,
the passing on of accents, even as animal, as an activity of replenishing ourselves
drinking water, we may still call to mind, however subtly, how our favorite athletes
drinks a Gatorade, right?
That's the purpose of those commercials to get that in your head.
This is how broad and all pervasive mimesis operates.
Humanity for Gerard would be completely unrecognizable without it.
The species of a memetic behavior that most concerns Gerard in both senses of the word
is desire.
It's fine and dandy when what mimesis transmits is accents or cultural codes, but when mimesis
converges the desires of people, well, that invites them into competition, conflict, and
often violence.
Gerard separates the entirety of human desires into two species.
The desire to be, which he terms metaphysical desire, and the desire to experience, which
he terms physical desire.
Metaphysical desire is directed at what objects say about me.
Physical desire is directed at an experience confirmed by the qualities of the object
itself.
Let me give you a few examples to clarify.
I can pursue, for example, sex for the experience out of physical desire, and what I would be
after there would be pleasure or intimacy, feelings in the moment, but I can also pursue
sex for being, what having sex with a certain type of person really says about me, right?
And this is a real psychology that people have.
This is the psychology of the Don Juan or the Coquette.
For these people, sex is no longer about sex, but something more core to their identity.
They are not out there to experience something, but to prove something.
Or take another more trivial and mundane example.
I can buy a car for the experience.
The trouble it would save me from walking everywhere, but I can also buy a car because
I want to be a certain type of person because I just want to have the coolest car on the
block and have people admire me.
You, for example, David, I must applaud you because clearly from your car, I can tell
that you're a very saintly man.
Clearly you do not care what the car says about you.
You are freed from metaphysical desire in this domain.
Congratulations.
I don't want to hear it.
My Toyota is beautiful, John.
Just please don't stop driving.
A reductive, but hopefully illuminating way to put this is that physical desire aims
at utility whereas metaphysical desire aims at identity.
Now, certainly this boundary between experience and being, between utility and identity is
not so clear.
You know, who we concede ourselves to be colors our experiences as much as our experiences
if ever so subtly shapes our self-conception, but just think about how drastically different
these experiences are.
Right?
Think about pursuing a profession because the work is engaging versus doing it because
it's the right job to have or dating a person because you like spending time with them versus
dating some person because you like to be seen with them or traveling to a place because
you're interested in the culture or because you just want to be seen in the coolest locale.
The distinction that Gerard has drawn here, if a bit muddied, is nonetheless meaningful,
especially at the extremes.
This desire to be at the heart of metaphysical desire is aimed at a fullness of being.
We want to exist, Gerard believes, in great measure.
Metaphysical desire takes form as a pursuit of objects in the broadest sense of the term.
Wanted to climb Mount Everest, wanted to build a unicorn company, wanted to study at an Ivy
League, or more mundane, buying a particular car, dating Sally instead of Susan, enjoying
a fancy restaurant.
But in all of these experiences, Gerard would say it's never objects we are really after.
I don't think this is a foreign concept to our this-worldly, achievement-focused consumer
society.
We want to acquire objects to bolster and back up our identity.
And the way we go about choosing which objects to go after, Gerard believes, is imitating
individuals whom we already consider to possess this fullness of being.
Celebrities, parental figures, entrepreneurs, and outstanding co-worker, we take on their
desires as our own.
The objects they value, as the objects we also strive for.
The faulty logic here, being that it must be the acquisition of these objects that grant
these models the fullness of their being.
Yeah, this reminds me of celebrity advertisements.
It does indeed, right?
You see a celebrity and you want what they want.
That's the whole logic behind these advertisements.
And I think the one line in celebrity advertisement that gives it all away is the tagline for
Jordan, Michael Jordan, sneakers, be like Mike.
What it's promising you isn't just a product or utility, but the being and prestige of
Michael Jordan, so that you can have a piece of that as well.
It's not jump like Mike.
It's not score like Mike.
The advertisement of basketball shoes doesn't talk about anything of the most important
physical qualities of the basketball shoes, and the lightness, the grip, the bounce.
It's promising you something you want all the more, being, be like Mike.
Draught's central thesis is that what often appears to be a subject pulled towards an
object due to the intrinsic value of that object is really the subject wanting to acquire
that object to be like some model.
What we are really after isn't the object, but the being of the model.
Whereas we think of desire as unidirectional, flowing from subject to object.
Draught thinks it's actually triangular, proceeding from subject through a model to
the object.
Because what is at stake in metaphysical desire is our identity, it is the strongest drive
in the human motivational repertoire.
I think it's quite obvious when we are motivated by such a drive because we can become obsessed
and compulsive.
We think that achievement, obtaining the objects that metaphysical desire wants, will
fully transform us.
I think in different stages of our lives, metaphysical desire usually directs us towards
a limited set of objects.
For me, first it was a specific toy that I really wanted, and then a weapon in World
of Warcraft, and then dating a person, and then an Ivy League, etc., etc.
I think we're always oriented at different stages in our lives towards something.
These are the objects pointed to by metaphysical desire.
These are objects in each period of our life that take on a disproportionate weight such
that you define progress as inching towards the object.
And whenever it slips away, however subtly, however minutely, your heart just thuds and
you feel a deep existential despair.
Romance provides a good example here.
Then you won't even be after the woman that you're interested in, and you won't be that
interested.
And what will happen is all of a sudden there's another suitor who comes along, and they are
interested in this woman.
And all of a sudden you get excited about this person too, and it is in that competition
that we are inflamed by the memetic spirit.
But then there's a second point here about this existential dread that we can feel.
We never feel those tremendous highs and lows in the early stages of talking to a woman
or something, and you'll be so excited because the texting is going well, and you'll be skipping
down the halls, and then all of a sudden she won't respond.
And you're freaking out, you're texting your friends what's going on here, you can't sleep
that night, and you wake up in the next morning, your alarm clock goes off, and you see a text,
and she's responded.
Now you jump out of bed and you wake up faster than a double shot of espresso.
That's precisely the right example to think of.
In fact, Drard would commonly go to romance as his canonical examples of metaphysical
desire and these two qualities you mentioned.
First, the object, not contributing anything or too much to desire, as well as these bipolar
swings.
All make romance, or at least the iterations you've described as textbook examples of
metaphysical desire.
And look, Drard's point is even in as intimate a domain as romance, our desires are, if you'd
excuse upon, helplessly penetrated by those of others.
Even our desires for our partners tend not to be informed fully by our partners, but
by people around them.
Drard's point is if even such a personal desire can be so external in origin, then
the same must also be true for other domains as well.
Career choice, political orientation, aesthetic taste, philosophical opinions.
This is a full-scale attack on the modern conception of individuals who can form their
own decisions with the reason to have an authentic core of desires to tap into.
Now, if this attack was not already threatening enough, Drard's next point will make it all
the more so and further problematize authenticity.
Just as memesis and metaphysical desire can make people conform, they can also make people
diverge.
But in another way, even a breaking away from the group in a so-called carving one's own
path can be radically socially determined.
When I think about it like this, the logic of metaphysical desire is to pursue the objects
associated with those who do have a fullness of being, right?
And so a natural continuation of this logic is to avoid or distance oneself from objects
associated with those we conceive to be as having a deficiency in being.
We both want to be like the cool kids, but also distant and be different from the social
outcasts.
Here's an example.
The tech elite with their plain t-shirts are not independent from Drard's perspective,
from the status games of finance-finally-addressed elite.
Even though they appear to be rejecting that game, in reality, it's merely the continuation
of the same game in a more accelerated form.
And when you think about it like this, showing up with a $5 t-shirt to a dinner where everyone
was wearing $500 suits is, in some sense, much more of a power play than showing up
with a $5,000 suit to the same dinner.
Because it's saying that I am so much better than you, that we aren't even playing the
same game, that I take your highest values, what you hold most here, as vulgar as nothing.
This is the logic of the negative phase of the mimesis, to distance oneself in order
to show one's superiority.
This breaking away from a group is no more authentic or independent than conformity,
because your choices are still made for what they say about you and not the object itself.
Now, in my own life decisions, if I may share a bit of a personal story, I think I've been
led astray by both the positive and the negative forces of mimesis.
I grew up idolizing entrepreneurs, the Steve Jobs of the world, and as soon as I got into
college, I felt like I had to drop out and start a company, ASAP.
And so I did.
My freshman spring, I dropped out, I raised a small round, and the company crashed and
burned out of vanity.
And it's not that I didn't enjoy building companies, that's not why I was led astray
by mimesis, but the degree to which I desired it, and the urgency of which I felt like I
had to achieve it, not unlike your romance example, was disproportionate to the value
of the object itself.
In other words, I desired being an entrepreneur and not necessarily the processes of building
a company.
Now, when I did go back to school as a sophomore a semester later, out of resentment for my
peers who had dropped out and did build successful companies, I think I went the other direction,
rejecting the worldly altogether, switching from CS to philosophy, going to a Buddhist
monastery.
For three years, I didn't do that much at all in industry, out of resentment.
Now, rejecting industry and building companies was my moral weapon to secure victory over
my more successful peers, to turn my failure into a triumph, but this was equally, if not
more inauthentic and perverse.
Now, the same story goes, it's not that I didn't enjoy philosophy and Buddhism, but
the degree to which I pursued it, and certainly the degree to which I renounced the world
was not genuine.
It wasn't reflective of how much I liked philosophical and meditative practice, and
certainly not how much I disliked the worldly, active life of industry.
And I think I really did miss out on valuable career opportunities because I was too resentful
to engage.
This carving of my own path was just as socially determined.
It was a form of coping so that I didn't have to feel lesser than my more successful
peers.
As a society, I think we all recognize this first move of conforming to this dropout culture
as socially determined, as prestige seeking, as not authentic, but I think the second move
of rejecting the group is just as socially determined, in that it was still primarily
the relationships with people that determined my choices, not for the choices themselves.
Admiration led me to converge in the first case, and resentment led me to diverge in
the second.
The direction is different, but the essence is the same.
But of course, in our society, to break away from the group, to carve one's own path,
so to speak, is thought to be a sure sign of independence, but that is not so.
Drard here is trying to tear down what he conceives of as the romantic lie.
The lie goes something like this.
At the bottom, we are all individuals, with a core of what we can call the authentic self.
And then there are these layers of social constraints, one on top of the other, with
the origins external.
The way to access authenticity, so this romantic lie goes, is by following one's heart, with
a bold, breaking free of the group, peeling away of these social layers.
Drard says not so fast.
This breaking free from the group can be just as socially determined as rigid adherence.
You're confusing difference for autonomy, you're confusing distance for independence,
and you're confusing originality for freedom.
The reality is, we can just as easily be socially determined by rejecting a group out of resentment,
as we can by conforming to the group out of admiration or peer pressure.
Memesis operates positively and negatively.
Memesis and metaphysical desire then, entrap us in every direction, both in conforming as
well as in breaking free.
Man is shown to be a social creature through and through.
If you take one thing from Drard's psychology, it is this.
The most powerful and explanatory element within the human psyche is our sociality.
Our values, our political orientation, aesthetic taste, and even philosophical positions are
heavily, often primarily, determined by others in deep and often unconscious ways, and not
chosen for their own sake.
We may think our desires are our own.
We may think we desire our spouse just because of who they are, or at the very least because
of their physical attractiveness, but Drard shows that even this turns out not to be the
full extent of the story.
We may think reason can hold the reins and guide our decisions, but this social dimension
of ourselves is often much, much stronger.
Reason pretends to be its steward, but in reality is its lawyer and spokesperson, engaged
in, more often than not, post-hog rationalization.
Oh yeah, of course, you know, I want to be an entrepreneur because I want to change the
world for the better.
Or on the other hand, of course, I would never be an entrepreneur because industry is vulgar
and capitalism is immoral.
The reasons we give for our decisions often come after we've already sworn allegiance
to those decisions due to ulterior social motives.
Now for Drard, our memetic natures, the extent to which we are socially determined, is what
differentiates us from animals and the main direction of human evolution from ape.
This direction of evolution is not, as commonly thought, the increase of our ability to reason
and grasp truth.
After all, Drard would say, other animals engage in truth-seeking behaviors as well.
There's echolocation, there's tapping into magnetic fields, there's night vision, these
are all truth-seeking activities.
But we are the only animals who create gods, who tell stories, who spin up fictions, who
would go to war for an abstract conception of honor which can neither taste nor smell
nor touch, who would trade food and shelter for pieces of paper, who would die for myths
and gods that clearly never even existed.
Animals are the sober ones.
We are the nut jobs.
What makes us unique for Drard is not our ability to determine truth, but our capacity
to believe in lies insofar as others around us do as well.
For the modern mind, this is a deeply alien conception of human nature, and it opens a
Pandora's box of questions.
What does it mean to protect individual freedom if we, like co-vibrating vile in-strings, are
never truly free to begin with?
How can we follow our own authentic desires if every part of our psyche is so helplessly
external in its origin?
How is the democratic process not as arbitrary as the whims of a single dictator if we are
so easily influenced and swayed by the mob?
These will have to remain questions for now, wrestled with over the course of the next
seven lectures, because memesis presents us a much more pressing and threatening problem
in this evolutionary story that we must now turn to.
Everything we've talked about up until this point, what we've discussed so far, are the
core psychological faculties that define humanity.
And now, let us jump back into Gerard's history to see the unique challenges which this psychology
brings about.
We are officially moving from psychology to history.
As early humans evolved to be more and more memetic, the simple dominance hierarchies
that were able to contain animal groups started breaking down.
The idea is to go something like this.
Dominance hierarchies, where there's a clear chain of alpha to beta to gamma all the way
to omega, works fine if there's little memesis.
Even so far as the beta doesn't desire what the alpha has, and the gamma doesn't desire
what the beta has, then all is well.
But the memetic tendency of early humans started to become so strong that there started
to be frequent cross-pollinization of desires across the hierarchy.
Metaphysical desire, at least the strength of it, is unique to humans, and this lets
subjects to enter into rivalry with their models.
Converging and competing metaphysical desires would rip social groups apart in wars of all
against all, destroying all those societies that were involved.
Gerard reasons that the only hominoid groups that survived and formed lasting cultures
were ones that stumbled upon a unique cultural technology to stop this escalating conflict,
and that he called the scapegoat mechanism.
In the midst of such a war of all against all, I think a civil war, a French revolution,
when society is an utter chaos, society's Gerard observes often converge upon a single
victim or a small set of victims, attributing to them all the blame and frustrations of
the chaos that they're in.
Now is this like a rational process, similar to the way that a jury sentences a victim?
Or what should I have in mind here?
Yeah, it's not a rational process, it's not a committee that, say, picks the victim,
but a somewhat random process, where certain accusations against certain people just start
gaining steam until the whole group falls under its spell.
Think about the randomness of the French Revolution rather than a calculated drone strike.
I think that's what you should have in mind here.
This victim, if not fully innocent, certainly does not deserve the extent of the blame
leveled on him.
This group is always deceitful, and their certainty is only bolstered by unanimity,
the fact that everyone believes in the victim's guilt.
This victim will be expelled, often murdered, very brutally, as the group gains a cathartic
release and peace is restored.
There are, unfortunately, too many examples of innocent scapegoats throughout human history.
Think about Socrates' trial and death at the hands of the Athenian jury.
Think about the Black Death, which was blamed on witches and witchcraft.
Think about the Nazis scapegoating the Jews for German decline.
Think about McCarthy-era witch hunts, persecuting innocents under the crimes of communism.
It's not enough, Gerard reasons, for us to find guilty parties, but we want to find one
radical source of evil to blame everything upon.
With the scapegoat mechanism, Gerard is highlighting the perennial need of human societies in times
of chaos to identify a single source to blame and murder.
To truly establish a peaceful society in a time of turmoil, this murder must be maximally
cathartic and as a result, has to be maximally violent and deceitful, often blaming a singular
victim for the entirety of the society's problems.
Gerard thinks that this murder is wrong, that it's based on a lie, that it's regrettable,
that it should not be done, but it worked, and it was the only thing that worked, which
kept early human societies alive.
To make sense of Gerard's claim here, because this is quite a radical claim on the violent
foundations of society, we must go back and think about Gerard's psychology.
For every social philosophy, I would wager, that we must ask who the subject is.
For Marx, the subject is class.
For fascism, it is the nation state.
For Augustine, it is a Christian soul.
For liberalism, it is a rational agent.
Gerard's subject of his social philosophy is the spirited animal.
Not one who thinks in terms of utility in numbers, but vengeance and pride, honor and
being, who experiences envy and resentment.
Now, for such a social creature, the primary mechanisms that govern him isn't consensus.
It's not the mandate of heaven.
It's not the common good.
It's certainly not rational political discourse.
For Gerard, we aren't rational agents interested in a systematic analysis and nuanced solution,
but social spirited creatures needing a cathartic release against their radical evil.
In moments of extreme turbulence, we are interested in truth, but a grand lie and founding murder
that can grant us catharsis.
The lie, however, goes even further.
While this no longer happens in modernity for reasons that we'll have to explore a
bit later on, in early pagan societies, the peace that descended onto the crowd would
be so miraculous, so instantaneous and unbelievable that people would struggle to make sense of
what had just happened.
How did we go from being at each other's throats to being fully reconciled?
And so, just as deceitfully as the crowd would blame the victim for causing chaos, they now
deceitfully praise the now dead victim for ending the chaos, turning the victim paradoxically
into a god.
Gerard's point is that the scapegoat mechanism is such a unanimous process.
People feel so justified in their expulsion that they don't even feel their own agency.
And so, they don't see themselves as bringing peace.
All they have in view is the victim and reasons that it must be the victim that has brought
us that peace.
The victim must be a god.
These pagan gods are all powerful, with the power to begin and end destruction.
These gods are seen as both good and evil.
The example Gerard will point to is the story of Oedipus, as told by Sophocles.
Now, we're going to spend an entire lecture with Oedipus, but let me give you a very,
very brief outline first.
And Oedipus is a new king of thebes that is being ravaged by a plague.
Oedipus is guilty of having committed both patricide, killing of one's father, as well
as incest, of having sex with one's mother.
Because of this, the entire city blames Oedipus for causing the plague and expels him.
The people get their catharsis and the plague goes away.
Oedipus wanders the Greek states, and as time progresses, something very, very strange happens.
Rather than only being an object of scorn that everyone wants to expel to distance from,
people are now competing to invite Oedipus into their lands.
See a prophecy has gained momentum in Greece, that wherever Oedipus's remains will be buried,
shall be granted lasting peace.
And in this Oedipus myth, then, we see both movements of the scapegoat mechanism.
Right?
First, we see the scapegoating.
Oedipus might have been morally bankrupt for patricide and incest, but it was certainly
an exaggerated lie to think that he was the cause of the entire plague, right?
His expulsion was a groundless lie.
Second, we see the movement of divinization.
As Oedipus's expulsion brought about lasting peace through catharsis, he started to gain
a dual character, still evil for causing the plague, but also radically good with the power
to end plagues and bring peace.
Oedipus, at the end of the story, has been divinized, or at least fetishized.
Gerard's claim is that in all pagan religions, we can find traces of a once-victim-turned-god
at the foundation of the culture.
We will investigate, in due course, across this entire lecture series, the Nordic myth
of Baldur's death that resembles a collective expulsion, the Greek myth of the birth of
Zeus and its eerie similarities to murder, and the Hindu hymn to Purusha, where a Genesis
deity is sacrificed with his remains giving birth to Hindu society and its caste.
It's not just religions, however, that are born from the scapegoat mechanism, but pagan
culture and society as well.
Take the example of Julius Caesar, who is the victim-turned-god of the Roman Imperium.
In the story of Caesar, we also find the key movements of the scapegoat mechanism.
First, Roman society is in a state of utter chaos and civil war.
Julius Caesar is famously scapegoated, blamed, and collectively murdered on the Senate floor.
Zeus does not come immediately to Rome indeed, but it does come at the hand of another Caesar,
Caesar Augustus, Julius' nephew.
And so with Augustus' victory, Julius Caesar is literally deified, recognized as a literal
god by the Roman Senate, and becomes a fountainhead of Roman legitimacy and prestige.
From then on, rulers derive their legitimacy from their relationship to Caesar, often explicitly,
by bearing their name, calling themselves Caesars.
That's why there are so many Caesars in the history of leaders.
The victim-turned-god, captured through myth for Gerard, is what lies at the heart of pagan
religion and society.
But of course, we need much more than stories to run a society and keep the peace.
So out of these myths and founding murders, two sets of real institutions were derived,
prohibitions and rituals.
The logic of prohibitions is to prevent chaos from erupting by creating social difference
between people so that metaphysical desire does not spread as easily.
Caste systems, gender roles, guild lineages, however oppressive, these served a crucial
function in pagan society to keep people from competing with each other.
Now, when prohibitions failed, another set of institutions must be used, and these are
rituals.
Rituals aim to enact the founding murder in a constrained way to generate a dissimilar
level of catharsis as the founding murder did.
Ritual incests, debauchers festivals, human sacrifice, however cruel, these institutions
also served a crucial function in pagan society to generate catharsis in order to keep the
peace.
They are a release valve.
To summarize then, the scapegoat mechanism proceeds from a real cataclysmic event where
a troubled society murders an innocent victim, gains cathartic release, and receives a set
of new gods.
This real event is dramatized and captured in myth and then translated back into real
institutions in the form of prohibitions and rituals.
This arc, going from real event to myth to real institutions, is not only how pagan gods
and religions have been made, but also how all human societies and cultures are founded.
Now, of course, these societies and myths are based on lies through and through, both
the scapegoating and the deification are equally deceitful, because the victim neither has
the power to cause or end the chaos.
It's all psychological projection by the crowd, grounded on nothing but unanimity.
And importantly, this deceitfulness is always occluded by myth, because myth is written
from the perspective of the persecutor.
The persecutor writes from a position of the crowd, and from that vantage point, all will
seem real.
The blame, the praise, the deification are all deserved and not mere projections.
But more importantly, none of this could be revealed, because if they were, then gods
would lose their powers if people realized that it was they themselves who through unanimity
projected the power onto them.
It's all deceitful and all arbitrary.
This explanation of pagan religion by Gerard then begs an important question.
Why is Gerard a Christian?
Primafeisha, Christianity perfectly conforms to this logic that he attributed to false
pagan religions, right?
There's civil unrest in Jerusalem, where Christ eventually gets crucified.
There's obviously Christ's unjust scapegoating and murder on the cross.
There's the resurrection and divinization.
There's the mythologization through the Bible.
And then there's the institutionalization through the Catholic Church and many of its
prohibitions and rituals.
The question is this, how can the Christian story be true for Gerard, but the pagan religions
be false?
Gerard's answer is that the Christian story is indeed going to have the same structure
as pagan religion, because Christ is going to be scapegoated.
But there's one crucial difference.
Christianity will be the first story told from the perspective of the victim.
Remember, pagan myth always sides with the murderers.
It always believes in the guilt of its victims.
Sophocles' telling of Oedipus affirms the judgment of Thebes that Oedipus was indeed
responsible for the plague because of his patricide and incest.
Or take the founding murder of the Roman Republic, that of Romulus and Remus, where Romulus kills
Remus to establish Rome.
The canonical telling here, again, paints the killing as, however regrettable, as justified
by Remus' hubris and transgression from ignoring Romulus' city's boundaries.
What the Bible is doing, then, is to tell the same type of story as pagan religion,
but from the other perspective.
Not the perspective of the persecutor, which all pagan religion has been told from, but
the victim.
I mean, think about it, what does the Bible tell us?
He tells us that Christ is not guilty, even his sentencer, Pontius Pilate, declares his
innocence.
A mob that convicts Christ is shown to be arbitrary, the true source of evil.
The sentencing of Christ is depicted as unjust through and through, with the charges against
Christ nothing more than psychological projections by the crowd.
This is what that story tells us.
And of course, the whole story is written down and told to us by the disciples, the
side of the victim and not the persecutor.
Christianity tells the story of scapegoating, but from the opposite, truthful side.
We are like jurors who have been hearing the criminals' lies for so long in pagan religion,
suddenly exposed to the truth of the victim's testimony.
The crucifixion exposes the lies of all religions.
To show that, the mob is deceitful, the victim is innocent, there is no sacred pagan power
that is merely projection.
This is the fundamental, resounding message that comes out of the crucifixion for Gerard.
And it is a message that will expose and begin to tear down the scapegoat mechanism, slowly
but surely.
From this moment on, we will be reading myths in the light of the Gospels, which allows
us to see through their lies.
Christ's innocence and unjust persecution through the proliferation of Christianity becomes
the dominant lens through which we will view the world from then on.
We will always be looking out for unjust persecution.
We will always be siding with the victim.
We will always be aware of the deceitfulness of the mob.
Christ knows that reason alone that an analytical articulation of the scapegoat mechanism like
the one I just provided you is not enough to shake societies out of this perennial cultural
practice.
What we need is an equally compelling story that shakes us into a radically new mode of
seeing the world.
To your point, I'm always surprised by how much of our secular world is grounded on
Christian concepts.
I think of the Protestant work ethic, our concern for victims, human rights, you know?
Yeah.
And this is how powerful the Christian story is.
We are all, in a sense, living in a Christian paradigm, even if we're not explicitly Christians,
because Christianity grounds the fundamental philosophical intuitions of modernity.
Christianity then for Gerard is the religion to end all religions, the myth to end all
myths, the founding murder to end all founding murders by exposing their violent, unjust,
and deceitful origins.
The right metaphor to think about Christianity and pagan religion then is the relationship
between a vaccine and the original disease.
The efficacy of a vaccine to neutralize the original disease lies in its proximity, not
its radical difference, right?
The structurally, the COVID vaccine is very similar to the original COVID disease, just
with a few tweaks, and it's that similarity is what makes it an effective COVID vaccine
and not like a polio vaccine, for example.
The Bible then for Gerard is a myth vaccine.
And so the strategy of many modern Christians to show that the Bible has nothing to do with
the myths of your, that it is radically different, is misguided.
I mean, take the epic of Gilgamesh, one of the first known myths of Mesopotamia.
Modern Christians blush at the similarities between this myth and the Bible, right?
There's a quest for a fruit of immortality from the tree of eternal life.
These are things that both exist in the Bible as well as the myth of Gilgamesh.
There's a deceitful snake eating a fruit and robbing us of our immortality.
And there's also great floods from which the chosen are protected.
Gerard would say, look, don't blush and don't try to distance the Bible from these myths.
The Bible is effective because and not despite of its proximity to myths.
The Bible is a Trojan horse that frees us from pagan religion from within.
Gerard's surprising conclusion is that Christianity is a demystifying force here to end all religions.
The Christian moral paradigm takes away the core foundational bedrock of all early human
societies.
Slowly but surely, Christianity allows us to decode and escape from the scapegoat mechanism,
which cannot function if people know that the victim is innocent.
If the victim is shown to be innocent, then catharsis cannot be achieved.
Without catharsis, there's no peace.
Without peace, there's no deification.
Without deification, pagan worldly institutions lose their prestige and without prestige,
they can no longer properly function.
Christianity takes humanity out of cyclical time, demarcated by these relativistic moral
paradigm shifts and accelerates us towards a linear trajectory.
Now the direction of this linearity is defined by four key forces that Christ lets loose
on human history.
Love, truth, innovation, and surprisingly, Gerard thinks violence.
As with all things Gerard, even his analysis on the worldly effects of Christianity are
deeply ambivalent.
Within this Pandora's box of forces that Christ has just let loose on human history,
we have the good, love, truth, innovation, but also the apocalyptic violence.
They are both growing and have broken free all at the same time.
What's more, even within these individual forces, Gerard's analysis is deeply ambivalent.
Love often manifests as hypocrisy.
Truth becomes dogma, and innovation degenerates into fashion.
And even in violence, Gerard sees a key motivational force that has brought forth the most enviable
living conditions of man when channeled productively through capitalism.
Let's examine each of these forces in turn.
The first force that Christianity unleashes on history is love.
Love is the force that has made all of our institutions like law so much more humane.
It's the force that sees developed nations competing for the prestige of helping troubled
nations.
It's the force that has freed us from cruel practices of human sacrifice and bloody rituals.
It's the force underpinning the modern political ideals of human rights and equality.
Gerard believes that Christ is responsible for all of this because that was his key message.
Renounce violence, turn the other cheek, develop love, love thy neighbor as thyself.
We are so concerned with the poor and the dispossessed these days, we naturally side
with victims in the same way that pagan societies might have sided with the strong because Christ's
story is about the innocence and the moral purity of victims.
Culturally, we are radically different from pagan society with their worship of power
and disregard for the weak, but in some sense, stubborn human nature still refuses to budge.
Gerard thinks we still need to persecute, but the only acceptable way to persecute is
now in the name of victims, in the name of stopping persecution.
In a way then, Gerard isn't convinced society has really changed that much at all that we've
really given up persecution.
Rather, perhaps the better reading is that it's a mere superficial switch of who we
think it's acceptable to persecute.
Because of our victim-concerned culture, anyone who looks like a traditional victim is completely
off limits, ethnic minorities, the lower classes, women, the disabled, and Gerard thinks that's
a great thing.
But the problem is that we've flipped it on its head.
Now we feel warranted, nay, maybe even compelled to persecute all types of privilege, white
privilege, ableist privilege, class privilege, male privilege.
Gerard has this to say, I'll give you a quote, our society's obligatory compassion authorizes
new forms of cruelty.
Gerard accuses modernity of hypocrisy, and he reminds us of the terrible atrocities
committed in the name of protecting victims.
Let me give you another quote.
Hypocrisy is dangerous then because it leads to what it claims to prevent, the persecution
of victims.
Anyone familiar with the tragedies of the Soviet Union grounded on protection of the
victimized proletariat should look at America's caught up in victimhood ideology with trembling
fear.
This is other totalitarianism.
This inquisition in the name of victims is the form that arbitrary unjustified violence
takes place today, the persecution of persecutors.
End quote.
Now, that's love.
And the same ambivalent story could be told for the second force of Christianity, truth.
Gerard asks us to look around in the modern world, more so than any almost other civilization.
We value truth and believe in our ability to obtain it.
Far are we from the garden of Eden's prohibitions against the tree of knowledge.
Far are we from the intellectual humilities of Job.
Far are we from the lessons from Oedipus that knowing more can lead to disaster.
And far are we from witch hunts and superstitions.
Perhaps unsurprisingly at this point, Gerard takes the crowning achievement of truth, science,
to be engendered by Christianity.
This might seem ridiculous, but let me give you a first pass at his argument.
Christianity paved the way for scientific inquiry by expelling myth and clearing the
ground as it were.
This should already be a familiar idea at this point.
Christianity exposes the deceitfulness of worldly foundations and begins to tear down prohibitions,
rituals, and all pagan religions.
And it's only when we cease to look for truth in myth does reason even have the fertile
ground to bear the fruits of truth.
After all, if something is already explained by a wildly prestigious myth that is fatal
to question, then reason will not even want to begin to investigate it.
Gerard's interlocutor sums up his view quite nicely here.
Let me quote again.
It is really Christianity that makes science possible by desacralizing the real, by freeing
people from magical causalities.
Once we stop seeing storms as being triggered by the machinations of the witch across the
street, we start being able to study meteorological phenomenon scientifically.
Now, I need to say a lot more and I will to convince you of this point, but before we
celebrate too early, the same problem with love occurs with truth.
Just as the protection of victims is the banner which persecutors rally under, we love science
so much that we have fetishized it into an unquestionable religion.
But what's the problem with science gaining an immense prestige?
What's wrong with that?
Gerard's answer is this.
By being deified, science can become unquestionable, which can silence opposing voices and justify
terrible political agendas.
Think about Malthus in the 18th century.
The reason that living standards will go back to subsistence is because population growth
grows geometrically while food increases arithmetically.
In the 1970s, there was a whole wave of ridiculous climate science championed by the Times, the
New York Review, Columbia Brown.
They were publishing articles about an inevitable ice age that just seems ludicrous from today's
perspective.
And of course, the terrors of the Nazis were justified on the latest science of the day,
eugenics.
Far from a pseudoscience, eugenics enjoyed enormous prestige in the early 20th century.
It was grounded on Darwin, the latest evolutionary biology of the day, and responsible for the
development of statistics.
There was a University College London chair of eugenics in the same way there might be
a chair for biology today.
And eugenics was supported by Nobel laureates like Hermann Mueller and political leaders
like Theodore Roosevelt.
So I hope the problem of deifying science is clear.
George thinks the reason that it is dangerous to deify science is the same reason it was
dangerous to deify edicts of the Catholic Church.
Just as the bloody European conquest of the Americas was, at least partially, legitimized
through the appeal to Catholicism as spreading the gospel, today we too legitimize our often
questionable political pursuits with just a sprinkle of reason, a little dab of science.
And just as whomever used to disagree with the Catholic Church, we called heretics.
We call those today who disagree with politically-charged, questionable science as anti-science, someone
whose positions we don't even have to contend with.
When deified, science becomes a blocker to truth and genuine inquiry, because it becomes
a conversation stopper.
Therein lies the hypocrisy.
Now, the third force of Christianity is innovation, and it has been engendered by Christ in a
very similar way that science was.
By tearing down myths, we are freed from an exaggerated adulation of the past, and we
are enabled and empowered to imagine its future.
The idea that Gerard has in mind here might be better approximated by thinking about the
negative case.
What is certainly not conducive to innovation is the reactionary idea, not uncommon throughout
most history, most famously perhaps among the Confucians and perhaps many Christians
that our best days are behind us.
And such a view lends to the practical orientation that the best we can do is to blindly imitate
the past and press the brakes on the downward trajectory of history.
Under such a worldview, the very word innovation had negative connotations in the West, up
until the 18th century.
Its connotations were negative because innovation implied a deviation from a sacred, albeit static
and rigid ideal, provided to us by the myths of yore.
Innovation before the 18th century was synonymous with heresy.
Now, such an exaggerated respect of the past is often grounded on a religious belief in
a mythologized past.
Christianity frees us from this blind worship because it is a force, according to Gerard,
of course, that tears down mythologization.
It reveals to us what we once thought of as immutable, as arbitrary, so we are free to
experiment and innovate.
One of the surprising things that I've seen is this weird anti-correlation between mythologizing
the past and innovation.
I started to get this hunch when I would spend time around Silicon Valley types and
you have dinner with them and they boast about their knowledge of the world.
But then you start talking to them about the history of their own industry and it's not
something that they think or talk about a lot.
I compare that to the people I've met in the oil industry or the finance industry, these
older and more established industries, where the people who I meet there, they know the
history of their industries cold.
You know what I mean?
That's a very interesting observation that there is a negative correlation between how
innovative an industry or a person is against how much they know about history or at least
seem to respect it.
I think Gerard would say that the difference between the tech industry and the oil industry
is the same difference between modernity and pagan society, that we are much less idolatrous
and concerned with the past and as a result much more oriented towards the future due
to Christianity.
Now, as we are freed from the grips of the past, innovation has brought about drastic
technological and social change.
Clearly, if you just look around our world, there's the mastery of travel and land, air
and sea.
There's the victory over disease and starvation, the political systems, gender norms, money,
Western civilization, at least in the past few hundred years, is defined by and prides
itself with change.
The problem with innovation is the same problem with love and truth, hypocrisy.
We've now fetishized innovation.
We are conforming to contrarianism.
We are obediently rallying under the banner of originality.
Gerard has this to say, it's so good that I'll quote it in full.
The modern world rejects imitation in favor of originality at all costs.
You should never say what others are saying, never paint what others are painting, never
think what others are thinking and so on.
Since this is absolutely impossible, there soon emerges a negative imitation that sterilizes
everything.
More and more, often they're obliged to turn their coats inside out and with great fanfare
announce some new epistemological rupture that is supposed to revolutionize the field
from top to bottom.
This rage for originality has produced a few rare masterpieces and quite a few rather
bizarre things.
The principle of originality at all costs leads to paralysis.
The more we celebrate creative and enriching innovations, the fewer of them there are.
For 2,000 years, the arts have been imitative and it's only in the 19th and 20th century
that people started refusing to be mimetic.
Why?
Because we're more mimetic than ever.
Rivalry plays a role such that we strive vainly to exercise imitation.
The problem that Gerard is identifying here, with categorically rejecting imitation and
idolizing innovation, is that imitation and meaningful innovation are often inseparable.
You need to imitate and gain mastery first before you can make any real innovations.
History is littered with examples where repetition, replication, imitation is a necessary precondition
for innovation.
Think about Goethe, who was a master of reproduction, reproducing the great poetic forms before
he pioneered his own.
Think about the industrial powers that started off as mere copycats but grew into innovators
in their own right.
Let me read Gerard again.
It began with Germany, which, in the 19th century, was thought to be at most capable
of imitating English.
And this, at the precise moment, surpassed them.
It continued with the Americans in whom, for a long time, the Europeans saw mediocre
gadget makers, who weren't theoretical or cerebral enough to take on a world leadership
role.
And it happened once more with the Japanese, who, after World War II, were still seen as
pathetic imitators of Western superiority.
It's starting up again, it seems, with Korea.
And soon, perhaps, it'll be the Chinese.
All of these consecutive mistakes about the creative potential of imitation cannot be
due to chance.
End quote.
Gerard's point here is that by fetishizing contrarianism, innovation, originality, and
by rejecting repetition, replication, imitation, we paradoxically doom ourselves to never make
any meaningful innovations whatsoever, because innovation is dependent on imitation.
Now, as you can see, even the three quote-unquote good forces of modernity are deeply ambivalent.
Nature's fundamentally changed.
There's never been a society as loving, truthful, and innovative as ours.
But stubborn human nature refuses to budge.
We still need to persecute, to deify, and to conform.
And so, the perversities of modernity for Gerard all take on the shape of hypocrisy,
persecution under the banner of protecting victims, rigid adherence to scientific dogmas
under the guise of free intellectual exploration, the most derivative of imitations packaged
as radical innovations.
The metaphor, then, that best captures this radical break as well as stubborn continuity
is a just-launch rocket struggling to reach escape velocity.
I mean, think about it.
Such a rocket is clearly a radical break from it was stationary.
But it is also in a continuity, because it is still governed by the pull of gravity.
The same, perhaps, can be said for the point of history that we're in now.
There's a clear radical break between our culture that protects victims and all the
ones that have come before, which made them into scapegoats.
But the stubborn gravitational pull of the human condition remains the same.
We still need to persecute and find victims to blame.
It's this tension between cultural advancement and the constancy of human nature that plagues
modernity for Gerard.
Now, our rocket ship of modernity is already in trouble, but the fourth and final force
of Christianity will send it crashing towards the ground—violence.
You may be surprised that Gerard conceived of violence as one of the forces coming out
of Christ's defeating the scapegoat mechanism.
But given Gerard's understanding of how worldly peace is brought about, this conclusion
in some sense should flow quite naturally.
After all, if worldly order, a peaceful society, is founded on a deceitful, violent act of
catharsis, then truth and love, which Christianity has unleashed, must be threatening if not
harmful for this foundation.
The scapegoat mechanism is a deeply morally ambivalent process for Gerard.
It is deceitful, it is wrong, but it's also so damn effective.
Just a single, innocent man has to be murdered for the entire community to be saved.
Christ's one, for the peace of all, limits the freedom of the parts for the stability
of the whole.
And so, we might say, in a highly reductive fashion, that the scapegoat mechanism is a
worldly good, but ultimate evil, whereas Christ is ultimately good, but brings forth worldly
destruction.
Gerard constantly reminds us that Christ himself says as much, Matthew 10.34, Christ
has this to say.
If not that I am come to send peace on earth, I came not to send peace, but a sword.
Christ's sword is aimed at the scapegoat mechanism, which lies at the foundation of
worldly order.
Now, while the consequences of the Christian revelation for Gerard are violent and destructive,
Christ's intentions surely are not.
Christ did not cut down the worldly order for the sake of cutting down worldly order,
but only so we may be freed from violence and lies, such that we can love each other.
Christ took off our training wheels so that we may be freed, yet we've simply fallen
and stumbled.
Without the scapegoat mechanism, we no longer have our old prohibitions to stop metaphysical
desires from running rampant, nor do we have sacrificial rituals to bring about catharsis.
So to put it in other words, we've lost both our tools to prevent and resolve violence.
So why haven't we gone bust yet?
After all, the world looks pretty peaceful to me.
Gerard responds, don't confuse the lack of the actuality of violence with the lack of
the potential for violence.
Violent energies have been building up and increasing, but they've been contained and
productively channeled for now, by two new institutions of modernity.
The first institution is capitalism.
Capitalism is the channel that absorbs and productively directs violence.
Let me be clear that when Gerard says that capitalism is a channel for violence, he
doesn't have in mind whipping slaves to build the pyramids, but that the same violent, competitive
energies of glory, of pride, of desire for conquest are the dominant ones driving capitalism
today.
Gerard reminds us, I quote, it is not by chance that the European aristocracy went into business
once heroes and warriors went out of style, end quote.
Gerard's point is that when we peek behind the motivational curtains of actors and capitalism,
we shouldn't expect to find a desire to help others.
We shouldn't even expect to find a materialistic greed, instead what people are really after
are the same social goods, recognition, honor, prestige, glory.
The princes and heroes of yore who would have amassed armies now find themselves competing
to make products and services.
Gerard warns us such, don't be fooled by the altruistic aims that capitalistic actors
so desperately advertise.
It's the same drive that drove Achilles to kill Hector, that drove Germany to invade
France, that drove Caesar to capture Vercingetorix, that underpins our world economy today.
It's funny, you're referencing ancient stories there, but even today, I'll look at my friends
who are successful entrepreneurs and a shocking percentage of them were criminals in high school.
Right.
And I think that the same energy that drove them to be criminals, what capitalism does,
is it redirects that energy towards entrepreneurship.
Yeah, and I think this is both a deep critique of capital, right, that it's fundamentally
driven off these spirited irrational forces, but also a depraise of capitalism, right?
What a miracle it is today that people who seek revenge, who seek glory, who seek domination,
who seek an outlet for their criminal energies have to do so, not by killing millions in
zero-sum wars as people have done for thousands of years, but they have to compete in making
better in products and services for others.
What a miracle Gerard's analysis on capitalism is deeply ambivalent.
Now, capitalism can only properly function in this way.
When it is supported by law, law is the second important institution of modernity that contains
violence.
For Gerard, law only works in situations where there's an entity with a monopoly over violence
that can arbitrate between disputing parties.
Law does not bring about peace through catharsis, nor the edicts of law justified on the prestige
of some deity.
It keeps peace by threatening with you with more violence.
If you, the injured party, aren't satisfied with the outcome of a trial and seek private
vengeance by killing or hurting the criminal who injured you, then the state will come
after you and punish you with more violence.
Law only functions when there is such a powerful entity with a monopoly over violence that
can easily overpower disputing parties.
That's where its efficacy stems from.
This is why within a single nation, laws are often inviolable and sacrosanct, yet between
nations, right?
Think the laws of the UN or the Geneva Convention.
These laws without an entity, without a monopoly over violence, are so often transgressed with
little consequence.
For Gerard, capitalism is this bubbling stew of violent competitive energies that must
be contained by law if that violence is not to overflow.
That is why Gerard thinks the dyke will break where capitalism intersects the weakest points
of law in between nations, in global trade.
Global trade is where national pride and competitive energies are piled up, yet there
is no monopolistic force of violence to arbitrate law between parties.
Under this light, let me read you Gerard's startling predictions 15 years ago once more.
He said this again at the height of Sino-American optimism, when popular wisdom all believed
that relationships between China and the U.S. would only get better through trade.
I quote to you again,
A conflict between the United States and China will follow.
Everything is in place.
Though it will not necessarily occur on the military level at first, trade can transform
very quickly into war.
From this point of view, we can reasonably fear a major clash between China and the United
States in the coming decades.
If such a war between colossal nation states were to actually happen, it could very well
be the last war.
With the invention of nuclear weaponry, Gerard thinks we genuinely do live in an apocalyptic
moment where the entire world can go up in flames in mere minutes.
What is unique about the nuke isn't its singular destructive force.
The firebombing of Tokyo, the Mongol mass murders, I think are all comparable to the
devastation of a singular nuclear strike.
What is unique about the nuke is that it forces rivals to utterly destroy each other at the
first glimpse of provocation.
Unlike firebombing or a Mongol horde that takes time to maneuver through terrain, there
are no frictions to unleashing your entire nuclear arsenal.
Before the nuke, nations fought wars like a boxing match, taking time to maneuver, resting
in between with fatal blows rare and after taking a very long time.
The nuke allows nation states to fight wars like a duel, an instant and fatal escalation.
In many ways, it's worse than a duel because it allows the dead party to shoot the person
who is alive.
Even if you nuke my entire landmass into oblivion, my nuclear submarines can still avenge me
post-mortem.
This is what it means by mutually assured destruction.
Armed in this light, Drard's worries of apocalypse is less theological speculation than deja vu.
On October 27, 1962, a Soviet submarine armed with a nuclear-tipped torpedo was located and
targeted by an American carrier group, dropping a signaling-depth charge like underwater bombs
intended to destroy the submarine at the height of the Cuban missile crisis.
The crew in that submarine had completely lost contact with Moscow for days and thought
that a new world war had broken out.
They were debating and considering whether to fire the nuke, believing that they were
under direct attack.
This submarine required all three senior officers to agree to launch the strike.
Two of them decided to do so.
Only one officer's stubborn refusal prevented an almost certain nuclear attack and likely
Armageddon.
This is how close we were.
The will of one man was all that stood in the way.
With the collapse of the Soviet Union, the specter of apocalypse has long faded from
the public imagination, but Drard prophesies that this ghost of yours will soon return
to haunt us once more.
If the end of the world had a beginning, I think we could do far worse than attributing
it to the invention of the nuclear bomb.
So how ought one live in the end times?
With apocalypse around the corner, what ought one do?
Drard's answer is brief as it is unsatisfying.
Withdraw.
Withdraw from the world.
Leave it all behind.
Tend to your own garden.
There's nothing you can do to stop apocalypse.
You're only going to muddy your own moral character by trying to get involved in such
a mess.
Withdraw.
Stay away from it all so that you can nurture your soul.
The kingdom of God will not be established here on earth, but perhaps we can preserve
ourselves to be worthy of it in heaven.
On November 4th, 2015, Drard passed away peacefully in his home in Stanford, California
at the age of 91, leaving us in deafening silence, stranded in an apocalyptic moment
with nothing but the advice to withdraw.
This is how Drard's story ends and where our lectures will also come to a screeching
halt.
Hopefully, I've given enough reason already to engage with Drard and continue with these
lecture series.
I fear that as time progresses, Drard will prove to be if you'll entertain another
metaphor, a seismograph of history, able to feel the slight tremors that would balloon
to tectonic shifts before others even know that we are standing on a fault line.
Drard begins his final work as such.
This is an apocalyptic book.
It will become more understandable with time because, unquestionably, we are accelerating
swiftly towards the destruction of the world."
Unfortunately, his most unlikely prediction of worsening Sino-American relationships has
already been made more understandable with time.
On the topic of apocalypse, I desperately hope Drard is wrong, but I fear that he is
right.
If he is right, then Drard is worth engaging because he is one of the only guys to help
us navigate the end time, one of the few Virgil's left who still take apocalypse literally
and seriously.
However, I would be a deceitful merchant of ideas if I also didn't share with you why
you shouldn't engage with Drard or continue with these lectures.
There's a common metaphor given about philosophy.
Philosophy is often compared with medicine, that it has the power to cure our souls and
societies and I think that's a quite apt metaphor, but just not taken far enough.
Because just as medicine has side effects, so do philosophies.
And I wish that philosophers wrote on the side of their books the unwanted side effects
of their philosophies as pharmaceutical companies did it on their drugs.
Warning, disdain for the material world if you take too much of these platonic dialogues
in one sitting.
Caution, more than one dose of Nietzsche a day makes patients with pre-existing health
conditions descend into uncontrollable rage.
Side effect, erectile dysfunction if you take these Buddhist sutras too seriously.
Attention, inability to form coherent sentences if you read too much Adorno in one sitting.
Just as a drug will course through your veins and infiltrate your entire system.
Drard's ideas will latch themselves onto your psyche and colonize your world view.
So we must ask, what are the side effects of engaging Drard?
I've presented to you the red pill, but as any honest merchant I must also tell you why
you should take the blue pill instead.
The likely but not necessary side effects of Drard are threefold.
First, alienation.
Drard will likely show your most intimate long-held desires, ones that your entire identity
have been staked on as external and alien.
The career you've always wanted since you were four, the type of person you wanted to
marry since childhood, the political cause that you've dedicated your life to, your
core desires will likely be thoroughly alienated and shown to be external and perhaps even
perverse.
The medic theory could also alienate you from others.
From this point going forward, you will have trouble fully participating in any political
or collective activity, always aware of the deceitfulness of mimesis and the madness of
crowds.
Second, inaction.
Drard is the most ambivalent writer that I've ever come across.
What should we do with escape going?
Well, on one hand, it's a huge lie.
You're killing innocents, but on the other, it is the only way that pagan societies have
brought peace.
Should we fight to remove caste systems?
Well, if you don't, then you will subject people to arbitrary distinction, meaningless
oppression grounded on nothing but lies.
But if you do, you open them up to competition of all against all.
Metaphysical desire will burn through their communities and set it ablaze.
Should we participate in capitalism?
Capitalism is a competitive cesspool of violent energies that has brought about the most lovely
prosperous and peaceful society known to date.
If you are looking for clear-cut answers or even answers at all, you've come knocking
on the wrong door.
Go to a Marx or Hegel instead.
The extreme ambivalence in all of Drard's ideas, in addition to his deep pessimism on
the human condition and history, tends to incapacitate those who've digested them a
bit too thoroughly.
Third, and certainly not least, the side effect of Drard is hopelessness.
By now, the point should be familiar.
Apocalypse is imminent.
There is nothing you, nor I, nor anyone can do about it.
If you do wish to remain hopeful after understanding and digesting Drard, just know that that
hope is going to have to come from you and not Drard.
You are going to have to dig yourself and all of us out of this apocalyptic hole Drard
really has nothing left to offer.
Turn back while you still can.
I have warned you thus.
Now, to those stubborn or perhaps morbidly curious enough to continue, I can only heed
one last time, against continuing on these lectures, by echoing what Dante inscribed
on the gates of hell, abandon all hope, ye who enter here.
