Okay, so thank you very much, thanks a lot for the invitation to speak, and it's a pleasure
to be here in this very nice program.
So I'm going to talk about holography in a setup that we are not normally used to, or
at least I'm not normally used to.
So the most standard setup where we think about holography are maybe two big examples
of things we do with.
Holography is one compute amplitude, for example this could be the boundary of ADS and we could
be drawing written diagrams where a particle propagates from one point in the boundary
to another, or perhaps we have a bunch of particles and they start interacting.
So that's an example of computations, we have ADS space and we put some probes inside ADS.
There is another different type of computation we often do, let me draw it here, where we
have ADS, say in global coordinates, so that's a cylinder, and we consider say a black hole,
a very heavy operator that lies here somewhere in global ADS and this would be here, some
black hole state, and then we do thermodynamics, we study entropies of these black holes and
so on.
Now one thing we could ask is how do I study correlation functions in holography for operators
that become extremely large, that they become as large as the operators that would create
these black holes that we are used to.
So what should I do if I want to say, study a three point function where each of these
operators is a black hole, or each of these operators is heavy enough to deform the geometry.
And the basic idea that we have been exploring with Jacob, Francesco and Rob, is the idea
that what happens is that you should think of some kind of fat version of these written
diagrams, where what will happen is that the geometry is approximately ADS if you are far
away from the insertion points, or if you are close to the boundary here, say far away
from the insertion points, but otherwise this would be where the geodesic would be, there
will be some banana like shape, and here we have the banana, and here in this side this
would be generalized to what would be a three leg banana.
Now what is a three leg banana, how does it show up, what is the topology of this three
leg banana, how should we think of these objects, how should we compute with them, is the kind
of things that I would like to speculate a little bit about.
Most of the time I will be talking about the two point function about understanding this
banana.
In Euclidean space, so the idea is that here we have RD, so we just want to take RD and
put three huge operators that create a black hole.
So the kind of questions of course we aim at answering in the future is how relevant
are the microstates that we use to prepare the heavy operator, do we get universality,
does it matter when we have say heavy, heavy, light, light, does it matter how different
the two heavy operators are, and so on and so forth, so we want to set that up, and first
we want to understand how to holographically, how from a gravity point of view, do we describe
these solutions where we have these banana black holes versus the more standard what
we would call the global, just global schwarzschild black holes.
Ok, so the idea, the intuition for going from this picture here, which we would call as
I said global, to the next picture that I am going to draw here, that I am going to
call the cone, was actually inspired by a nice paper by Romold Janek.
So Janek was asking a similar question, not for such heavy operators, but for strings.
He was also saying in integrability we are always tired of studying rotating strings
in the middle of ADS, we study their energies, we quantize them, we get these nice rigid
trajectories that Eric was talking about, but what we do with the computer dimensions
of these operators is we compute the energy in global ADS, but that should be a way of
also thinking of some kind of fat-witten diagram, of stringy-witten diagram, where you send
a string that rotates a lot, and then goes from one point to the other, and so he found
a bunch of non-unitary transformations, and in practice at the end of the day, when you
start with Lorentzian ADS, and you want to ask how do I go from this Lorentzian picture
to the Euclidean picture, at the end of after a few transformations, the key transformation
you have to do, I wrote it up here, but I'm going to write it again.
So we start with Schwarzschild up here on the corner, so we have the usual Schwarzschild
in the dimensions in global ADS, R is the radial direction, so we have R here, we have
time here, Euclidean time, or if you want Lorentzian time t, but there I wrote already
with Euclidean, and then we have a sphere here, a rotation here, and the idea is to
consider this radial map, where you say that R is going to become R over Z, which means
that this constant R black hole is now going to be in this picture, a cone, and if I consider
going away from this cone, drawing this line, I would go all the way like this, and then
this is how this radial coordinate works, and then time here, E to the tau is related
to the distance from the tip of the cone, R squared plus E squared, so that's traveling
along the black hole here, is traveling along this cone, and so this is how we would start
with a metric in global ADS, we could start in Lorentzian, first step, you weak rotate
t to I tau, now you are in Euclidean, and after you rotate, you do this change of variable
in this first yellow box, and you go to this cone metric, which would be some metric, where
now we foliate things not with concentric cylinders, but with concentric with this opening
more and more white cones, and now of course what we could do is take this metric, where
the operator would be inserted one at zero, one at infinity, and just apply an ADS isometry,
which now because the metric is not just ADS, it is an honest change of variable, and now
we would go to the metric of the banana, where the cone is mapped to a banana, and now we
would have a point inserted at say zero, and one point inserted at x, yes, we are in the
dimensions, but yeah, that's right, so here we are in RD, so this boundary here is RD,
so by doing this change of variables, we went from that frame to this frame, where the boundary
now is RD, okay, so you are worried about the S1, so let me emphasize that point, that
normally what we do when we consider the Euclidean black hole is that we make this circle periodic,
and we consider finite temperature, and the temperature is dictated by not having a singularity
at the horizon, and that's what we normally do, now here I am not doing this identification,
that's right, so now let's suppose we want to ask if this is the end result, so we would
ask let's compute the action, the gravitational action for the banana, and see what we get,
right, so we take the banana, let's evaluate this action, now what should we do, we are
doing a log graph, so what we should do is we should cut off this geometry, some epsilon
away here, so we put some regulator here, and we say I am going to consider the geometry
up to some surface epsilon, at z equal epsilon, the usual thing, and then what should we do,
so if we translate back to what it means here, it would mean that we would consider going
from this point all the way to this point here, would correspond to traveling a certain
amount from here to here, and this height that we would integrate would be delta tau,
and this delta tau would be related to the separation of the banana by something like
this, I would separate, the separation of the point would dictate by how much it should
evolve in the black hole, and then what is the usual way of computing these actions that
when we study thermodynamics, we compute the bulk action, and we have a boundary which
is AdS, so we also put at the boundary, let me draw this yellow line, we also put here
some given Hawking's term for the boundary, so if I add the bulk and we compute this
given Hawking's term, what would it translate here in the banana, I am computing the bulk
action, and I should put a given Hawking's term here in the boundary in AdS, now if
we do this computation, we all did this computation of thermodynamics, when we compute the gravity
action with this given Hawking's term and we compute it, as Shiraz said, normally we
identify this with some temperature beta, so what is the answer, the answer is just
exponential of minus beta, but beta here is delta tau, so this delta tau is usually beta,
because the action is invariant, it is translation invariant, so whatever interval I compute,
it is just multiplied by that interval, multiplied by the free energy, which is the energy of
the black hole minus the inverse temperature times the entropy, right, and so this is what
we would normally get, and this would become, under that identification, up to some normalization,
1 over x to the power twice the energy minus t times the energy, sorry, we want to compute
exponential of minus the action, and that would give me this, right, and so we would
see that the correlation function would become 1 over x square to the power of the energy
minus the entropy, and this is wrong, this is not what we want, so this is not what
we want, which is 1 over x to the power of the energy of just the mass of the object
I put there, and so how should we correctly do this computation, it is related to what
Shiraz said, that this space, as we do not identify this space is singular there, so
actually if you look at the banana, you see that you have this banana that touches the
boundary, touches the surface here at epsilon, so the boundary of your space that we thought
first was just epsilon, now it is pierced by this banana, so you better consider the
surface of the banana as also part of your boundary, and so the idea is that actually
the boundary of the space is this surface at z equal epsilon, not the boundary, plus
the peel of the banana, right, so you have to cover the banana, and you have to consider
the boundary to be this, and you have to add an egg, you have to put something a little
bit unusual, you should put some Gibbon Hawking's term here, that you can show that if you
evaluate what this Gibbon Hawking's term does here is kill this entropy term, and so the
proposal in other words is that if you were to translate back to this computation, even
here you could ask how do I compute exponential, how do I compute the evolution, Euclidean
evolution of black hole, exponential of Hamiltonian times tau, and then black hole, for any tau,
right, I can always for any tau decide I want to compute for some reason, exponential of
minus tau times Hamiltonian acting on black hole or solving black hole, and I should get
e to the minus energy times tau without the entropy without anything, so I want to change
ensemble, I want to go from fixing temperature and having all this entropy to just saying
I fixed the states, and I have one state and I want to just reproduce e to the minus energy
times tau, and the claim is that this boundary term precisely does that, and similarly if
we were to study black holes with charge, we would also put a boundary term to fix the
charge versus the chemical potential and so on.
In the original picture, it would be that you would also consider a Gibbon Hawking's
term now, you would put a stretched horizon and you would also put a Gibbon Hawking's
term at the stretched horizon, and now the claim is that if you wrap now this stretched
horizon with a Gibbon Hawking's term, you are computing exponential of minus the energy
of the state times time without the entropy.
Now, actually to do properly the computation, it's often useful to think of an even better
cone and an even better banana, so we call it the improved cone and the improved banana,
so let me just say what it is, it's something very simple, if you just follow the transformation
there on top, you go from global to the cone, you see that that cone metric is a little
bit funny, it has cross turns, this EDR, it has some funny form, it is not of the usual
Pfeffer-Hamm Graham form, it is not of the usual form that it is ADS plus stress tensor
DXDX plus dot dot dot, so you could ask, can I do a change of variables to make it into
the more standard holographic normalization form, where I have ADS plus stress tensor plus
corrections to that, and you can, so that's what is given in the second equal sign, so
if you go from that cone metric to this what we call here the improved cone, then there
is a change of variables where you change R over Z to some new R over Z, in fact it's
a very messy transformation that we found in perturbation theory and we saw that the metric
resummed into this nice metric, I think we actually only know the explicit expression
for this mess in three dimensions, but in any dimension we managed to guess what the metric
is and then check that it obeys Einstein equations, and this would be the improved cone where in
this last metric here, this nice metric, if you expand close to the boundary you do get
ADS plus stress tensor plus etc, yes?
Yes?
Okay, maybe you could show me later, yeah.
No, of course now that we know the change of variable we can find the map in some dimensions
directly from Schwarzschild to this, we don't know this map I think in general indeed not
equal to three, but with this cone foliation I'm not sure it exists, but I'm happy to have
a look later, if you show me, if you show us that would be great.
Now let me make a few comments about this cone metric and this improved cone, so first
of all strictly speaking what I said before about doing the usual renormalization with
epsilon, I should do it in the improved cone, it's in the improved cone that I have Faffer-Hamm-Gram,
so when I said put the cutoff at epsilon, it should strictly speaking put the cutoff
at epsilon in this good metric.
Okay, so I oversimplified a little bit, that's the first comment.
But the second comment is that right now, I mean I call it really improved cone in quotation
marks, because this improved cone has a big drawback, it has a big advantage, boundary conditions
are manifest, it is Faffer-Hamm-Gram, it has a big drawback, it's not complete.
So this metric doesn't go all the way to the horizon, so let me describe what happens.
And I'm just closing this discussion because this is going to be relevant as we go to three
points.
And so the basic idea is that this improved cone, let's put in quotation improved, it
has this very nice feature, Faffer-Hamm-Gram is great, but it's not complete.
Whereas the original cone is the opposite, Faffer-Hamm-Gram is not okay, but it is a nice metric
that you can go all the way to the horizon.
So this metric you cannot, it's easy to see that if you check this improved metric, that
there is a cone, there is a cone here where the determinant of the metric is equal to
zero, and this happens if you trace back to global coordinates, add some r star that is
bigger than the horizon.
For example, I know by heart that if you are in three dimensions, this r star is square
root of m, and the horizon is square root of m minus one.
So r star is bigger than r h, and so you have this cone, and the matrix, this improved cone
is a good metric here, but if you want to go inside the statue, you have to complete this
metric, and the honest horizon is somewhere here inside.
So here is where there is this black hole arrest.
And this is going to be a generic feature, because now that we know, now the idea for
studying higher point correlation functions is you have to study a geometry, and you know
the boundary conditions close to each puncture, is this Faffer-Hamm-Gram, and so close to each
puncture you will have a banana tip, and that banana tip is not going to be complete.
It's going to hide the black hole a little bit inside.
And so this is going to be a generic feature that as we go from this picture to three points,
we will now get some kind of three-legged wall, so there will be here some wall, and
the honest black holes would be somewhere here inside, and we want to ask what happens
and we have to understand how to complete this geometry and how to go inside.
Any question here?
I'm having trouble to understand this banana still.
Can you draw a picture for a two-dimensional space time?
Two? Oh, I will go to three dimensions.
That's how much I'm willing to simplify. Two?
Your original picture is for two-dimensional.
Yeah, yeah, so I'm willing to say they are a fitting picture.
So I think let me highlight something funny about this banana.
Of course, these are just coordinates at this point, but it's worth highlighting that,
of course, going around the black hole means going around the cone,
which means here in the banana going around the banana, right?
And if you measure the length of this geodesic, it would be two pi r h.
It would be in three dimensions, or in general, it would be related to the area of the black hole.
But going along this direction here, if we are at the black hole horizon,
or very close to the black hole horizon, this distance is null.
And so similarly, if I go, if I travel along the banana in this direction,
I'm traveling along an old distance.
So in that sense, it's a little bit funny.
It's really like the tip of the cigar at the end of space.
The space ends at the banana.
There's no inside of the banana.
So the banana is where space ends.
And indeed, we don't even go close the banana.
We put the peel and we go to the stretched horizon, which is right nearby the banana,
but we don't try to go inside the banana.
So now there are two things we could do at this point that I think would be fun to do.
One thing we could do now that we have this setup is study things like heavy, heavy, light, light, et cetera.
Now I think I have the banana.
This is the background and I can put probes and stuff like this.
So that's one thing.
I'm not going to discuss this.
I mean, we did some nice things.
And if you want, you can ask any questions.
And the other thing is to try to understand what happens when we have, say, three black holes.
And that's more challenging.
So in black holes, the thing to say is that it would be fantastic to develop some procedure to find these solutions.
And I don't see a way to do it right now, which is not numerical.
But I would be very happy to think how could we ever do this analytically, of course.
There are no three solutions of three huge black holes.
Sorry?
Yeah, this is Euclidean.
I mean, I should be able to compute the dual of a 2.5 of two heavy operators, right?
It must be some deformation of the Euclidean geometry.
Okay.
Okay, so by the way, of course, this works for any solution.
If you have a solution that you know how to put in global ideas, you just do this change of variables.
And the claim is that if you have this spherical symmetry and so on, it's always going to work.
It's always going to give you just what you expect, which is the energy of the solution to the power of the distance.
So it's not, for example, we tested it on other solutions that are not black holes, like LLM geometries and so on.
It works as well.
So I think it should work for a star.
Yeah, I asked Eric, and Eric said he told him there are some nice papers about stars, these boson stars in EDS.
I started looking at it.
So we did some examples.
We have some examples of some solutions that are a little bit like stars.
And you're story of the star versus black hole part of this place.
The main difference is that in some of these solutions, you can go all the way to the center of the geometry,
and then you don't need this new stuff of the given markings at the horizon.
And you just go all the way to the center.
And then you automatically get the energy of the star times the distance.
Okay, so three black holes is hard.
And so the idea is to consider three dimensions where we can make some progress because gravity is much simpler in three dimensions.
And so the idea now is to move to three dimensions.
And moving to three dimensions, the claim is that it's actually very easy, and I wrote it here.
So let me flash what I wrote already.
So again, we start with Schwarzschild.
We went to the cone.
We found this improved cone that is improved but not complete.
And then you see that when D is equal to 2, this improved cone simplifies a lot.
This term disappears.
This term, when D is equal to 2, is just linear.
And in fact, this metric, when D is equal to 2, is a famous metric.
It's called the Bagnados metric.
So the Bagnados metric is a metric.
It's a beautiful completion of EDS.
Where you write EDS, you put the stress tensor L and L bar.
And then there is this beautiful thing that you start with Faffer-Hamm Graham form.
And to go up, you just put Z squared times L L bar.
It's a very simple, yeah.
It's a very simple completion into the bulk that truncates and you just add this D squared.
Where this L and L bar are the stress tensors for the two-point function.
If I put a point at zero, a point at infinity, there would be just one over W squared.
M over W squared.
And so this has the right boundary conditions.
This is not complete.
The determinant of this is zero at some cone.
To go inside, we would undo this improvement and undo what we did.
But now it becomes obvious what we should do if we want to go to three points.
We should just take this same metric and replace L by the corresponding L of the three-point function.
And now the L of the three-point function, it is just some function that instead of having two poles,
now you have three poles at three locations.
And then there would be this surface that hides the black hole.
Some 3D shape that hides the black hole and the black hole will be somewhere inside.
And now we want to complete this solution and look inside these horizons and see what the geometry looks like.
Now, we don't know how to do this in this sense of just finding the analog of the inverse of this transformation
to go to some coordinates that still look like this.
But in ADS-3, there is another way of completing the solutions, which is by realizing that they are just identifications of empty ADS.
And so that's another way of completing, noticing that this solution with this L and L bar is just empty ADS
with identifications that are given by what's called the Roberts map that Roberts found
that sends this Banagos metric into empty ADS.
And the idea is that these capital variables where you have empty ADS close to the boundary when Z is equal to zero,
they are given by Z goes to the boundary, W is F of W, W bar is F bar of W bar,
where this F and F bar obey some Schwarzian equation that relates them to L and L bar.
So we know how to find this F and F bar.
And then there is some complicated correction that you need to put if you want really the full map from Banagos to empty ADS.
And so let's discuss a little bit this map.
And let's first do it for the two-point function.
So for the two-point function, this map that sends you to Banagos to empty ADS,
if you are studying a black hole, this F of W is W to the power of square root of M minus 1.
And F bar is the conjugate function.
And so let me highlight something very simple but very important,
which is that dilatations in W are now rotations in F of W, which close to the boundary is capital W.
So rotations in this W are dilatations and dilatations here are rotations here.
So it swaps what we call dilatations and rotations.
And so if we start in the cone picture,
so if I start in W, now this W, here I'm in two dimensions, so this coordinates here would be the W plane, this is the W plane.
And if I make dilatations in this cone, I'm rotating in that W.
And if I'm rotating in this cone, I'm making a dilatation in that W.
And therefore, because rotations here are dilatations there, it means that in W space, the fundamental domain should be an annulus.
Where going around the geometry, this line A, would correspond to traveling from one point of the annulus to the other.
But going from 0 to infinity, say from 0 to infinity, this line B, or the projection here into the boundary B,
traveling from 0 to infinity, would now correspond to rotating.
And so B would correspond to rotating.
And you want to go from one point of the cone to the other, so you need to be able to rotate infinitely many times.
And so that gives rise to the importance of the door.
We need to put the door here.
And now as you rotate, you cross and you go as many times as you want, and this is what B is.
And so there is this idea that we need here to put the door.
So in 3D, if you think now not just at the boundary, you have two concentric domes.
The black hole arrives and is some line here.
And then there is a door here.
And in this picture, that 3D line B is some line that goes around here.
So going around like this is traveling along the cone of the black hole.
While doing some circle around the black hole, this A would be traveling from one point of the dome to the other.
And so you need this picture where you have these domes and this door.
And now we can immediately ask, so what happens now for three points?
For three points, the map is more complicated. It's what's called the Schwartz triangle map.
So I'll just tell you what the domes are and what the picture is at the end of the day.
And so the claim is that for three points, here is the picture.
For three points, so first of all, like here, when I put two domes concentric, it's a choice.
There are many fundamental domains I can choose. I'm going to write one choice. There are more choices.
So one choice, the fundamental domain looks like this.
I'm just drawing the circles at the boundary. Each of these circles is a dome. It's a spherical dome.
And then they are identified, as here, that this dome is identified with this dome.
And there are doors. And there is a door here. There is a door here. And there is a door here.
And so the claim is that you have a room with three doors. So each of these doors is a three-dimensional door.
Here is one door. Here is the other door. And here is the other door.
And so the picture, the claim is that this picture, if you apply the Schwarz triangle map, this is where you end up with.
And now let's interpret what this picture is doing.
Now what happens with this picture is that you see that if you are at the boundary, what can you do?
Or if you are in this geometry, what can you do? You can go through the door.
But you can go through any of these three doors and you can actually enter the door through one direction or through other direction.
So there are six options. You are in this room and you can enter each of the three doors through this one side or through the other.
When you enter a door, suppose I enter this door, then what you see after you enter the door, you enter this door.
Now you are on the other side of the door. You are here. And you see nothing else.
You enter in this room and in this room the other doors are not there. These other doors are not there.
So you have a room with three doors. You enter a door and now you are in a room that only has the door that you just came through.
And so that's the picture, the global picture. You have three doors.
You can enter each of the doors through any of the directions and when you enter, you see a room which only has that door.
And the claim is that this is describing a wormhole.
So the picture is that you see that here in this picture there is an inside region and there is an outside region in the boundary.
And if I allow myself to travel through the bulk, it's fine. I can just go up and pass by the wall and go from in to out.
But if I stay inside, if I stay in this region in the boundary, I cannot connect to the outside.
Similarly, if I stay on the outside at the boundary, I cannot connect to the inside. I need to go through the bulk to connect from inside to outside.
And so the picture, what's happening is that you have this central room which is like the wormhole.
And then as you enter each of the doors, now you are going to the leg of the black hole.
And so the picture, what this picture is describing in banana language, is actually that you have your three bananas.
But they are somehow connecting to another side, and this is the jump.
And clearly, if you are in this middle room, you have six options. You can go up or down here, you can go up or down here, and you can go up and down here.
And this would correspond to going through these doors any number of times.
Now, this picture, it's nice to think what happens as the black holes become lights.
So let me conclude with that. So what happens when M decreases is that these circles collide.
So the first thing that happens when M decreases is that these two circles, that there was a door between them, now collide.
And we get a picture, let me collide all of them.
So the door was stretching between these two, and now they collide, and this point is identified with this one.
And the intersection of the two domes is some geodesic that travels from the inside of the wormhole to the outside.
These two guys, the door that was here now becomes again this defect-like object that travels from this side to this side.
And similarly, the door that is here now becomes this defect that travels from inside to outside.
So again, there is a wormhole, but now what were the doors become defects that travel from inside to the outside?
And this is the transition where the black holes become defects.
And we have the wormhole, and this was the solution that Scott and Tom and friends studied recently, where they have the defects and the two-sided defects.
And now we could shrink the mass further, and what would happen is that you would just get circles where the middle region disappears.
And now you don't have double-sided, and what you have, I'm just going to draw the top picture of the geodesics,
is that you will have three geodesics meeting at the point, and now you would get a single-sided solution, and this would be the solution of Cheng and Ling.
And this is how the picture would interpolate.
So I have one slide with a summary, and where I repeat this picture with some slightly more artistic style,
with some wormholes being World of War carved portals.
So let me summarize and end with some speculations about higher dimensions and some questions,
and something even more important that I put on the slide not to forget, and I was almost going to forget.
Okay.
So let me summarize.
So as we go in reverse, so the idea is that when the objects are very light,
when these black holes are very light, they should be just like a pebble, so that's just three particles that meet in some geodesic in the middle.
That's the picture on the left.
Then, if you increase the mass of these objects, they start back reacting on the geometry, and now these three geodesics that are meeting at the optimal point,
this point is moving up, and that's the solution found by Cheng and Ling.
They become heavier and heavier.
This point that goes up and up, it forms this portal, and you have a wormhole now.
And that would be the solution found two years ago by Chandra, Collier, Hartman and Maloney.
And then as we increase the mass further, these effects become black holes, and we get these three doors, this room with three doors,
plus this infinite sequence of rooms with one door that I described today.
And then the doors for any parameter range, this is expected to be given universality, universally by what the bootstrap predicts, which is the DOC formula.
So an obvious comment is what happens in higher dimensions, and I don't have anything very smart to say, except that of course it will be fantastic to develop some numerical procedure where we could look for this
solutions and answer this question what we expect.
We expect to find a two sided solution or a one sided solution.
Is it something like just the three geodesics slightly fatter the picture, or is it more something like the picture on the right where you have a wormhole or is it something more exotic and I don't know what the answer to this question is.
Let me mention that there are two limits where the computation simplifies a lot.
There are two small black holes that are just geodesics, and very big black holes very heavy black holes, if you lose if you study very heavy black holes.
The computation simplifies a lot for example the three point function becomes very simply given by log of 27 over 16 times the mass of the black holes.
And it will be awesome to have a geometrical interpretation for what that simple number is.
I mean, is that 27 just three to the dimension.
What what what will happen in higher dimensions why do we get that big number there. What would it be.
Let me say that I think that actually we could have we could have different things even perhaps more exotic geometry wise and this is a bit of a crazy speculation, besides geodesic meeting at the point I'm just going to summarize this.
I'm not going to get the points or this wormholes.
For example, in any course for supreme meals, I would claim that we have some evidence that the picture is rather that the geometry as genius one that the geometry fragments and opens up and you get more some kind of triangle picture like this where each geometry breaks up into two and form a triangle.
It's a simple computation you can do combinatorics, and there are some solutions that are protected they don't depend on the coupling, and you can use them to predict what a gravitational action should give.
And if you do them for some we did it some computation building on some tools that shot a develop, and we got that the action for some symmetric character representations that are dual to some LLM geometries.
And that is this structure, where it's a sum of tube, what we call tube that depends on j i j minus one half of tubes that depend on j i, and this is very suggestive and in an importation like this, where you have contributions that depend on the effective charge,
contributing between each operator, and that I would say suggest very strongly that the geometry breaks into this triangle like picture.
And this will be an example of something even more exotic I will say than a wormhole or banana with three legs, which will be a donut with three legs.
And of course, more generally it will be very interesting to just develop tools for doing computations in gauge theory.
But there's a lot to do. And in particular I have put positions in Brazil. So if you know good students that for some reason still did not get a position I have definitely one maybe two, perhaps even three positions to fill in.
So I would be happy to know and talk to me in the break. Thank you.
So just a first a quick comment about what might be useful terminology.
If you decide you don't like talking about these internal boundaries for your banana and the Gibbons Hawking term. I think you can just as well say that you're doing the usual gravitational path integral, fixing the area of the black hole horizon you can call these fixed area state
and you get exactly the same results. It's a different perspective a different terminology that might be useful. I see. And in that regard, I guess I'm tempted to ask, you know your results of computing these three point OPEs, or
I guess really the mod squared of the three point OPEs the wormhole calculation, it's natural in the black hole case if you only are specifying that you have a black hole, perhaps of some area which is like specifying as we heard from Tom Hartman,
dimension that primary or something that you can't calculate just see you can calculate these mod C squares.
But do you think it's possible that if you added more information somehow specifying more structure that there might be a one sided solution the black hole regime that involves the three conical singularities actually meeting and intersecting.
Yeah, so the short answer is that since this picture is matching the OZZ and the OZZ should come from the bootstrap.
I would be reluctant to touch it because it's already working. So I was just but that's a cheap answer to say probably this is good.
It's good the question is going to do better.
It gives the expected results from the modular bootstrap. So if you start finding new solutions that dominate over the ones that we found already that give the good deal to see then we would be in trouble, I guess.
Well, just before I finish, I'm not suggesting when find new things that dominate with the same boundary conditions. I'm just asking if we could specify additional constraints on the solution, effectively adding additional.
Additional boundary conditions at your internal boundary or specifically in a different way that would lead to a different setting where you'd have different solutions.
That's right. Yeah, or you could say, are there other identifications that outside is that you give the same thing but as you go inside they are single sided.
I have no theorem that I don't know if you are here when Tom gave his talk or discussion during the program. I mean I asked him exactly this question.
So we know that there are no solutions with one side on the black hole, or with two sides with the defects.
Because the usual idea is once you make an answer like this Maldesena mouse, then you are guaranteed but you are inputting a little bit that you have to say.
So if you make already an answer that already injects that information, then you get that information back.
It will be awesome to have a theorem that says it needs to be that at this mass one quarter that is a transition and you need to have two sides.
And I don't know. I mean, yeah, when I asked, yeah, it will be great.
If we had three particular operators, each of mass and squared would would, is the expectation that the details of the operator don't matter and computing the three point functions that all of them give the same answer.
It's hard to answer, right? I mean, that's what we would like to answer. So for example, so for black holes, I don't know, because this there are barely there is maybe one state that people sound that describes one black hole, right?
You have almost no microscopic description of this black holes in n equals four.
But you could ask a model of that question, which would be if you take LLM geometries, there are many LLM geometries that could differ a little bit by changing the young tableau a little bit.
And now you could ask this question. You could ask, I compute three operators with three young tableaus. I changed the young tableau of one of them. How sensitive is the result is back reaction important.
Can I ignore back reaction or not shot as a beautiful paper explaining that in some situations back reaction is very important and the details matter.
So this is exactly the kind of things that if we could set up this banana computation in gravity, we could predict the result computing gauge theory, see how universal it is and see if perhaps the exponential is universal, but the order one prefactor is not.
That's the most naive guess, but it could be something more exotic than this.
So I just don't know. I mean, I would I would need to have control over the gauge theory and for now be beyond LLM. It's very hard.
Any further questions or in light of time. Let's thank again.
