Welcome to the first lecture of our course on the Physics of Impossible Things.
I'm Ben Schumacher. I'm professor of physics at Kenyon College, and I'll be your instructor for this course.
Now I must tell you from the outset that this course is a paradox.
On the one hand, it is a course on physics. It's a serious exploration of the fundamental laws of nature,
and we will be thinking about the way the world really is.
But on the other hand, our central focus, our basic theme, and our indispensable tool will be the impossible.
So we will also be thinking about the way the world really isn't.
In this course, we'll be talking about crazy stuff. We'll be talking about going back in time, going faster than the speed of light,
escaping from inside occult, or producing an electromagnetic miracle.
Now many of these ideas are familiar from science fiction stories, and we will use some of those stories for our inspiration.
But in fact, and this is quite an interesting fact, physicists think about impossible things quite a lot.
Why? Why is it a useful pursuit to study impossible things?
Well as I see it, there are three essential reasons for this.
And the first is that the boundary between the possible and the impossible is an important line.
It's a good thing to know what is and is not possible in our universe.
And the laws of physics determine where that line between the possible and the impossible should be drawn.
So it's a good thing to think about just where that line is and why.
Second, thinking about the impossible is a tremendous tool for understanding the laws of physics.
And this is the main idea of this course.
You see, by pondering the impossible, we gain amazing insights into the meaning of physical laws
and the remarkable connections between different branches of physics.
It turns out that whenever we find that something is really and truly impossible,
there is always a great principle of physics at work.
And third, our own understanding of the laws of nature is imperfect.
It's provisional.
History is possible and sometimes big changes are made.
Sometimes things that were once thought possible turn out to be impossible.
For example, perpetual motion machines were regarded as possible for a long time,
but now we know they're impossible.
And it also can happen that things we once thought were impossible turn out to be possible after all.
For example, finding out what the distant stars are made of.
Once thought impossible, now we do it all the time.
Thinking about impossible things, therefore, is going to be useful in such revolutionary times.
Thinking about impossible things will help us understand the meaning and significance of new discoveries and new theories.
Now, I said there were three reasons, but of course, there are really four.
You see, thinking about impossible things is terrifically entertaining.
It is a really fun game.
So what makes the game of the impossible so fun to play?
Well, on the one hand, it challenges our imagination.
It inspires our creativity.
It forces us to think outside of the box.
On the other hand, to play the impossible game well, we have to use careful reasoning and ironclad logic.
And a game that uses both of these things, both imagination and logic,
and brings them together for understanding the laws of nature, that's a game worth playing.
Okay, so first of all, what do we mean by the word impossible?
When is it reasonable to say that something is impossible?
Now, in this course, we will distinguish among three different types of impossibility,
and each of them is useful to think about.
So three types of impossibility.
The first is absolute impossibility.
Something is an absolute impossibility if it involves a logical or mathematical contradiction.
This is a kind of impossibility that does not rely on any special assumptions.
The thing is impossible in itself.
What I mean is that we cannot imagine a world in which this kind of impossible thing is actually true.
So an absolute impossibility is the strongest type of impossibility.
The second type of impossibility is what we might call a derived impossibility.
This is something that's not impossible in itself, but it's impossible because it can.
But such a world is not our own world.
It's a world that follows different laws.
Now, of course, this type of impossibility depends on how reliable our assumptions are.
And if we change the framework of assumptions that we use, for example,
if we're forced to change the laws of physics that we know,
then we must reevaluate this type of impossibility.
And finally, the third type of impossibility is what we might call statistical impossibility.
Now, a statistical impossibility is not impossible in the strictest sense,
but it's something that is so overwhelmingly improbable that we can regard it as effectively impossible.
So, for example, let's imagine that we take a coin, a fair coin, and we flip it 10,000 times.
It's equally likely to land heads or tails each time.
So could I flip this coin 10,000 times and get all heads?
And the answer is yes, this is possible.
But it is so unlikely that it might as well be impossible.
So what are the odds of flipping this coin 10,000 times and getting all heads?
Well, the odds are about two followed by 3,000 zeros,
actually two followed by 3,010 zeros to one against.
Now, I'd like to give you some illustrations of these three types of impossibilities,
the absolute impossibilities, the derived physical impossibilities, and the statistical impossibilities.
And I'd also like to nominate patron saints for each type.
And these patron saints will be significant figures in the history of science
who thought about the impossible and who used the impossible to advance our understanding of the world.
So we'll start out with our patron saint of absolute impossibility, Euclid.
Euclid, of course, was a Greek mathematician.
He flourished around 300 BC.
And his great book, The Elements, is a treatise on geometry and the theory of numbers.
And The Elements is, without doubt, the most influential math textbook in history.
It's used as a textbook right up to our present day.
And all geometry textbooks are modeled, to some extent, on Euclid's elements.
What Euclid did is he started out with some basic postulates about geometry,
postulates about the properties of points and lines and so on.
And then he used rigorous logic to prove more advanced propositions.
Now, one of Euclid's favorite methods was something called proof by contradiction,
which is also known as reductio ad absurdum, reduction to an absurdity.
And so how does a proof by contradiction work?
Well, okay, so here's how it works.
Suppose you want to prove X. How do you do it?
Well, what you do is you pretend that X is not true.
Now, this will turn out to be a mathematical impossibility.
You're going to eventually prove that X is true, but you pretend that X is not true.
And then you logically show that this hypothesis, it's in book one,
and it's proposition six of book one.
And this is actually the very first proof by contradiction in Euclid's elements.
And it's a proposition about triangles, like the triangle ABC.
And Euclid has just shown in proposition five
that if ABC, AB, and AC have to have equal length,
you have to have an isosceles triangle.
And so what Euclid does is he says, well, suppose that's not true.
Euclid imagines an impossible triangle in which the angles at the bottom are equal,
the angles at B and C are equal, but the length of AB is longer than the length of AC.
Okay, given such a triangle, what do you do?
Well, what Euclid says is you can pick a point D, which is on the AB side,
so that the distance between D and B is the same as the distance between A and C.
DB and AC are equal to each other.
So we can take our diagram and we can divide it into two pieces.
There's an angle DBC and an angle ACB.
And those two angles are equal by our original assumption.
And those two pieces of the diagram share a common side, the base, BC,
which is, of course, the same length as CB.
That segment has the same length as itself.
And the other two sides, DB on the one side and AC on the other side,
have sides that are equal by our hypothesis.
That's how we picked the point D.
Therefore, the two triangles that we've formed, D angles, is a part of the other.
And that means that the areas of the two triangles cannot be equal.
One area must be greater than the other one.
And so we've arrived at a contradiction.
We arrived at an absurdity.
Therefore, our imagined triangle must really be impossible.
It must be impossible to make a triangle with the two angles being equal,
but the two sides not being equal.
And that means that the proposition is proved.
Now notice what Euclid has done.
By thinking about something that is mathematically impossible, an impossible triangle,
he has helped to establish what is really true about actual triangles.
He's used the impossibility of the triangle as a tool.
And that's what makes Euclid our patron saint of absolute impossibility.
Okay, so who's our patron saint of derived or physical impossibility?
Well, for that, we're going to choose none other than Isaac Newton.
Isaac Newton, of course, was an English physicist of the late 17th and early 18th century.
He was one of the greatest scientific minds in all of history.
And his great work, the Principia Mathematica, Philosophia e Naturalis,
published in 1687, was a fantastic foundation for the science of mechanics.
Mechanics, of course, is the science of force and motion.
And Newton founded this science based on laws of motion and gravitation.
And his mechanics was able to describe the motion of everything from projectiles to planets,
based on a single set of laws.
So I want to focus on something in book one of the Principia,
just after he introduces the laws of motion.
And he's discussing the law of action and reaction, one of those laws of motion.
And he imagines two objects, number one and number two, two balls, perhaps.
And if number one exerts a force on number two, the force of number two on number one
must be exactly equal in strength and opposite in direction.
That's a general law, in fact.
It applies to all forces between all objects.
And so Newton asks, what if this weren't true?
What if the law of action and reaction had an exception?
So Newton considered what we might call Newton's dumbbell.
You have two spheres, and they're connected to each other by a stiff rod.
And we'll suppose that the spheres attract each other.
But one of the spheres experiences a greater force,
in contradiction to the law of action and reaction.
Okay, so one of the spheres experiences a greater force.
What happens to the dumbbell?
Well, on the dumbbell, there's a net force to one side.
One of the forces is greater than the other, so the whole dumbbell accelerates in that direction.
But this violates another of the laws of motion, the law of inertia,
which states that in the absence of an outside force, the dumbbell should remain at rest
or move with constant velocity.
But this dumbbell accelerates without an outside force.
So by thinking about a physically impossible dumbbell, Newton shows how the laws of motion fit together.
If you contradict the law of action and reaction for the two spheres,
and you must also contradict the law of inertia for the whole dumbbell.
And that's a significant insight into mechanics.
And that's why we nominate Newton as the patron saint of this type of impossibility.
Okay, so who shall we nominate for our patron saint of statistical impossibility?
Well, I'm going to nominate James Clerk Maxwell.
Maxwell was a Scottish physicist of the 19th century.
Now, almost everyone has heard of Euclid and Newton, but I think that Maxwell deserves that kind of fame.
He made decisive discoveries in electromagnetism and thermodynamics.
He created the first color photograph in history, and he invented engineering control theory, among other things.
He's one of my heroes in physics, and he will come up in this course several times.
Now, our present concern is a passage from his book, Theory of Heat, published in 1871.
And Maxwell invites us to consider a container with a gas inside.
And initially, the gas only fills half of the container, and the rest is empty.
So maybe there was a partition down the middle of the container, and we removed the partition,
and now we ask, what will happen to the gas?
Well, what happens to the gas, of course, is that the gas rapidly expands, and it fills the whole container.
Now, the reverse process, where the gas spontaneously starts out in the whole container and gathers to one side,
that reverse process is never seen.
And in the mid-19th century, they understood that this fact illustrates something called the second law of thermodynamics.
Now, thermodynamics is the science of heat, and it's a physical impossibility.
We're going to discuss this a lot in lectures five and six.
Now, Maxwell pointed out that the gas is made up of trillions upon trillions of tiny molecules.
These molecules fly around, colliding, bouncing off the sides of the container.
The motion of these molecules is immensely complex.
We must regard it, in fact, as chaotic and random, although it actually is following Newton's laws of motion.
So Maxwell asks, what prevents the impossible?
What prevents all of the gas molecules from going to one half of the container?
And his answer is rather startling.
His answer is, nothing prevents it. It could happen.
But it is exceedingly improbable.
Okay, what are the odds?
Well, when we flipped a coin, we estimated the odds of 10,000 heads to be a 2,
followed by 3,010 zeros, to one against.
That was pretty unlikely.
What are the odds that all of the gas molecules will gather on one side of the container?
Well, that's a one followed by 150 billion trillion zeros to one against.
This is statistically impossible.
What Maxwell realizes is that the laws of thermodynamics, at least the second law,
these laws are statistical laws, laws about probabilities.
And this is a profound insight in the history of science.
It manipulates the atoms and can radically change the odds of what happens.
And we will discuss Maxwell's demonet some length in lecture 6.
Okay, we've seen three different kinds of impossibility.
Absolute or mathematical impossibility, derived or physical impossibility, and statistical impossibility.
And we've seen how these can be used as tools for establishing the line between the possible and the impossible,
for exploring how the laws of physics fit together,
and for changing our views about those laws in the light of new discoveries.
Now, because our course is about the impossible, we're going to range all over the place in topic.
We're going to talk about many, many branches of physics.
We're going to talk about phenomena large and small, theories old and very new.
Fine, but I want to tell you that is not what we are about.
Here's what we will find.
We will find that similar themes recur over and over again in our discussion.
That quite different impossible things turn out to be impossible for very similar reasons.
We'll see why we cannot even always turn one form of energy into another.
We'll discuss why we cannot reach absolute zero, the absolute minimum temperature, the limit of cold.
And we'll see why we cannot exactly predict the future.
And after this, we're going to do several more lectures where we get into issues about space and time, cause and effect.
We'll talk about why we cannot travel into the past or go faster than the speed of light.
We'll spend a few lectures talking about the notion of symmetry and geometry.
Now, the idea of symmetry is a crucially important idea for physics.
But how is it connected to the impossible?
Well, we say that a shape has a symmetry. Let's say it's left-right symmetric.
If it is impossible to tell whether that shape has been reflected, the reflected version and the original are exactly the same.
And so symmetry is a principle of impossibility.
And in the same way, we can ask whether the laws of physics themselves are symmetric.
We can consider mirror worlds, a world in which we've exchanged left and right, or matter and antimatter, or the future and the past.
And we can ask, would it be possible to distinguish those mirror worlds from our own?
And we can also talk about magnified worlds, worlds where everything has just been enlarged.
And we'll find out why the Earth is never actually menaced by those giant insect monsters.
After this, we're going to turn to the quantum world.
We're going to talk about how the quantum revolution changed physics,
and why it is impossible to know precisely where a particle is and where it is going.
We'll talk about how quantum particles can go places and do things that seem impossible.
We'll talk about how the idea of the impossible guides our understanding of elementary particles.
And we'll talk about why it is impossible to duplicate a quantum particle,
and why that is one of the most important facts in the universe.
At the end of our course, we're going to take up some profound questions about the physical world.
We're going to say, what does all of this impossible stuff tell us about the laws of nature?
We're going to ask, how does the universe actually enforce its laws?
We'll actually be able to give a partial answer to that question.
We'll ask, what kinds of impossibility are there?
What kinds of impossibility are possible?
And as we learn more about nature, what is the future of the impossible?
Now, this is inspired in part by my own work as a physicist, my own thinking about impossible things.
My research specialty is in something called quantum information theory,
which is how quantum physics governs the way we store and retrieve and transmit and process information.
And it's a relatively new branch of physics, and it's still full of surprises.
We're still mapping out the border between the possible and the impossible.
And so I find myself using the impossible as a tool for figuring out what the laws of physics mean and how they work.
I keep running into astonishing connections between apparently disparate subjects,
between thermodynamics and relativity and quantum physics and information theory and more.
And sometimes I've had to revise my thinking about the impossible in light of new discoveries.
And I was often surprised by what turns out to be possible, as I am by what turns out to be impossible.
And this continues to be a tremendous adventure.
And that experience has been the inspiration for this course.
I know of no way to get more directly at more fundamental questions about the physical world than to use the impossible.
If our goal, therefore, is understanding, there is nothing more practical than the impossible.
But of course, if we're going to use the idea of the impossible, we had better be careful.
History is full of surprises.
Lots of things were once regarded as impossible and were later found to be possible after all.
There were technological impossibilities like powered flight and nuclear energy.
They said it couldn't be done and then somebody did it.
And there have also been natural and scientific impossibilities.
They said that it couldn't happen.
They said that it was scientifically impossible for something to happen and then someone discovered that it did happen.
So in our discussion of the impossible, we'd like to avoid such failures of the imagination.
So next time, we're going to take a look at a few of these not quite impossible things.
That's next time. I'll see you then.
