Welcome to the second lecture in our course on the physics of impossible things.
Last time, we discussed what it means to be impossible,
and we distinguished among different types of impossible things.
And we saw that thinking about the impossible is a powerful and enlightening thing to do.
Now, our main business in this course is to map out the line between the possible and the things once thought to be impossible,
which later turned out to be possible after all.
Now, in these cases, the naysayers were not all stupid, thoughtless people.
Many of them were the best minds with the best information.
So this lecture is going to be a brief survey of some things that only seemed impossible.
Invented the idea of the communication satellite in a paper in 1945.
Alas, he didn't patent the idea.
A story he told in an essay entitled, How I Lost a Billion Dollars in My Spare Time.
Now, in 1962, Arthur C. Clarke published a book called Profiles of the Future,
and this was later revised in 1999.
And this book is not a novel.
It's a book of speculation about the future of science and technology.
But more interestingly, it's also a book about the nature and the perils of such speculation.
Clarke posed three laws, Clarke's three laws about speculation,
and these are observations about human nature and our ability to foresee the future.
And so I want to give you these three laws, but we'll mention them here out of order.
I'll begin with the second law, Clarke's second law.
The only way of discovering the limits of the possible is to venture a little way past them into the impossible.
This law, of course, could be the motto for our entire course.
Clarke's third law states that any sufficiently advanced technology is indistinguishable from magic.
That's an interesting claim, and we'll return to this claim, actually, at the end of the course in lecture 24.
But today, I want to concentrate on Clarke's first law, which goes like this.
When a distinguished but elderly scientist states that something is possible, he is almost certainly right.
When he states that something is impossible, he is very probably wrong.
This is the law, especially that second part of the law, that we will be illustrating in this lecture.
The first law is to fly in the air, but they are lighter than aircraft.
They fly because the gas contained in the balloon has less weight than the air around it,
and balloons are huge and they're fragile and they're slow and they're hard to control.
Also, by 1900, there had been some limited and rather unimpressive experiments with gliders.
So the question that several people were asking in 1900 is, is powered heavier than air flight possible?
And in 1903, an eminent astronomer and mathematician named Simon Newcomb writes an essay about the subject.
And so what does Newcomb say?
He says, well, some people say, of course such a machine is possible because birds fly,
and if birds can fly, we can build a machine that can fly.
But Newcomb says, this is not good logic to say that just because birds can fly,
we can build large machines that will enable us to fly,
because even with birds, just because a sparrow can fly doesn't mean that an animal
a hundred times the size of a sparrow would be able to fly.
As we will see in lecture 16, it doesn't work that way.
We can't just scale up and fly the way the birds fly.
Newcomb's quite right about this.
So as Newcomb sees it, there are two basic problems with the technology of flight.
The first problem is the problem of materials.
What materials are available?
Well, there's wood and wire, fabric and metal,
and Newcomb says these materials are not light and strong enough for a powered air-flying machine.
And the second problem that Newcomb sees is the problem of the power source.
There might be steam engines or electric motors and so on,
and he says these power sources are too heavy,
and they're not powerful enough for an airplane.
Now, Newcomb doesn't want to say that flight is impossible.
He realizes that he cannot predict future discoveries in science.
Maybe someday we'll discover how to cancel out gravity.
Thus, he concludes that it is not quite impossible that a practical flying machine
will be invented by the end of the 20th century,
but it's not that likely either.
Newcomb's essay is published in October of 1903,
and within two months, Orville and Wilbur Wright conduct their first test flights of a powered airplane.
So why was Newcomb wrong?
Newcomb, in fact, identified the problems correctly.
Now, he did not know enough aerodynamics to be an expert.
He didn't, for example, understand exactly how wings work, how wings generate lift.
That's not surprising. Relatively few people in 1903 understood how wings work.
And Newcomb also did not appreciate what was already possible,
or the rapid development of future technology.
So Clark uses Newcomb as a prime example of his first law.
Was Newcomb distinguished? Absolutely.
This paper that a sufficiently powerful rocket could be used to reach the moon.
Now, Goddard received widespread ridicule,
including a rather scathing editorial in The New York Times, no less,
saying that rockets could never work in outer space.
The editors of The New York Times said that in the vacuum of space,
there's nothing for the rocket to push against. There's no air.
Well, of course, that's nonsense, and Goddard knew it was nonsense.
Rockets push against their own exhaust,
and that works, in fact, it works even more efficiently in outer space.
Nevertheless, the conventional wisdom was Goddard was spouting impossibilities.
So time passes, and in 1956, that's after Goddard's experiments
with solid and liquid-fueled rockets in the 1920s and 30s,
it's after the German V-2 missile in World War II.
It's after more than a decade of intense post-war rocket research
on both sides of the Iron Curtain.
In 1956, Richard Vandereet Woolley, the British astronomer royal,
gave an interview to Time Magazine.
Okay, is Woolley distinguished? Certainly he's distinguished.
Is he elderly? He was about 50 years old,
and I hesitate to call that elderly.
That's only a couple of years older than I am.
But draw your own conclusions.
Okay, so what did Woolley say about space travel?
I quote, it is utter bilge.
That was 1956.
By the end of 1957, the Soviet Union had launched Sputnik,
the first artificial Earth satellite.
In fact, Woolley lived to see humans in orbit,
the landings on the moon, and the space shuttle.
So why was Woolley so wrong?
Well, he was a distinguished scientist and a really smart guy,
but he was no expert in astronautics.
He was a solar expert.
And Woolley did not appreciate how rapidly technology was advancing.
And he believed that space travel would simply be too expensive.
No one could afford it.
And anyway, all that money would be better spent on telescopes and such.
Okay, we've seen a couple of examples, the airplane, space flight.
There are plenty of other examples.
Radio and TV, nuclear energy, computers, and so on.
All of these were regarded as impossible or extremely impractical,
even by well-informed scientists and not just astronomers like Newcombe and Woolley.
I don't mean to pick on astronomers.
And even quite soon before these things became common.
So what lessons can we draw from this?
Well, the first lesson is never underestimate a very good guide
as to what will turn out to be possible or not.
What about science fiction?
Science fiction writers are experts at exploring possibilities.
Are they as good or better at prophecy than the scientists?
Well, if you go back and you read the science fiction magazines of the 1930s and 40s and 50s,
you find lots of really interesting ideas about future technology.
And there are, in there somewhere, some pretty good predictions.
But the real future has actually been rather different from the future envisioned
in the golden age of science fiction and can actually formulate a general trend.
The science fiction writers of the 30s and 40s and 50s in general
somewhat overestimated how powerful our propulsion systems would turn out to be.
There are lots of super-duper spaceships, flying cars, and so on.
They can go fast and fly far, and the fuel tanks aren't very big.
So they sort of overestimated propulsion and energy systems.
On the other hand, they greatly underestimated how powerful our computers
and communication systems would become.
Now, right now, there are more computers than people on the earth.
And every one of those computers is more powerful,
and almost all of them are much smaller than any computer in existence in the 1950s.
So the moral of the story is that science fiction writers can be both overly optimistic
and not optimistic enough.
Okay, we've discussed technological examples.
Examples of technological advances thought to be impossible
and then later proven to be possible.
Our further examples are going to be of a more fundamental nature.
We're going to look at claims of scientific impossibility.
Now, our first example will concern Auguste Comte.
He was a 19th century French philosopher of science.
And Comte was one of the founders of the philosophical school of positivism.
Now, what's positivism?
Well, positivism is based on the idea that human knowledge,
and most especially scientific knowledge, is based only on what we can perceive with our senses.
So this means that only statements that can be tested by direct experiment and observation
are scientific statements.
And this is a very good principle.
However, in 1835, Comte wrote about the limitations of the science of astronomy.
And he says, the stars are immensely far away.
At about this time, they were beginning to measure the distances to the first stars.
The stars are trillions and trillions of miles away.
And so Comte says, we will never be able to travel to the stars and study them directly.
Therefore, he concludes, that it is impossible to determine the chemical composition of the stars,
what basic elements compose them.
Therefore, since we will never be able to find this out,
the question, what are stars made of, is not a scientific question in Comte's view.
He notes that the planets are a million times closer than the stars,
and so maybe their composition could be discovered someday by light that they themselves emit.
And that light carries information about the stars' composition.
In the early 19th century, Fraunhofer discovered there's a distinctive pattern of light and dark bands
in the spectrum of light from the sun.
Some colors of light are emitted more strongly, other colors much less.
And similar but different patterns are present in the light from distant stars.
And so by 1860, physicists had discovered that these patterns revealed the chemical composition of the outer layers of the stars.
They found that stars were mostly made of hydrogen.
There were lots of other identifiable elements like oxygen and sodium,
and there was at least one new element, helium, that they'd never seen on Earth.
Of course, they later identified it on Earth as a trace gas.
This technique of using light to determine composition is called spectroscopy,
and it's proven to be a terrifically important technique in stellar astronomy.
Comte said that we would never know what the stars are made of.
But within 25 years of Comte's writing, astronomers knew more and knew more directly about what the stars were made of
than what the planets were made of.
They knew more about the composition of distant stars than they knew about the composition of the interior of the Earth itself.
So Comte was not just wrong, he was spectacularly wrong.
All of our examples so far are kind of old, they're 50 or 100 or 150 years ago.
So maybe we've been smarter more recently, maybe we've learned our lessons.
We could never be so mistaken about what is impossible.
So my second example of scientific impossibility is a somewhat more recent story drawn from biology,
and it's based on a simple observation.
The observation is that living things are killed by high temperatures.
I mean, after all, this is how we sterilize surgical instruments.
We subject them to high temperatures and the germs all die.
Now, of course, some organisms are more heat tolerant than others.
So the question is, what's the limit?
What is the highest temperature that a living thing can endure?
So this is all about temperature.
And we'll be using, for this lecture, the Celsius scale of temperature.
And just to remind you, in the Celsius scale, at 0 degrees Celsius, water freezes.
The freezing point of water.
20 to 25 degrees is a typical room temperature.
37 degrees is human body temperature.
And at 100 degrees, water boils.
Now, as we'll see later on, lecture six, to be specific,
temperature measures the speed of microscopic random motions of molecules.
So our question is, what is the temperature limit in degrees Celsius for living cells to thrive, to grow and reproduce?
It may be possible that a cell could just sort of hunker down and survive for a while at a higher temperature,
but what's the highest temperature for it to carry on the business of life?
And our question is really a question about biochemistry.
High temperature kills by disrupting chemical and physical processes of life.
So let's consider the two most important kinds of molecules in living things, proteins and DNA.
Now, a protein is a long chain of basic units called amino acids, a long chain,
and this chain is tightly folded into a complex shape.
And the shape of the molecule is absolutely essential for its function.
And the problem is that molecular adjacent unraveled proteins can become tangled up with each other.
This is called cooking.
And it begins to happen at a route about 50 degrees, depends on exactly which protein you're talking about.
And indeed, most organisms are killed by sustained temperatures above 50 degrees Celsius.
Now, we've noticed that these bacteria are called thermophiles, heat lovers.
And the way these work is they use specially heat-resistant proteins.
For example, their proteins contain less of the amino acid glycine.
The rule of one of the things that glycine does on a protein is it makes that protein more flexible.
Less glycine, less flexible, harder to unfold.
But of course, there are limits.
At 60 to 5 degrees Celsius, you can cook an egg.
It's slower than boiling. It takes about an hour, but an hour or two will have all your proteins unraveled and tangled up together.
So, around 1970, it was believed that the absolute limit, even with heat-resistant proteins, was just above 70 degrees Celsius.
And why was that the absolute limit?
DNA.
DNA, of course, is a fundamental molecule in our body.
It consists of two strands wrapped around each other in a double helix shape.
And the parts in between the two strands store the basic information about the cell, about its structure and function.
They come apart at about 73 degrees Celsius.
And since all life on Earth is based on DNA, this looks like a firm limit.
So the idea was that it is impossible for any organism to function above 73 degrees Celsius.
But then, in the 1970s and 1980s, came the discovery of some really strange new forms of life, mostly bacteria.
And these living things, these bacteria, showed up in very unexpected places.
They showed up inside porous rocks deep within the Earth's crust.
They showed up inside hot springs and geysers, like the ones at Yellowstone National Park.
And most amazing of all, they showed up inside volcanic vents deep under the ocean.
These were extreme thermophiles.
These were bacteria that could grow and reproduce at 80 or 90 or 100 degrees Celsius.
The present record holder is a little guy called Mephanopyrus kendleri.
Mephanopyrus thrives in water at 112 degrees Celsius.
Wait a minute. Doesn't water boil at 100 degrees Celsius?
Yes, at ordinary pressures.
But Mephanopyrus bacteria live deep in the ocean, kilometers under the water, where the pressure is very high.
And these high pressures keep the water from actually boiling even at 112 degrees Celsius.
So how do they do it?
Do Mephanopyrus bacteria have special, different heat-resistant DNA?
No. Their DNA is exactly like ours.
But they do have a couple of things that they do.
They have special enzymes, these are proteins, that cause the DNA to be coiled into a tight spiral.
The helix is then itself coiled into a tight spiral like a phone cord.
And then there are other protein molecules that bind to the DNA strand and help to hold it together despite the violent molecular shaking at 112 degrees Celsius.
So now that we know about organisms like Mephanopyrus kendleri, we no longer know what the impossible temperature for earth-type life might be.
We just don't know. Is it 200 or 300 degrees?
Such temperatures do seem to be impossible, not proteins and DNA, but something more heat-resistant?
Maybe. We simply don't know.
So what is this the main danger in declaring something to be impossible?
Well, according to Arthur C. Clarke, the danger is a failure of the imagination.
If we can't see how a thing is possible, that doesn't make it impossible.
So the moral for us is that we should be very cautious about conclusive principle.
In other words, we should ignore mere technological difficulties.
If the laws of physics allow something, we will call it possible even if we do not have the resources and the know-how actually to make it happen.
And we want to appeal to those laws as directly as possible because complicated proofs of impossibility may have loopholes or hidden assumptions.
So we want to look for those loopholes. We want to look for those hidden assumptions.
We want to try and find ways to make something possible.
And the second general rule that we want to keep in mind is that when we call something impossible,
we should keep in mind, we should know and keep in mind exactly what kind of impossibility we're talking about.
Is this an absolute impossibility, something that involves a logical contradiction?
Is it a physical impossibility, something derived from the laws of physics and therefore dependent on the exact nature of those laws?
Or is it a statistical impossibility, something that is actually just very, very, very improbable?
And we also want to know how would things change if we made some new discoveries?
Now, despite our best efforts, a century from now, a few of our statements will very likely seem as funny as Newcombe's and Woolie's statements about airplanes and spaceflight.
We're going to do the best with what we know now, but we have to accept that science will probably move that line between the possible and impossible,
and we better get used to that idea.
In this lecture, we've looked at some examples of technological and scientific so-called impossibilities, heavier than air flight, space travel, finding out what distant stars are made of,
and organisms that can live at the temperature of boiling water.
But every one of these things, once thought to be impossible, turned out to be possible after all, and sometimes in some rather surprising ways.
So in our next lecture, we will turn to our first really impossible thing.
We're going to talk about a perpetual motion machine.
That's a machine that runs forever and does useful work for free.
Something like that would be a very handy device, but unfortunately, a perpetual motion machine is impossible.
The reason why is a remarkable story, and that's our story for next time.
I'll see you then.
