Machine that seemed possible to many people to countless would-be inventors for centuries.
Yet that machine is actually a physical impossibility.
Today we're going to talk about a perpetual motion machine.
The story of why the perpetual motion machine is impossible is the story of one of the most
fundamental and if you have an ox cart rolling along a level road that cart will eventually
come to a halt unless you have an ox to pull it.
Why?
Well the answer is friction.
So maybe you can grease the axles of the cart and you can make the road a lot smoother
and then you'll find that the ox cart will go a lot further before it comes to a stop.
Well could there be a cart with no friction at all?
Such a cart would keep rolling forever.
That would be due to its inertia.
Now we don't know how to build such a thing.
We don't know how to build an ox definition of work is a force acting through a distance.
So for example if I'm standing here I am exerting a force on the floor.
But there's no work involved because the floor does not move.
If that force does not act through a distance no work.
On the other hand let's imagine that I want to lift a weight to a higher level.
Then there's some work involved because the object moves.
For example if I want to draw water from a well then I have to do work because the force
of pulling the water up acts through the distance, the depth of the well.
And so getting an ox cart moving or keeping it moving despite friction that's also work.
Now ordinary machines that do work seem to run down without an external supply of force
or action.
And the ox will run down if we don't feed it.
A perpetual motion machine is an imaginary device that can do work forever without any
external supply of anything.
Now this would be an extremely useful kind of machine.
And over the centuries there have been many ideas for building one.
Let's take a look at a classic design for a perpetual motion machine.
This is called an unbalanced wheel.
Now the basic idea for this design actually comes from India in the 12th century almost
a thousand years ago.
Wheel is divided into wedge shaped compartments and those compartments hold small heavy masses
maybe lead balls.
And we arrange the compartments in such a way that on one side of the wheel the masses
tend to be farther from the axle.
Farther out means that the weight is more effective at turning that wheel.
There's more torque and on the other side they tend to be closer to the axle.
So there are lots of variations on this.
You could have tubes filled with a little friction in the axle.
The force will be able to overcome it.
And it'll turn in that direction even if we use the wheel to lift weights like to run
a pulley and draw water from the well.
And so in this case the unbalanced wheel would allow us to get work for free, forever.
The only problem is that such machines never quite function as advertised.
For example in the notebooks of Leonardo da Vinci in 15th century Italy there are several
sketches of perpetual motion machines of this type.
There are several variations on the unbalanced wheel but there's also a notation these things
do not work.
And in fact it is a fact that all such machines must fail.
A perpetual motion machine is really impossible.
Now the first person to understand that this is a fundamental principle of nature was Simon
Stevan, the great Flemish physicist and mathematician.
He was a contemporary of Galileo.
And Stevan considered a variation on the unbalanced wheel.
Stevan considered a loop of chain that hangs over a triangular support.
And the idea is that the weight of the links will pull down more on the steeper side of
the support.
So that means that the chain will continually slide around the triangle even if there's
a little friction.
The chain will be a perpetual motion machine.
And Stevan realized that yes the links on the steeper side sort of pull harder but there
are more links on the less steep side.
And so there's no net force pulling in either direction.
The chain is in equilibrium.
It's in a state of balanced forces, equal forces in each direction.
So here's the intuition behind Stevan's idea.
If you were to slide there is no such thing as a perpetual motion machine.
And this is a new principle of physics.
Now legend has it that Stevan had his diagram engraved on his tombstone and inscribed with
his motto, and excuse my Dutch, wonder en is geen wonder.
What seems a wonder is not a wonder.
But alas Stevan's tomb is lost.
We don't know where it is.
And so we can't check on the legend.
All right.
A machine cannot do work.
Unless it undergoes some net change.
But exactly what has to change?
What has to change about the machine in order for it to do work?
And the modern answer is energy has to change.
Now the concept of energy has a long and murky history.
In the 18th century when physicists were first working out the implications of Newton's physics,
it was actually called vis-viva, which is Latin for living force.
And the name energy was actually adopted in the early 19th century.
But very early on there were two kinds of energy recognized.
And so I'll illustrate them.
Newton had an apple.
We'll use an orange.
So the first kind of energy is kinetic energy.
It's the energy of an object due to its motion through space.
So if this orange is moving, it has kinetic energy.
And the faster it moves, the more kinetic energy it has.
All right.
The second kind of energy is potential energy.
And we'll talk about potential energy in connection with gravity.
This is the energy of an object due to its position.
Gravity contributes to this.
To the potential energy of the orange, the higher up the orange is, the more potential
energy it has.
It has low potential energy down low, high potential energy up high.
The total mechanical energy, mechanical because this is the energy in mechanics, the total
mechanical energy is the kinetic energy plus the potential energy.
So for an orange flying through the air with only gravity acting, the kinetic plus the
potential stays constant.
Kinetic energy plus potential energy, total mechanical energy is constant.
So let's imagine, let's suppose I throw the orange upward.
At first, when I first throw the orange, it has a high kinetic energy, but it has a low
potential energy.
At the top, it has a low kinetic energy.
It's almost come to a stop, but it has a high potential energy because it's up higher.
And back at the bottom, it has a high kinetic energy because it's moving fast, but a low
potential energy.
But the total of kinetic energy plus potential energy is constant.
Now if I do work on my orange, if I act on it with a force acting through a distance,
I will change its mechanical energy.
I'll either speed it up, which means I'll give it more kinetic energy, or I'll lift
it to a higher point, which means it has more potential energy.
No work is a change in mechanical energy.
And if there's no change, there's no work, which is a way of looking at Stevan's principle.
Of course, the story of the orange is incomplete.
Where did the orange's energy come from?
It came from my muscles.
And where did the orange's energy go?
Well, when I caught the orange, there was friction.
So our conclusion is that mechanical energy here, but it's not very impressive as a general
law of physics.
OK, so that's the mechanical idea of energy that was developed during the...
And so the easy way to think about it is that hot objects have more of something than the
cold objects do, and that something is what we call heat.
Now the best theory of heat at the time is that heat is actually an intangible fluid,
an invisible fluid called caloric.
And so let's think about the caloric theory for a minute.
Let's imagine you have a hot piece of iron.
Because the iron is very hot, you have lots of caloric in that hot piece of iron.
Now we plunge the hot piece of iron into cold water.
And so caloric flows from the hot iron into the water, and the iron cools down, and the
water warms up, which is, of course, just what we see.
And the temperature rise of the water, how much the water temperature rises, tells us
how much caloric went into it.
And we could use this to actually measure the flow of caloric in a certain sense.
Well, how did we heat up the iron in the first place?
Well maybe we had it in a fire.
Well where does the heat in a fire come from?
Where does caloric come from in a fire?
Well, if we burn a piece of wood, so the theory goes, somehow caloric is released from the
wood.
The wood has some stored caloric, and then in burning it's released.
And this is a nice theory, actually, because if I look at what's left over after I burn
the wood, the ashes, there isn't any caloric available from the cold ashes.
You can't burn ashes, so you can tell that one of the differences between ashes and wood
is that, the obvious physical difference, and one of the ways to explain that is there's
no more caloric that you can get out of the ashes.
All right, that's the theory, the caloric theory.
Well along comes Benjamin Thompson, who's a scientist and engineer.
Thompson is born in Colonial Massachusetts in 1753, but he can't stay in America.
He has to leave America during the American Revolution because he's a loyalist to the
British Crown.
He has to move to England in the 1780s, and then later on he moves to Bavaria.
And in Bavaria, he gets a job overseeing munitions manufacture for the local prince.
And in recognition of his services, he actually becomes a count of the Holy Roman Empire,
and so Benjamin Thompson is also known as Count Rumpford.
All right, so while he's supervising munitions manufacture in Bavaria, in 1798 he makes
a remarkable discovery, a discovery that really actually destroys the caloric theory.
It makes the caloric theory impossible, but so widely accepted as the caloric theory of
heat that hardly anyone notices Thompson's discovery for a long while.
OK, so what's Thompson's discovery?
Well, Thompson is looking at the boring of cannon, making cannon.
And how do you make a cannon?
Well, what you do is you cast a piece of bronze, and then you bore out the inside of that piece
of bronze, the inside of the barrel with an abrasive bit.
So you grind and grind and grind and grind and grind to bore out the barrel of the cannon.
And in the process, the brass gets very hot.
In fact, you usually have to immerse the whole thing in water to help keep it cool.
And Thompson's very interested in this.
Obviously, a lot of caloric is being released.
And so one of the things he does is he gathers up the little brass chips, brass shavings
that come out of the boring.
And he studies them and he says, these are just like ordinary brass.
There's been no change.
It's not like wood where we get a lot of caloric out and then what's left over is obviously different.
No, this is just regular brass.
Where does the heat come from?
So Thompson's experiment is to actually blunt the boring bit and then just keep boring
without actually grinding out any of the cannon brass.
Just keep boring, keep boring, keep boring.
It doesn't be kept up as long as you like.
You just keep pushing that borer around and around and around.
And then it produces heat.
It produces a lot of heat.
It produces after an hour or so you can get water boiling and you can keep it boiling
for as long as you keep pushing it.
So where does all that heat come from?
You can get out as much as you like.
What are you putting into this system to get out all that heat?
And Thompson realizes that the only thing we are putting into the system is work.
We're pushing the borer around and around and around and around.
We have to keep pushing it.
That force keeps acting through a distance.
The only thing we're putting in is work and the friction between the borer and the brass
turns that work and the brass is just turned into not mechanical energy,
not kinetic and potential energy, but heat.
Now, since almost everyone at the time accepted the caloric idea without question,
Thompson's discovery actually took half a century to bear fruit.
But indeed it did eventually bear fruit.
The next step came in the 1840s due to the work of two men.
One was Julius von Meer, who was a German medical doctor,
and the other is James Prescott Jewel, who was an English physicist.
And both these men were able, by very different methods,
to determine exactly how much work corresponds to how much heat.
How much work do you have to do to produce how much heat?
What's the exchange rate between work and heat?
And so if you can figure out the exchange rate,
if you can find out the heat value of a given amount of work,
that really established only a little bit more massive than a baseball.
How much energy would be in that fast-pitched orange?
Well, the answer is it's about 100 joules of kinetic energy, 100 joules.
That's a lot.
Well, now let's suppose we want to heat the orange up.
Let's suppose we want to raise the temperature of the orange by a couple of degrees.
How much energy does that take?
Well, it actually takes about a thousand joules of heat energy
to raise the temperature of an orange by a couple of degrees.
So heat is another form of energy,
but actually what seems like a fairly modest amount of heat
corresponds to a lot of energy, a lot of joules of energy.
Okay, so mayor and jewel are able to show that heat energy is another form of energy.
And then they take the next step.
They propose that energy, total energy, is conserved.
Now, this is our first example of a very important,
that X cannot be created or destroyed.
The total amount of X cannot change over time.
And in this case, X is energy, X energy.
And there are different kinds of energy.
There's kinetic energy as we saw.
There's potential energy. There's heat.
And there are also other kinds of energy that we haven't really discussed.
There's chemical energy. There's electrical energy.
There's radiant energy, the energy carried by light, and so on.
And we can actually measure all of these different kinds of energy independently.
We can find out how much chemical energy there is, how much electrical energy,
how much and so on.
Now, energy can change form.
So in our little experiment,
my hand, that kinetic energy turns into heat in the orange in my hand,
via friction.
So even just as simple action as tossing an orange up and catching it,
is actually a set of very complicated energy transformations,
but through it all, the total amount of energy remains the same.
Okay, the conservation of energy is one of the most far-reaching principles in all of science.
The conservation of energy is the fundamental reason why perpetual motion machines are impossible.
You see, if the machine does work, if it adds energy to its surroundings,
say lifts water out of the well, that energy must come from somewhere.
No machine can produce more energy than it consumes.
It's impossible.
But what kind of impossibility is it?
Well, we tag this as a physical impossibility.
That is to say, a perpetual motion machine is a derived impossibility.
Its impossibility is derived from, based on, the laws of physics.
In this case, the law of the conservation of energy.
So you could imagine a universe in which perpetual motion machine could exist.
But such a universe would have to follow different laws than our universe.
So the impossibility of a perpetual motion machine is only as sure as the underlying law that it's based on is sure.
But perpetual motion machines are impossible because the conservation of energy is a law.
So are perpetual motion machines dead and gone?
Do we just never see them proposed anymore?
Well, not quite.
The unbalanced wheel and its cousins have been reinvented thousands of times by eager optimists.
But the inventions never work.
The unbalanced wheel never works.
And some people, even in empty space, it's called vacuum energy, sometimes also called zero-point energy.
And so the question is, can we tap this energy?
And the energy of empty space sounds like an inexhaustible source.
If we can tap this energy, we can make a perpetual motion machine.
Now this is not actually completely ridiculous because the vacuum energy can actually do work.
There's something called the Casimir effect, which was discovered by the Dutch physicist Hendrik Casimir.
And in the Casimir effect, you imagine parallel metal plates in otherwise empty space.
They're just two metal plates that are parallel.
And because of the energy in the vacuum surrounding the plates, those plates are actually slightly attracted to each other.
There's a slight force attracting the plates to each other.
And we could use this force to do work.
We could use the tiny force between the plates as we bring the plates together to lift a weight or make something go faster.
But notice what's happened. There's been a net change.
Now the metal plates, which were far apart, are together.
And because the plates are in a different location, the empty space around them has changed.
There's less zero-point energy.
So Stevan's principle that there must be a change if you get work out of the machine still holds.
And if we want to get any more work out of this machine, we're going to have to pry these plates apart again.
But to do that, we're going to have to put energy back into the system.
So what this means is that even if we can extract some energy from the quantum vacuum, the vacuum itself is altered by that process.
The vacuum energy still does not allow us to build a perpetual motion machine.
Now the conservation of energy is one of the most firmly established laws in all of science.
It's also known as the given the first law of thermodynamics, the conservation of energy.
These processes, these phenomena look impossible, yet they really do happen.
So these phenomena challenge the validity of the first law of thermodynamics.
I mean, maybe we're just wrong about it.
It's only a principle that we have conceived.
Maybe perpetual motion machines are possible after all.
Well next time we're going to tell the story of some of these challenges to the law of conservation of energy, the first law of thermodynamics.
And we'll see how the first law still manages to survive as a fundamental principle of physics.
So challenging the first law of thermodynamics.
That's next time. I'll see you then.
