Welcome to the fourth lecture in our course on the physics of impossible things.
Last time we saw that perpetual motion machines are impossible.
And this is because of the principle of Stevan,
that no machine can do work unless it undergoes some net change.
We also saw how Benjamin Thompson discovered that there was a connection between work and heat.
And this led to Mayer and Jules' discovery of the law of conservation of energy,
the statement that energy may change in form or be transferred from place to place,
but it cannot be created or destroyed.
This is called the first law of thermodynamics.
Now, this time we're going to talk about some observations and discoveries
that have challenged this law over the years.
So our first challenge is a completely obvious question.
What makes the sun shine?
I mean, this is a fundamental fact about our experience.
It's in some ways the fundamental fact of astrophysics.
The sun is very hot and very bright.
And it has been very hot and very bright for a really, really long time.
The sun pours immense amounts of energy, sunlight, into space.
It emits 400 trillion, trillion joules of energy every second.
So where does all that energy come from?
Well, pretty much the first person to think about this question in a serious scientific way
was Hermann von Helmholtz, the great German physicist of the 19th century.
And in 1854, just a few years after the conservation of energy was formulated,
he asked the question, what is the source of the sun's energy?
Well, what sources could there be?
Well, one naive idea is that maybe the source is chemical energy.
Maybe the sun is actually a fire.
Maybe it's burning like a piece of coal.
Well, suppose the entire sun were composed of fuel and oxygen.
Maybe hydrogen.
We know that there's hydrogen in the sun.
Maybe this entire sun is composed of hydrogen and oxygen.
And it's burning to release the radiant energy that we see.
Given the sun's mass, how long could it maintain its output?
And the answer is about 2,000 years.
Now, that's not long enough.
We have written records that the sun has been shining for more than 2,000 years.
And if you try other fuels besides hydrogen and oxygen, you get similar answers.
Chemical energy cannot power the sun for more than a few thousand years.
So that must not be the answer.
Then Helmholtz had a better idea.
The idea of gravitational potential energy.
Now, recall the idea of potential energy.
A ball has a bigger potential energy if it's high.
That are all exerting gravitational forces on each other.
If these masses are spread apart widely, that's a situation of high potential energy.
And if the masses are clumped together closely, that's a situation of low potential energy.
Now, the sun is very massive.
And its gravitation is very strong.
So perhaps Helmholtz said, the sun is slowly contracting.
It's slowly becoming more and more clumped together.
And it's not doing this very rapidly.
It's contracting only a few meters per year.
But that means the sun is losing potential energy.
And that potential energy is then turned into other forms of energy, including heat.
And the hot sun radiates energy to its surroundings.
And Helmholtz realized that it could keep this up for a very long time.
So he estimated that the sun could have released energy in this way for up to about 20 million years.
Which sounds a lot better than 2,000 years.
So Helmholtz concludes that 20 million years is an upper limit to the age of the sun and the planets.
At least with conditions as they are now, with the sun emitting lots of light and heat
and with the earth being warm, as we see it today.
20 million years.
But there's a problem.
As Helmholtz is working out the possible physics of why the sun shines,
19th century geology is coming to a vastly different conclusion about the age of the earth.
Especially the English geologist Charles Lyell, great 19th century English geologist.
So the question is, how do we explain the geological facts of life?
The rock strata that we see, where they are, what's going on?
And if you try to explain these by geological processes,
then 20 million years is not enough to explain what we see.
In fact, maybe 200 million years is not enough.
The evidence of the geological record suggests that the earth must be at least a billion
and maybe billions of years old.
A billion is a thousand million.
Also about this time, biologists are also finding evidence for deep time.
Especially after Charles Darwin's theory of evolution by natural selection.
Evolution, the development of new forms of life, is a slow process.
And so the history of the earth must include time for this slow process of evolution to take place.
Furthermore, the history of the earth must include time for the rise and extinction of millions of species in the fossil record.
This is impossible.
A warm earth, an earth warm enough to sustain life and ordinary geological processes like flowing water,
a warm earth can only have existed for 20 or 30 million years.
Why?
The reason is that the sun must get its energy.
We now believe that the earth and the sun are both around four and a half billion years old.
Where did Helmholtz go wrong?
He went wrong because there's another source of energy that he did not know about.
That source is nuclear energy.
Now the story of nuclear energy that the substances are emitting energy was most clearly appreciated
by Pierre and Marie Curie, the famous married couple of Nobel laureates.
And they discovered a very radioactive element, many, many times more radioactive than uranium, called radium.
And their measurements told them that one gram of radium emits a 30th of a joule per second.
Now a 30th of a joule per second doesn't sound like very much, but this continues on and on and on.
This means that a gram of radium emits over 2,000 joules per day.
A gram of radium emits almost a million joules every year.
Well, at first the discovery of radioactivity only makes things worse for the conservation of energy.
So we have now a second challenge.
Not only do we wonder why the sun shines, we wonder where does this energy come from?
The energy emitted by radioactive materials.
Well, in fact, the energy comes from changes inside the nuclei of radium atoms.
Now each second, a few radium atoms, how few?
About 37 billion radium atoms in one gram of radium.
And that sounds like a lot, but 37 billion is very few radium atoms.
About 37 billion radium atoms in that gram of radium disintegrate and they emit particles carrying energy.
Now what's left behind are nuclei of a different element. Radon nuclei. Radon is a gas.
And these radon nuclei have slightly less mass.
That mass has actually been converted into energy.
Converted into energy? How?
Well, according to the famous formula discovered by Albert Einstein, the formula E equals MC squared,
where E is the energy, M is the mass that has been lost, and C is the speed of light.
The speed of light is very fast, a very big number, and we square it.
So that means that a little mass corresponds to a huge amount of energy.
Now I want to just give you a side light on this with that theory of relativity.
It was a theory about space and time.
And indeed we'll talk about relativity quite a lot in this course, starting in lecture 10.
But as so often happens, a new discovery in one subject explains puzzles elsewhere.
In this case, explains the source of energy in radioactivity.
So nuclear energy is the type of energy that's released in radioactivity.
And it shows up as a small change in the mass of the nucleus, mass that's converted to energy.
And the sun shines because nuclear reactions take place in its core.
Now for the sun, the reactions are not radioactivity.
It's not like the sun is made of radium, but hydrogen fusion.
Now the mechanism for this was worked out around 1939 by Hans Bethe, a German-American physicist
and later Nobel laureate.
And this process, hydrogen fusion, happens at very high temperatures,
temperatures of millions of degrees such as are found in the core of the sun.
And in hydrogen fusion, by a series of steps, four hydrogen nuclei, protons, combine
and they form one helium nucleus which contains two protons and two neutrons
and a few other particles.
And the total mass of the products, the total mass that you have at the end of the process
is about seven tenths of one percent smaller than the mass of the ingredients.
So where did that mass go?
The mass is released as energy.
And of course, there's lots of hydrogen in the sun.
So if we just count the energy supply in the core of the sun, the central ten percent of the sun,
there's enough hydrogen there for the sun to shine for ten billion years.
And that's the energy source of the sun.
So the discovery of a new form of energy saved the law of conservation of energy,
which had been challenged both by the energy output of the sun and by radioactivity.
We see that the law still holds.
It still remains a fundamental principle, but there are just more forms of energy than we had suspected.
But radioactivity brings another more subtle challenge.
So to explain this, I want to consider one type of radioactivity.
This is called beta decay.
And beta decay is worth explaining in detail, and we'll see it again in lecture 15, for example.
So let's consider something called carbon-14 decay.
Now carbon-14 is a particular variety of carbon.
A carbon-14 nucleus contains six protons and eight neutrons.
And carbon-14 is slightly unstable.
So after thousands of years, thousands of years, how long?
Well, it's unpredictable.
Carbon-14 has a certain mass.
The result, nitrogen-14, has a certain smaller mass, and the electron has a certain mass.
So if you add up, if you do the arithmetic, you find that the electron should be ejected with a particular definite energy.
The energy that's left over, the energy that the mass has been converted into, the electron should carry that energy away.
So we can go do the experiment, and we can check the electron energies, measure the energy of the electrons.
And a few of the electrons have about the right energy.
But most of the electrons have too little energy.
There's a whole range of energies of the electrons, and only the most energetic of the electrons has about the right energy.
The rest of them have too little.
So some mass went away, but we don't have any energy to show for it.
Where did the missing energy go?
This was a tremendous puzzle for nuclear physics around 1930.
Different groups of scientists thought there were different answers to this question.
One group led by Niels Bohr, the great Danish physicist and one of the founders of quantum theory.
Said that maybe the conservation of energy is not, after all, an exact law.
Maybe energy can come or go in individual nuclear reactions, but of course on average, energy is conserved.
So that means that the creation or destruction of energy in everyday amounts would only be a statistical impossibility,
like getting a hundred heads in a row.
But for microscopic amounts of energy, it can happen.
That'd be like flipping five heads in a row.
That's not impossible at all.
So by giving up the exact law of conservation of energy, Niels Bohr and the people who agreed with him
thought that they could explain the mystery of beta decay.
Now the other group of scientists included Wolfgang Pauley, a Swiss physicist,
and Enrico Fermi, the Italian and later American physicist.
And Pauley and Fermi said, no, no, the conservation of energy is a law that holds exactly.
But maybe we don't see all of the particles that are actually produced in beta decay.
Maybe when a carbon-14 nucleus turns into a nitrogen-14 nucleus and produces an electron,
there's also an invisible particle produced.
Fermi called it the neutrino, which is Italian for the little neutral thing.
And the neutrino, so the theory goes, moves at the speed of light, or almost the speed of light,
and it carries no electric charge, like the neutron, it's electrically neutral,
but it does, and that would mean that some of the energy has disappeared.
What do you mean disappeared?
Well, the neutrinos interact with matter only very rarely.
A neutrino can easily fly through the entire Earth without hitting anything.
And this means that ordinary particle detectors, like the Geiger counters used in a physics lab,
cannot register neutrinos.
So the energy appears to disappear, but really the neutrino carries it away.
And sometimes the controversy became rather comical.
So our scene is Niels Bohr's Institute for Theoretical Physics in Copenhagen,
and it's April 1932, and there's just been a two-week-long symposium about problems in physics.
And at the conclusion of the meeting, they put on a parody of Gertus Faust.
They put on a play, which is a satirical, farcical version of Gertus Faust.
You remember in Faust, Faust is tempted by the devil, Mephistopheles,
to reject God in order to obtain knowledge and power.
In the parody, Faust is a physicist.
And he's tempted by Mephistopheles, Wolfgang Pauli, to reject God, Niels Bohr,
and embrace the theory of the neutrino.
Most physicists did succumb to temptation.
Most physicists did accept the idea of an invisible neutrino.
Keeping the law of conservation of energy, but having to admit that there were forms of energy that we couldn't see.
A kind of fishy proposition.
But then, in 1956, more than 25 years after the theory,
to detect a tiny fraction of the neutrinos that were produced by the reactor.
And they could tell that they were being produced by the reactor because they could turn the reactor on and off.
And when it was off, they didn't detect the neutrinos, and when it was on, they did.
So they were able to show that Pauli and Fermi were right.
A little chapter to this story.
Remember, our theory is that the Sun generates its energy by nuclear reactions in its central region,
where the temperature is millions of degrees, the nuclear reaction of hydrogen fusion.
But of course, we can't see this directly.
It's hidden inside hundreds of thousands of kilometers of the outer layers of the Sun.
We can't see into the Sun.
On the other hand, any neutrinos produced by those nuclear reactions should be able to escape.
Come out of the Sun, and maybe we could detect them.
In other words, these neutrinos would be a window into the Sun,
a way that we could test our theory of the energy production inside of stars.
And so starting in 1970, the American physicist and chemist Raymond Davis Jr.
began to operate a solar neutrino experiment in the Homestake Gold Mine in South Dakota.
It's almost a mile underground.
If you wanted to do an experiment about the Sun, why would you bury your experiment a mile underground?
Well, the reason, of course, is to eliminate interference from other kinds of cosmic radiation.
Only the neutrinos will be able to get that deep and affect your detector.
So what's your detector?
Well, the detector is a gigantic 100,000 gallon tank of basically dry cleaning fluid.
And what happens is that very rarely, a neutrino will come along and turn one of the chlorine atoms in the fluid, atoms per day,
one and a half argon atoms per day, about 10 argon atoms per week.
Okay, so how many were found?
Well, in fact, only about a third this many were actually detected,
only about an atom every other day, about three argon atoms per week.
And this surprising and perplexing result came to be known as the solar neutrino problem.
Now, everybody's first reaction to this problem was,
oh, well, we've calculated things wrong about the details of the reactions inside the Sun,
or maybe we don't quite understand how the apparatus works or something.
But they are very careful, and they check all their calculations, and they seem to hold up,
and the results of the solar neutrino experiment hold up over the entire 30-year lifetime of the experiment.
And this doesn't sound like a big deal.
I mean, we expect to see 10 neutrinos in a week, and we only see three.
But in fact, the solar neutrino problem is a slow, quiet underground crisis in physics.
Those missing neutrinos might mean that our whole theory for explaining the energy output of the Sun
and other stars might be badly wrong.
There might be something completely different going on inside of stars.
So physicists became quite interested in this and turned a great deal of attention to resolving it.
So how did this story turn out?
Well, it turned out that we found something new about neutrinos.
You see, there are actually three types of neutrinos.
They're on neutrinos.
And that's the kind of neutrino that the home stake experiment is set up to detect, electron neutrinos.
But it turns out that neutrinos actually can oscillate from one type to another.
The electron neutrinos can turn into muon and tau neutrinos,
and the tau neutrinos can turn into muon and electron neutrinos, and so on.
They can sort of go back and forth.
So what happens is the Sun produces neutrinos of one type, electron neutrinos,
but by the time they reach Earth, so it's no accident that Davis found only one-third of the neutrinos that he expected.
So how do we know this is right?
Well, in 2001, there was a new experiment, an experiment at Sudbury, Ontario.
It's a variation of the home state gold mine experiment,
but it's designed to detect all types of neutrinos from the Sun.
And when you count up all the neutrinos, you find the expiacions.
It posed repeated challenges to the principle of conservation of energy.
In these phenomena, energy seemed to appear or disappear in various situations,
which would be impossible if the law was valid.
And if that had been the whole story, science would have to abandon the idea that energy is conserved.
That's how science works.
If the principle doesn't match up with observation, we have to get rid of it.
We'd have to say that creating or destroying energy was possible after all.
But in each case, we discovered new physics.
We discovered new types of energy in the universe.
We began to take a look at the second law of thermodynamics.
The first law says that energy cannot be created or destroyed, only transformed.
The second law tells us that certain energy transformations are themselves actually impossible.
We'll see how the thoughts of a French steam engineer
led to one of the most remarkable insights in the history of science
and to the birth of a whole new field of study.
That's next time. I'll see you then.
