Welcome to the sixth lecture in our course on the physics of impossible things.
In the last lecture, we'd heed to an object, the object has more of it.
And entropy also tells us something about how available an object's energy is for doing work.
The higher the entropy, the less available that energy is for doing work.
And entropy also somehow gave a direction to time, made a distinction between the past and the future.
Those are all part of the answer, but we'll give a better answer later.
Now, the second law is important.
For a physicist, this is the second law.
When a physicist cites the second law, the physicist is not talking about the second law of Newton, Newton's law of motion,
or Kepler's law of planetary orbits, or Kirchhoff's law, second law of electric circuits,
or Mindel's second law of heredity, or even Clark's second law of speculation.
For a physicist, the second law of thermodynamics is the second law.
And because of this law, a perpetual motion machine of the second kind,
a machine that takes in heat and turns it all into work, that kind of machine is impossible.
We actually mentioned this back in lecture one.
Let's imagine gas in an enclosure.
At first, it only occupies one half of the volume of the enclosure.
Maybe we've just removed a partition, the gas was confined to one half,
and we just removed the wall in between the two halves.
Well, the gas expands and fills the whole volume.
The entropy increases, as the second law says.
Let's go down.
No.
Because when we squeeze the gas, we do work on the gas.
We add energy to the gas.
The gas heats up as we compress it.
And so at best, the entropy would stay the same.
And the decrease in entropy due to the reduction in volume would be balanced
by the increase in entropy due to the increase in temperature.
That's the best.
Okay, back to our story.
In the second half of the 19th century, physicists began to conclude,
what chemists already knew, that matter was made of tiny particles, atoms, or molecules.
And a gas is simply a gigantic swarm of trillions of trillions of molecules,
flying in all directions, moving according to Newton's laws.
And so you have two pictures of a gas.
The first picture is the big picture, the picture we see.
The gas, say, the air in this room, it's at rest,
or maybe it's moving very gently, there's a slight breeze.
But if you zoom in to the tiny picture,
the individual molecules are actually moving extremely fast.
In this room, the oxygen and nitrogen molecules in the air are moving at hundreds of meters per second.
But those molecular motions average out in some ways.
They average out in some ways, but not others.
For example, the pressure of a gas, the force that a gas exerts on a wall of its container,
is the force exerted by the collisions of myriads of gas molecules with the wall of the container.
That pressure is due to the molecular motion.
And heat energy in the gas is actually kinetic energy of rapid random microscopic motions.
Heat energy, in other words, is not some special different sort of energy.
It's actually ordinary kinetic energy of microscopic random motions of the molecules in a gas.
Okay, so where does that picture of matter leave the second law?
In the gas exactly bunching up in one side of the container,
the odds are one, followed by 150 billion trillion zeros, to one against.
So what the second law says is impossible is actually only extremely unlikely.
The second law is really a statistical law.
Going against it is actually a statistical impossibility.
Maxwell's got a sense of humor. He's a pretty funny guy.
He wrote and sang satirical songs about physics, which he would accompany on the guitar.
He's not your stereotypical Victorian era Scotsman.
And Maxwell devised, if you did it in both chambers, it will never collect into one chamber.
And the second law in its statistical form says the gas molecules are merely very, very, very, very unlikely to collect in one chamber.
So Maxwell says, suppose there's a tiny being that's stationed at the opening between the two chambers.
And this tiny being can operate a door. This, of course, is the famous demon.
So what does the demon do? The demon watches the molecules.
And when a molecule approaches from the right, he allows it to pass through.
But when a molecule approaches from the left, he closes the door and the molecule bounces back.
In other words, the demon only allows molecules to go one way through the opening from right to left.
So we start out with molecules on both sides.
And eventually, all of the molecules are on the left.
Now this is not like compressing the gas.
The gas is not heated up. The demon does not change the speed of any molecule.
So the same gas with the same temperature occupies a smaller volume.
The entropy of the gas has been decreased by the demon.
Okay, what does this mean?
Well, if the gas occupies a smaller volume, then it could end up in the same volume.
But the gas would be cooler and we got some useful work out of it.
In other words, we've extracted heat from the gas and turned it all into work.
So Maxwell's demon would allow us to build what the demon does.
We're much too large to control gas molecules one at a time.
In other words, Maxwell's point is that the second law holds for us but not for the imaginary demon.
Okay, this is ceasing to be a reliable law.
But now the demon changes those odds.
A decrease in entropy is guaranteed.
And notice, the demon does not have to be a supernatural creature.
There are no miracles required here.
The demon could be a machine.
In laboratories today, we can build molecular machines that manipulate matter at the atomic scale, atom by atom.
So Maxwell's demon might be a kind of nano robot.
So this raises some crucial questions.
Is Maxwell's demon possible or impossible?
And if Maxwell's demon is possible, is a perpetual motion machine of the second kind possible after all?
Is the second law of thermodynamics really even a law, a fundamental law of nature at all?
Now, Maxwell suggested the demon way back in 1867.
And for the next 100 years or so, there were dozens of analyses of Maxwell's demon.
And they all asked the question, is Maxwell's demon really possible?
Or is there some detail that we might have overlooked that saves the second law?
Let me mention an example.
Marian Smolachowski was a Polish physicist.
He was a contemporary of Einstein.
In 1912, he said, well, let's suppose we just replace this demon by just a tiny spring-loaded trap door.
And molecules that approach from the left, well, the door is held closed.
But molecules that approach from the right will actually push the door open.
The door is pushed open.
It's a very lightweight door.
And the molecules can go through.
Sounds like Maxwell's demon.
But Smolachowski said that this will not actually work.
You see, what happens is that very soon the door starts to flop around on its own.
It picks up others, too many to mention,
and also try in the century after Maxwell's demon to analyze in detail how the demon might work.
And the general idea is to show that the second law cannot really be violated
or can only be violated with a tiny probability
that violating the second law is at least a statistical impossibility.
But it's extremely hard to reach a general conclusion about the demon.
So Smolachowski's trap door doesn't work.
But what about this other idea?
And so it's like trying to analyze a perpetual motion machine of the first kind
and trying to dismiss those things one at a time.
Oh, this unbalanced wheel won't work and that unbalanced wheel won't work
and this gyroscope idea won't work and so on, one at a time.
That never gets you to the general conclusion.
Today, though, we think we have Maxwell's demon finally figured out
thanks to Rolf Landauer and Charles Bennett, two physicists at IBM Research.
And what Landauer and Bennett have done is to distill the demon to its essence.
They say what the demon does is the demon gathers information.
The demon observes molecules, whether they come from the left or the right.
And then the demon uses that information to control the molecules
by opening and closing the door.
So in the Landauer and Bennett view, the demon is essentially an information processing machine,
essentially a computer.
And information processing is a physical process that can be analyzed.
So let's talk about how the demon works.
The demon operates, it observes the molecules, it opens and closes the door.
And as the demon operates, it builds up a memory record.
It saw a molecule here, it saw one there, it saw another molecule over here and so on.
It must gather this information in order to work.
And we can imagine that this information is stored in the form of bits.
Bits, of course, is the basic unit of information.
A bit stands for binary digit, a zero or a one.
And that zero or a one could represent a no or a yes, it could represent off or on,
it could represent left or right and so on.
And we can store any type of information whatsoever in this way.
And this is actually a fairly familiar fact to us in the age of digital devices.
We know that we can store a text file or numerical data or music or images or video in a computer
all in the same way as bits in the way that bits are stored in the computer.
Now, a typical personal computer can store about one trillion bits.
To accomplish a significant reduction in entropy of a system of reasonable size,
Maxwell's demon must store trillions of trillions of bits,
not just a trillion bits, but trillions of trillions of bits.
That's more information than can be stored in all the computers on Earth.
Now, afterward, the gas has indeed been confined to a smaller volume.
After the demon has done his operation, the gas is now located in one half of the original container.
So the entropy of the gas is decreased.
But something else has happened.
The demon has accumulated lots and lots of useless bits of information.
And so its memory, its memory is full.
So there's a delicate point here.
We can't make a perpetual motion machine of the second kind unless we can keep using it.
Unless at the end of one of its operating cycles, it returns to the same situation it was in before.
But the demon hasn't done this yet.
The demon's memory is full of useless junk.
So in order to get back to the original state, we must restore the demon to its original state by erasing its memory.
By erasing all of the bits of information stored in the demon's memory.
Now, I've described doing this at the end of the process.
But we might do it as we go along, erasing a few bits at a time, or all at once afterwards.
It doesn't matter.
In any case, in order to wind up at the right point, we must erase trillions and trillions of bits of information.
Now, this is where Rolf Landauer comes in.
Landauer showed that erasure of information is not free.
Erasure costs something.
What does it cost?
Erasure costs energy.
Landauer showed that for each bit of information that a computer erases, it must expel a little waste heat into its surroundings.
How much?
Not much.
At room temperature, erasing one bit requires at least three billions of...
But the demon must erase a lot of bits, trillions of trillions of bits, and even that very tiny cost adds up.
So, the net result is that the demon emits waste heat.
It adds entropy to its surroundings.
How much entropy?
Well, when you work out the details, it turns out that it must add to its surroundings at least as much entropy as the entropy reduction of the gas.
In other words, when we count everything, the total entropy of the gas and the demon and the surroundings doesn't decrease after all.
The second law is still valid.
This heat generation by information erasure, the heat that must be radiated away when you erase information, then Carnot's engine.
And that means there can be no perpetual motion machine of the second kind after all.
The second law is saved.
Now, there are two important points I want to mention.
The first is, we can still arrange it so that the demon might occasionally get lucky.
And that just corresponds to the fact that we can go against the second law, but only with extremely low probability.
This is only a statistical law.
And on average, the entropy never decreases.
But the more important point is that this is a striking example and it's by no means our last example of the role of information in physics.
Now, the concept of information is a relatively new one.
The modern idea of information goes back to the late 1940s to the work of the American mathematician Claude Shannon at Bell Labs.
The general mathematical theory of the process of communication is what Shannon was interested in.
He wanted to describe mathematically what it meant to communicate, and so he invented information theory.
And we've gotten used to this idea of information in modern life.
There are all sorts of messages that we consider, text, numbers, sounds, images, and they can all be represented in the same basic way as bits, as binary digits.
So for example, this lecture.
This lecture is represented as bits, stored perhaps on a digital video disc.
So we can store, retrieve, transmit, receive, process information in many, many ways.
And information, therefore, is a concept developed for technology, a concept developed to explain and help us understand how to do these tasks of communication and computation.
So it's startling to find this concept playing a role in the basic laws of physics.
We have now met for the first time one of the central themes of this course.
In this course, we're going to be very concerned with the laws governing information in our universe.
And it'll turn out that these are some of the most fundamental laws of nature.
And so here's our first great information law, Landauer's principle.
Energy is required to erase information.
It is impossible to erase information for free without waste heat.
And it's Landauer's principle that makes the second law of thermodynamics apply even to Maxwell's demon.
Now this discussion leads us to reconsider our old question.
What the heck is entropy?
And it suggests an amazing answer to that.
We don't know the details.
We don't know which molecule is going where.
We don't know how fast the molecule is going.
And what entropy is, is the amount of information that we lack, the missing information about the detailed state of the gas molecules.
Entropy is how much we don't know about the microscopic situation.
The entropy is how much we would need to learn in order to determine that microscopic situation in all its details.
So we could measure the entropy in bits.
That's not the traditional measure of entropy, but that's okay.
It works just fine.
So what happens when we add energy to the gas?
Well, when we add energy to the gas, there are more ways that that energy can be shared among the gas molecules.
And so we lack more information about the detailed configuration and motion of those molecules.
So there's a greater entropy.
Or here's a more obvious example.
Let's suppose we increase the volume occupied by the gas.
So now each molecule has more different places than it can be.
So we lack more information about the details.
Now physicists sometimes say that entropy is a measure of disorder.
Entropy is a measure of the microscopic disorder of a system.
And a higher entropy means a higher degree of disorder.
And indeed, this is true enough.
So consider a very orderly system, like the atoms in a crystal.
In a crystal, you may know, the atoms are a perfectly regular arrangement in space, say a lattice, like a cubicle lattice.
And so because the atoms are in such a regular arrangement, we know a lot about the details of a crystal.
We know a lot about the microscopic configuration of the crystal.
And so the entropy of a crystal is very low.
On the other hand, consider a very disorderly system, the atoms in a gas.
We know a lot less about the details of the molecules in a gas.
They could be anywhere. They're not in any sort of regular arrangement.
And so the entropy is high.
So entropy does indeed measure the degree of microscopic disorder in a system.
But in my opinion, the statement that entropy is information is the more fundamental view of entropy.
Maxwell's demon reduces the entropy of the gas.
But how does Maxwell's demon do it?
By gaining a huge amount of data in its memory.
The data in the demon's memory, therefore, is also a form of entropy.
And when the demon erases the data, you get rid of the demon's memory entropy, so to speak,
but you must generate entropy in the surroundings by releasing waste heat.
So where does that leave us?
Is Maxwell's demon possible or impossible?
Well, the supernatural demon, the demon that can work by miraculous means,
is, by definition, physically impossible.
It goes beyond the laws of nature.
But the physical demon, a machine obeying the laws of physics, is possible,
but would not violate the second law of thermodynamics.
So this is an amazing idea.
The second law of thermodynamics, the thing that limits the efficiency of steam engines
and makes a perpetual motion machine of the second kind impossible,
that second law of thermodynamics is fundamentally about information.
That's the lesson of Maxwell's demon.
Now, we're not quite done with thermodynamics.
In addition to the first law of thermodynamics and the second law of thermodynamics,
there is also a third law of thermodynamics.
That law is a little technical.
It's about the relation of temperature and entropy.
And the third law tells us about the behavior of objects at extremely cold temperatures.
In fact, the third law sets a limit to the degree of coldness in an object.
It sets an absolute zero.
And scientists have come fantastically close to absolute zero.
They've lowered the temperature of objects amazingly close to absolute zero.
And along the way, they've discovered some amazing things about the behavior of matter at low temperatures.
But they've never quite reached absolute zero.
Why?
Because they can't.
It's impossible.
And since it's impossible, we can't resist it.
Absolute zero next time.
