Welcome to the eighth lecture of our course on the physics of impossible things.
We've now seen three laws of thermodynamics, and each one tells us that something is impossible.
The first law tells us that we cannot create or destroy energy.
The second law tells us that we cannot turn heat completely into work.
The third law tells us, among other things, that we can never reach absolute zero.
So today we're going to turn to a different sort of impossibility, nevertheless related to those three.
Like the second law, it will turn on the idea of information.
Like the third law, it tells us about an ideal limit that we can never really attain.
So let me set the scene.
Now, first of all, we've mentioned quantum physics a couple of times.
It's the physics of the microscopic realm, the realm of atoms and electrons and elementary particles and so on.
And Newton's laws of mechanics do not apply here.
We have a new quantum mechanics in order to describe this realm.
And quantum mechanics was not discovered until the early 20th century.
And we will talk much more about quantum physics beginning in lecture 17.
But just for this lecture, we're going to forget all about quantum physics.
We're going to suppose that the world is perfectly described by Newton's laws of mechanics, laws of inertia, of motion, of action and reaction.
And indeed, Newton's laws of mechanics give a very accurate description of the large scale world, the macroscopic realm.
And it does a pretty good job even of describing the particles moving in a gas.
So, there are forces on one another, and so they affect each other's paths.
And Newtonian mechanics provides mathematical equations to describe all this.
And if we solve those equations, we find out the motions of all of the particles.
Now think what this means.
According to Newton, the universe is deterministic.
A deterministic universe is one in which the future of the universe is exactly determined by the present.
Now this point was made with great force by one of Newton's great followers, the 18th century French mathematician Pierre Simon Laplace.
And Laplace envisioned what we might call Laplace's demon.
Laplace said, if a being knew all of the positions and all of the velocities of all of the particles in the universe,
then with Newton's laws, that being could in principle predict the exact future of the whole universe.
According to Laplace, there's no room for any free will or chance or randomness.
Everything is predestined and predetermined and in principle predictable.
So is Laplace correct?
Is it really possible to predict the future of simple systems?
You don't need trillions of particles flying around.
Three particles is enough to make prediction impossible.
Why?
The reason is known as chaos.
Now back in the early 1600s, the German astronomer Johannes Kepler discovered three simple laws that pretty well described the motion of each planet around the sun.
And then later on in the 17th century, Newton was able to explain Kepler's laws by considering two bodies, the sun and a planet.
And Newton applied his laws of motion and their planets combined, but these forces are there.
So the question becomes, how do the planets affect each other's orbits?
Or take an even simpler example.
The moon goes around the earth.
The earth and the moon go around the sun.
So the question is, how is the moon's orbit affected by the sun?
Now the moon's orbit is not that simple.
We can observe changes in its orbit over time.
The question is, can we predict those changes?
This is an example of the three-body problem.
The basic idea is you have three objects in space and they're attracting each other by gravity and you set them in motion and you ask, how will they behave?
Will they orbit all around together in a swarm?
Or will two of them orbit each other and that pair orbits the third one, like the earth, moon and sun?
Or will one of them be ejected into distant space, leaving the other two to orbit each other?
And so on. What's going to happen?
And indeed, it might be that these three bodies do one thing for a while and then they do something else for a while.
This problem, the three-body problem, is simple to state but it's very, very hard to solve.
And a couple of centuries of the greatest mathematicians in history labored on this problem.
And they found a few special versions of the problem that could be worked out.
They found some approximation techniques that helped out in some cases but broke down in other cases.
But the general problem remained unsolved.
And this is kind of disappointing.
I mean Newton solved two bodies completely.
Why should three bodies be so much harder?
Forces are small but what about in the long run?
Newton worried about this.
In fact, Newton wondered whether God would have to intervene from time to time to sort of repair things, to fix things.
Well, Laplace didn't believe in that kind of God.
And so he spent many years trying to answer this question, trying to prove that the solar system was stable.
And here's what he found.
He found that Jupiter and Saturn, the two largest planets, should not affect each other's orbits too much or at least not too quickly.
And he showed that these planets should not have a very rapid effect on the other planets in the solar system.
And so he concluded that the solar system was stable in the long run.
But Laplace's solution leaves much to be desired.
It's based on approximation techniques and so on and so it's just a little unsatisfied.
So decades pass and then along comes another French mathematician Henri Poincaré,
the great French mathematician of the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
Poincaré was the son of a professor of medicine.
He was from a very influential family.
The French seemed to combine science with politics sometimes,
like Saudi Carnot's nephew Henri Poincaré's cousin served as president of France.
And Poincaré was one of the most brilliant mathematicians of all time.
He made contributions to many different branches of mathematics,
and he laid, for example, much of the mathematical foundation for Einstein's theory of relativity.
So Poincaré tackled the three-body problem in 1887.
The King of Sweden, it turns out, had offered a cash prize for the solution of this long-standing physics problem.
And Poincaré, in fact, did not find a general solution extraordinarily complicated and unpredictable ways.
And in this, Poincaré glimpsed an immense complexity in the problem.
But he lacked the tools to pin it down.
He lacked the tools.
What tools did he lack?
Basically, Poincaré lacked a computer,
because a computer can be not only a tool for calculation,
but also a tool for understanding.
By doing simulations and numerical experiments, if you will,
you can do a new style of mathematics, a new way of exploring mathematical ideas
away unavailable to Poincaré.
So a further advance had to await the development of the computer.
And in fact, our next important figure in the story is not a mathematician at all.
Not really a regular physicist, but a meteorologist, an atmospheric physicist.
And that was Edward Lorenz of MIT.
In around 1960, Lorenz became interested in the idea of using computers for weather prediction.
Computers, you have to understand, were still very primitive,
but the basic idea is to take a simplified model of the weather
to work out a few equations.
Lorenz started out with 12 equations to capture the basic physics of the atmosphere,
to describe heat transfer and air pressure and wind and so on,
and then program the equations on the computer to input present conditions
and then let the computer run and see what happens.
Now this seems like a simple idea now, this is what they do,
but it was a pretty radical approach in those days.
Lorenz actually had a computer in his office that's the size of a desk,
and he could try out many ideas very easily.
And what does he find?
Well, he finds something funny.
He finds that if you input one set of numbers,
one set of pressure and temperature and so on, and you run the computer,
you get one series of predictions, the conditions today, tomorrow, next week, and so on.
Then if you do it again, and you input a very similar set of numbers,
and in fact the first time he did this, he actually just put in a rounded off set of numbers,
rounded off versions of the first set of numbers,
and you run the computer, how do the new predictions match up?
Well, at first the predictions are pretty close.
Tomorrow's weather and the next day's weather looks about the same.
They're only a little different, but the differences don't stay small.
They grow, and they grow at an increasing rate.
Very soon, a week or two of model time,
the two different initial conditions lead to completely different results.
So Lorenz realizes that something weird is going on.
And so he experiments with other mathematical systems,
and he realizes that it has almost nothing to do with how complicated things are.
He soon arrives at an example with only three fairly simple equations.
So this system, the three equation system, can be visualized as a kind of water wheel.
The wheel is built like a ferrous wheel, but instead of the seats,
you have cups that can hold water, and there's no motor in the ferrous wheel.
And we dribble water into our water wheel into the top cup.
And the wheel can either turn to the right or to the left.
It's free to turn either right or left.
And I want to add two details to this.
There's a little bit of friction in the wheel.
And secondly, the cups themselves have small holes in the bottom that allow the water to leak out.
And so if there happens to be more water in the cups on one side than the other,
the wheel will be pushed to turn in that direction.
And if there's more water on the other side, then the wheel will be pushed in that way.
Now under certain circumstances, the wheel can even stop and reverse itself,
because if you have a lot of water on one side and it rotates too fast,
then that water winds up on the other side and that can cause the direction of motion to be reversed.
And if you adjust things just so, just so much friction, just so much water being added,
you find that the motion of the water wheel is strangely unsteady.
The wheel seems to go one way, to speed up and slow down,
and then it'll change direction, go the other way for a while,
and it'll do this in an erratic way, seemingly unpredictable.
Now Lawrence intended this water wheel model to model the process of convection,
to model the motions in the air driven by temperature differences between the ground and the air,
as Carnot was interested in.
And you can actually build such a system out of a water wheel.
You can actually build such a thing.
But Lawrence, of course, used a computer to simulate it, and it's described by just three equations.
The system is pretty, it goes that way, and so on, we make a record of this.
We take a movie of the way the water wheel behaves.
And now we go back and we repeat the experiment,
but this time we set up the water wheel in a very slightly different way.
So for example, maybe we add one more drop of water in one cup to start out with.
What happens?
Well for a short while, the water wheel acts just like it did last time.
But then we begin to notice that it's behaving a little differently.
The behavior of the wheel is a little different from the movie that we kept from before.
That difference grows rapidly.
Small difference in the present can lead to a very different future.
It's called sensitive dependence on initial conditions.
Okay, so what does this mean?
Lawrence actually is a very, how it would behave, forever.
The system is deterministic.
But we never know things exactly.
We always start out with a little uncertainty about things.
When I say uncertain value of the velocity and so on,
and any initial uncertainty is tremendously amplified as the water wheel evolves in time.
And very soon, even the tiniest uncertainty blows up into complete ignorance.
We cannot even say for sure whether the wheel will be going this way or that way.
What Lawrence discovered soon came to be called chaos.
And chaotic systems like the water wheel are deterministic.
The present determines the future.
But any tiny uncertainty in the present situation is quickly amplified into a huge uncertainty about the future.
And since we always have some uncertainty about the present,
the long-term future is always unknown.
Long-term prediction is impossible.
Now, let's be careful.
We can say some things about the future,
sure that the cups will not contain 5,000 gallons of water.
We can set limits on the future behavior.
But the details, exactly how it's moving at a particular time,
we can't say for sure.
So suppose we were able to predict the water wheel pretty well for one minute.
And we can predict it for one minute.
So let's start over again, and we work very hard,
and we measure everything 10 times more accurately than we had before.
We know how much water is in each cup and what the speed of the water wheel is
10 times more accurately.
So how much longer can we predict things?
Can we predict it 10 times as long?
No, we can't predict it for 10 minutes.
We can predict it for more like one minute and 10 seconds.
We only got 10 more seconds for that great increase in precision.
Okay, let's go back and do it again.
Let's measure everything at the beginning 100 times more accurately.
Well, then maybe we can predict the water wheel for a minute and 20 seconds.
The point is, if we increase our initial exactness,
yes, we can predict things for longer.
More information does increase predictability.
But even a huge gain, and what's become a very famous phrase for this,
he called it the butterfly effect.
Remember, Lorenz is interested in weather forecasting,
but he realizes that the Earth's atmosphere is a chaotic system.
We never know all the present details of temperature and air movement
everywhere in the world.
So Lorenz estimates that weather prediction longer than about two weeks
is not really possible.
Weather, perhaps we can predict the average behavior,
the climate, but we can't predict the details
because we simply don't have that kind of information.
Chaos is not just about the weather or water wheels.
Chaotic systems are everywhere.
The three-body problem? Yes, it's chaotic.
This is exactly what Poincare had glimpsed.
And there are lots of examples.
If we can fall up and down slightly, that's a chaotic system.
So when we look around the world, we see that chaos is really ubiquitous.
Chaos is everywhere.
So here's a favorite example in space now,
and it's rotation at this moment.
Then by using Newton's laws, we can predict what orientation
we have pretty well a couple of years from now.
But each additional year...
So this means that the presence of chaos in the world
means that the world is fundamentally unpredictable,
even though it is deterministic.
The long-term prediction of a chaotic system is impossible.
So where does that leave Laplace's demon?
Remember Laplace's demon?
This demon possesses exact knowledge
and of all the positions and velocities of all the particles.
And from this, it can exactly predict the future of the entire universe
using Newton's laws.
That's Laplace's demon.
But of course, the universe contains chaos.
So what does that mean for the demon?
Well, we said that the demon had exact knowledge.
That means that the demon has an infinite amount of information,
because the demon knows all of the numbers
describing the positions of the particles
and velocities of the particles to all of their decimal places,
an infinite number of decimal places.
And a demon with an infinite amount of information
is a supernatural demon,
a demon that's working outside the laws of nature.
And so, of course, a demon like that can work
what we might call miracles.
But if you had a real physical demon,
a real creature existing in the universe
and obeying the laws of nature,
that creature could only have a finite amount of information,
a finite number of bits.
And therefore, the demon will have some uncertainty
that statement is taking a God's eye view.
It's a statement about mathematical perfection
and infinite exactness.
But we function within the universe.
We can only have a finite amount of information,
and we can only do a finite number of calculations.
And those things limit our ability to forecast the future.
And as we'll see, quantum physics casts doubt on determinism.
So that story starts in lecture 17.
But the universe is unpredictable even without quantum physics.
If we wanted to sum it up, we'd say it this way,
whether or not the universe is deterministic
for inhabitants of the universe, it is unpredictable.
We cannot predict the future.
We cannot predict the weather a year from now.
So, is the future unknowable?
No, no, of course.
We can just wait and see what happens.
If we want to know what the weather is a year from now,
we can wait a year.
But maybe we're impatient.
Maybe we'd like to find out now what the weather is going to be like.
Is there another possibility?
Well, that brings us to a favorite science fiction theme, time travel.
A time traveler from the future could come back
and tell us what things are going to be like.
There would be no prediction involved.
The traveler would just consult his memory.
Of course, it turns out that time travel is impossible.
And that will be the subject of our next lecture.
I'll see you then.
