Welcome to the ninth lecture of our course on the physics of impossible things.
Think for a minute about the last few lectures.
Several of them have told us something interesting about time.
For example, the second law of thermodynamics gives a direction to time,
a difference between only the past, not the future.
Now, that does seem rather glib.
And if you're dissatisfied with that explanation, good.
Because there are many mysteries about our experience of time,
and physicists and neuroscientists and philosophers are still figuring it out.
Okay, so much for the past.
What about the future?
Well, last time we saw that the future of a chaotic system can be predicted in detail
only for a short time, that long-term prediction is impossible.
And that's true even if the underlying laws of nature are perfectly deterministic.
So it seems in a way that our access to the future seems to be limited.
Of course, there is a sure-fire way to see the future.
Just wait. The future will happen.
But I wonder about a sort of more direct access to the future.
Could we in the present take a look at the future?
Could someone from the future somehow return and tell us about it?
Well, that was the idea that inspired Herbert George Wells.
H. G. Wells, 1895.
The hero of this book, called The Time Traveler,
invents a device that enables him to travel in time, going into the future or the past.
And Wells' explanation is quite fascinating.
He says time is just another dimension, like the three dimensions of space.
I find that remarkable, especially given that the book is written ten years before Einstein's relativity.
It nevertheless anticipates many of the con years.
Time travel is a major theme of science fiction to this day.
And Wells' own novel has been made into movies at least three times
and has been the direct inspiration for many more.
My favorite remains the 1960 adaptation directed by George Powell,
starring Rod Taylor as The Time Traveler.
Now, Wells used the idea of the time machine.
So our question today is, is time travel possible?
Well, time travel into the future is quite possible.
To visit next year, just wait one year.
Well, is it possible to reach next year sooner, with less than one year passing for you?
And the answer is yes, it's possible in several different ways.
For example, there's the idea of biological stasis or hibernation.
Perhaps we could go into a state of suspended animation.
And then no time would pass for us subjectively during the year between now and next year.
And that's maybe possible.
And there are at least two ways that involve relativity.
They involve traveling at high speeds or cozying up next to a black hole.
We'll talk about relativity somewhat later.
And there may be other ways of getting to the future a little faster.
But the point is that's a possibility.
Time travel into the past, however, is impossible.
Why do we think so?
That's the story we're here to tell.
The basic reason for the impossibility of time travel into the past is a theme of many time travel stories,
the so-called grandfather paradox.
So let's suppose I get into a time machine and I travel back in time 100 years,
and I meet my own grandfather as a young man before he marries my grandmother and has children.
Then I pull out a gun and I shoot him dead.
Now what?
Well, if grandpa is dead as a young man, then he would have no children.
And they would have no children. I can never be born.
I can never go back in time.
And so therefore I can never kill grandpa.
And he does have children, and I am born.
So I do go back in time, and I do kill grandpa, and you see the problem.
You go around and around in a circle contradicting yourself at every round.
It's a paradox.
Do I shoot my grandfather or not? Am I born or not?
Surely there has to be an answer, but either answer leads to trouble,
but an absolute impossibility.
Well, it at least suggests that the impossibility of a time machine is of a very strong type.
It's an impossibility that does not depend on a lot of detail or I do not.
I'm not relying on Newton's laws or the principles of thermodynamics, etc.
Okay, let's take a deeper look at the grandfather paradox.
Actually, it's kind of violent and depraved.
I mean, why would I want to shoot my grandfather?
He was a good man. I'm named after my grandfather.
So I think that the violence makes it easy to miss the key point.
So let me propose an alternate form, the telegraph paradox.
The point here is that we do not actually have to travel into the past.
It is enough simply to be able to send messages into the past.
So we're going to consider a different kind of time machine,
not a time traveling machine, not a vehicle, but a time telegraph.
It can send messages into the past.
And the message that we send could be as simple as a single bit of information, yes or no.
All right, so suppose we possess a time telegraph.
Well, here's our experiment.
We're going to use the time telegraph to send a message one day into the past,
from Wednesday back to Tuesday.
Now, if we receive the message no on Tuesday,
then we will arrange it to send no, et cetera,
around and around with a twist, around and around with a contradiction.
It's the same as the grandfather paradox.
Will the message read yes or will it read no?
Either answer leads to its opposite.
It's a paradox, a contradiction.
And so our conclusion is that a time machine is impossible.
It is impossible to send a message into the past.
And once again, the fundamental idea is the idea of information.
Now, in turn, causes what message is received on Tuesday.
And if that ever happens, we have the potential for a paradox.
So our conclusion is that these so-called causal loops are impossible.
Now, does this stop anyone from thinking about time machines,
either time traveling machines or time telegraphs?
Of course not.
They're too fun and interesting to think about.
They pose a challenge.
How can we get around the paradoxes?
And science fiction writers and actual physicists,
as well, spend time thinking about time travel anyway.
You see, there are two assumptions for the grandfather paradox
or the telegraph paradox.
The first one is that given a time machine,
we are free to use it as we suggested,
going back and shooting grandpa
or sending whatever message we choose into the past.
And the second assumption is that some particular thing happens.
I either shoot grandpa or I do not.
The message is either yes or no.
So to resolve the paradox,
we must deny one or the other of those assumptions.
And each choice that we might make has some literary antecedents.
So the first theory calls to mind the story of Oedipus.
Oedipus was a mythical king of thieves
and the subject of several plays by the Greek playwright Sophocles.
So let's recall the story.
A prophecy predicted when Oedipus was born
that he would kill his father Laos and marry his mother Jocasta.
Now, what's a prophecy?
From our point of view, a prophecy is simply a message from the future.
Information sent back in time.
So the infant Oedipus is taken outside the city
and on a hillside exposed to the elements.
But he's found by a shepherd
who then raises him in another city,
raises him in ignorance of his heritage.
And then later on, the prophecy comes once again
to the adult Oedipus living in that city.
So he resolves that he must leave his home and wander.
He must prevent this terrible thing from coming to pass.
So he goes out and wanders and eventually he comes to Thebes.
And as he's approaching Thebes,
he meets Laos, his real father, on the road.
And they agree, takes to avoid fate, actually bring it about.
Even though Laos and Jocasta and Oedipus have a message from the future,
they are not free to act in such a way as to contradict it.
So what does this have to do with time machine paradoxes?
Well, during the telegraph paradox, I'll change my mind
or I'll make a mistake or the time telegraph will break down
or something like that will happen.
Or consider the grandfather paradox.
Maybe I go back in time and I shoot the wrong man.
Or maybe the gun misfires.
Or maybe grandpa is wounded but he survives and so on.
The point is, the idea is that the world is consistent
and will enforce its consistency.
And our apparent freedom of action is an illusion.
The unbreakable hand of fate will control us.
Interestingly, there's actually a mathematical version of this idea.
It was proposed by the Russian cosmologist Igor Novikov.
And it's called the Novikov self-consistency principle.
It simply states that the universe is consistent.
The universe is consistent.
Well, a universe that has time machines
and is ruled by the Novikov principle is actually a kind of a curious place.
For instance, it's been pointed out that you could use a time telegraph
in such a universe to build a really strange and very powerful type of computer.
So let's take a minute to explain how such a computer would work.
Let's suppose you're trying to solve a mathematical equation.
You know that the solution to the equation is a positive
about whether or not 17 is the answer.
The problem is that you don't know which positive whole number is the solution.
And not even the most powerful computer can check them all.
There are an infinite number of them.
So not even the most powerful computer can check all the numbers.
Or can it?
Suppose you have a computer that can send messages into the past.
Then it turns out it can solve your equation.
It can answer your problem easily.
How does it do it?
Well, at the start of its program,
the computer first checks the message it receives from the future.
Now, let's suppose that this message says 41 is not the answer.
So what does the computer do?
Well, it checks out the next number.
It checks out the number 42.
And then it sends its results back in time.
It either says 42 is the answer,
or, well, then the computer checks that number, 42,
to see if this really is the solution.
That's pretty easy.
And it sends the result of its computation back in time.
It either says 42 is the answer,
or it says 42 is not the answer.
Okay, now according to the Novikov self-consistency principle,
the message sent by the computer from the future
must be exactly the same as the message received by the computer in the past.
They must agree because the universe is self-consistent.
But the only way that this can happen
is if the message actually gives the correct answer.
You see, otherwise, the message from the future,
the future computer's message is either about some other number,
the next number one higher,
or it corrects a false message that the...
Okay, now despite Oedipus,
despite Novikov, something still seems fishy here.
I mean, how exactly does the universe go about enforcing its self-consistency?
If a time telegraph exists,
what physical laws actually prevent me from using it
to set up a telegraph paradox?
I mean, it's true that stories about irresistible fate
make powerful literature.
They tend to be tragedies, like Oedipus.
But it's a practical down-to-earth matter.
How does that happen exactly?
Exactly what is it that prevents the paradoxical experiment from being performed?
Exactly how does the right answer appear in the time machine computer?
It all sounds rather mystical and supernatural.
Now, one suggestion is that the laws of nature conspire
to make sure that time machines are never invented in the first place.
I once read an amusing science fiction story
in which a civilization about to build a time machine
is suddenly destroyed by a sudden outbreak of wacky improbable disasters.
The idea is that the universe will prevent paradoxes no matter what.
And, of course, the simplest way for the universe to prevent paradoxes
is if the laws of nature are such,
and a time machine takes us back to a previous branching,
then we might not go the same way this time.
In other words, a time telegraph, for example,
would allow us to communicate between branches.
The yes and no branches are actually sending messages to one another.
Both the branches really exist, but with the time telegraph, they can communicate.
Now, this branching time idea was used in the popular Back to the Future movies.
You remember those?
In Back to the Future, Marty, the hero,
goes back in the time-traveling car that Doc Brown invents,
and he changes the past.
He accidentally creates a new timeline in which his parents do not marry each other.
And so he has to fix things.
And in the movies, the past has changed several times,
each change leading to a different future.
Now, the Back to the Future movies do contain a few illogical things.
For example, there's a photo in Marty's pocket
that keeps changing depending on how he's changed the past.
But for the most part, the branching time idea is used with great ingenuity.
And you will not be surprised to find out.
There's a mathematical version of this idea, too.
David Deutsch, the English quantum physicist,
has pointed out that the time-branching theory has similarities
to one of the major schools of interpretation of quantum theory,
the many-worlds interpretation.
You see, quantum events appear to be non-deterministic.
The particle goes this way or that way in an experiment at random.
But the many-worlds idea is that both ways are actually chosen
in different branches of the quantum universe,
sometimes called the multiverse.
All the quantum possibilities are part of the real quantum universe.
And Deutsch said that time machines could possibly make use of this quantum branching.
And Deutsch has actually considered how this kind of quantum time branching,
time travel, could be used to make a computer.
And he finds that such a computer, like the self-consistency computer we talked about earlier,
would have almost miraculous computational powers.
It could easily find the solutions to immensely difficult equations.
The details are a bit technical.
Deutsch's paper is a kind of extremely mathematical science fiction story.
And again, it's hard to say exactly how and when the time machine computer arrives at its answers.
Okay.
I think it goes too far to say that the many-worlds idea makes time machines possible.
Possible.
Okay.
What are our conclusions about time travel or about sending messages into the past?
Well, under the most straightforward view of the laws of physics, they are impossible.
A time machine would lead us to contradictions and inconsistencies.
Now, if you are willing to adopt some really weird ideas about the world,
then it is just barely possible to have time machines without logical contradictions.
But the arguments against time machines are still really, really strong.
And so we're going to tag them, at least provisionally, as impossible.
And we're going to use the impossibility of time machines as a basis for thinking about other impossible things.
Because it is a surprising fact that theoretical physicists in certain subfields of physics
on the part of actual physicists.
Well, time machines play a role like Maxwell's Demon.
They are thought experiments that test our theories almost to the breaking point.
If your theory forbids time machines, then it's interesting to understand why this is true.
But if your theory permits time machines, then you have a lot of explaining to do to avoid the paradoxes.
And as we'll see in lecture 13, this is a serious point.
So time machines are a profound issue at the frontier of theoretical physics.
And also, time machines help us to understand more about time, about information, about cause and effect.
And these are important issues.
We're going to find out that the impossibility of time machines is related to many other basic questions about the world.
There's going to be a general principle.
In fact, there's a general principle throughout physics, which is that a cause must happen before its effects.
There are no causal loops. That principle is used in every branch of physics.
So to play by the rules, we're going to have to keep this law unless we have good reason to alter it.
So thinking about the impossible time machines are going to help us understand the implications of that law.
So clearly, we need to understand more about time.
Now our best understanding of time is Einstein's theory of relativity, dimension of the universe.
A physicist's term for that four-dimensional universe is space-time.
So in the next lecture, we're going to learn to think about the world in terms of space-time.
I'll see you then.
