Welcome to the tenth lecture of our course on the physics of impossible things. Last
time we talked about time machines. Time machines, of course, were introduced to literature
by H. G. Wells, and ever since they've been an extremely popular device in science fiction
stories and movies. Time machines lead to the grandfather paradox. Time travel is impossible
since it leads to contradictions. If I go back in time and shoot my grandfather, I can
never be born and then never go back in time. And so this is a pretty strong form of impossible.
It comes up pretty close to absolute impossibility. And there was another version we saw, the
telegraph paradox. Sending information into the past is impossible for the same reason.
Now we also talked about two highly speculative ideas for evading the paradoxes. One was what
we might call the irresistible fate idea. The paradoxes do not occur because we are somehow
destined by the iron laws of logical necessity, doxical, since time can branch out into many
inconsistent paths. And David Deutch has suggested that some ideas in quantum theory may allow
this to take place. Our basic conclusion, however, is that time machines are impossible,
that we cannot have causal loops, circular chains of cause and effect. In this lecture,
we're going to take a deeper look at time and its relation to space. We're going to
introduce some fundamental ideas from Einstein's theory of relativity. Now, Einstein's theory
was a revolution in physics. It involved a major redrawing of that boundary between the
possible and the impossible. And so we're going to need to conduct a survey of that
territory under the new rules. So for this lecture, we're going to spend most of our
time on the possible side. Many of the things that we talk about may sound impossible, but
all of them are confirmed by experiments. Because relativity theory is not mere speculation.
Relativity is a battle-tested theory of nature. That battle-tested theory leads to far-reaching
changes in our understanding of space and time. So our job is going to be to learn to
think of the world as in relativity, as essentially four-dimensional. Three dimensions of space,
one dimension of time. Spacetime. Relativity, of course, was invented by Albert Einstein.
German physicist, he was later a Swiss citizen, then an American citizen. Einstein, of course,
was one of the greatest scientists of all time. To this day, he's a popular icon. And
he made absolutely brilliant contributions to statistical physics. He was a founder of
quantum theory, but most famously, Einstein was the father of relativity theory. In a
series of scientific papers, beginning in 1905, when Einstein was a technical expert
third class at the Swiss patent office, culminating in his general theory of relativity, when
he was a professor at the University of Berlin, in 1915, Einstein laid out the theory. So
what was he trying to do? Well, we don't really have time for the complete story of
the origins of relativity, so I'll simplify a little bit. Basically, in the late 19th century,
some people had recognized that there was a mathematical inconsistency between two theories.
On the one hand, you had Newton's laws of mechanics, the laws of force and motion. And
on the other hand, you had equations developed during the 19th century, describing electric
and magnetic fields, equations that were invented by James Clarek Maxwell. The problem focused
on, but what if the experimenter who is measuring the speed of light is actually moving in motion?
What if the laboratory is moving through space, like the Earth in its orbit, for example? Well,
according to the Newtonian view, an observer in motion should measure a different speed
in different directions for the speed of light. Now, for Maxwell's theory, the speed
is c. That's it. That's the number. In the 19th century, almost everyone around the sun
should indeed measure different speeds of light in different directions. Okay, in the 1880s,
Albert Michelson and Edward Morley, a couple of American physicists, did a super sensitive
optical experiment to detect this effect, the fact that the speed of light could be
different in different directions. Really, one of the most sensitive experiments that
had ever been done. And they should have seen it, but they find no such effect. The speed
of light simply seems to be c. Now, in the late 19th century, a number of physicists
tried to tackle this problem, including Henri Poincare, who really almost got the answer
right. But the situation wasn't clear until Einstein proposed a radical solution. Einstein
proposed that it was Newton's theory that needed to be altered. Maxwell's equations
were right. Newton's theory must be altered. The speed of light, says Einstein, is really
the same for every observer, whether or not the observer is moving. Every observer would
measure the same speed of light in their laboratory. And Einstein works out the implications
of this idea, and his arguments are, I have to tell you, they're brilliant, they're lucid,
they're simple, but they're startling. Because Einstein concludes that different observers
will simply disagree about space and time measurements. Different observers will disagree
about the distance between two events, and the time elapsed between two events. In other
words, Einstein concludes that measurements of space and time are relative to who measures
them. That's the relative part of relativity. But we shouldn't focus altogether on the
relative part, because fundamental things are the same for all observers. All observers
see exactly the same laws of physics, including exactly the same speed of light. So in a way,
the theory is really based on what must be the same for everyone, not what must be different.
Okay, keep talking about the speed of light. What's so special about light? What's the
special role that light plays in relativity? And the answer is, nothing. Light has no special
role in relativity. The point is that this speed, C, 300,000 kilometers per second, is
a fundamental speed in the universe. Light happens to be one of the things, and not
the only one, that goes at this fundamental speed, C. But the value of C, the value of
that speed affects everything. For example, we've seen one of the consequences that Einstein
derived way back in lecture four. We talked about the relation between mass and energy.
E equals MC squared. The energy content of an object is its electromagnetic waves. It's
a fundamental relation based on the fundamental speed, C. Now, we're still going to call
C the speed of light for convenience. But there's nothing special about light, except
that it happens to move at C. And we're going to see more of the consequences of Einstein's
idea next time. But meanwhile, we want to take a look at a new point of view, a point
of view that's implicit in Einstein's work, but in fact, was contributed by someone else.
And that someone else was Hermann Minkowski. Hermann Minkowski was a German mathematician.
In fact, he was one of Einstein's professors at the Technical University at Zurich. And
Minkowski was, and I want to quote to you how it starts. It starts with ringing words.
He says, the views of space and time, which I wish to lay before you, have sprung from
the soil of experimental physics, and therein lies their strength. They are radical. Henceforth,
space by itself and time by itself are doomed to fade away into mere shadows, and only a
kind of union of the two will preserve an independent reality. That union of the two
is what Minkowski called spacetime. And your longitude, latitude tells you east-west, longitude
tells you north-south, and you'll need your altitude. That'll tell you where you are up
and down. And these are in fact exactly the three numbers that your electronic GPS unit
might give you. To specify something that happens in the universe, though, an event,
we also need the time of the event. We need one more number. So everything that happens
in the universe can be located by four numbers, three numbers for space and one number for
time. And so we say that there are four coordinates for space and time. That's what we mean when
we say that the universe is four-dimensional. So space and time together make spacetime.
Everything that happens in the universe is a part of spacetime. Everything happens somewhere
and some when. So how are we going to think about something in four dimensions? How can
we visualize four-dimensional geometry? Well, maybe some people can do this. I know physicists
who seem to be able to do something very much like this, but for the rest of us, we're going
to have to simplify. And typically what we're going to do is, for purposes of explanation,
we'll typically pretend that space is one-dimensional or two-dimensional. We'll forget about that
third dimension of space and we'll draw a picture that includes both space and time
relationships. Such a picture is called a spacetime diagram. Now, by tradition, in a
spacetime diagram, we dears. And Minkowski said, this is like using inches for measuring
east-west distance and miles for measuring north-south distance. That doesn't make sense.
So what we really need to do is we need to somehow measure time in meters. How do we
do that? How do we convert seconds to meters? Well, the way we do it is we multiply by c,
the speed of light, the fundamental speed, so many meters per second. And so one meter
of time, one meter of time, this is one meter of space, so what's one meter of time look
like? Well, the axes x and y and ct, c times time. Okay, so we can draw our spacetime diagrams.
What sorts of things are in spacetime? Well, an event is just a point in spacetime. It's
a where and a when. And what we would call a moment in time would be a horizontal plane,
including all the points in space at a particular instant of time. And we can think of spacetime
as kind of a stack of moments in time, one upon another, all stacked up into a volume.
It's sort of like taking the frames of a film and clipping the frames apart in the film
and then piling them up one frame after the other to form a solid block. That solid block
would kind of contain the film. So that's spacetime. Now, what does an ordinary object,
like a particle, look like in spacetime? Well, at each moment, the particle has a location
in space. There's an event associated with that particle, particle here. So the particle
in spacetime is all of these events taken together. I mean, Koski says you have what
he calls a world line stretching from the past to the future. That represents a particle.
The motion of the particle is simply the shape of that world line. A particle at rest is
a straight world line, straight up and down. It's parallel to the time axis. At every moment
in time, it's the same place, the same location in space. A particle in uniform motion would
be a straight world line, but tilted to one side. At each moment in time, slightly, well
then your world line would have some thickness, what's sometimes called a world tube. So all
at all, this is kind of an interesting view of the world. If you will, from the spacetime
point of view, the world does not exactly happen. The past, the present, and the future
are all combined at once in spacetime. All right, let's suppose that there's a flash
of light somewhere. For example, there's a flash bulb popping. There's poof, light flies
out in all directions. But our usual event would be that there's a flash event, and then
afterwards we could imagine there's an expanding sphere of light, the flash, and it expands
outward at the speed of light, C. Now, where the light flash takes place, the point of
the light cone. And event B is the event where I perceive the flash, and that's the point
where my world line intersects the light cone. So the light cone from A includes all the events
in spacetime that are reached by light from A. But of course we can also extend the light
cone back into the past, creating what we call the past light cone, and that includes
all the events from which light reaches A. So how do I think about this? Well, go out
tonight. Look at the stars, if the sky is clear. And when you look at the stars, some
of those stars are closer than others. And from the more distant stars, light takes a
longer time to travel. From the nearest stars, it takes a few years. The distance is a few
light years. But other stars that you can see are hundreds or thousands of light years
away. It takes hundreds or thousands of years for the light to reach you. So right now when
you look out into the universe, you're not seeing a moment of time in the universe. The
starlight is years or centuries old. And for distant galaxies that you might be able to
see in a telescope, the light is millions or billions of years old. Astronomers say this
way. When you look out into space, you're also looking back in time. Now in spacetime,
the where and the when of where you are is the here and now event, a point in spacetime.
Here and now. When you look out into the sky, what you always see is the past light cone
of here and now. Farther out is also farther back in time. Now events, world lines and
light cones are the basic concepts of spacetime. And Minkowski said Einstein's relativity is
really a theory about the geometry of spacetime. That geometry is not quite the same as Euclidean
geometry. I have to tell you, it has a different idea of distance. And that will help us make
sense of diagrams a little bit later. Minkowski gives some simple rules for his geometry and
then derives relativity right. But he soon changes his mind. Spacetime he comes to believe
including the region that includes all of space and all of time is the true arena for
physics to take place. And the idea of spacetime affected Einstein's whole outlook on life.
He later would say that the passage of time is merely a stubborn illusion. And he liked
to take a more eternal point of view, outside time, where all the times in the universe
are present together in spacetime. Okay, so what's this business of different observers?
What about the relativity in relativity? Well, different observers will put different
time and space coordinates on the same spacetime. So consider two observers, Alice and Bob.
And Alice says, I'm at rest. Bob, Bob's moving to the right. And in the spacetime diagram,
Alice's world line is vertical. Bob's is tilted to the right. Now of course, if you
ask Bob, Bob will say, look, I'm at rest. Alice is moving to the left. And if you look at Bob's
spacetime diagram, Alice's world line is tilted to the left. Bob's is vertical. The two diagrams
look different. But here's the most important point. The two diagrams represent the same
spacetime. They're like maps with two different coordinate systems showing the same landscape.
There's only one landscape. And in the same way, there's only one spacetime, the set of
all events that happen. Different observers assign different space and time coordinates
to the events in spacetime. So let me illustrate this idea with a little thought experiment.
What I want to do is I want to imagine two simultaneous events, two events that happen
at the same time. And to make this clear, I want to first figure out how I'm going to
make these two events simultaneous. So here's how I'm going to do it. I'm going to imagine
I have three devices that are equally spaced and they're sitting here at rest. And in the
center, I have a flash bulb. And at each end, I have a bell with a little electrical device
that will ring the bell when the light flash reaches the bell. And then I'll set off the
flash bulb. Light will go out in each direction at the same speed, the speed C. When the light
reaches each bell, each bell will ring and it reaches the two bells at the same moment.
So the two bells ring simultaneously, the ringing of the bells simultaneous events.
Now if I draw a spacetime diagram and I'll draw it in two dimensions so our light cones
are just a pair of diagonal lines, I have the world lines of the three devices. And
the world lines are vertical because the devices are at rest. And the first event is the firing
of the flash bulb in the middle. And then the light cone angles out from this event.
And there are two more events, the bell ringing events, and the bells ring at the same moment.
They're on the same horizontal line, the same level in the spacetime diagram because the
light from the flash event reaches them at the same level, the same horizontal line.
The two events are simultaneous. Now I want to look at the same setup, but this time I'm
going to suppose that the devices are moving to the right. Now this could be the same experiment,
observed by someone moving to the left. They would see the whole apparatus moving to the
right. Now the flash bulb flashes and the light goes each direction at a speed C. Remember
it's the same speed as before, it's a fundamental speed of the universe. Light always travels
at C. Now the light hits the left hand bell before it reaches the right hand bell because
the left hand bell is catching up to the light and the right hand bell is moving away from
the light. And so the two bell ringing events are not simultaneous. The left hand bell,
the trailing bell, rings first. The right hand bell, the leading bell, rings second.
So let's take a look at the spacetime diagram. The world lines of the three devices are tilted
since they're moving. And the first event is the flash bulb going off in the middle
device. The light cone sides are still at 45 degrees. Light still moves at the speed C,
that's a universal number. So the two events are where the light cone intersects the other
two world lines and those are where the bells ring. Those bell ringing events happen at
different times. The left hand bell ringing is lower, happens earlier than the right hand
ringing. Okay, there are many things to learn from this example. First of all, two events
which are simultaneous for one observer are not simultaneous for another observer. This
is what's called the relativity of simultaneity, which was a profound insight of Einstein.
Different observers define space and time relationships differently. Ultaneity is relative
to the observer. The second thing I want to point out is that these two spacetime diagrams
look quite different. Each one of them is kind of V-shaped. You've got a flash event
and two ringing events. You've got a light cone. But the two arms and the diagrams appear
to have equal length in one diagram, but not in the other diagram. This is because the
laws we've drawn are spacetime in ordinary space. We've used the geometry of Euclid to
try to represent the geometry of spacetime, but the geometry of spacetime is not the geometry
of Euclid. It's Minkowski geometry and the two arms are actually the same in both diagrams.
Remember I said there was a different definition of distance. And that finally brings us to
the third point. Each observer sees and each diagram represents exactly the same spacetime.
There are the same world lines, the world lines of the three devices. They are the same
events. One flash, two rings. There are the same light cone relationships among the events.
So despite the relativity of space and time relationships, there is only one spacetime.
Okay, in this lecture we've had a taste of Einstein's relativity and we've had a look
at Minkowski's spacetime geometry. Different observers see the same spacetime, but different
observers divide that spacetime. Its time diagrams may look different to our Euclidean
eyes, but they do represent the same spacetime world. Now, next time we're going to use
all this to learn about something impossible. In fact, nothing can travel faster than the
speed of light. It's impossible. Well, is that true? We'll see that in part it depends
on what we mean by a thing. If no thing can travel faster than light, what do we mean
by a thing? And when we investigate this we'll actually find that this is going to change
what we mean by past and future in the spacetime world. That's next time. I'll see you then.
Thank you.
