Welcome to the 13th lecture of our course on the Physics of Impossible Things.
We have been delving into the mysteries of space and time.
Relativity, of course, teaches us to regard these as parts of a single thing.
Spacetime, the arena within which all physics takes place.
We've seen how events and the world lines of particles and light cones define a spacetime geometry.
The light cones in particular tell us about information flow in spacetime.
The information from an event can only reach the inside of its future light cone.
And this is why we cannot send information faster than light, and therefore why we cannot travel faster than light.
If we had a way of sending information faster than light, then we could send information into the past.
And that would allow us to set up paradoxical experiments.
We could create causal loops, where A causes B, which causes C, which causes A.
And we concluded that we could not send information into the past, and we could not send information faster than light outside the light cone.
Now last time we talked about Einstein's general theory of relativity, in which he showed that gravity was really the curvature of spacetime.
And this is a wonderful theory. We only touched a few of the ideas of the general theory of relativity.
In this theory, the presence of a mass distorts the spacetime geometry around this, around the mass.
And this is most extreme in the case of a black hole.
The light cone structure around a black hole is altered, so that there's a region of space, the inside of the hole,
where the light cones are completely tilted inward toward the mass.
And so events inside that region, inside the event horizon, which is a mathematically defined surface,
can never send information to the outside world. The light cones from those events only point inward.
And so it is impossible to escape from inside a black hole, or even indeed to send a message out of the hole.
Now this warping of spacetime geometry is actually a warping of the very structure of cause and effect in spacetime.
And that's really remarkable. Think about it. In an ordinary spacetime, an event here and now can eventually have an effect on any point in space.
The light cone expands without bound, and at any point in space you will eventually be inside that light cone if you wait long enough.
So the news from the here and now event eventually gets everywhere.
But a black hole spacetime is not the same. An event inside the black hole, inside the event horizon, can never have any effect on any event outside of the event horizon.
So this leads to a disturbing question. If the structure of cause and effect in the universe can be bent by gravity, what does that make possible? Bent how?
Could we bend it in a circle? Could we use gravity to create a causal loop?
Okay, so let's sharpen up the question a little bit.
Remember the Einstein equations. These are the equations of general relativity that the basic rules for matter and spacetime geometry.
So our question is going to be, do these equations allow for any closed, time-like curve?
Now, there's a bit of jargon. Closed, time-like curve. What does that mean?
Well, let's take it apart at the ends. A curve, of course, we mean by a, what we mean by a curve is a world line in spacetime.
And closed means this world line forms a complete loop.
So what does that middle word, time-like mean?
Well, this word is actually Minkowski's word. And a time-like curve is a world line that stays inside its light cones all the way.
It never gets outside of its light cones, the light cones of events along the world line.
And so a time-like curve is a possible world line, a possible trajectory for an object in spacetime.
Now, that object could carry a clock along with it, and the clock could measure time along the world line.
Hence, we call the world line time-like, and that clock could produce a sequence of events along the world line, ticks of the clock.
These tick events would mark points along the world line.
A time-like curve could map out a chain of cause and effect in spacetime, a chain in which each event causes the next one on the curve.
And as long as the curve is time-like, that makes sense.
Now, if we have a time-like curve that is closed, that forms a complete loop, then we have a causal loop in spacetime.
And we've seen that that can lead to trouble.
So our question is, is there a possible universe, that is to say a spacetime that obeys the Einstein equations, that contains a causal loop?
And the answer to this question is an amazing story, and it takes us to the very edge of the physics that we know at present, and maybe a bit beyond.
So the story begins with a very elementary observation.
So suppose you are rotating about some axis, say about the axis that goes from your feet to your head.
So you're rotating around.
How do you know that you are rotating?
Or if you want to stop rotating, how do you do it?
Well, basically, there are two methods, and we can call those methods the eyes shut method and the eyes open method.
So with your eyes shut, you find that if you are rotating, your arms tend to be pulled outward.
They feel like they're pulled outward from your body if you rotate around.
And this is really an effect of inertia.
Your arms want to go in straight lines rather than around a circle, so that tendency to go in a straight line instead of going around with you,
that tendency means that they feel pulled outward.
It's an effect of inertia.
So because of this, if I want to stop rotating, I just adjust myself so that my arms aren't pulled outward.
And in the end, they're very sensitive instruments that could help you out with these.
And as long as we're not looking anywhere else, these can count as eyes shut methods, even if I sneak a peek at my instruments,
or there are laser gyroscopes that can easily detect a rotation rate of only one turn per thousand years.
Okay, so that's the eyes shut method.
Of course, there's another method.
The other method is, eyes open.
I can look out at the universe.
I can look out at the distant stars and galaxies far away in the universe.
And if I see them moving around me, then I know I'm rotating.
So to stop rotating, all you need to do is adjust yourself so that the stars are steady.
The stars aren't turning around you.
So there are two ways to make sure you're not rotating.
And here's a remarkable fact.
Those two methods lead to the same result.
If you stop your rotation using the eyes shut method, then you will find that you're also not rotating according to the eyes open method.
Now this fact was emphasized by the Austrian physicist Ernst Mach at the end of the 19th century.
Mach was a famous guy.
He's the Mach in Mach number, the speed of an airplane compared to the speed of sound is its Mach number.
This is the Mach in Mach number.
And he was sort of a philosophically minded physicist, a fascinating character.
And Mach proposed that the remarkable fact, the fact that the eyes open method and the eyes shut method give you the same answer.
That remarkable fact is no coincidence.
Remember, the eyes open method looks out at the rest of the universe.
The eyes shut method relies on the local effects of inertia, the inertia of my arms.
So what Mach is saying is the distant masses in the universe actually determine the local inertia of my arms, perhaps by some gravitational effect.
And this is a strange and interesting idea.
It's not so much a theory, it's kind of a prophecy about physics.
These things will turn out to be connected.
And this idea is called Mach's principle.
Now Einstein was inspired by Mach's principle.
He was inspired by a relation between inertia and gravity.
And Mach's principle was actually a major motivation for his own work on the general theory of relativity.
On the other hand, after he was finished with the theory, after the theory was completed, it isn't clear that Mach's principle is obviously built into relativity in any way.
How does Mach's principle fit with general relativity?
It's inspiration, but is it actually part of the theory?
Well, let me tell you what's true in general relativity.
Something called the Lentz-Thuring effect.
This is named after two other Austrian physicists, Joseph Lentz and Hans Thuring, who discovered this in 1918.
And so let me explain it by means of a thought experiment.
Imagine that you're at the center of our experiment and you're surrounded by a spherical shell of mass, a very massive spherical shell of mass.
You're inside it.
And let's also imagine that the shell has windows or it's otherwise transparent.
You can see through it.
And the shell is spinning around you, is spinning around you very rapidly on its axis.
So now you're going to try to stop your rotation.
And once again, there are two ways.
There's the eyes shut way, where you feel your own inertia.
And there's the eyes open way, where you look out through the spinning shell at the distant stars.
And now the amazing fact of the Lentz-Thuring effect is that these slightly disagree.
They disagree.
If you stop your rotation using the eyes shut method, relying on your inertia,
and you open your eyes and look at the distant stars, the stars tell you that you are rotating very slightly,
rotating in the same direction as the shell.
And it's generally a very small effect.
How small?
Well, suppose your shell was the mass of the entire Earth, and its radius was the radius of the Earth, and you were right in the middle of it.
And it was spinning at one revolution per second.
Then the difference between the eyes shut and eyes open method would be very small, maybe one degree per month.
Very slow rotation, but there's a difference.
What's happening is the spin of the massive shell is dragging your own sense of rotation,
your own inertia around with it, dragging it very slightly.
And so we may regard this as an example of Mach's principle in action.
The whole universe affects your own inertia, affects your ability to sense rotation.
But the shell, which is very massive and very close to you, gets a significant vote in that influence.
And so its rotation can change your sense of rotation.
Its rotation has a real effect on your inertia.
Okay, that's very interesting, but it's not very alarming so far the causal structure of space-time doesn't seem in danger.
But let's jump forward with a story a little bit, to 1949.
And in 1949, Einstein is about to turn 70 years old.
It's his birthday.
By now he's at the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton.
And to honor his birthday, they're getting together a collection of papers,
a collection of papers from eminent scientists on subjects of interest to Einstein.
And so one of the people recruited to contribute to this volume is Kurt Gerdl,
the famous Austrian mathematician.
He's the author of the famous incompleteness theorem in mathematical logic.
Gerdl proved that every mathematical system must contain unprovable statements.
A remarkable fact.
And think what you'd have to do to prove this.
You'd have to prove mathematically that some mathematical statements cannot be proved or disproved mathematically.
Well, safe to say that Gerdl's mind thrives on paradox.
And by this time, Gerdl is also at the Institute for Advanced Study, and he's a great friend of Einstein's.
So his contribution to the birthday book is a paper on Mach's principle.
And so what does he do?
Gerdl invents a universe.
That is to say, he invents a space time, a geometry that is a new solution to the Einstein equations of general relativity,
a new solution to the mathematics.
So Gerdl's universe follows the basic laws of space time geometry.
In some sense, it's a possible universe.
But the whole universe in Gerdl's universe is rotating.
Your eyes shut and eyes open method of stopping your rotation.
Those two methods lead to different results everywhere.
If you stop yourself in the middle with your eyes shut and you look out at the distant stars, they're spinning around you.
Mach's principle is entirely wrong in this universe.
Even though that universe obeys the basic laws of the general theory of relativity, the Einstein equations.
Now, Gerdl's universe is a bizarre place.
And so we can make an attempt to draw the space time diagram for Gerdl's universe.
In the middle near your world line, the light cones look okay.
But on each side, going out from that center, on each side, the light cones are tilted.
And they're not tilted in like in a black hole.
They're not tilted out, but they're tilted around.
They're twisting around in some directions, say counterclockwise.
And farther out, the light cones are twisted even more.
And even farther out, the light cones are almost sideways.
And this leads to a shocking consequence.
If I leave here and I go outward, and then I make a large loop counterclockwise around the Gerdl universe,
I can return to the same location afterwards, not only in space, but also in time.
I can return to here and now.
In other words, the Gerdl universe contains a closed time-like curve.
An object can follow a closed world line.
It can return to its own past.
In the Gerdl universe, time travel is possible.
Well, that's sort of alarming. Is that really going to happen?
Well, our best observations to date, when we look out at the universe,
our best observations tell us that our universe is not rotating.
Mach's principle seems to hold in our universe.
We do not live in the Gerdl universe, in other words.
But in some sense, it is a possible world.
It's consistent with the laws of spacetime, the Einstein equations of general relativity.
Nothing in those laws by themselves actually forbids time travel.
And that is a profoundly disturbing conclusion.
And it gets worse.
So in the 1980s, the astronomer Carl Sagan is writing a science fiction novel,
the novel that was later published as Contact.
And he has the usual problem.
He wants to get his protagonist to a distant star and back in a few hours.
And of course, the stars are light years away.
So Sagan decides to dust off an old idea of Einstein and Nathan Rosen.
That is that two distant regions of space might be connected by a shortcut,
a kind of spacetime bridge.
So you must imagine two regions in space very far apart,
and they don't appear to be connected to each other,
but if you step into one of them, almost immediately, you can step out of the other one.
They appear far apart, but the distance through the wormhole,
the hidden connection between these two regions, may be quite short.
And actually, the term wormhole was not Einstein and Rosen's name for it.
That was actually coined later on by John Wheeler, the same guy who introduced black hole.
So black holes and wormholes.
All right, so Sagan thinks this is a pretty cool idea.
So he calls up his friend, Kip Thorne, who's a physicist at Caltech
and an expert on the general theory of relativity.
And the conversation goes like this.
Sagan says, would this work?
And Thorne says, well, no.
Actually, wormholes collapse on themselves and form black holes.
And this happens so quickly that you would not be able to traverse the wormhole before it happened.
So not only would the wormhole not work, as you think, it would kill you if you try it.
You'd be caught in a black hole.
And Sagan says, gee, that's too bad.
I really need this for my plot.
Is there any way to somehow prevent the wormhole from collapsing?
And Thorne says, I'm not sure.
That's an interesting question.
Let me call you back.
And so Thorne begins a multi-year study, a mathematical study of spacetimes with wormholes.
And the study is based on the mathematical laws of spacetime, the Einstein equations.
And what he discovers is that it is possible to do this in a sense.
What you have to do is you have to stuff the wormhole with a special sort of matter,
a matter that's sometimes called exotic matter.
Well, what's exotic about exotic matter?
What's exotic about it is that it has negative energy.
And if you put exotic matter into the wormhole, then you can stabilize it,
and you can keep it open, and you can use it for travel.
And indeed, this is how it works in Sagan's novel, Contact.
So let me make some points about wormholes.
First of all, does this exotic energy or negative energy matter actually exist?
Well, in fact, we do not know of any stuff like this.
All of the ordinary matter we know, electromagnetic fields and so on, they all have positive energy.
Now, there are some effects of quantum physics which tell us that small regions of space
might have a little negative energy in the small region of space
as long as there's some positive energy around it.
But exotic matter in bulk, bulk quantities, that does not seem to be available.
Yet, it is hard to prove on fundamental grounds that such matter is impossible.
A second point is that you can use wormholes to travel both in space and time.
It's actually not hard to turn a pair of wormholes into a time machine,
which means that space times with wormholes can have closed, time-like curves.
They can have causal loops.
They can have time travel with all the potential paradox that that implies.
Another question, third question is, how would you make a wormhole?
Well, indeed, nobody knows how to make a wormhole from scratch.
And it's most likely impossible under the ordinary laws of general relativity to make a wormhole from scratch.
But some theories suggest that there are actually extremely tiny wormholes all over the place.
These wormholes might have been formed during the Big Bang when things were pretty messy
and out there somewhere.
So all you have to do is find one, vastly enlarge it, stabilize it on both ends with some exotic matter,
and then maybe you're in business.
Finally, some people hope that quantum physics will somehow save the day,
will save us from the dangers of wormholes.
If you really did have a wormhole, there's actually some reason to believe
that it would be surrounded by very intense, powerful quantum radiation.
And so the idea is that maybe any information sent into one end of the wormhole
would be totally scrambled by the radiation before it came out.
And of course, sending information through the wormhole is the real problem.
It's sending information into the past that causes the paradoxes.
Now wormholes are not the only idea for traveling faster than light.
In 1994, the Mexican physicist Miguel Alcubierre proposed a very, very cool idea.
So let's see if we can illustrate this.
In a space-time diagram, you have to imagine that there's kind of a tube that cuts across space-time
faster than the speed of light.
And outside of the tube, the light cones are normal. They look normal.
But inside the tube, the light cones are tilted over along the tube.
So to take another picture, you imagine a bubble.
And outside the bubble, you can't go faster than light.
And inside the bubble, you also can't go faster than light.
But the bubble itself appears to move through space faster than light.
I say appears to move in some sense what's happening is that space is contracting at the front of the bubble
and it's expanding at the back of the bubble.
And that causes the bubble to appear to go faster than light.
And Alcubierre shows that this is actually a possible solution to the Einstein equations.
And it's actually strongly reminiscent of the warp drive of Star Trek.
So sometimes this is called the Alcubierre warp drive.
And so the idea is that you can go faster than see the speed limit of the universe
by bending the space-time around you.
Of course, there are problems.
And one of the problems you might be able to guess, the bubble itself requires this exotic matter.
It requires negative energy to maintain the bubble.
And it's also not at all clear how to set up the Alcubierre situation to begin with.
Nobody has a scenario for how to do that.
Once you have such a thing, we know how to use it, but it's hard to see how you would set it up.
Okay, all of this is very distressing.
This potential for going faster than light or for creating closed, time-like curves, causal loops.
Is time travel possible after all?
Well, not quite, of course.
All of these things have a little something, a little wrong with them.
For example, we do not appear to be living in a rotating universe like the Gertel universe.
So if we're not in a rotating universe, that method for creating closed, time-like curves won't work.
And both these traversable wormholes and the Alcubierre warp drive require exotic matter,
matter with negative energies, and such matter does not appear to exist.
And also it may be impossible to make wormholes from scratch.
If they do not already exist, then even if they're possible in principle, we're stuck.
We can't have one.
If closed, time-like curves exist, if causal loops exist, if time travel is possible, then we face the paradoxes.
We face the grandfather paradox.
We face the telegraph paradox.
And in that case, we must fall back upon one of our last-ditch resolutions of the paradoxes.
Remember what those were?
There was the irresistible fate theory, the theory that the universe prevents paradoxes from happening.
And if we try to make a paradox, then something prevents us.
We must fail.
In other words, we have less freedom of action than we might imagine.
And this is kind of embodied in Novikov's self-consistency principle.
And on the other hand, there was the multiple timeline theory that the universe embraces a vast tree of branching possibilities.
And this is embodied in Deutsch's quantum mini-worlds theory of time paradoxes.
On the other hand, another physicist, Stephen Hawking, an English physicist in 1992, proposed the chronology protection conjecture.
And the conjecture goes like this.
There is some general principle that prevents closed, time-like curves in our universe.
Now, Hawking is unclear exactly what that principle is.
He joked that it was the chronology protection agency.
But there is some principle that prevents it.
Unfortunately, this is a story without a definitive end.
I mean, sending information back in time or faster than light still seems to be impossible.
However, this impossibility seems to be on shakier ground than before.
There are applications of known laws, plus a few speculative elements like negative energy,
that can lead to closed, time-like curves, and thus to causal loops, and thus to time travel at its paradoxes.
And it's not clear how those paradoxes would be avoided.
Or it might be, as Hawking suggests, that some general principle of nature keeps this from happening.
The result of all this is that time travel is a serious subject of theoretical study today.
It's obviously a highly speculative subject.
Nobody, as far as I know, is suggesting any real experiments.
But time travel is a crucial test of the meaning and self-consistency of our fundamental theories.
Now, my own bet is that Hawking is right, that time travel will turn out to be impossible.
But learning exactly why that's true is going to involve a new and deeper understanding
of the nature of space and time, of information, of cause and effect.
And that, of course, is the real reason to study it in the first place.
So, for now, we're going to leave the time machines behind.
At this point in the course, we're going to take a turn in a different direction.
We're going to study a new sort of impossibility, one that is no less fundamental than the ones we've been talking about.
The impossibility I'm talking about is one that is the basis for our most powerful theories of physics.
And that sounds rather paradoxical to base theories of physics on impossibility.
What I'm talking about is the impossibility of knowing whether a particular transformation has taken place.
What do I mean by a transformation?
Well, it's a shift or a rotation or a reflection in space, something like that.
And the reason that it's impossible to tell whether that's taken place
is that the new situation after the transformation looks exactly like the old situation.
Things that are, things are invariant, invariant, unchanging with respect to transformation.
And this idea of invariance under transformation is called symmetry.
And that's a wonderful and far-reaching subject.
It touches all branches of physics.
And it's going to tell us amazing new things about energy and time and matter.
And the whole idea is built out of the impossible.
So the Laws of Symmetry next time.
I'll see you then.
