Welcome to the fourteenth lecture of our course on the physics of impossible things.
In the last few lectures we've been exploring ideas about space and time, about information,
about cause and effect.
And we talked about the impossibility of causal loops, where A causes B, which causes C, which
causes A. And the reason that those are impossible is that they can lead to paradoxes.
The loop might connect back in a contradictory way.
And this led us to consider all kinds of impossible things, time machines, sending messages faster
than light, escaping from inside a black hole.
And we took the space-time point of view to discuss these things.
We talked about the causal structure, the light cone arrangement in space-time.
And we saw that that structure can be warped by gravitational effects because of Einstein's
general relativity.
And this led us, in the last lecture, to consider some speculative ideas about causal loops that
might be possible, after all, in various ideas like wormholes and rotating universes.
And there are strange consequences that would follow from this.
Our business has been mapping the line between the possible and the impossible.
And time and information and causation are pretty fundamental ideas in drawing that line.
But this time, we're going to begin to explore a concept that is just as fundamental as those
are, just as important for drawing the possible-impossible line.
In fact, it's a concept that's rooted in the idea of the impossible itself.
In this lecture, we're going to begin to discuss the concept of symmetry.
Now the original concept of symmetry is that it's a geometric idea.
A shape can be symmetric or not.
So since it's geometry, let's go back to Euclid, the great Greek geometer.
We remember Euclid from lecture one.
Euclid was our patron saint of absolute impossibility.
And why was that?
Well, it was because of Euclid's proof by contradiction, his use of the impossible to
prove things are true.
To prove that x is true, you first assume that x is false, which is going to turn out
to be an impossibility.
And then you show that this assumption leads to an absurdity, a logical contradiction.
You use the impossible to establish what is true.
And we actually studied one of Euclid's proofs in detail to see this idea in action.
We looked at proposition six of book one of Euclid's elements, which was about triangles.
Now I want to return to the very same theorem, and I want to look at it in a new way.
I'm going to give a proof, not a proof by contradiction, I'm going to give you another
way of thinking about this fact about triangles.
It's a way that's also based on using the impossible.
So let's imagine we are given the triangle A, B, C as before.
And what we know is that the angles at the points B and C are the same.
And what we wish to prove is that the sides A, B, and A, C are also the same length.
That is that the triangle is an isosceles triangle.
So what I want to do is I want to compare two triangles, the original one, the ABC triangle,
and another triangle that is reflected, the reflected triangle, the triangle A, C, B.
And I obtain this one by taking the original triangle and flipping it over, by exchanging
left and right.
Okay, so how are these two triangles different?
Well, I can find that out by laying the reflected triangle, A, C, B, on top of the original
triangle, ABC.
And the basis of those two triangles, the bases, agree exactly, in fact, they're the
same line.
The line B, C is the same as the line C, B, the line segment.
And the angles on either side of the base are also the same because, by assumption,
the B angle is the same as the C angle.
And because of this, the apex of the triangle, where the two sides of the triangle intersect,
that apex must be the same point for the two triangles.
And this means that the reflected triangle and the original triangle are actually the
same shape.
It is impossible to distinguish between the original and the reflected versions.
And because they're the same shape, the corresponding parts of the two triangles are the same.
So the left side of the original, the AB side, is the same as the left side of the reflected
triangle.
But that one is AC.
So AB is the same length as AC, and our theorem is proved.
We'll see what we did.
We transformed the triangle.
We flipped it over.
In so doing, we found a new shape that was the same as the old shape.
That is to say, the triangle, the shape, is symmetric.
And there are lots of regular geometric shapes that have symmetry in this way.
It's a very useful concept.
And not only abstract, idealized geometrical shapes have symmetry, but many natural shapes,
shapes occurring in nature also have symmetry.
For example, the human body.
Now, not like most vertebrates, the human beings have a bilateral symmetry in their
body plan.
That is to say, they're sort of the same on the left and the right.
They have two arms, they have two legs, they have two eyes, they have two ears, and so
on.
And even if you look at the internal anatomy of a human being, there's a lot of asymmetry
there.
There's a symmetry in the skeleton.
The skeleton is pretty symmetric.
The skeletal muscles, the lungs, there's one lung on each side, and so on.
Now some parts of our anatomy are not symmetric.
The heart, the stomach, the liver, their shapes and placements are not exactly symmetric in
our body.
So the human body is only approximately symmetric.
It's symmetric except for some details.
Symmetry is everywhere.
And the concept of symmetry is actually more general than a left-right reflection.
There are other kinds of symmetry corresponding to other kinds of transformations we might
make, other ways of transforming something.
So for example, we can rotate or shift.
So let me give you a general definition for symmetry that applies to all these different
kinds of changes.
Symmetry is invariance under transformation.
That is to say that something is symmetric if a given transformation of that something
leaves it unchanged.
Or another way of putting it is that something is symmetric if it is impossible to tell whether
or not that transformation has been applied to it.
It's impossible to tell the difference between the original and the transformed version.
They're completely equivalent.
That's the general idea of symmetry.
And you can tell that symmetry, the idea of symmetry is based on the idea of impossibility,
that it's impossible to tell the difference between something and its transformed form.
Symmetry is a property that makes something impossible.
So let's consider a kind of a useful exercise.
Let's look at the capital letters of the Roman alphabet, A, B, C, etc.
If you do this on a computer, you should be sure to use a very basic uncomplicated, undecorated
font.
Let's think about the symmetry of these letters.
How could you transform the various letter shapes without changing them?
Well, if you look at A, A has left-right reflection symmetry.
If you flip left and right, A looks just like A.
The letter D has an up-down reflection symmetry.
If I flip it, if I exchange up and down, I get the same shape.
The letter H has both of these kinds of symmetry, plus some combinations of them.
The letter N has no reflection symmetry at all.
If I reflect N, it doesn't look like an N.
But N does have another kind of symmetry.
It has a rotation symmetry.
If I turn in by 180 degrees, it looks the same.
And some letters, of course, like the letter R, have no symmetry at all.
So it's actually kind of an interesting game.
You can divide the alphabet into groups of letters with the same kind of symmetry.
And A and letter T, for example, are part of the same group.
But A and N, both of them have symmetry, but they have different kinds of symmetry,
so they belong in different groups.
Symmetry is very often a source of great beauty and aesthetic satisfaction.
So a very common example is the idea of a pattern or a tiling.
In such patterns, we often have a simple motif, but the motif is repeated over and over and
over.
There's a great example in the Alhambra, which is a 14th century Moorish palace in
southern Spain, which is world famous for its beautiful architecture.
And it's especially famous for the wonderful abstract tilings on its floors and walls.
Not only are the shapes in the tilings symmetric, but not only the tiles symmetric, often they're
the same if you rotate them or reflect them, but also the pattern of the tiles repeats
itself.
And so the whole tiling would remain the same if we shifted the tiling over a few inches.
And this shifting symmetry is another species of geometric symmetry.
Okay, we've now seen how shapes and objects and situations can be symmetric.
But the concept of symmetry runs deeper than this.
In physics, we can apply the concept of symmetry to the laws themselves.
Symmetry is a property of the laws of nature.
So what does it mean to say that the laws are symmetric or the laws have symmetry?
All right, well, what do the laws of physics tell us?
Well, in a given situation, a given arrangement of particles and fields and so on, the laws
allow us to predict the behavior of that system.
Now exact prediction may not be possible, though the laws may be non-deterministic or
the system may be chaotic.
But there must be a degree of predictability.
That's what we mean by a law.
So there's some predictability of the system, and that's encompassed in the laws of physics.
Now given a possible transformation of the system, a rotation or a reflection or something,
we can imagine two different situations, the original situation and the transformed version
of the original situation.
And the laws of physics are symmetric if the original and transformed situations have
exactly the same behavior.
In other words, the behavior of the system is simply unchanged by the transformation.
As far as the future behavior of the system is concerned, it is impossible to tell the
difference between the two situations.
Okay, let me give you an example.
And this example is called translation symmetry.
I'll tell you what I mean by translation in a moment.
So let's consider the solar system, and we'll ignore the interactions with distance stars
and so on.
We've got the planets going around the sun, the sun and the planets are exerting gravity
on each other.
The planets are also exerting gravity on each other, so they slightly perturb each other's
orbits and so on.
They're all following Newton's laws of motion.
Now let's start everything over, but with the whole solar system shifted one meter to
the right.
That shift is called a translation in space.
Well the shifted solar system behaves in exactly the same way.
It is impossible to tell the difference between the shifted solar system and the original.
I mean, suppose I told you, I said, well, while you weren't looking, I shifted everything
by one meter, everything in the solar system.
That sounds unlikely, but how would you tell for sure?
There's really no way.
It's impossible.
And note that it's important that I shift everything.
If I shifted the planets, but not the sun, if I shifted some things, but not others,
you could tell.
But if I shift everything, it's impossible to tell.
The moral of the story is that translation in space, shifting in space, is a symmetry
of the laws of physics.
A physicist might say that the laws of physics are translation invariant, they are unchanged
by a shift in space.
Or another common way to put it is that there is no location in space with special properties.
The laws work exactly the same everywhere.
Physicists sometimes say that there's no preferred location in space.
They don't mean there's no especially desirable location, but simply there's no location that's
any different from any other location.
Another example of symmetry in the laws of physics is called exchange symmetry.
It's a fact of nature that all of the electrons in the universe, for example, are exactly
identical.
They have exactly the same properties, exactly the same mass, exactly the same electric charge,
and so on.
So if I swap two electrons in a system, it makes no difference.
So I told you, oh, while you weren't looking, I exchanged two electrons.
You can't tell whether I did or not, it's impossible.
The electrons are identical.
So the exchange of electrons is a symmetry of the laws.
The laws are exchange invariant, and it's also true for protons.
All protons are identical, all neutrons are identical, all photons of light are identical,
and so on.
So it's about to be a very important principle of physics.
Okay, there are lots of symmetries in the laws of physics, and these symmetries have
a truly astounding significance, and that significance is expressed by the marvelous
mathematical discovery made by Emmy Nether.
Emmy Nether was a brilliant German mathematician of the early 20th century, probably the greatest
woman mathematician of all time.
And in spite of, frankly, idiotic resistance by many within German academia, Nether never
received the academic appointments and recognition that she deserved, in spite of this, Nether
made pioneering discoveries in algebra.
She invented entire subfields of the subject of algebra.
And I'll have to tell you, Emmy Nether is an absolute heroine to every physicist on
earth.
Why?
Because of Nether's theorem, which was originally proved in 1915, the same year that Einstein
finished General Relativity.
So what's Nether's theorem?
Here's Nether's theorem in a nutshell.
Every symmetry of the laws of physics leads to a conservation law, and every conservation
law arises from a symmetry in the laws of physics.
You remember what a conservation law is?
A conservation law says that something is conserved.
It cannot be created or destroyed.
The total amount of it remains unchanged over time, and our great example was the conservation
of energy, the first law of thermodynamics.
And so what Nether's theorem does is it provides a breathtaking connection.
Symmetry in the laws of physics is equivalent to conservation laws.
Now, of course, I'm leaving some stuff out.
I'm leaving some of the mathematical machinery of Nether's theorem.
I'm leaving out how to tell which symmetry is connected to which conservation law.
And instead of explaining that, I'm going to give you a handful of examples of Nether's
theorem in action.
So here's the first one.
Our symmetry is translation symmetry, a shift in any direction.
Remember that one?
If I say, I shifted everything while you weren't paying attention, it's actually impossible
to tell whether I did or not.
There's no preferred location in space, no location in space at which the laws of physics
are any different.
What's the conservation law?
The conservation law is conservation of momentum.
The momentum of a particle is its mass times its velocity.
And as particles interact with each other, they can exchange momentum by exerting forces
on each other.
But by Newton's third law, there's a relation between those forces, action and reaction.
Newton's third law has the consequence that any momentum lost from particle number one
must be gained by particle number two, and so the total momentum is conserved.
That's a really basic law of physics, and it's related to translation symmetry.
Or here's another example, rotation symmetry.
If I rotate a system about any axis, the system behaves in exactly the same way.
If I told you, oh, while you weren't looking, I rotated everything by 35 degrees, it's actually
impossible to tell that just based on the behavior of the system.
If you will, there's no preferred direction in space, there's no direction which has properties
different from any other direction.
What's the corresponding conservation law?
Conservation of angular momentum.
Angular momentum is a quantity that measures the total amount of spin about some axis in
the system.
Conservation of angular momentum is related to rotation symmetry.
Or here's another example, remember our example of exchange symmetry.
If you swap to identical particles, nothing changes.
If I told you, oh, I switched those two electrons, you can't tell, it's impossible to tell whether
I did that or not.
What's the corresponding conservation law?
The conservation law here is a bit subtle, there really isn't a name for it, but I'll
try to describe it.
Basically in the universe there are two types of particles.
There are bosons and there are fermions.
And bosons, we actually mentioned before in Lecture 7, you might have missed it, but let
me just tell you, bosons are the kinds of particles that can form Bose-Einstein condensates
at low temperatures.
On the other hand, fermions, like electrons, protons and neutrons, fermions obey the Pauli
exclusion principle, named after Wolfgang Pauli, which states that no two identical
fermions can be in exactly the same place.
Now, the point is that particles of one type stay that type.
If you start out a boson, you stay a boson, if you start out a fermion, you stay a fermion.
And that's kind of a conservation law, it's conservation of bosonness or fermionness.
So the lesson here is that the symmetry we talked about is kind of obvious, the conservation
law is kind of subtle.
And the reverse can happen as well.
So here's another example, the famous conservation law, the conservation of electric charge.
Electrons can have electric charge, they can have positive charge or negative charge
or zero charge, protons are positively charged, electrons are negatively charged, neutrons
have zero charge, and electric charge is related to the electric and magnetic fields around
particles.
And it turns out that charge is conserved, net electric charge cannot be created or destroyed.
So what's the symmetry associated with that conservation law?
Well it's something called gauge symmetry, it's a very subtle mathematical symmetry of
the electric and magnetic fields.
So this is a case where the conservation law is really obvious, the symmetry is kind of
subtle.
But the general principle still holds, for every symmetry there's a conservation law,
for every conservation law there's a symmetry.
Okay, I saved the big one for last.
The symmetry is translation in time.
If we simply shift everything in time, the behavior of a system does not change.
If I tell you, oh I delayed everything by an hour, you couldn't tell just based on the
behavior of the system.
There's no preferred time, the laws apply equally in the same way at all times.
What's the corresponding conservation law?
The conservation of energy.
Now it's hard to express how shocking and unexpected this is, but let me try.
What I'm saying is that it's impossible to tell what time it is.
And I mean some kind of absolute time.
You can obviously read a clock.
But if everything around you, including the clock, had been delayed one hour, you couldn't
tell that just based on the behavior of things in the universe.
The laws of physics work exactly the same way at all times.
It's impossible, therefore, to determine the absolute time.
Nether's theorem says, because of that fact, it is impossible to build a perpetual motion
machine of the first kind, a machine that creates more energy than it uses.
Why?
Because time-shift symmetry is connected to the conservation of energy.
Nether's theorem is one of the most profound insights in all of physics.
And it's proved remarkably durable.
It was originally proved in the context of so-called classical theories of physics.
Theories, for example, like Newton's Laws.
But the theorem works even better in quantum theory.
Nether's theorem is absolutely central to all modern fundamental theories of nature.
But it's even better than that.
Nether's theorem is also extremely handy.
If you have a toolbox in your home, you know that there are always two or three tools in
that toolbox that get used all the time for almost every job.
In my toolbox, it's a medium-sized screwdriver, a pair of needle-nose pliers, and a roll of
duct tape.
Now in the theoretical physics toolbox, Nether's theorem is one of those tools.
It's useful for almost every kind of job.
So far, we've talked about the idea of exact symmetry.
But the laws of physics also have some approximate symmetries, like the approximate symmetry
of the human body.
And these approximate symmetries are associated with approximate conservation laws.
So let me illustrate this with an example.
So let me just tell you what the fundamental forces of nature are.
And I'll list them in order of decreasing strength.
The strongest one is called the strong nuclear force.
It's the force that holds nuclei together.
The next one is the electromagnetic force.
The next one is the weak nuclear force.
The next one is gravity.
And those are the fundamental forces.
And we'll talk much more about all this in lecture 20.
Now the strong nuclear force is about 100 times stronger than the next strongest force,
than electromagnetism.
So that's really the most important force in some sense.
It's the force that holds atomic nuclei together.
Inside those nuclei, you have protons and neutrons.
And protons and neutrons are very similar particles.
They have almost the same mass, for example.
Neutron is less than 1% more massive than the proton.
But protons have a positive charge, and neutrons have a zero charge.
So they're a little bit different, at least with respect to the electromagnetic force.
Now in 1932, Werner Heisenberg had a really brilliant insight.
He realized that the strong nuclear force treats protons and neutrons essentially in
the same way, that these two kinds of particles are only affected differently by other much
weaker forces, like electromagnetism.
So there's an approximate symmetry of nature, the symmetry in which I exchange protons and
neutrons.
I turn all the protons to neutrons, all the neutrons to protons.
And if I did that, then the new situation looks just the same as far as the strong nuclear
force is concerned.
Not for the other forces, but for the strong nuclear force, which is more than 100 times
stronger than anything else, the two situations look the same.
So that means that it's impossible to tell the difference between protons and neutrons
using only the nuclear force.
And this leads to an approximate conservation law, the conservation of something called isospin.
Isospin is basically proton-ness or neutron-ness.
And isospin, despite the name, really has nothing to do with things that are rotating,
spinning stuff.
The name comes from a mathematical analogy to particle spin, which doesn't need to concern
us here.
Now isospin is not conserved.
And we've already seen that.
Remember from lecture four, we talked about beta decay.
A neutron can actually turn into a proton.
It doesn't conserve its neutron-ness.
Nitrogen-14, for example, containing eight neutrons and six protons, can turn into nitrogen
protein, or nitrogen-14, with seven neutrons and seven protons, and it emits a fast electron
and a neutrino and so on.
So isospin is not conserved, but isospin is approximately conserved.
And what that means is that changes in isospin cannot happen very rapidly.
Things that change neutrons to protons or protons to neutrons can only happen relatively
slowly or rarely.
So recall that the average lifetime of carbon-14 is actually 8,000 years.
So this approximate conservation law, isospin, reflects an approximate symmetry between protons
and neutrons in the physics of the nucleus.
And we'll see a lot more of this kind of idea in lecture 20.
In this lecture, we've looked at the idea of symmetry in physics, and you can think
of symmetry as a kind of a generalized mirror.
The mirror may reflect, or it may rotate, or translate, or delay in time, or exchange
particles and so on.
And so I can imagine holding something up to the mirror, and that something is symmetric
if it's impossible to tell the difference between it and its mirror version.
And symmetry in the laws of physics work this way.
In effect, I hold the mirror up to the whole universe.
And I observe how the mirror universe behaves.
And I ask the question, can we tell the mirror universe from our own?
And if we can't, then the mirror is a symmetry of the underlying laws.
And Emmy Nether's wonderful theorem tells us that every symmetry of the laws corresponds
to a conservation law, and vice versa.
Now in the next lecture, we're going to hold up three special mirrors to the universe.
One will be an ordinary mirror that just reflects left and right.
And another one will be a kind of mirror that exchanges matter and antimatter.
And the third one will be a mirror that exchanges the future and the past.
So is it possible to tell these mirror worlds from our own?
And what does that imply about the laws of nature?
We'll look at these mirror worlds next time.
I'll see you then.
