Welcome to the 16th lecture of our course on the physics of impossible things.
In the last two lectures, we have been talking about the idea of symmetry,
one of the most important ideas in all of physics.
And last time we studied three mirrors for the world, reflections in space,
in the properties of matter, and in the direction of time.
We called these three mirrors P, C, and T.
And none of them by themselves is an exact symmetry of the laws of physics.
By closely examining nuclear reactions,
it is possible to tell the difference between the real world and a reflected world.
But the combination of them, C, P, T, does seem to be a basic symmetry of the laws of nature.
This time, rather than reflecting the world, we're going to magnify it.
After all, in geometry, a change in scale does not make any real difference.
A square one inch on a side and a square one mile on a side have the same geometrical properties.
They have four equal sides, four right angles, and so on.
The laws of geometry are the same for little squares and big squares.
But what about physics? What about the laws of physics?
Do large objects behave the same way as small ones?
If someone made a movie of some objects interacting with each other, would it be possible to tell how big they were?
Talking about movies, let's put it another way.
Some of the classic monsters in old science fiction movies were simply ordinary creatures enlarged to gigantic size.
Giant gorillas, insects the size of trucks, or an octopus the size of a battleship.
Could such creatures really exist in our world?
Or is there a physical reason why they are, in fact, impossible?
Well, they are impossible.
And the reason why they are impossible is a remarkable law of physics, a fundamental fact of nature.
It was first discovered by Galileo Galilei in 1638 in his last great work.
And for reasons we will explain, Galileo's discovery is today called the square cube law.
It tells how size affects the physical properties of things.
And it does not only tell us about giant movie monsters, but it also tells us about our own anatomy,
why we are in some ways bigger on the inside than we are on the outside.
It tells us the reason a substance can be safe in one form and dangerous in another.
It even tells us why there are active volcanoes on the earth, but not on the moon.
The square cube law tells us that a scale model is not the size of an object.
You increase both area and volume, but area and volume do not increase in the same way.
So, what was Galileo's discovery?
Well, in 1638, two sciences.
And one part of the book is about ballistic motion, the paths of projectiles through space.
The other part, the one we're interested in, is about the strength of structures.
Galileo noticed that there was a difference between the basic designs of small animals at a plane.
Weight, on the other hand, is proportional to the volume of an object.
And area and volume, as we'll see, depend on size in different ways.
So the relation of strength to weight will be different for different objects of different size.
That's Galileo's discovery, the square cube law.
And it's a tremendously far-reaching idea.
Once you understand it, you will see it everywhere.
But let's consider one of those great, bad science fiction movies of the 1950s, one of my personal favorites.
Them, which is a 1954 shocker from Warner Brothers starring James R. Ness and James Whitmore.
And in the movie, Them, a colony of ants, movie monsters.
And in the movie, there's a scientist, played by Edmund Gwynne, who explains why.
He says ants are hardy and prolific creatures.
He points out that they're highly social.
They live in organized colonies of thousands of individuals.
But is it reasonable?
I mean, never mind the basic premise about atomic mutation and stuff, which is extremely far-fetched.
Let's grant that.
Is the super strength of a giant ant in the movie physically possible?
The answer is no.
Now, to see why we need some geometry.
We'll have to put the ants on hold for a minute and think about some geometrical facts of life.
So let's imagine a one-foot square the size of a common floor tile.
The sides are one foot by one foot, one foot wide, one foot long.
The area of the square is one square foot.
Was it sort of missing the corners?
A two-foot circle has an area that is exactly four times bigger than the one-foot circle.
And for any shape, if you double its size, you'll double its width.
You'll double its length.
And so you'll have four times the area.
The area is proportional to the square of the linear size.
Now consider a 3D object, like a cube, a cubicle box.
It's one foot by one foot by one foot.
And that means that its volume will be one cubic foot.
So if we take this one foot by one foot by one foot box and we double its size,
now it's two feet by two feet by two feet.
And the volume of the bigger box is now eight cubic feet.
If we triple its size, it's three feet by three feet by three feet,
its volume is 20 cube of the size.
What shape do we mean?
Any shape in three dimensions will do.
What area do we mean?
It could be the area of the base.
It could be the cross-sectional area.
It could be the outer surface area.
So imagine a sphere.
It has a certain surface area and volume.
And we make the sphere 10 times bigger.
The surface area of the sphere is now 100 times bigger because 10 squared is 100.
The volume, though, the volume is now 1,000 times bigger.
10 cubed is 1,000.
So both area and volume have gotten bigger.
But the volume has gotten bigger in a bigger way.
So here's the conclusion.
Compared to their volumes, larger objects have proportionally smaller areas.
And smaller objects have proportionally larger areas.
That sounds paradoxical.
I'm not saying that larger objects have smaller areas,
but they have smaller areas proportional to their volume.
These statements make sense as statements about the relation
between the area and the volume of an object.
Okay, back to Galileo and the giant ants.
In the movie, them, the ants have grown about 1,000 times larger than they were before.
They're 1,000 times longer.
They're 1,000 times wider.
They're 1,000 times taller.
And that means that giant ants are stronger.
The cross-section of the limbs is the thing that determines structural strength.
It determines the number of muscle fibers and so on.
And so if you work it out, the ant strength is increased by the square of 1,000.
The ants are 1 million times stronger than they were before.
Yikes!
But the weight of the ant is proportional to its volume.
And the volume of the ant is 1,000 cubed times larger,
which is 1 billion times larger.
A billion is 1,000 million.
So the giant ants are actually helpless creatures.
Sure, they're 1,000,000 times stronger, but they're 1,000,000 times heavier.
Even a leaf-cutter ant, if we enlarged it 1,000 times,
could not even lift its own weight to walk.
So giant ants are not much of a threat to humanity.
The giant movie monster ants, as in the movie, are impossible.
But wait a second.
There really are giant animals.
I mean, elephants are the size of pickup trucks.
How do they manage?
Well, they do it in two ways.
First of all, elephants lead a more sedate lifestyle than ants do.
You never see elephants climbing up a cliff carrying a boxcar on their backs, for example.
Well, why not?
Well, elephants are larger and therefore proportionally weaker and more delicate.
They have to be careful.
And the second thing is that, and other insects, have something called spiracles.
And spiracles are tiny holes in the outer surface that lead to air passages inside the ant.
And so air kind of seeps in and out of the ant, bringing oxygen to the tissues.
And it's a simple system.
And it works fine for an ant.
But suppose we had a giant ant.
The oxygen demand for the ant is 1 billion times bigger,
because it has 1 billion times the weight of tissues to be supplied with oxygen.
But the available oxygen supply for the ant is proportional to its outer surface area,
only a million times larger.
The demand is a billion times bigger, the supply is a million times bigger.
The moral is the giant ant will immediately suffocate.
But again, we must realize that there really are real creatures that large.
There are large creatures.
After all, we humans are hundreds of times larger than an ant.
How do we manage?
Well, we do several things.
One is we have a lower metabolic rate, so our tissues demand less.
And we also breathe in and out.
We force the air in and out, rather than relying on seepage like the ant does.
But most important of all, we have tiny sacs in the lungs.
And the oxygen crosses the walls of the alveoli into the bloodstream.
So what matters is the surface area of the alveoli.
And if you add up the surface area for all of the innumerable tiny air sacs in the lungs,
the inside surface area of our lungs is something around a thousand square feet.
Compare that to our skin surface, which is about 15 or 20 square feet.
The lungs have a surface area inside of a thousand square feet.
In a very real way, in terms of area, we are bigger on the inside than we are on the outside.
You see, our bodies are designed by evolution for our large size.
We've adapted to our large size.
We have thicker limbs for strength, complex lungs for breathing, and so on.
All right.
The square cube law is not just about giant ants, or even about the strength of structures.
In fact, it's a general principle of physics.
It applies to anything.
So, for example, here's a lump of coal.
Now, if we could burn this lump of coal, we could set fire to it, and a lump of coal burns at a moderate rate.
But suppose we were to grind the lump of coal into dust, fine coal dust, and suspend it in the air.
Then suddenly the situation has become very dangerous.
In fact, it's become explosive.
Suspended coal dust has been the cause of any number of terrible explosions in coal mines.
Why?
It's the same substance.
It undergoes the same chemical reactions.
The difference is particle size and the square cube law.
Remember what combustion is.
In combustion, oxygen from the air combines with carbon in the coal, releasing energy, heat.
But that process can only happen at the surface of the coal, where there are atoms exposed to the air.
If we grind the lump into dust, the surface area increases thousands of times.
We have a rapid explosion.
And the same thing is true for other substances.
There's nothing special about coal.
A pile of grain will burn, grain, wheat, but grain dust suspended in the air can lead to an explosion.
And that's a very significant fact.
There are many examples in history of terrible explosions in grain elevators when the dust got out of hand.
What's the difference between a pile of grain and grain dust?
It's the square cube law.
The properties of the tiny dust grains do not match the properties of the big lump.
Chemical reactions can take place much faster for the tiny grains.
Let's take another example.
Let's switch from the tiny to the gigantic.
Let's talk about geophysics.
The interior of the earth is very hot.
It's very, very hot.
In fact, we believe the central temperature of the earth is around 7,000 degrees.
It's not as the surface of the sun.
Why?
Well, our old friend Hermann von Helmholtz, who back in lecture three tried to figure out the energy source of the sun,
tried to figure this out as well.
Helmholtz thought that it was left over heat from the formation of the earth.
The earth formed in a molten state, and it's still slowly cooling.
The earth is actually much older than Helmholtz thought.
It's billions of years old, and so this can't be right.
All of that heat would have escaped by now.
In fact, the earth needs an internal source of energy,
and about one-one-hundredth of one percent of all the potassium in the world is potassium-40.
Now, potassium-40 is unstable.
It decays by beta decay into argon-40,
and it releases energy as it does so.
The typical lifetime of a potassium-40 nucleus is more than a billion years.
But, you know, there isn't that much potassium-40 in the earth.
There's only about one atom in a million in the earth, potassium-40.
So, suppose you have a rock, like this very nice rock.
Actually, it actually is called a nice, it's an igneous rock from the Rocky Mountains.
If you have a rock with the same fraction of potassium-40,
the interior of this rock does not heat up.
It's not any warmer inside than the surface is.
Nevertheless, it has the same proportion of radioactive material that the earth does.
So, why does the energy release of radioactivity, the energy released by the decay of potassium-40,
make the interior of the earth so hot, but not the interior of the rock?
The answer, that is to say it's proportional to the volume of the earth.
Now, the rate at which heat can escape from the earth is proportional to the surface area of the earth.
The interior heat must escape through the surface.
Now, the earth is much larger than a rock, and so it has a much smaller surface area in proportion to its volume.
So, the heat escape is much smaller in comparison to the heat production.
Thus, the interior of the earth can get very, very hot.
And that's important, because it is the interior heat of the earth,
the energy from inside the earth that drives geological processes like earthquakes
and the motion of the continents, plate tectonics, and volcanoes.
Now, let's compare the earth and the moon.
The moon is about one-fourth the diameter of the earth,
so it has one-sixteenth of the surface area, and one-sixty-fourth of the volume.
And so the square cube law tells us that the moon's interior should be cooler than the interior of the earth.
Let me give you an analogy.
Where I live, every winter, there are announcements on the news to make it smaller.
Now, the moon is sort of child-size compared to the earth.
And so the moon has comparative hypothermia to the earth.
The moon's core temperature is actually less than 2,000 degrees.
And because of this, there has been essentially no volcanic activity,
but on the other hand, volume is proportional to the cube of the linear size.
And the difference between the square and the cube makes all the difference.
It means that the giant ants have seen how the tiny heat from radioactivity
is enough to make the earth's interior hot, but not the interior of an ordinary surface rock.
So because of the square cube law, simple, magnificent material.
It's because they are made of the same material.
You see, if you create a giant ant, you can't build it out of giant atoms.
There are no giant atoms.
The atoms of each element have a definite size.
The size of atoms is determined by the laws of physics.
So if you create a giant ant, you must use the same kind of atoms, just more of them.
And that makes the difference.
Similarly, the carbon atoms in coal dust are just the same as the carbon atoms in a lump of coal.
But in the dust, more of those atoms are on the outside surface, ready to combine with the oxygen.
And that makes the difference.
In simple geometry, there is no real difference between large and small.
Nothing in geometry determines an absolute measure of size.
Tiny triangles and squares are just the same as big ones.
In fact, we can't say in an absolute way what big and small mean in geometry.
But in nature, there is an absolute measure of size, the size of an atom.
Things that are billions and billions of times larger than an atom are big in an absolute way.
Things that are the size of an atom or smaller are small in an absolute way.
So what determines the size of an atom?
What sets the size scale for the universe?
And the answer is quantum physics.
The fact that giant movie monster ants are impossible leads us straight to one of the weirdest and most exciting branches of physics.
Quantum physics, the physics of the very, very small.
And quantum physics is full of surprises and paradoxes.
Things that seem impossible to us turn out to be possible in the quantum realm.
And things that seem possible to us turn out to be impossible in the quantum realm.
In other words, quantum physics redraws the line between possible and impossible.
So for the next several lectures, we're going to begin to explore this new quantum universe.
It's a strange and amazing place.
But the most amazing thing of all is that it is the same universe that we live in.
So the quantum world next time.
I'll see you then.
