The system cannot provide it with enough oxygen.
We saw that the square cube law turns out to have all sorts of applications, the rate
at which things burn, the interior heat of the earth.
The significant point was that the laws of physics do make a distinction between small
and large.
There is an absolute scale of size in the universe.
Why?
The answer turns out to be quantum physics, the physics of the microscopic world, the
physics of atoms and photons, and the elementary constituents of matter.
It is quantum physics that determines the sizes of atoms, the fundamental units of energy,
and so on.
It's quantum physics that sets the fundamental scale of nature.
So in this lecture and the ones to follow, we will begin to explore quantum physics science.
Quantum physics involved the most wholesale revision of our ideas of the impossible.
Quantum physics brought the most revolutionary redrawing of that border between the possible
and the impossible.
And so if we want to explore that border, quantum physics will be an indispensable tool.
Let's begin.
The first thing to understand is that quantum physics was devised by physicists struggling
to explain experimental facts, facts that seemed on the basis of the physics known then
to be almost impossible themselves.
So in the 19th century, physicists had built up a very successful picture of the world,
a picture based on Newton's laws of motion to which they added some more pieces, the
principles of thermodynamics as we've seen, and also the mathematical theory of electric
and magnetic fields.
We'll talk more about those in lecture 22.
So here's the essential story, the essential picture of the world built up in 19th century
physics.
Matter is composed of tiny particles called atoms.
And these are very, very small.
Their size wasn't accurately measured until after the 19th century, but they knew that
there were small particles called atoms.
And also light, light is a wave phenomenon, a moving, oscillating disturbance of electric
and magnetic fields.
That's the picture.
Around 1900, however, that picture began to fall apart.
It began with a German physicist, Max Planck.
Planck was interested in thermodynamics.
He was interested in a particular question, the relation of heat and light.
And it's obvious that there is some such relation.
A hot object emits light, like the filament of an incandescent light bulb.
If you heat it to a very high temperature, it emits light.
Planck found that the characteristics of that light were very hard to explain, based
on classical 19th century physics.
And he was finally forced to accept a very strange hypothesis.
You see, if light is a wave, then it should be able to have any strength, any amount of
energy in the wave.
You can have it wave.
The E equals HF.
E is the photon energy, F is the light frequency, and H, the thing that connects them, is Planck's
constant, an extremely small quantity, but a universal constant of nature.
So because Planck's constant is extremely small, ordinary light contains trillions and
trillions of photons.
In fact, there are billions of photons entering your eyes each second.
Now this was a weird idea, and Planck knew it was a weird idea, and it took some time
for its full implications to emerge.
So the next step came in 1905 with Albert Einstein.
Einstein is at this time, a young man working at the Swiss Patent Office, and he's just
finished his doctoral thesis on statistical physics, and he's inventing, at the same time,
the special theory of relativity.
But he's fascinated by Planck's idea, and he realizes that Planck's quantum hypothesis
could explain another mystery of physics, the photoelectric effect.
Here's how the photoelectric effect works.
If we shine light on a metal surface, then electrons are ejected from the surface.
The energy is absorbed from the light and transferred to the electrons, but the details
of this process are rather strange.
For example, if you shine a much brighter light, so a much stronger light wave, then
you get more electrons.
But here's the weird bit.
Individual electrons are ejected with no more energy than before.
Even though the wave is much stronger, and so the wave is shaking the electrons around
more violently in some sense, the electrons come out with the same energy.
Well, what does change the higher energy electrons?
If you have lower frequency light, green or yellow or orange, you produce electrons with
less energy.
And if you go to even lower frequencies, red or infrared light, you might produce no electrons
at all.
Now none of this makes sense.
It even seems impossible if light is simply a wave phenomenon, a traveling, continuous
disturbance of electric and magnetic fields.
But Einstein pointed out that all of this makes sense if we think of light as a stream
of photons.
Each photon gives its energy to one electron.
One photon, one electron.
And the energy of the photon by Planck's formula is related to the light frequency.
In the light intensity means more photons, which produce more electrons, but each photon,
and hence eat that even though light is an electromagnetic wave, it somehow is also a
stream of particles.
OK.
After Einstein's work, quantum ideas began to spread throughout physics.
And it soon became clear that there is something weird, not just about light, but about matter
as well.
And in 1913, the Danish physicist Niels Bohr discovered that these quantum ideas determine
the inner structure of atoms.
Now by that time, they'd realized that an atom consists of a positively charged nucleus,
we now know it contains protons and neutrons, orbited by one or more electrons.
But this was a bit of a puzzle, because according to 19th century physics, orbiting electrons
should produce electromagnetic waves.
They should radiate energy away, and therefore they should spiral inward toward the nuclei.
The atoms should collapse on themselves in a microsecond.
But now Bohr applied quantum ideas to the electron motion.
Bohr found that the electrons could only move in certain discrete orbits, that is, say,
this orbit or that orbit, but not in between.
And the size of these orbits is determined by Planck's constant, H, the same Planck's
constant from the radiation emitted by hot objects and from the photoelectric effect.
And electrons can jump from one orbit to another when they absorb or emit photons.
So here's a metaphor to describe how different this is.
The 19th century picture of electron orbits would be a ramp.
You can stand anywhere along a ramp.
You can stand at any height above the ground.
And different places on the ramp are possible electron orbits in the atom, and there could
be anywhere on the ramp, any sort of orbit as possible.
The electron can move in any orbit.
It can have any energy.
And this tendency of the electron to spiral inward is analogous to the tendency of a ball
on a ramp to sort of roll continuously downhill.
But the quantum picture is not a ramp, but a staircase.
Only certain steps are possible.
It can only be at certain heights.
So the electron can only move in certain orbits.
It can only have certain energies.
And here's the key fact.
There is a bottom step.
There is a smallest orbit, a lowest energy for the electron.
The electron cannot orbit any closer to the nucleus than this innermost quantum orbit.
It can't just spiral inward all the way to the nucleus of atoms.
The size of an atom is the size of the smallest innermost orbit, the lowest energy orbit.
The atom cannot compress any further than that.
And Bohr's atomic theory predicted that a hydrogen atom is about one-tenth of a billionth
of a meter in diameter, and that's exactly as we observe.
So it's quantum theory that sets the size of atoms, the absolute length scale of the
universe.
Now in 1924, the French physicist and aristocrat Louis de Broglie added another piece of the
puzzle.
Light, as we've seen, behaves both as a wave and as a stream of particles.
De Broglie realized that the particles of matter, electrons, protons, and so on, can
also have wave properties.
And so this idea helped give a more definite picture of Bohr's orbits.
They represent stationary wave patterns for an electron in an atom.
And so with de Broglie's discovery, the old 19th century distinction, matter is made
of particles, light is a wave, completely breaks down.
In the quantum world, both light and matter have both wave and particle.
Karaklunk, Einstein, Bohr, de Broglie, and many others, a whole generation of the most
brilliant physicists in history, extended the new theory to explain a wider and wider
range of phenomena.
But it was still a bit of a mess.
But out of that chaos, we can sort of recognize three characteristics of the new quantum physics
as it was arising.
First of all, things that were once thought to be smooth and continuous, the energy in
a light beam, the possible orbits for an electron in an atom, these things we thought
were smooth and continuous turned out to be discrete and didn't h.
It's a universal constant that governs all quantum phenomena, whether it has to do with
light or with matter.
And because h, Planck's constant, is so very tiny in value, quantum phenomena occur in
the microscopic realm.
Systematic mathematical theory emerged, and that's the theory of quantum mechanics.
It was invented by Erwin Schrodinger, who was an Austrian, and Werner Heisenberg, who
was a German.
In fact, Schrodinger and Heisenberg developed what looked like completely different theories,
and they were theory, the same quantum mechanics.
And that quantum mechanics is an outstandingly successful theory.
It's the most successful theory ever.
It explains an amazing variety of physical phenomena.
And electrons, electrons are also discrete and individual, they're particles, but they
too have wave characteristics, as De Bruy anticipated.
And this seems paradoxical, and in fact it's quite true that consistent thinking
about quantum mechanics, if these two waves combine, we see phenomena called interference
in the pattern of light produced.
We can recognize that it's a wave phenomenon that we have waves passing through two slits.
But if light is a particle, then each photon, surely, exactly which slit the photon passes
through.
This would be a very difficult experiment to do, but it's possible in principle.
Let's set up an experiment so we can detect which slit each photon passes through.
We can do the experiment.
But notice that this is a different experimental arrangement.
Now in our two slit experiment, there are photon detectors next to the slits.
And so we do find out which slit the photon particle passes.
But when we do that, the wave interference effect disappears.
And no longer works.
So we can see either the wave effect, interference experiment, or the particle property, the
definite path that the photon takes.
But we can never, as I said, we need both the wave and the particle descriptions.
But those two descriptions never get in each other's way.
You see, they can only apply to different experiments.
And because they can only apply in different experiments, they are not contradictory.
They are complementary.
OK, so complementarity is the one hand of dealing with wave particle duality.
And the other hand is wave and particle properties are related to each other.
They are related by mathematical relations discovered by Planck and De Broglie.
So as we've seen, the particle energy is related to the wave frequency.
E is equal to hf.
Higher wave frequency means higher particle energy.
A lower wave frequency would be a lower particle energy.
And the small value of Planck's constant h means that we're usually talking about extremely
small energies.
De Broglie discovered that particle momentum is related to wavelength.
So p, the momentum, is equal to mv, the mass times the velocity.
That's what momentum is.
And that's equal to Planck's constant divided by lambda.
Lambda is the wavelength of the wave, the distance between successive crests of the wave.
So momentum is Planck's constant divided by the wavelength.
And there's Planck's constant again.
Now there's another relation between particle and wave characteristics, besides the Planck-De Broglie relations.
Another relation between wave and particle characteristics, but it deserves to be separated out all by itself.
It will be our second major feature of quantum mechanics.
And that second major feature of quantum mechanics is indeterminism.
You see, quantum mechanics does not tell us exactly what will happen in a given situation.
Quantum mechanics only predicts probabilities.
Now this is not because the microscopic quantum world is complicated or chaotic, but because
that world is fundamentally not deterministic.
The present does not completely determine the future in quantum physics.
That's very different from Newtonian physics.
And in fact it's rather unsettling to have some real randomness in the world.
Einstein, for instance, thought this was a flaw in quantum mechanics.
He said rather famously, God does not play dice with the universe.
And he kept looking for the last 30 years of his life for some even better theory, better
than quantum mechanics, that somehow restores deterministic and countless experiments since
then.
And so the real randomness and indeterminism of quantum mechanics seems here to stay.
Probability is another link between the wave and particle pictures in quantum mechanics.
So there's a simple quantum rule.
The intensity of the quantum wave at any point determines the probability of finding
a quantum particle there.
So to illustrate this, let's imagine we shine a light on the wall and each photon strikes
the wall in a random place.
As we will see, wave particle duality and indeterminism together lead to some startling
things, possibilities and impossibilities that no one had ever dreamed of.
But there is another feature of quantum mechanics that is even stranger than these, and that's
the third major feature of quantum physics, entanglement.
So suppose two quantum particles interact with each other, and then they fly off in
different directions.
So after they've interacted, they fly off, they're separate.
They may be separated by a great distance.
And yet, it turns out that these two particles can still retain a peculiar sort of quantum
connection, even at a distance.
The two particles behave in uncorrelated ways, almost as if they had an instantaneous communication
link between them.
Now that's a rather alarming thing to say.
Remember lecture 11, faster than light communication, instantaneous communication, could be used
to send messages into the past.
And that could be used to create a time telegraph paradox.
We could make causal loops in space time.
We could create paradoxical situations.
And we said, that's impossible.
So is quantum entanglement going to knock that argument down?
Well, light communication remains impossible, even in quantum mechanics.
We'll turn out to be something quite unexpected, and that will be our story in lecture 21.
So stay tuned for that.
OK, these basic features of this revolution, and in doing so, we'll often compare so-called
classical physics, essentially the physics that was discovered before 1900, we'll compare
classical physics with the new quantum physics.
Now classical physics is a very good description of the large-scale everyday world, the development
of classical physics by the end of the 19th century was a great triumph, a great success.
But classical physics can be quite misleading about the way things work in the quantum realm.
So, next lecture we're going to see how the indeterminacy of quantum theory sets a fundamental
limit on our knowledge of the world.
This is the famous Uncertainty Principle, discovered by Werner Heisenberg.
We'll see that exact knowledge of a particle's position and velocity, actually its momentum,
is simply impossible.
Why?
That impossibility comes from the wave-particle duality of the quantum realm.
So, the Uncertainty Principle, next time, I'll see you then.
