We'll focus on the first two, wave particle duality and indeterminism.
And we'll find these aspects make it impossible to find out too much about a quantum particle.
We can learn where it is or where it is going, but we cannot find out both exactly at the same time.
So why is that impossible?
Physician and physicist Laplace and the demon knows exactly all of the present positions
and all of the present velocities of all of the particles in the universe.
And by applying Newton's laws of motion said Laplace, the demon determined by the present.
Now Laplace said that this means that the universe must also be predictable.
But because of chaos, this isn't quite true.
Even in a fairly simple system, three bodies in orbit around each other or Lorenz's water wheel,
even a simple system like that may be impossible to predict in the long run.
No matter how precisely we know how the system starts out, we have a tiny bit of uncertainty.
But in a chaotic system, this means that we can predict the system only for a little while.
And after that, who knows?
So even a deterministic system, we saw, can be unpredictable.
Now our point this time is something even more fundamental.
Our point this time is that there is a limit to how precisely we can know the position and velocity of a particle.
And this is not due to imperfect instruments, not due to any imprecision in the way we go about our measurement.
It's a fundamental law of nature and it has nothing to do with chaos.
It comes from quantum physics and it involves Planck's constant H.
And for microscopic particles, this limit can be a quite serious matter.
Laplace's demon, we decided, cannot predict the universe.
But in fact, it is impossible even to predict the behavior of a single dimension.
We'll call its position along the line x.
x simply labels how far in meters, let's say, along the line that the particle is to be found.
And the particle moves with a certain velocity, you can call it v.
And that's how fast in meters per second that the particle is moving at any given moment.
And actually, it's better to consider the particle's momentum, p.
And momentum is, as we saw, mass times velocity, p is m times v.
Now, in the old classical Newtonian physics, a particle always has a definite position in space, a definite x, and a definite momentum, a definite p.
However, in quantum physics, things are not quite so cut and dried.
A quantum particle is somewhat indeterminate, it's described by probabilities.
So rather than definite values for x and for p, for position and momentum,
we have a whole range of possible values for each.
One way of thinking is to regard a quantum mechanical particle as slightly blurry.
And we're going to express this idea with the idea of uncertainty.
So by the symbol at the same time.
Here's the mathematical expression.
Delta x times delta p, the uncertainty in position times the uncertainty in momentum, is greater than h, Planck's constant.
That's the Heisenberg uncertainty principle.
So there are several things we should note about this remarkable fact.
First of all, it's an inequality.
It says that the product of the uncertainties is at least this big.
There may be situations in which the product is larger than this, but it has to be at least this big.
And the second thing we should note is that it involves a trade-off.
The more exactly we know x, for example, the smaller delta x is, in other words,
the less exactly we can know p, the momentum, and thus the velocity.
So the more exactly we know position, the less exactly we can know momentum.
And vice versa, the more exactly we know the momentum, the smaller delta p is, the less exactly we can know position.
And it does not matter how we might measure x and p, position and momentum,
knowing them both to greater precision than this limit is simply impossible.
Now, on the right-hand side of the uncertainty principle is our old friend Planck's constant h,
the constant of nature which determines the size of quantum effects.
And as we said, h is extremely tiny, extremely tiny quantity.
Well, how tiny is extremely tiny?
Well, let's suppose we measure distance in meters and time in seconds and mass in kilograms.
That's a common set of physics units.
Then the value of h is 0.00033 zeros after the decimal place, 663 kilograms real world.
That would be okay for an orange because the value of h is not very big.
But for the particles of the microscopic world, for atoms, photons, electrons and so forth,
the uncertainty principle is an important fact.
Even the tiny value of h is significant on those scales.
In the microscopic world, the uncertainty principle is a big deal.
Okay, where does the Heisenberg uncertainty principle come from?
Well, here's a simple explanation.
We said that a quantum particle moves through space in the form of waves.
The particle may be found wherever the wave is,
because the wave intensity gives the particle probability.
So we could draw a quantum wave,
and this would be a wave train or sometimes called a wave packet
that only extends over a short region.
And the particle will be found somewhere in the region successive crests of the wave.
So to specify the wavelength very exactly,
you need to find the length of many waves, of 10 or 20 or 100,
and then divide by that number to get a really good answer.
So to have a very well-defined wavelength, we need a long wave train, many waves,
to have a well-defined wavelength.
The wavelength for a very short wave train is not very well-defined.
Now wavelength is related to momentum.
The more certain we are therefore about the position,
the shorter the wave train, the fewer waves we have,
the less certain we are about the wavelength,
and therefore the less certain we are about the momentum.
Now we should also note that the term uncertainty might be a little misleading.
The point is not so much about our knowledge or about measurement.
In fact, Heisenberg himself misunderstood this when he first derived the uncertainty principle.
This often happens in science.
When you first discover something, you don't always understand it right away.
Heisenberg's original explanation was full of thought experiments,
how you might measure is limited because the particle itself is indeterminate.
The uncertainty principle might be called an indeterminacy principle.
Quantum particles simply do not have a definite position and a definite momentum.
They're not the sort of thing that has definite position and momentum.
They're fuzzier creatures than that.
Now let's think.
This connection between position and momentum may remind you of something.
Back in lecture 14, when we were talking about symmetry,
we saw that symmetries are connected to conservation laws.
This was Emmy Nether's wonderful insight.
For instance, if I shift the position of an object,
if a shift in position is my symmetry transformation,
between position and momentum,
a position symmetry is related to momentum conservation.
So this suggests that there might be other uncertainty principles out there.
For instance, Nether's theorem gave us a connection between time and energy.
Suppose we shift everything in time and that does not alter a system's behavior.
Suppose a time shift is a symmetry of the laws.
Then we found energy is conserved.
It's like the connection between position and momentum.
So does this mean that there is an uncertainty principle about time and energy?
Yes.
And here it is.
It says delta T times delta E is greater than H.
Planck's constant.
This is the time, energy, uncertainty principle.
Okay, what does it mean?
Well, suppose we have some process, the absorption and emission of a photon,
or emission of a photon, say.
Delta E is the time at which this process takes place.
And delta T is our uncertainty about that time.
E is the energy involved in the process.
Delta E would be our uncertainty about that energy.
The time, energy, uncertainty principle tells us that we cannot know both T, the time,
and E, the energy, exactly.
They are always a little indeterminate.
For example, in the laboratory these days, we can now make pulses of laser light
that are incredibly fast.
They last for an extremely short period of time, less than one femtosecond.
A femtosecond is one quadrillionth of a second.
Now, in such a pulse of light, the energy of the photons is extremely uncertain.
Because the time they're produced is extremely certain.
So, the uncertainty principle, both the position momentum flavor
and the time, energy flavor of the uncertainty principle,
the uncertainty principle has many implications in the quantum world.
For instance, think about electrons in atoms.
The electron in an atom orbits the nucleus.
Or rather, the electron wave is in a standing wave pattern around the nucleus.
In any case, the electron is confined to a pretty small region of space, the size of an atom.
The uncertainty in its position is very small, around one tenth of a billionth of a meter.
And this means that its momentum is uncertain.
Well, how uncertain?
In a hydrogen atom, which has just one electron in it,
we can calculate that the electron's orbital speed should be about one percent of the speed of light.
That's pretty fast.
But notice that the location of the electron in its orbit is indeterminate.
The wave is spread out all around the atom.
Therefore, the electron could be moving this way at one percent the speed of light,
or that way at one percent the speed of light, or this way, or that way.
And so, its exact momentum, including its direction, is extremely uncertain.
The uncertainty principle has some curious implications about the energy of a quantum system as well.
So, let's imagine a pendulum, a pendulum swinging back and forth.
Now, the pendulum has kinetic energy due to its motion.
Faster swinging has more kinetic energy.
And it also has potential energy due to its position.
The potential energy is, let's say, zero at the center, at the bottom of the arc,
and it's something more than zero up at the side.
And as it swings back and forth, the energy is conserved,
where the potential energy is high, the kinetic energy is low, and so on.
Now, how small can the total energy of the pendulum be?
Well, maybe it could be zero.
Let's think about zero energy.
A pendulum would have zero energy if it's exactly at rest, exactly in the center of the arc.
And this is possible in classical Newtonian physics.
But in quantum physics, zero energy is impossible.
Zero energy would require the pendulum to have an exact position, right in the middle,
and an exact momentum, exactly at rest.
And the uncertainty principle forbids this.
No matter what, the pendulum must have a minimum quantum energy.
And this is sometimes called zero point energy.
So let's imagine this pendulum is at some temperature.
There's a little energy in it due to random thermal vibrations.
Then there's a little bit of energy in it, but that zero point energy is energy that's there,
even if the temperature is absolute zero.
There's still energy in the pendulum, even at absolute zero.
The same thing is true for atoms in a material.
Even at absolute zero, with no heat energy at all,
they would still have zero point energy due to the quantum uncertainty principle.
Now, we know, by the third law of thermodynamics, which we learned about in lecture seven,
we know that it is impossible actually to reach absolute zero of temperature.
But even if you could achieve zero Kelvin,
it is still impossible to reduce the energy of the atoms to zero.
Now, this can be important.
So for example, there is no, you can't freeze helium.
It's impossible.
The quantum zero point energy of the helium atoms
is actually enough to keep helium a liquid, even at absolute zero, zero degrees Kelvin.
And this is the real reason why liquid helium is so strange,
why it, for example, forms a superfluid.
We spoke about this before, and a superfluid is something that can flow without friction,
and something that...
Now, our last example of the uncertainty principle in action
is something that is even stranger than liquid helium.
And that's the example of empty space, the vacuum.
Now, in the history of human thought, the idea of nothing,
the idea of empty space has attracted more attention than you might think.
And over 2,000 years ago, the Greek philosopher Aristotle famously said
that empty space was just impossible.
He said, nature abhors a vacuum.
And there were other Greek philosophers at the same time,
the so-called atomists, who disagreed.
Now, the view of Newtonian mechanics is like the view of the atomists.
The view of Newtonian mechanics is the world is made of particles.
The particles move through space, they exert forces on each other,
and so what lies between the particles?
What's between the particles?
And the answer is nothing.
It's just empty space between the particles.
Similarly, we can think about electromagnetism,
which is one of the 19th century contributions to classical physics.
In electromagnetism, even when there aren't any particles in a region of space,
there can still be electric and magnetic fields.
And they count as something.
Energy can be carried, for example, by electromagnetic waves.
But even in electromagnetism, there could be places where the fields are zero,
where there are no waves at all.
So in classical physics, there could be truly empty space.
It's possible to have a true vacuum,
a place where there's no particles, no waves, zero energy,
the oscillation of the pendulum.
Even at the minimum possible energy, where there are no real photons present,
there is still some zero-point energy.
In other words, the quantum vacuum is still full of quantum fluctuations
in the fields, in the electric and magnetic fields.
That sounds weird, but it really happens.
Careful experiments can observe the effects of this vacuum energy
on particles traveling through space.
So, so-called empty space is really full of an irreducible sort of quantum activity.
Now let me give you an intuitive heuristic picture of this.
This picture is useful, although you should not take it too seriously.
It's kind of a cartoon version of the mathematics of quantum theory.
So, here it is.
Let's suppose we had empty space, nothing in it, zero energy.
Could it happen that a particle, a photon, say, just appears out of nowhere?
And, you say, a short interval of time.
The process takes place in a time delta t that is extremely short.
Now, by the time energy uncertainty, delta t times delta e must be greater than Planck's constant h.
This means that the energy of the process, this very rapid process, is highly uncertain.
There must be an irreducible uncertainty, delta e, in the energy.
Now, if this energy is large enough, then the photon's entire energy, which we said we couldn't have because we couldn't get it from nowhere,
the entire energy of the photon might be hidden within the uncertainty.
This sounds like shady accounting.
In effect, we can borrow the energy to create the photon as long as we pay it back very quickly.
Doesn't this violate the conservation of energy?
Not in any observable way.
The time energy uncertainty relation keeps it all hidden from view.
So the quantum picture is that the quantum vacuum is simply full principle, and that's a very exciting sort of place.
What we've seen is that lots of things seem possible in classical physics, particles with exact position and momentum,
processes that happen at a definite time with a definite energy, objects with zero energy,
both zero kinetic energy and zero potential energy, or perfectly empty space with no particles and no waves, and therefore no energy.
All these things are possible in classical physics, but in quantum physics, all of these things are impossible.
You see how quantum physics moves the boundary between the possible and the impossible.
Many things we thought possible before the quantum revolution turn out to be impossible in the quantum realm.
Next time, we'll see how quantum mechanics can also move the boundary in the other direction.
We'll find that a quantum particle can do things that would be impossible for any classical particle.
We will see how a quantum particle can somehow tunnel through a barrier that seems impassable and end up in places that would be forbidden to any classical particle.
This is an idea with some amazing consequences.
So that's quantum tunneling, and we'll talk about that next time.
I'll see you then.
