World, make it impossible to pin down a particle's position and momentum exactly.
That's the uncertainty principle.
And because of the uncertainty principle, many things that seem possible, possible that
is, from the point of view of the old classical Newtonian physics, many of those things turn
out to be impossible.
It is impossible for a particle to have a definite position and a definite momentum at the same
time.
It is impossible for a process to occur at a definite time and have a definite energy.
It is impossible to reduce the energy of a system all the way to zero.
There is always some quantum zero point energy around.
And this is true even of empty space.
The quantum vacuum we found is full of virtual particles popping into and out of existence.
All this happens below the threshold set by the uncertainty principle.
Now this time, we want to look at something that seems impossible.
Imagine you are in jail and you pace back and forth in your cell between concrete walls
and you can't escape.
You simply do not have enough energy to break through the walls.
Classically you seem to be trapped forever.
Then suddenly you find yourself outside the walls, outside the cell.
You escape.
You're free.
How?
Quantum tunneling.
Quantum indeterminacy has allowed you to pass through the walls.
You escape the cell even though you did not have enough energy to break through the walls.
Now a jail story is of course metaphorical.
It's a vivid way of presenting the idea rather than a literal scenario.
Quantum effects after all are governed by Planck's constant H, which is very tiny.
So we do not expect to see an entire person pass through a concrete wall due to quantum
effects.
But on the microscopic scale, something very much like this can and does happen.
So to understand tunneling, think once more about a particle moving along a line.
And first, we'll describe what happens using classical physics.
And so I want to remind you of the ideas of kinetic energy and potential energy, which
we introduced in lecture three.
The kinetic energy of a particle is its energy of motion.
And it's a quantity that's always greater than or equal to zero.
If the particle is at rest, its kinetic energy is zero.
And if the particle is moving, its kinetic energy is greater than zero.
Now the potential energy depends on where the particle is located.
So on the line, it can be visualized as a kind of a curve.
A landscape of hills and valleys is always pushed in the downhill direction, from high
to low potential energy.
So if the particle is moving downhill, the force speeds it up.
But if the particle is moving uphill, the force slows it down.
OK, so let's also remind ourselves that the total mechanical energy of the particle,
the kinetic energy plus the potential energy, remains constant.
So in our picture, we can represent the total energy by a horizontal line.
Wherever you are, the energy is constant.
Now the difference between that horizontal line, the total energy, and the potential
energy curve is just the particle's kinetic energy, where that difference is large, where
the energy line is far above the potential energy landscape, the particle is moving quickly.
And there, to climb the hill.
Alright, now let's put our particle in jail.
We're going to put the particle between two walls, or barriers.
The walls are hills in the potential energy curve.
The particle's energy E is lower than the tops of the hills, so it can't get on the
top of the hill.
So the particle is trapped.
It is impossible for the particle, in classical physics, to escape.
So much for classical physics.
What about quantum mechanics?
Well in quantum mechanics, we have to remember wave particle duality.
The motion of the particle is described by a quantum wave.
The wave, quantum wave of very low intensity.
That means low probability.
But low probability is not the same thing as no probability.
What this means is that there is some likelihood that the particle will get out, that it will
be found outside the wall.
There is a tunneling probability to slip past the barrier and escape the trap and get out
of jail.
Well, how big is this probability?
Well, it depends on several factors.
It depends on the particle's mass.
It depends on the height of the potential energy barrier, and it depends on how wide
the barrier is.
And for a small particle and an atomic-sized barrier, the probability can be quite large.
But for a large object and a strong, thick barrier, the probability is extremely small.
So, how small is extremely small?
Well, let's take an example.
Under our classroom, below the floor, there is another room.
The floor is a potential energy barrier for me.
I do not have enough energy to go through.
I have enough energy to be in the room below, but not enough energy to push my way through
the floor and get there.
And this is exactly what I mean when I say that the floor is solid and it holds me up.
Now, I do not pass through the barrier.
I will suddenly tunnel through the floor and find myself downstairs.
Well I did a rough calculation, and my calculation is almost certainly an overestimate of that
quantum-tunneling probability.
So what's the likelihood that I will tunnel into the floor below us?
Well, the probability is 0.000, there are lots and lots and lots of zeros before we
get to a number that's not zero, one or something.
How many zeros are in this number?
Ten to the 37th power, ten trillion, trillion, trillion zeros.
There are more zeros in this number than there are atoms in my body before you get to the
other digits.
So my quantum-tunneling probability is unthinkably small.
In fact, it's much more likely that all of the air molecules in this room will by coincidence
gather together in one corner like Maxwell imagined.
The odds are so overwhelming that we would be justified betting any amount of money against
it happening.
So a person passing through a wall or a floor by quantum-tunneling, it's not physically
impossible, but it is statistically impossible.
It is so improbable that it might as well be impossible.
So quantum-tunneling is statistically impossible for anything big like me.
But what about tiny particles tunneling through tiny barriers?
And it can happen.
And it does happen all the time.
Our first example is radioactive decay.
We've talked a lot about beta decay in which an unstable nucleus emits an electron and
a neutrino.
But another type of radioactive decay is called alpha decay.
And in alpha decay, an unstable nucleus emits an alpha particle in nucleus and emits an
alpha particle.
And so the question is, how does the alpha particle get out of the nucleus?
And this was first analyzed by the Russian physicist and later United States citizen
George Gamoff in 1928 at the very beginning of quantum theory, quantum mechanics.
Gamoff said that the escape of the alpha particle from the nucleus is due to quantum tunneling.
So you have to imagine that the alpha particle exists inside the nucleus, and the nuclear
forces hold it in.
They create a potential barrier against the particle escaping.
But the alpha particle is positively charged, as is the rest of the atomic nucleus.
If they were ever separated, they would repel each other.
So outside the nucleus, the potential energy landscape drops away.
This means that the alpha particle has enough energy to exist outside the nucleus.
It could be outside the nucleus.
And that means that it can tunnel out with some quantum probability.
Now for uranium turning into thorium, an alpha particle escaping from a uranium nucleus,
the probability turns out to be the height of the barrier and its width.
So let's consider another example.
Let's think about electrons trapped inside a piece of solid material, say a piece of
graphite, solid carbon, from the surface to the wire, from the graphite to the wire.
And electrons tunneling from one to the other can produce a very tiny electric current.
Now the probability of tunneling is much higher if the gap is very narrow.
So here's our idea.
We can move the wire across the surface and we can keep track of the number of electrons
that tunnel through the gap at any given moment, the tunneling current.
And by looking at that tunneling current, you can map out the surface features.
The bumps in the surface will narrow the gap between the wire and the surface and that
will increase the number of electrons that tunnel, the tunneling current.
The dips in the surface will widen the gap and decrease the tunneling current.
This is the basis for a wonderful invention called the scanning tunneling microscope,
the STM.
And a scanning tunneling microscope is a device for creating extremely detailed images of
a surface.
You carefully scan the wire tip back and forth over the surface and you use the tunneling
current to map out its topography.
And techniques for controlling the wire and measuring the tunneling current have become
very, very precise, so precise that we can make images that show the individual atoms
in the surface.
This is a beautiful and amazing technology and it relies on quantum tunneling.
Now quantum tunneling is related to the uncertainty principle.
I mean, how does the particle get beyond the barrier without enough energy?
Here's an intuitive heuristic picture.
It's useful but not to be taken too seriously.
The particle to get out beyond the barrier simply borrows the energy.
Borrows all last time.
This is okay as long as it happens very quickly.
If the time it takes, delta T, the uncertainty in time, and the energy it takes, delta E,
uncertainty in energy, to get past the barrier, so the lesson is that tunneling through the
barrier is something like the creation and annihilation of a virtual particle in the
quantum vacuum.
Okay, in quantum tunneling, a particle can sometimes, in our diagrams, the time direction
is upward and spatial directions are horizontal.
So from any event, any here and now, we can imagine a bubble of light expanding outward
in all directions, and this bubble of light traces a cone in space time.
In effect, the particle is trapped within the light cone.
Of course, that assumes that there is a definite path in space, a definite world line.
What about a quantum particle?
Can it escape its light cone?
Can a quantum particle travel faster than light?
Well, it's a tricky question, and it has a kind of a tricky answer.
It's a question of relativistic quantum theory, the theory of how quantum physics works within
space time.
And by the way, this is a lot easier than the quantum theory of space time itself, which
would be, in effect, a quantum theory of gravity, and we do not have such a theory at present.
But we do know how quantum mechanics fits into space time.
In fact, this is what Paul Dirac was discovering when he predicted the existence of antiparticles,
as we mentioned in lecture 15.
So in relativistic quantum theory, the causal structure of space time is respected.
The light cone, in other words, is still a barrier.
Real particles cannot go faster than light.
You cannot use quantum physics to send messages faster than light.
On the other hand, virtual particles are a different matter.
A virtual photon, or a virtual electron, can travel faster than light.
Now, they are virtual particles, so we never see them directly.
In a way, they live underneath the uncertainty principle.
But we can sometimes see the effects of virtual particles on real particles.
So the presence of virtual particles makes the light cone slightly fuzzy, and this has
an amazing consequence for the theory of black holes.
Now, remember from lecture 12, the mass of a black hole distorts space time in its vicinity.
Its gravity bends the light cones inward toward the mass, and this is why it is impossible
to escape from inside the event horizon of a black hole.
The light cones are bent over so far that you can't go outward.
You can't escape.
Or so it seems.
In 1974, the English physicist Stephen Hawking mathematically analyzed how quantum particles
behave near black holes.
He made an astonishing discovery.
He discovered that black holes are not exactly black.
He found that black holes actually emit photons and other particles, they stream outward from
the black hole into the surrounding space.
And this is called Hawking radiation.
And it's exactly like the radiation from a warm object as described by Planck.
Black holes, in effect, have a temperature above absolute zero, the Hawking temperature.
Now thermodynamics, they contain energy, they have a temperature, they even have an entropy
proportional to the area of the event horizon.
So by putting together quantum theory and relativity, he got thermodynamics for black
holes.
And so very, very slowly, very, very, very slowly, the black hole loses energy and it shrinks.
Now a black hole with the mass of the earth is tiny by astrophysical standards.
Most black holes that form are very much larger.
And larger black holes have even lower Hawking temperatures, Hawking temperatures closer
to absolute zero, and they emit even less energy.
So that means that bigger black holes are, in effect, more black.
So that looks as if particles trapped inside the black hole can tunnel through the event
horizon and escape.
But here's another way to look at it.
Look very close to the event horizon, very close to the event horizon, virtual particles
appear and disappear in the quantum vacuum.
And typically these particles come in pairs, a virtual particle and a virtual antiparticle
that appear and then annihilate each other very quickly.
But sometimes one of those virtual particles crosses the horizon and is swallowed by the
hole and the other virtual particle escapes.
It becomes a real particle with positive energy.
Its partner, the absorbed particle, actually has negative total energy and that's why
the black hole loses.
It swallows a particle with negative energy.
And so from far away what we see is a very faint outward stream of particles from very
close to the event horizon.
And that's the Hawking radiation.
Now that explanation does not sound much like quantum tunneling.
It doesn't sound like the trapped particles are escaping.
The particles that come out of the hole are sort of manufactured at the horizon.
They do not deforms from a collapsing star.
We seem to lose a lot of information.
All of the details about what the star was made of and so on, those details are now hidden
inside the horizon.
So is that information just gone, in fact, comes back out in scrambled form in the Hawking
radiation?
If we could very carefully examine every single photon that emerges, we could deduce to get
out.
Okay, quantum physics takes us to some pretty strange places.
It allows objects to tunnel through walls, even if they do not have enough energy to
get over them.
And that's responsible for radioactive decay and responsible for how the scanning tunneling
microscope works.
And quantum physics even allows black holes to leak out energy and information in the
form of Hawking radiation.
In fact, it sometimes seems that in quantum physics just about anything goes.
And there is a sense in which that is close to the truth.
There's a grain of truth in that statement.
Let me put it another way.
If something is really impossible in the quantum world, if it's really and truly impossible
in the quantum world, there must be an important reason.
So in the next lecture, we're going to delve into the laws of elementary particles.
And these particles collide and interact, or they decay into other particles, and we're
going to ask, in what ways can these things happen?
And our motto will be, whatever can happen, must happen.
But that means that whatever does not happen, whatever is truly impossible among the elementary
particles will give us a clue to the fundamental laws of nature.
That's next time.
I'll see you then.
