Welcome to the twentieth lecture of our course on the physics of impossible things.
We've been talking about quantum mechanics, the strange and surprising physics of the microscopic realm.
In that realm, the line between the possible and the impossible is not always where we might think it might be.
The uncertainty principle, for example, tells us that the microscopic world cannot be pinned down exactly as classical Newtonian physics leads us to expect.
We cannot know the position and momentum exactly of a particle, or both time and energy exactly.
We cannot reduce energy all the way to zero, not even an empty space.
On the other hand, quantum tunneling is also especially instructive.
If you have a particle moving along a line in a potential energy landscape, let's see an allowed path, simply an allowed destination.
If it is possible for the particle to be in the right hand valley, eventually it will get there.
Whatever can happen, eventually must happen.
This is a principle happen.
Lots of things can happen in lots of different ways.
The motto of particle physics, though, is that everything that is not forbidden is compulsory.
Now, stated that way, it's a joke.
But it's a joke with a serious side.
You see, as we examine the huge complexity of particle behavior, we're faced with the question.
How do we figure out what the rules are?
We figure it out by looking for the impossible, for the things that do not ever happen.
If an elementary particle process never happens, then there must be a basic law of nature involved, a rule that forbids it.
If there were no such rule, then it would happen, a symbolic representation of a particle reaction.
And suppose that we actually never observe this process.
Suppose it's actually impossible.
Then there must be one or more fun equal to the x value for b plus c, the one on the right hand side.
And so the law of conservation of x, whatever x is, thus forbids this reaction.
We can also sort of turn the logic around.
We might use this observation, the observation that a never turns into b plus c to discover that x is conserved in the first place.
So in this way, the impossible helps us discover new laws of nature.
Now, to describe how this really works, we're going to have to begin with a quick survey of some ideas in particle physics.
We're going to have to talk about the fundamental forces of nature, and we're going to have to talk about families of elementary particles.
So let's first talk about the fundamental forces.
There are four basic forces in nature.
There are four basic ways that particles can interact with each other.
And so the first one is called the strong nuclear force.
It's the strongest force there is.
It's the force that actually holds nuclei together.
It's very, very strong, but it's also very short range.
It only reaches actually part way across an atomic nucleus, not even from one side of a large nucleus to the other.
It's very short range.
And this strong nuclear force is also sometimes called the hadronic force.
Hadron comes from the Greek word meaning strong, so the hadronic force.
Our second fundamental force is the electromagnetic force.
And the electromagnetic force is about 100 times weaker than the strong nuclear force.
It's weaker, but it has an advantage.
It's a long range force.
It can reach far out into space.
The electromagnetic force could span a whole galaxy.
And indeed, because it has a much longer range, the basic forces between atoms and molecules,
the forces that shape the properties of materials and the laws of chemistry,
the forces are all the electromagnetic force.
That brings us to our third fundamental force of nature, and that's the weak nuclear force.
The weak nuclear force is a lot weaker than the strong nuclear force.
The weak nuclear force is more than a trillion times weaker than the strong nuclear force.
And like the strong nuclear force, it is also extremely short range,
although its range is even shorter than the range of the strong nuclear force.
But nevertheless, the weak nuclear force can be important,
because that's the force that's responsible.
Quantum physics of gravity is poorly understood.
So for our present discussion, we will mostly ignore gravity and concentrate on the big three,
the strong nuclear force, the electromagnetic force, and the weak nuclear force.
Now each type of force has one or more particle associated with the force.
So for example, the electromagnetic force is associated with the photon.
And these particles associated with the forces, they carry the force from place to place.
So for example, the electrical repulsion, the repelling force between two electrons,
is carried between them by verptons.
Okay, so generally speaking, the baryons are the heaviest particles.
They are the most massive family.
The members of this family are the most massive particles.
And the name baryon comes from the Greek word that means heavy.
The leptons are the least massive family.
That's a general rule.
There are a few exotic leptons that are actually quite massive, but the mesons are a bit less familiar.
And there are several varieties, and we'll mention a couple of them in today's lecture.
Now in this set of particles, every sort of particle has an antiparticle.
So the baryons, for example, have antiberions, including the antiproton and the antinutron.
Every baryon has an antiberion.
And the leptons have antileptons.
Every sort of particle has an antiparticle.
So we've seen, for example, the positron, which is the anti-electron.
And there are also antinutrinos.
The antiparticles of the mesons, this is kind of curious, the antiparticles of the mesons are mesons.
So, for example, the pi-zero meson is actually its own antiparticle.
And as you might imagine, it has a very short lifetime.
Now we now know that these baryons and mesons are themselves made of even smaller particles called quarks.
And this name quark is a curious name.
It was coined by the American physicist Murray Gelman, who is almost as famous for his word play as for his brilliant physics.
And in the quark scheme, the baryons are all made of three quarks.
And the antiberions are made of three anti-quarks.
Of course, they're anti-quarks as well as quarks.
The mesons are made, each of them is made of a combination of one quark and one anti-quark.
And so that's why the anti-mesons are just mesons.
Because if you take the antiparticles of those, you get an anti-quark and a quark.
It's just a meson.
So we can talk about quarks, but the action happens because of one or the other of the fundamental forces.
And since we're ignoring gravity, one of the big three of the fundamental forces, the strong force, the electromagnetic force, or the weak force.
That's the first rule.
And the second rule is, are affected by the strong force.
These are the hadrons, but not the leptons.
The leptons are invisible to the strong force.
The strong force has no effect on them at all.
Similarly, the electromagnetic force only affects particles with electric charge, which means electrons, yes, they're affected by the electromagnetic force, but neutrinos, no.
Neutrinos have no electric charge.
They're not affected by the electromagnetic force.
And by the way, this is why neutrinos are so very hard to see.
They ignore both of the two strongest forces in nature.
In fact, the only kind of force that affects the neutrino, besides gravity, the only kind of force that affects neutrino is the weak force.
In effect, the weak force affects almost every kind of particle, including neutrinos.
All right, in our discussion, we're mostly going to consider particle decay processes, where a particle A turns into other things.
And every such decay occurs because of one of the fundamental forces of nature.
So what I want to do is I want to ask about some impossible things, some impossible processes, and find out why they're impossible.
So the first one is, why can't, why don't you have electrons that turn themselves into other things?
Well, let's see, there's the problem of the conservation of energy.
That would tell me that the other things that the electron would turn itself into would have to be less massive.
In fact, this never happens.
It's impossible.
Why?
The reason is the conservation of electric charge.
You see, electrons have a negative electric charge.
And none of the less massive particles, the photons, the neutrinos and so on, have any electric charge at all.
So the electron could not decay away unless we were to somehow destroy its electric charge.
And that's impossible.
And because of that, electrons are stable, since they are the least massive particles with charge.
They are stable.
All right.
How about neutrons and protons?
Well, actually, neutrons by themselves, out on their own, are slightly unstable.
They decay by beta decay.
They turn into a proton and an electron and a neutrino.
And the average lifetime for an isolated neutron is about 20 minutes.
Inside a nucleus, on the other hand, the neutron can be stabilized by the strong forces between the protons and the neutrons inside the nucleus.
So the neutrons in a nucleus can be stable.
Now, some nuclei still do decay by beta decay.
It can still happen in some nuclei that a neutron turns into a proton and emits electron and neutrino.
And we've seen several examples of that.
We talked about carbon-14 and cobalt-60 and potassium-40.
So neutrons are unstable on their own, but in a nucleus, they can be stabilized.
How about protons?
Well, protons appear to be stable.
They never decay.
Why not?
Let's consider two conceivable reactions for proton decay.
In the first one, a proton turns into a pi plus meson and a neutrino.
The pi plus is a positively charged cousin of the pi zero I mentioned a few minutes ago.
That's one possible reaction.
Proton turns into a pi plus and a neutrino.
Here's another possible reaction.
The proton could turn itself into a positron and two neutrinos.
Each of these processes conserves energy and also conserves electric charge.
On each side of the reaction, we have the same total electric charge.
And although I haven't talked about this, these reactions also conserve momentum and angular momentum,
the spin of the particles, and so on.
Tration law.
And there is.
It's called the conservation of baryon number.
Now, baryon number is a quantity you may never have heard of,
but baryons, like the protons and the neutrons and so on, have baryon number plus one.
And the anti-baryons, the antimatter versions, have baryon number minus one, because they're opposite.
And the other particles, the mesons and the leptons and so on, they all have baryon number zero.
And the law is that the total baryon number can be neither created nor destroyed.
Now, that sounds obscure, but it's one of the most significant facts in all of nature.
I mean, think about it.
Every atom has protons and neutrons in the nucleus, making up more than 99% of the mass of the atom.
Now, the neutrons are only slightly unstable, so they can be stabilized inside the atomic nucleus.
But imagine for a moment that protons are unstable.
What would happen then?
Then every atom would also be unstable.
Over time, the protons would decay, and the neutrons, lacking proton neighbors, would become unstable again.
They would decay by beta decay, turning into protons.
Those protons would decay, and eventually the whole atom would just disintegrate.
Now, the fact that atoms do not disintegrate is important to us.
We are made of atoms.
And in fact, the atoms that we are made of have been around for billions of years,
so it's a good thing for us that they've lasted this long.
It's an important fact that protons are stable.
Okay, so by observing particle reactions in nature, we've actually discovered some other conservation laws as well.
Let me mention one, the conservation of lepton number.
Leptons, the electrons and neutrinos, have lepton number plus one.
The antileptons have lepton number minus one, and everything else has lepton number zero.
And the law is that the total leptoprocess does not change.
So we find new conservation laws by noticing that some particle reactions are impossible.
And we also observe in nature that some reactions are possible, but very rare.
They're not impossible, but they're very improbable.
And these reactions are associated with so-called approximate conservation laws,
quantities that are almost conserved.
And typically, these are conservation laws that only apply to some of the fundamental forces, but not to all.
So let me give you an example.
Let's consider nuclear reactions where we smash nuclei together in nuclear fusion,
or we split them apart in nuclear fission and so on,
and we observe that in these things, protons and neutrons generally remain distinct.
Now, it can happen that a neutron turns into a proton, or a proton turns into a neutron,
but that's rarer.
It usually only occurs in something like beta decay, and that might take a relatively long time.
It might take a few seconds.
It might take up to thousands of years in the case of some of the nuclei we've talked about.
So what we find in these reactions is an approximate conservation of, if you will, approximately conserved.
Okay, here's another example.
Remember in lecture 15, we saw that the laws of physics are almost symmetric if viewed in a mirror,
a mirror that flips left and right.
This is called parity symmetry.
And this approximate symmetry of nature is associated with an approximate conservation law,
the conservation of a property which is also called parity.
It's a measure of leftness or rightness.
Both the strong and the electromagnetic forces respect parity.
Parity is conserved in processes that are governed by those forces,
but the weak force does not conserve parity.
We saw this in beta decay.
Okay, here's something new.
I think this is the most interesting example.
And to do this, I want to introduce you to another type of baryon.
It's called the lambda zero particle.
It's kind of like a heavier cousin of the neutron.
There's no electric charge, but it's a bit more massive than a neutron.
In fact, it's massive enough that it can decay into a proton and a pi minus meson.
The pi minus is the antiparticle of the pi plus we mentioned before.
So the reaction lambda zero goes to proton plus pi minus.
That reaction conserves energy.
It conserves electric charge.
It conserves baryon number and so on.
And so this process can happen.
In fact, it does happen.
But notice that all of the particles involved in the process are either baryons or mesons.
That is to say they're all hadrons.
All of the particles can participate in the strong nuclear force, the strongest force in nature.
And so we would expect that this decay should happen pretty fast.
So how fast is pretty fast?
Well, things do happen fast in the microscopic world.
And so we'll need a new unit of time to talk sensibly about these things.
One jiffy is the time it takes for light to go across an atomic nucleus.
This is an actual unit of physics, the jiffy.
And that's an extremely short period of time.
It's three trillions of a trillionth of a second.
But we would expect the lambda zero to decay in a jiffy or maybe a few dozen or a few hundred jiffies.
Pretty fast.
But instead the lambda zero lasts for about a tenth of a nanosecond.
That's long enough for light to travel one inch.
And for an elementary particle, this is an enormous span of time.
Let's translate this into terms that we can understand.
It's as if we expect an unstable particle to exist for one second, but instead it lasts for a million years.
The difference is that great.
So clearly something strange is going on to make the lambda zero so long lived.
So in 1953, Murray Gelman and the Japanese physicist Kazuhiko Nishijima proposed that there's an almost conserved quantity.
A quantity that came to be called strangeness.
There's Gelman's verbal humor again.
Strangeness is conserved by the strong force and the electromagnetic force.
But the weak force can create or destroy strangeness.
Now, pi masons and protons and neutrons all have zero strangeness.
They're not strange at all.
But many other particles do have strangeness.
In fact, the lambda zero has strangeness equal to minus one.
So the decay of the lambda zero into unstrange particles cannot occur by the strong force or the electromagnetic force because it doesn't conserve strangeness.
It can only take place by the weak force.
And so, since that's a much weaker force, it's a much slower process and the lambda is a much longer lived particle.
Now, this raises an interesting question.
We said that the proton is stable.
We said that its lifetime is infinite.
But how do we know, really?
I mean, maybe it is only very, very long lived.
Maybe baryon number itself is only approximately conserved.
And indeed, according to some modern speculative particle theories, the so-called grand unified theories, baryon number is not conserved.
Protons should eventually decay.
So that's an interesting question.
There have been a lot of experiments to look for proton decay.
You get a lot of protons together and you watch them very carefully.
You watch for one of those reactions by which protons turn into other things.
And as of today, we have never seen even one proton decay into smaller particles.
That means that the estimate is that the proton lifetime in years is at least one followed by 33 zeros.
It's at least a billion trillion trillion years.
And notice I said that the lifetime is at least that long.
It might be longer, probably is longer.
So could it be infinite?
Well, we do have reason to think that baryon number is not exactly conserved.
And the reason has to do with a force that we've left out, gravity.
So consider a star.
A star has lots of protons, lots of neutrons.
Its baryon number is enormous.
It's 10 to the 57th power or something.
And imagine that that star collapses and forms a black hole.
Hocking radiation is mostly photons and neutrinos and so on.
The hocking radiation contains almost no baryons, which are all pretty massive anyway.
So the overall process, star turns into black hole, turns into hocking radiation.
That overall process takes an immense span of time, but that process would not conserve baryon number.
So perhaps, baryon number is only approximately conserved after all.
Okay, we've been talking about quantum physics.
We discussed the uncertainty principle and a few of its implications.
We explored the weird phenomenon of quantum tunneling,
and in this lecture we use the idea of the impossible as a technique
to discover some of the fundamental laws of particle physics.
And all of these things are pretty strange.
In fact, Gelman even used the word strangeness to describe an unexpected property of elementary particles.
But in the next lecture, I want to discuss what I believe is the strangest thing in the whole strange world of quantum physics.
That's quantum entanglement.
Entangled quantum particles have a peculiar sort of connection to each other.
They behave as if they were parts of a single quantum system, even though they may be thousands of miles apart.
Yet even with quantum entanglement, it is impossible to send messages faster than light.
Why not? The reason turns out to be rather unexpected.
In the quantum world you see, it is impossible to exactly copy information.
That's called the quantum no-cloning theorem, and it's an amazing story.
That's next time. I'll see you then.
