Welcome to the 22nd lecture in our course on the physics of impossible things.
Last time we finished up our discussion of quantum impossibilities with the no-cloning theorem.
We saw that if we could clone quantum particles,
we could use quantum entanglement to send signals faster than light.
And the no-cloning theorem prevents this.
And this gave us an amazing connection.
The laws of quantum physics help to enforce the basic laws of causality and information in the universe.
Now for the next three lectures, we're going to try to draw some lessons from our study of the impossible.
We're going to ask about the nature of the laws of physics.
How do they work? How are they enforced?
And the topic for this lecture is an amazing clue from the subject of electromagnetism.
Now electromagnetism deals with electric charge and law of electromagnetism.
It's not one of Maxwell's equations, but it's a closely related principle.
This was in lecture 20, the law of the conservation of electric charge.
Particles, as we saw, can have positive or negative charge, or they can have zero charge.
And these particles can move around or even be created or destroyed.
But net electric charge is always conserved.
If we create a positive charge, then we must also create a negative charge.
It's one of the basic conservation laws of the universe.
So our question today is something impossible and asking a question about it.
Let's call it an electromagnetic miracle.
Here's the idea. The laws of electromagnetism hold everywhere, except inside a special cubicle box for a limited time.
For example, the box might be this room.
The laws hold everywhere in the universe, all the time.
And in this room, most of the time, but during a limited period on Tuesday, let's say, we get a free pass.
The laws are suspended. Anything goes.
On Tuesday, inside this room, electric and magnetic fields behave anyhow, however we like.
Electric charge can be created or destroyed.
The laws of electromagnetic physics just don't apply.
It's a miracle.
And then on Wednesday, the laws come into effect once more.
So it's an electromagnetic miracle, but it only has bounded extent.
It is a miracle that applies only to a limited region of space-time.
So here's our question.
If we allow this sort of miracle, could we use it to create a net electric charge?
Suppose at the beginning of the day, on Tuesday, there's zero net charge in this room.
And then during the day, we make sure that no charges cross through the walls, the doors, or the windows.
And then at the end of Tuesday, is it possible to wind up with a net positive charge, say, in this room?
And the answer seems to be, of course it is possible.
We've suspended the laws inside the box, inside this room.
Charges can be created out of nothing.
But the real answer is, no.
True, charges can be made or destroyed during the day.
The laws do not apply.
But nevertheless, at the end of the day, the charge must wind up zero.
The conservation of electric charge says that net electric charge cannot be created or destroyed.
But even with a miracle, a bounded miracle, a miracle limited in space and time,
it is impossible to make a lasting exception to that law.
Now, this sounds paradoxical.
I mean, if we turn off the law of charge conservation, how can that law still be enforced?
The answer is deep.
Actually write down and use the basic equations of electromagnetism.
And I have to tell you, electromagnetic theory is often considered one of the most challenging subjects in the education of a physicist.
My other students this semester certainly think so.
But the good news is that we can do without elaborate technical and mathematical machinery.
With some pictures and some careful thinking, the essential meaning of the equations is actually accessible to almost anyone.
The equations tell us how electric and magnetic fields are related to charges and to each other.
So what is a field?
Well, we need a picture.
We need a useful tool for picturing a field.
And so I want to talk about air flow, the so-called wind field, which we'll call W.
And at every point in space, there's a particular velocity of the air at that point.
The wind, W, has a direction and a strength, a speed.
A mathematician would call such a quantity that has both direction and strength, a vector.
So how to imagine the wind field, W?
How do we picture the wind field in this room?
Well, what we can do is we can draw streamlines, streamlines that trace out the flow pattern in space.
In wind tunnels, this is often done by having thin trails of smoke carried by the wind through the wind tunnel.
And these streamlines help us visualize the field.
The direction of the streamlines tells us the direction of the wind.
And the density of the streamlines actually tells us the speed of the wind.
The streamlines are closer together where the wind is faster.
So the speed is faster whenever we see the streamlines get closer together.
So these ideas of streamlines for visualizing the wind field are very intuitive.
We can picture them.
And so we can use the same ideas to describe electric and magnetic fields.
So okay, we have the electric field, which is called E,
and we have the magnetic field, which is called, for historical reasons, B.
And at each point in space, each of those fields has a direction and a strength.
The mathematicians would say each of these is a vector quantity.
And so we can draw so-called field lines, they're like the streamlines of the wind field,
field lines to help us visualize the patterns of the field.
And we'll need two sets flowing along the electric and magnetic lines.
They're just a trick for visualizing the pattern of the field.
But we can still use the wind analogy because the wind analogy connects these abstract pictures to something tangible.
All right, to go further, we're going to need some simple geometry.
We're going to need an assortment of geometrical figures.
We're going to have cubical boxes, and we're going to have flat squares and straight lines,
line segments, that is.
And our squares are going to be special, they're not just going to be squares,
they're going to have a plus side and a minus side.
We're going to distinguish between the two sides of the squares,
and one side of the square is going to be the plus side, and the other side is the minus side.
And in a similar way for our line segments,
our line segments are going to have a direction associated with those line segments.
There's going to be a plus direction, and the other directional line is a minus direction.
So we have boxes, we have squares of direction of the square.
Okay, now that we have boxes and squares and line segments,
we can begin to build the ideas we need to understand the equations of electromagnetism.
And it's actually based on just two ideas, and the ideas are called flux and push.
Alright, so to understand these, let's go back to the wind field again.
Let's consider a square.
The flux, which we can write f of w, the flux through that square is simply the amount of air that flows through the square.
Flux, in fact, means flow.
You can sort of imagine the square as a window, the flux is the breeze through the window.
And if the breeze goes from the minus side to the plus side,
that's the direction of the streamlines, then that means that f of w is positive.
If the breeze on the other hand blows across the square,
then no air is actually going through the window, and so that means that f of w is zero.
And if the breeze goes the other way, if it goes from the plus side to the minus side,
that means that the flux is negative, f of w is negative.
Okay, so let's imagine we had a cube.
Could we have f of w be positive going through all six sides?
Could there be wind blowing out of all the sides?
Sure.
All we need is an air source in the middle.
Say we had a tank of compressed air.
We opened the valve, then air would flow out through all the sides of the cube.
The streamlines of the wind field would diverge from the center.
It would go out through all the sides.
Okay, now let's think about push.
Imagine a line.
A line, think of that line as a track.
And on the track, we have a small sail-powered cart on the track.
And the push of the wind field, p of w, along the line,
is the total amount of push on the cart in the plus direction as it goes from one into the other.
So if the breeze is going in the plus direction along the line,
then the push of the wind field is positive.
But if the breeze is perpendicular to the line,
then there's no net push on the cart,
and the push of the wind field, p of w, is zero.
And if the breeze is actually blowing in the minus direction,
then the push of the wind field on the cart is actually negative.
p of w is negative.
Okay, so let's imagine we put four lines around a square of the square.
It was blowing faster than on the west side of the square.
That would be called wind shear.
If the wind were blowing faster on one side than the other,
there would be a net push of the wind field around the square.
Or we could have just a whirlwind.
The streamlines might curl around the square and push the cart all the way around.
So we could have a net push around a square.
All right, let's go back to electromagnetism.
Now that we have boxes, squares, and lines, and we have the flux and the push.
In the early 19th century, several brilliant physicists
discovered the basic laws of electromagnetism.
And the laws were finally put together in their final mathematical form in 1861 by Maxwell.
And the final theory is summed up in Maxwell's field equations.
And Maxwell's equations, it's one of the greatest achievements in the history of science.
Maxwell's equations are the guiding principles behind electrical technology,
radio, modern electronics, and so on.
And they are exceedingly beautiful equations.
In fact, the beauty of Maxwell's equations is why I became a physicist.
So what Maxwell's equations do is they describe how the electric and magnetic fields
are related to their sources, to electric charges, and electric currents,
which are flows of charge.
So we can express Maxwell's equations in terms of the flux and push of the electric and magnetic fields,
the E and B fields.
The flux and push are just defined by analogy with the wind field.
Remember, nothing is actually flowing along the E and B field lines,
but we can use the ideas of flux and push by analogy.
Okay, Maxwell's equations are four in number.
There are two that we might call box laws and two that we might call square laws.
So let's talk about the two box laws.
The first one, equation number one, is called Gauss's law for electric flux.
And Gauss's law is this.
F of E, the flux of the electric field, is equal to Q, the charge enclosed.
So if Q is positive, then the field lines tend to point out of the box.
And if Q is negative, the field lines tend to point into the box.
So there's a negative flux.
One way of saying it is that field lines begin and end at positive and negative electric charges, respectively.
If we were to draw the field lines, they would begin or end only at charges.
They begin at positive charges, they end at negative charges.
That's sort of the content of Gauss's law.
Okay, that's the first of Maxwell's equations.
Here's the second. It's even easier.
It's called Gauss's law for magnetic fields.
It's not actually due to Gauss, but it's called that by analogy.
The flux of the magnetic field through the walls of a cubicle box, in this case, is zero.
F of B is equal to zero.
So it's just like the law for electric fields, except there are no magnetic charges.
So what does this mean?
Well, if you had a simple bar magnet, a simple bar magnet has a north and a south end.
That sort of behaves like positive and negative charges.
But when you break the magnet in two, each piece of the magnet always has both ends.
There's no single isolated magnetic pole.
There's no north by itself or south by itself.
No so-called monopole is possible.
And that's what Gauss's law for magnetic fields means.
It means that the magnetic field lines never begin or end anywhere.
They form closed loops or they stretch forever.
Okay, so much for our two box laws.
Now we want to talk about the two square laws.
And they're a little trickier because they involve how things change with time.
So I need to introduce one more piece of notation.
If I put a dot over something, if I write down x dot, that means the rate of change of x with time.
It is how fast x is changing, either increasing or decreasing, at any given moment.
x dot means how fast it's changing.
Okay, now that we know that, I can tell you Maxwell's equation number three, which is called Faraday's law.
It was discovered by the English physicist Michael Faraday in 1831.
So let's imagine a square in space.
And f of b is of f of b dot.
That is to say the rate of change of magnetic flux through the square.
This changing magnetic flux through the square produces an electric field around the square.
This is a little subtle, but it has a familiar application.
This is how an electric generator works.
If you move a magnet very rapidly near a coil of wire, the changing flux of b through the coil produces a net electric push around the wire.
And that net electric push produces an electric current.
We get a flow of charge in the wire.
That's how we produce electric currents in an electric generator.
It's using Faraday's law.
Okay, we now have three of the four of Maxwell's equations.
Let's go for number four.
Well, number four is called Ampere's law.
In its original form, it was proposed by André-Marie Ampere in 1826.
So Ampere's law, we imagine once again a square in space.
And now instead of the square, so electric charge might be crossing the square and that contributes to i.
And so in its original form, Ampere's law looked like this.
The magnetic push around the outside of the square, p of b, is equal to i, the current flowing through the square.
What this means intuitively is that magnetic field lines bend around flowing currents, moving charges.
And actually, this is what makes electromagnets work.
What we do is we run some electric current through some wires and that generates a magnetic field that curls around the wires.
All right, so far everything I said was in place before Maxwell came along.
But now comes Maxwell's brilliant insight in 1861.
In 1861, Maxwell realized that Ampere's law was incomplete.
Well, what's it missing?
Well, it's missing a term that's related to f of e, the electric flux through the square.
And so the new law, the new improved version of Ampere's law, the Ampere-Maxwell law, if you will, is that the magnetic push told the complete laws.
We have the complete laws governing electric and magnetic fields.
And Maxwell and his successors derived all kinds of amazing things from the laws.
So for example, you notice that changing magnetic fields can produce electric fields.
That's just Faraday's law.
And changing electric fields can produce magnetic fields.
That's just Ampere's law as improved by Maxwell.
And what that means is that disturbances in electric and magnetic fields can propagate through empty space, electromagnetic miracle.
Remember, we have a cubicle box, this room, inside the box.
On Tuesday, all of Maxwell's equations and the conservation of charge simply do not apply.
But they do apply outside and they apply on the walls of the box.
At the beginning of Tuesday, the charge Q is equal to zero inside the box.
No charges go across the walls of the box during Tuesday, so the electric current I is equal to zero for each of the six sides of the box all the time.
So what I want to know is, what is the charge Q in the box at the end of the day inside the box?
And neither of our box laws, therefore, Gauss's law for electric and magnetic fields, work anymore.
However, the laws of electromagnetism still apply to the outside of the box.
The square laws apply to the six square faces of the cubicle box, even on Tuesday.
So let's apply Ampere's law to each side of the cube.
Remember, we're assuming that there is no electric current through the walls.
So Ampere's law for a particular side called S is that the magnetic push around the outside of S, P of B sub S,
is equal to the rate of change of the electric flux through S, F of E sub S dot.
The current, of course, equals zero.
So we have this for every side of the box.
Now let's add all the sides together.
The right-hand side just gives me the electric flux dot added for all the sides of the box, the rate of change of the electric flux.
But how about the left-hand side?
How do the six magnetic pushes add up?
Well, there are six squares, and you have a push around each one.
So that's 24 lines of push.
But if you look carefully, you'll notice that this includes the push P of B along each side of the box, each edge of the box twice,
once in one direction and once in the other.
And these must be negatives of each other.
And so if you add them all up, the net electric push around all the sides of the box is zero.
And so the net result is the rate of change of the electric flux through the box must be zero.
That's an amazing fact.
No matter what's going on inside the box, the net electric flux through the box does not change on Tuesday.
Its rate of change is zero.
So at the beginning of Tuesday, that net electric flux is zero.
During the miracle, there can still be no net charge in the box at the end.
Charge is still conserved.
What's happened is that Maxwell's equations tell how the electric and magnetic fields are connected to electric charge.
And this connection is actually responsible for the conservation of charge.
Even if we suspend the laws of electromagnetism inside the box, an electromagnetic miracle,
the field outside the box still enforces conservation of electric charge.
Now, there's another way to think about this.
Suppose some wave.
A longitudinal wave is like a sound wave.
The air molecules in a sound wave vibrate back and forth,
but they do their vibrating along the same direction that the sound wave travels.
So in the field outside the box where Maxwell's equations hold,
longitudinal waves are impossible.
The outside field cannot carry the news of the new charge in the box.
The conservation of charge is enforced by a kind of censorship.
The laws of the field prevent that kind of information from spreading to the rest of the universe.
So to sum up, the electric and magnetic fields enforce the conservation of charge,
even if we allow miracles, limited exceptions to Maxwell's field equations.
Now, this is remarkable.
Do any other conservation laws work this way?
Well, some of them do.
For example, conservation of energy.
You see, energy is related to mass,
and that's linked to the gravitational field, the warping of space and time.
And the gravitational field enforces the conservation of energy,
just as Maxwell's equations enforce the conservation of charge.
Now, there are other conservation laws that do not work this way.
For example, conservation of Baryon number, which we mentioned in lecture 20.
It's not enforced by any field, but also maybe it's not exactly conserved.
So this is an amazing story.
We wondered whether a miraculous box, one that can turn off the laws of electromagnetism
in a limited part of space and time, could violate the law of charge conservation.
And to learn the answer, we expressed the fundamental laws of electric and magnetic field
in relatively simple geometric form, Maxwell's equations.
And we found that even if Maxwell's equations did not apply within the box,
it still cannot create a new electric charge.
The conservation of charge is enforced by the rest of the universe.
Or put it another way, to really violate this conservation law,
we would need an electromagnetic miracle that is not limited,
a miracle that involves the entire universe.
And we saw that the same type of argument connects the conservation of energy to gravity.
And also, the concept of information once again shows up as a central point.
Now, so far in this course, we've been mapping out the border between the possible and the impossible.
And that border is determined by the laws of physics.
We studied thermodynamics and spacetime geometry.
We've studied laws of symmetry, of quantum physics, of electromagnetism.
And actually, it's been a rather far-ranging tour of modern physics.
So now it's time to step back.
Now we're going to take in the big picture.
What does the impossible tell us about the laws of nature?
What kind of laws are they?
How are they connected?
What are the most unifying, the most fundamental ideas in physics?
How might future discoveries change things and redraw our map of the impossible?
These questions will be our business for the last two lectures of the course.
And as always, the idea of the impossible will be our guide.
So that starts next time.
I'll see you then.
