of impossible things. Our study of the impossible has led us to some quite deep insights into
the laws of nature. And in lecture 23, we identified some major themes, central ideas
that show up again and again throughout physics. We talked about symmetry. And a second major
theme was the theme of information. Information is a basic idea in thermodynamics and relativity
in quantum theory. And we saw that information is really just how we keep track of cause
and effect. The laws of information are really the laws governing the causal structure of
the world. And finally, our third theme was probability. Maxwell said that the true logic
of this world is the calculus of probabilities. Now in classical, now our discussion so far
has been based on our best present understanding of the laws of physics. But of course, our
understanding is provisional. It's subject to change as we make further discoveries about
the world. And in the history of science, we see that time and again we have had to revise
our theories sometimes in a revolutionary way as in the discovery of quantum mechanics.
So we've had to redraw that border on our maps between the possible and the impossible.
So is there anything that we know is impossible? After all, we may someday discover new physics
and redraw our maps. Who knows where that border might end up? What things we believe
will turn out to be possible? What things that we believe are impossible will turn out
to be possible after all? What seeming impossibilities will turn out to be possible? What seeming
possibilities will turn out to be impossible? We don't know. So that's the question for
this lecture. What is the future of the impossible? That is, given our knowledge of physics, given
that it has changed and probably will change, changes that might be as revolutionary as
the discovery of quantum theory, is there anything that we can with confidence call
impossible?
Notice that I say with confidence, not with certainty. Outside of pure logic and abstract
mathematics, absolute certainty is hard to come by. But confidence is a matter of degree.
So I'm not prone to gambling, but there are some things that I would be willing to place
a bet on. On some things, I'd bet a nickel. On other things, I'd bet a dollar. I'm more
confident of those things. So my question is, are there any million dollar bets that
we should take about the future of the impossible?
Well, that's a difficult question. As Niels Bohr once said, predictions can be very difficult,
especially about the future of physics as well. Now, Clark's first law was, when a
distinguished but elderly scientist states that something is possible, he is almost
certainly right. When he states that something is impossible, he is very probably wrong.
And we saw lots of examples of this in lecture two. Many statements about the impossibility
of powered flight or finding a composition of the stars, statements that later sounded
just embarrassing. Clark's second law states this, the awesome into the impossible. But
here's the one that I want to discuss today, Clark's third law, which states that any sufficiently
advanced technology is indistinguishable from magic. Well, what does Clark mean by this?
He means that the far future of technology is beyond our ability to foresee. So here's
a common illustration. If we were to show a computer or a television or an airplane
to one of our distant ancestors, they would not even begin to understand what these machines
did or how they worked. Such devices would seem completely impossible to them. And the
moral of this, according to Clark, is that we cannot confidently state that anything
is truly impossible. Well, I disagree with Clark's third law. I think that we can distinguish
between super advanced technology, which is based on the fundamental laws of nature, and
magic, which is not. In other words, I think we can distinguish between the possible and
the impossible. So to make my point, I want to cast our minds back 300 years to the 18th
century. And in the 18th century, civilized nations faced a vitally important problem
of science and technology. That was the problem of finding longitude. This is a navigation
problem for ships. Finding latitude, your location north and south is comparatively easy.
All you have to do is measure the angle of the pole star in the sky. But finding longitude,
your east-west position, adds much harder. But it's very important. And in 1714, the
British Parliament set up the Longitude Prize, up to 20,000 pounds, for a practical, accurate
method for finding the longitude of a ship at sea. The essential problem is measuring
time. You see, the Earth is rotating on its axis. So if we knew the exact time, the time,
the same time as at the Royal Observatory in Greenwich, then we could turn our observations
of the positions of the sun or the moon or the stars into a measurement of longitude.
So what we need is a very accurate method of measuring time. How accurate? Well, if
we're one minute off, then we will be up to fidges, might last for many months. And ships
roll and pitch as they travel. So any simple pendulum clock would be knocked off its time.
So then along came John Harrison, the great English clockmaker, who became interested
in the problem of longitude around the year 1730. But he would work on it for the next
several decades. Now, Harrison was not really a scientist. He was actually what we would
call a precision mechanical engineer. Some time ago, I visited the display of Harrison's
marine chronometers at the Royal Observatory in Greenwich, the place where the zero of
longitude is defined. And in the display case, they're arranged in order. There's the H1,
the H2, and the H3. All of these are big, intricate pieces of machinery, each of them
more sophisticated than the last. And then after 30 years of patient development, something
astonishing, the H4, the clock that won the prize. And it is not a big, elaborate machine
that's too heavy to lift. It's essentially a large pocket watch. It's about five inches
across. You could hold it in your hand. But this watch could keep time to within a few
seconds in a sailing voyage across the ocean. That technical leap from the big, complicated
H3 to the H4, that leap so vividly displayed at Greenwich, is one of the most amazing things
I have ever seen in my life. And I have to tell you, my seven-year-old daughter thought
so too. She actually climbed up on the display case for a better look, earning the polite
but firm attention of the security guard. I had to scold her a bit, but I understood
her fascination. Yet, as amazing, even awe-inspiring as the H4 was, it was still obviously a machine,
a piece of engineering. If you open it up and you look at its inner workings, the inner
workings are based on the same idea. GPS, the global positioning system, is based on
a constellation of about 30 satellites in orbit about the Earth. And a handheld GPS unit
uses precise timing signals from at least four satellites at once. And it can display
quite accurately the latitude, longitude, altitude above sea level, and time. Now, this
would be a really baffling little device to an 18th century person. For one thing, the
principles of electricity, of radio communication, and so on would be totally unfamiliar. Even
the plastic of the outer cover would seem strange. And when you open it up, you would
find no moving parts at all. To the 18th century eye, it doesn't even look like a machine.
It would seem impossible. It would seem almost like magic. However, after some experiments,
I think you'd realize that the GPS is not really magic. You'd see that it follows laws
of physics, not exactly the laws you're familiar with, but laws that make sense. So for example,
the GPS unit only tells where it is, or where it has been. It doesn't tell you where Aunt
Sally is. It does not tell you where it will be tomorrow. The GPS is also clearly receiving
it under a tunnel or a cave. It doesn't work. The physical influence that gives it its information
is blocked. And finally, if you leave the GPS unit on for too long, it no longer works.
It runs down. It's a machine. It's a device. It's technology. It's not magic. A machine
that predicted the future, or got its information without physical means, or ran forever without
running down, that would be magic. Now, there were some magical ideas for solving the longitude
problem. My favorite was the powder of sympathy. This is based on an old bit of quack medicine.
The idea is that on board the ship, you would keep a dog with a wound, a gash or something.
And back at Greenwich, you would keep an old bandage from the same dog. And at exactly
noon Greenwich time, someone at the Royal Observatory would dip the old bandage into
this mysterious stuff, this powder of sympathy. And the dog anywhere in the world would immediately
howl in pain, providing a precise time signal for the ship's navigator. Now, even in those
days, real scientists and engineers knew that the powder of sympathy did not make physical
sense. It violated a basic tenet of causality, that there must be a physical connection between
cause and effect, a physical means for information to be transferred. They would not have put
it this way, but they understood the principle. So, for instance, Galileo understood this
principle a hundred years before Harrison's day. His 1632 book, Dialogue on the Two Great
World Systems, the book that got him in trouble with the church, contains an amusing story.
The character Segredo, one of the three characters in the dialogue, relates that a certain man,
a con man or a crackpot you gather, wanted to sell him a new invention for long distance
communication. With this invention, you could send messages over a thousand miles. So, how
does it work? By a certain sympathy of magnetic needles. And so, Segredo says, I'd be happy
to buy this, provided you can demonstrate that it works. But I don't care about a thousand
miles, just send a message from one room in my house to the next. And the man says, oh,
well, it does not work over distances that short. And Segredo says, in that case, I will
keep my money. You see, this is why I do not agree with Clark's three scientists. I think
the same is true of the laws of physics. New discoveries will lead to unexpected things,
but not to magic. Why not? Well, new scientific theories don't really change everything. They
always leave a lot of our previous understanding in place. So, for example, Isaac Newton realized
that the force of gravity, the force that caused the apple to fall from the tree, was
the same force that held the moon in its orbit. Nowadays, we have a very different concept
of gravity, Einstein's theory of space-time curvature. But in the new theory, the falling
apple and the orbiting moon are still both examples of the same phenomenon, gravitation
in action. And I think we can confidently predict a million-dollar bet that there have
been at least two revolutions in our understanding of the physics of matter. First, we found
that matter is actually made of atoms and molecules, and heat energy is just the energy
of random molecular motions. Second, we found quantum mechanics. Quantum mechanics seems
to change everything, and yet the second law is still here. The law has changed a little.
We now know that it is a statistical law, a matter of probability, as Maxwell pointed
out. A violation of the second law is a statistical impossibility, merely overwhelmingly improbable.
But I think it is a good bet, a million-dollar bet, that the second law of thermodynamics
in some form will survive even the most revolutionary changes in our theories of the constituents
of matter. And this would mean that perpetual motion machines of the second kind will always
be impossible. Actually, the physicist Michio Kaku, in his excellent book on the physics
of the impossible, one of the recommended texts for this course, ranks a perpetual motion
machine as what he calls a class III impossibility, the impossibility that violated a law of physics.
We also called this a derived impossibility because it is derived from the law. And finally,
there's statistical impossibility, not impossible exactly, but extremely, extremely improbable.
Now of these three different kinds of impossibility, I think that the middle one, physical impossibility,
is actually the weakest because that's the kind of impossibility that depends on the
details of the laws. But new discoveries can change our understanding of those laws. The
border between the possible and the impossible is sort of most changeable in this place. Both
absolute impossibilities and statistical impossibilities, I think, are stronger. They're less vulnerable
to a reassessment. Absolute impossibilities, if they really are such, must always be impossible.
Statistical impossibilities remain extremely improbable even if we adjust the details.
Flipping a coin and getting 10,000 heads in a row is vastly improbable, as we saw. And
that's true whether we flip a dime or a quarter. It's true whether the coin flip is done with our
right hand or our left hand. It's true whether that coin flip is unpredictable due to chaos or we
somehow use a quantum coin and it's unpredictable due to quantum physics. In any case, 10,000 heads
in a row is statistically impossible. So, what is my million dollar list? What is my list of
things that we've discussed in this course that I confidently believe I would bet on million
dollars, if I had a million dollars, will remain impossible even if we discover new laws of physics.
Well, you might want to pause this lecture at this point and spend a few minutes thinking about your
own list so you can compare it to mine. And if you want to do that, you can do it now.
All right, here are the ones that violate the second law of thermodynamics, the increase in
entropy. Both kinds will always be impossible. They're on my million dollar list.
How about attaining absolute zero? That's supposed to be impossible. Well, I'm not quite as confident
about that one, so I'm going to leave it off my list. But it's probably impossible, but I'm just
not quite as sure. But predicting the far future of a chaotic system, that is definitely on the
million dollar list. I would bet a million dollars that it will never be possible to do that.
How about time travel or sending information into the past? Well, those are certainly on my
million dollar list, my list of impossibilities that I think will still be around no matter how
the laws of physics change. The paradoxes involved in time travel are just I'm. And those ideas
might just be wrong. So let's put those on the on the half million dollar list. The basic symmetries
of the world do seem to be important. But but I noticed that too many supposed symmetries,
like parity, the symmetry of left and right, have turned out to be only approximate symmetries of
the world. So I don't think that any of the fundamental symmetries are on my million dollar
list. I wouldn't bet a million dollars on any of them. On the other hand, giant insect monsters,
they're on the list. I think they're just impossible. The square cube law simply cannot be ignored.
I believe that some of the basic impossibilities in quantum theory, the Heisenberg uncertainty
principle and the quantum no cloning theorem will will remain impossible, even if we someday go
beyond quantum theory itself. And finally, I am very impressed with the way that conservation
of electric charge is enforced by the surrounding electromagnetic field that the rest of the
universe can enforce conservation laws in a region of space. I think I think that that those
conservation laws that have this feature, this feature of being enforced by a field. And we
mentioned both the conservation of electric charge and the conservation of energy. I think that those
conservation laws are likely to endure. I would put them on my million dollar list. I think violating
one of those would be would be on my million dollar list of impossibilities. I bet a million
dollars against it. But other conservation laws like the conservation of baryon number or lepton
number, I'm much less confident about. And I would not place violating those conservation laws on the
list. Okay, that's my list. I do invite you to to come up with your own list of million dollar
bets. The things that you are confident will remain impossible, even if physics undergoes further
revolutionary changes. But in the end, we'll have to see how things develop. Well, here at the end
of the course, it is only fair to tell you, at last, what this course has really been about. It's
been about the impossible. Yes, but but we have used the idea of the impossible as a means to an
end. And let me talk about the end. The syllabus of this course has seemed to wander all over the
map. We've talked about thermodynamics and chaos about the structure of space time about gravity.
We've talked about symmetry and quantum mechanics and field theory. We've ranged so widely, because
this course is really about the unity of physical law, the way that the laws of nature work together.
Time and time again, we found deep and surprising relationships between apparently disparate branches
of physics. For example, consider the conservation of energy. We first saw it as the first law of
thermodynamics, the reason that the unbalanced wheel does not turn and do work forever. But later,
we found that it's also connected to time shift symmetry by Nether's theorem. And also, we saw that
it's enforced in each region of space time by the surrounding gravitational field. Or consider the
Hawking radiation from a black hole. When we combine quantum mechanics with the warping of
space time by the black hole's gravity, we discover that black holes are part of thermodynamics,
that they have energy, temperature, and entropy like any ordinary object. Or consider the quantum
no cloning theorem. It's a principle of quantum theory that says that quantum information cannot
be perfectly copied. Yet somehow, it's also one reason that information cannot be sent faster than
light or backward in time. Time and again, we've seen how the central themes of symmetry,
information, and probability shape not one or two, but many different branches of physics. And we
have brought all of these wonderful connections to light by pondering the impossible, always full
of wonder. I hope you have had, as inspiring, a journey. And I hope to see you again soon.
