Hello. I'm Tom Rawlins, President of the Teaching Company. These lectures are part of the Great
Courses on Tape series. They are produced by the Teaching Company. The lectures on these
tapes are titled, Ancient Greek Civilization, Part 1. The lecturer is Dr. Jeremy McInerney.
Professor McInerney received his PhD from the University of California at Berkeley in 1992.
Since 1992, he has been teaching Greek history at the University of Pennsylvania, where he is
currently an associate professor in the Department of Classical Studies and serves as chair of the
graduate group in the art and archeology of the Mediterranean world. Professor McInerney also
serves on the managing committee of the American School of Classical Studies at Athens. He has
excavated in Israel, at Corinth, and on Crete. His research interests include topography,
epigraphy, and historiography. He has published articles in numerous journals and participated
in colloquia on ethnicity in the ancient world, posted by the Center for Hellenic Studies in
Washington. Lecture 1, Greece and the Western World. Hello, and welcome to this, our series of lectures
on Ancient Greek Civilization. My name is Jeremy McInerney, and in the course of the
next 24 lectures, what I would like to do is to introduce you to the world of Greek culture,
the accomplishments of the ancient Greek civilization. My name is Jeremy McInerney, and in the course
of the next 24 lectures, what I would like to do is to introduce you to the world of Greek
culture, the accomplishments of the Greeks. And today, to begin, I'd like to talk a little
bit about what it was that the Greeks produced and how we, as a culture, much later, relate
to the accomplishment of the Greeks. In order to clarify this right from the start and to
give you an idea of what it is that I want to do in both this lecture and the rest of
this series, I'd like to just start with a story of an episode that occurred a few years
ago when I was an undergraduate, and I sat in a lecture where the lecturer talking about
Greek religion began by saying, now, it's very important when we study the Greeks to
pay close attention to their religion and their thought system. And I was sitting in
the audience thinking, well, this is very good, he's showing proper respect for them.
And he then proceeded to tell a series of stories about how when the Greeks worshiped
their gods, they performed sacrifices where they cut animals open and where they played
with their livers and their intestines to try and divine what was happening in the future.
And as he was telling these various stories, he was grimacing and leering and trying to
elicit a reaction from the undergraduates. He was quite successful in making them think
that the Greeks were somehow very odd and very weird and very inferior to us and to
our conception of how to deal with God. What the episode crystallized for me was that we
have a real difficulty when we approach the Greeks because we have a tendency either to
think of the Greeks as being demigods, a culture that accomplished more than we could ever
hope to, and a culture in whose shadow we live, or else as somehow being so alien and
so different that we can never really understand them at all. And in some sense, it's those
two poles that I want to navigate in the course of these lectures to try to think about the
ways in which we are alike to the Greeks and the ways in which we are very different from
the Greeks. I don't want to turn them into gods and I don't want to turn them into comic
book characters either, but rather to think about them as a culture that was extremely
important for us. And there's no doubt about it that it is a culture which is in a way
a bedrock of Western civilization. Now, some people like to advance the argument that we
should study the Greeks because they are more important to us than any other culture, that
their culture is unique. That's a claim that you might want to think about. In what sense
is any culture unique better than others? Well, all cultures are unique, I would argue,
Japanese culture, Chinese culture, Indian culture. We even know now that cultures which were
once dismissed as primitive, in fact, can have extremely rich cultural lives. The epistemology,
the cosmology of the Aborigines or the Plains Indians, these are extremely interesting and
exciting. Nevertheless, whether it's an historical accident or not, the case remains that we are
somehow closely tied to the Greeks. For better or for worse, if you will. I mean, think of it,
for example, in these terms.
