Hello, and welcome back to our series of lectures on ancient Greek civilization.
In the last lecture, we looked at the world of Minoan Crete, the first of the two great
Bronze Age civilizations that we have from the Greek world.
And at the end of that lecture, I was talking about Sir Arthur Evans and suggesting that
Evans was in a way the creator of what we know about that Bronze Age culture.
When you look at the frescoes at Knossos, we see not just what was there, but also the
restorations done by Evans and his draftsman.
When we turn to the second of the great Bronze Age cultures, that of Mycenaean Greece, the
Bronze Age culture of the mainland, we find yet again that we are beholden to the work
of one great archaeologist.
And like Evans, the great archaeologist who uncovered for us Mycenaean Greece, Heinrich
Schleeman, was not a professional scholar.
In fact, he was anything but.
He had been a businessman in the early part of his life.
He had made a fortune on the California gold fields, not by digging for gold, but rather
by providing goods to the gold diggers.
And the fortune that he made allowed him as a middle-aged man to turn his attention to
his true love, which was the world of Homer, the epic world of the Greeks.
And armed with Homer as his guide, he quite simply set off to find the places which Homer
had described, the places which had been the homeland of those Bronze Age Greeks whom Homer
called the Achaeans.
And when in 1876 he excavated at Mycenae, he uncovered the traces of a glorious Bronze
Age culture, a wealthy society, which he took to be the homeland of Homer's Mycenaean
Greeks, the Achaeans.
In fact, there's a wonderful story told of Schleeman's work at Mycenae.
He first came across two grave circles, and within these grave circles he was able to
find a number of shaft graves that had been dug down through the soil and into the rock.
At the bottom of one of these, having excavated all the material above, he came down upon
what he claimed to be the remains of one of Homer's Achaean kings.
Now, of course, the great king who ruled at Mycenae in Homer's poems is Agamemnon.
When Schleeman got to the bottom of this shaft grave, he came upon a gold mask, a death mask
which had been placed over the ancient king.
And according to Schleeman and a telegram that he later sent, when he lifted the gold
faceplate off for a second, he saw the face of Agamemnon.
It's a wonderful story, and in a way it sums up everything that is both wonderful and terrible
about Schleeman.
That is to say, his flair for the dramatic, his understanding of what would excite his
audience made archaeology internationally famous and the culture of the Greeks internationally
famous, and yet there is always a question of how much was fabricated by this very gifted
storyteller.
And I don't mean Homer, I mean Schleeman.
Now, subsequent work carried on at Mycenae by generations of British, Greek and American
archaeologists.
Subsequent work has added more nuance to the story of what Schleeman originally found.
And we now know that the civilization which he uncovered in the shaft graves was in fact
a civilization flourishing around 16 and 1500 BC, some three to four hundred years earlier
than the supposed date of the Trojan War which Schleeman thought that he was uncovering
archaeologically.
So in fact he was down even below the levels of Agamemnon or Priam and excavating something
earlier, a Bronze Age culture located in the mainland of Greece that was already reaching
a peak of wealth and power after 1600 BC.
The grave goods that came from the shaft graves are extraordinarily rich and they justify the
label that Homer gave to Mycenae which is Mycenae rich in gold.
They also create a problem for us because Greece is not rich in gold and the question
arises where did this material wealth come from?
