Unfortunately, in a way that we know can happen from events this last summer when a tsunami
hit the north coast of New Guinea and where villages were wiped out by exactly such a
dramatic action.
So we have this volcanic evidence from Thera.
We have what might have been evidence of its effect on Crete itself supporting this.
And then there is a third piece of evidence that is sometimes reduced to support this
very dramatic explanation for the collapse of Minoan Crete.
And once again we go back to the realm of Greek mythology.
We've already talked about Theseus and the Minotaur as possibly a folk memory and myth
based on the idea of a Mycenaean invasion overthrowing Minoan power.
Well there are other stories in Greek myth also about the dramatic cataclysmic end of
the Great Civilization and I'm referring of course to the stories of Atlantis found
in Plato's Crito and Timeus.
Now these stories written down by Plato early in the 4th century are obviously written long
after the volcanic explosion and long after the Bronze Age but many people have suggested
they have within them the kernel, the seed of an actual memory of some extraordinary
cataclysm.
And remember that according to Plato this wonderful society of Atlantis was wiped out
suddenly and sank into the ocean.
It's very tempting to try to make both the archaeology and the myth correspond in ways
that we've already been doing in the last couple of lectures.
Although the volcanic theory is extremely romantic and very attractive it's wrong and
there are a number of very solid reasons for dismissing it as the primary explanation
for the collapse of Minoan power on Crete.
The first is that in recent years our scientific understanding of the eruption that took place
at Thera has increased enormously as we've been able to use core samples taken from the
Arctic Circle and to use core samples taken from the floor of the Mediterranean and to
examine tree ring evidence of all these areas to give a much more reliable date for the
eruption of Thera.
The eruption took place close to 1600 BC and as we know the palaces on Crete were still
quite happily functioning in 1600 BC and continued to do so down at least until 1450, 150 years
later.
So it is simply incorrect to suppose that when Thera blew up overnight or even very
soon after Cretan civilization came to an abrupt end, it didn't.
This scientific evidence corroborates some pottery evidence which has been traditionally
used to try to understand the relationship between Thera and Crete more closely.
We know that both on Crete and in Thera the same types of pottery were being used.
However, on Minoan Crete one of the last forms of pottery that we get is known as Maritime
style.
It's a, excuse me, marine style, I'm misreading that.
Marine style pottery of course has on it motifs borrowed from the sea, the place where the
Minoans were trading, they put squid and they put dolphins and so forth on their vessels.
This type of pottery is not found on Thera and we have to explain that gap and the most
logical explanation is that Thera blew up and after it blew up then the Cretans back
on Crete devised their marine style pottery.
So that would be concrete evidence in the pottery record that Crete was not wiped out
by the Thera explosion and rather continued to exist for some time afterwards.
And there is a third body of evidence and I'm very pleased to say this is quite current
archaeological evidence of the last 10 years or so.
Excavations by Temple University and University of Pennsylvania at sites on the coast of North
Eastern Crete at Psyra and Moclos have brought to light the ash layer that we associate
with that great cloud of ash coming from Thera.
And what we find on that ash layer that is to say after it's been deposited is fresh
building.
In other words the people in North Eastern Crete who were closest to Thera 200 miles
away from it were not so completely overwhelmed that they were killed outright as for example
say the people of Pompeii and Herculaneum.
Rather they lived long enough to go back and clean up their houses and then build new ones
on top of the debris left by this Thera explosion.
So I think we can fairly emphatically say that the explosion though a romantic story
will not explain the collapse of Crete and power.
