In, for instance, the part of the inferno which is given over to lust and the sexual
pleasure, the way in which Dante envisions this as being punished, Dante envisions it
as being punished near the top of hell, that is, it's the least bad sin if lust is up here
and various forms of betrayal and fraud are at the very bottom.
But what Dante the poet envisions that the lustful souls have to do is that he envisions
them as like very flighty birds being blown around constantly in a maelstrom and that
they're giving over to pleasure and giving over to pleasure entirely, never let them
put their feet on the ground at all for any kind of genuine commitment.
So too I think the poet Dante is reflecting upon his own actual experience of disordered
love early in his life, the inability to make the kind of commitment he needed to make.
When Dante finally gets all the way up the mountain of purgatory at the end of the second
part of the divine comedy, likewise the thing that's least bad in purgatory is lust, whereas
there have been other kinds of sin which have been much heavier therapeutic punishments.
But at that point he envisions the only place where he envisions fire occurring in purgatory,
very very infrequent in hell, but he envisions fire and he finds that he must go through
it, that he must himself embrace it because of the warmth and the excitement and the fascination,
but he must let it purify him so that his loves will now be well ordered and not badly
ordered.
It's not that the loves have to be knocked out, it's that the loves have to be well used
and well ordered so that they are appropriately directed with the appropriate kind of commitments
to true and genuine goods.
Well in both of these instances I think we have a strong sense of how pleasure needs
to be well trained.
By contrast I think you see in some other popular modern novels ways in which there
is a serious anti-aristatelian point of view, ways in which there is a sense, if I understand
the authors rightly, of how seriously they disagreed with Aristotle in their cultivation
of pleasure.
I think of something like Aldous Huxley's Brave New World.
It's one of those novels which I think is extremely exciting to adolescents because
it envisions such a radical new order and yet what they have in Brave New World is the
cultivation of a utilitarian, hedonist universe in which everything is established and set
up so as progressively to maximize the pleasures, so as progressively to make more sophisticated
the use of the reason as an instrument in gaining certain types of pleasures.
But the result of course is a society in which freedom is non-existent, in which there is
no possibility of genuine self-sacrifice for a good higher than oneself, but rather the
reduction of the entire ethos of the community toward more and more complicated patterns
of using the reason with great sophistication merely for the sake of open hedonism.
You find in a particular novel like that, a viewpoint I think exactly opposite to Aristotle's
and yet perhaps a kind of a backhanded compliment.
Part of the literary conceit of Aldous Huxley in Brave New World is how people could never
be brought to this merely by theoretical discussion, merely by lecture or conversation, but how
they would need to be habituated into it from the earliest period.
And so much of the novel is set in showing how to indoctrinate a whole society precisely
by cultivating from the very beginning a delight in certain kind of pleasures and a
reinforcement of certain pains and disfavors and shames with other kinds of pleasures.
Even though Huxley so severely disagrees with Aristotle, I think about what the nature
of real virtue or real community is, you have there a backhanded compliment in that Huxley
readily admits and shows by his literary craft precisely this point that Aristotle
is trying to make in service of another vision of what the common good is about the need
for habituation in the pleasures and the possibility of recovery even for those whose loves have
been disordered and disaffected.
It will be a very slow process because these things go so deep and begin so early and yet
ultimately happiness very much depends upon ordering our loves rightly and having an appropriate
sense of the place of pleasure cultivated after the right ends.
It will be to that topic that we turn in the next lecture when we consider the other part
of Aristotle's book 10, His Deliberations on the Nature of Happiness.
