What we've got, I think, at Delphi and Olympia are some of the tensions that we're seeing
expressed in the 8th century world. These Pan-Hellenic contests are what allow the archaic Greeks,
the Greeks of the 8th century and on, to define themselves as a nation. They provide them
with a cultural context which acknowledges separate units across the Greek world, but
also provides them with participation in a competition that is only open to the Greeks.
This is an important point. At one point, later on around the beginning of the 5th century,
a Macedonian king applied to take part in the Olympic Games and he was originally rebuffed.
He was rebuffed on the grounds that he wasn't a Greek. He then returned and provided an elaborate
genealogy that outlined his family's history and he attempted to prove that his far-distant
ancestors had come to Macedon from Greece so that in that respect he was Greek. And as
a result of that, he was allowed then to compete at the Olympic Games. So it was vitally important
that you prove yourself to be a Greek in order to be included in the Games and then by participating
in the Games, you further demonstrated your Greek-ness. The people who deliberated on this,
the people who decided whether you or you or you or you was a Greek, were known as the
Helanodikai and their name means the judges of the Greeks. So inclusion in the Games actually
affirms that you are a Greek. What this, I think, draws our attention to is that in
the 8th century there was some concern with defining exactly who was and who wasn't a
Greek and deciding what it meant to be a Greek. And this issue of ethnic identity, an issue
which remains an interesting one in the modern world as well, particularly in societies like
the United States which have such diverse populations, the Greeks were thinking about
this same sort of issue. And in Herodotus, we get a sense of what the Greek definition
of Greek-ness is. Herodotus says that those are Greeks who share a common blood, a common
language, a common religion and common customs. Now common blood should mean that people are
actually born Greek because their parents were Greek. So this is a kind of a biological
definition of being a Greek. But notice some of the other definitions there as well. Greek
language. Well, presumably anyone can learn Greek so that that seems to open the door
of the idea that there may be a cultural definition of Greek-ness. Religion and customs, similarly.
In other words, to be a Greek it's not enough to say that your parents are Greek and that
your blood is Greek. You have to perform and live and act like a Greek. And for the Greeks
that essentially means competition. Now this idea of competition is not only key to Greek
culture, it is probably also the key to what is both best and worst about their culture.
Let me try and explain this. A couple of years ago a colleague of mine who teaches Japanese
history approached me and asked me to join him teaching a class that would compare the
classical Greeks and medieval Japan, the classical period of Japanese culture. And I liked the
idea of a comparative approach and he then sort of threw me for a loop by asking me if
you had to summarise the Greeks in a single line, if there were one poetic line that was
somehow to get to the very core of Greek culture, what would it be? That's a tall order. But
after some thought, the line that did occur to me was a line that comes from Hesiod, Holmes
Contemporary in the late 8th century, round the time that these changes are going on that
we've been talking about. And in one of his poems Hesiod says, all abroad the earth there
is not one but rather two kinds of competition, of strife. The Greek word for it is eris.
And he further goes on to define these and to say the first of these is the spirit of
strife or competition that leads you to emulate your neighbour and his success. So for example
it's mid winter and you think you'll just sit cosily by the fire but you look out and
you see there goes your neighbour off to the barn to make some baskets so that when spring
time comes he'll be ready to go out into the fields and do more work. Whereas you then
will have to spend your spring time doing the work you should have done in winter. Hesiod
says if you decide to copy your neighbour and to do the same sort of thing so that you
will be as successful as he is, then that is a good kind of strife or competition.
The bad kind of strife or competition he says is that which leads you to envy of your neighbour.
I was made to think of this some years ago when a friend told me that he had introduced
a new technique for planting his vines in Greece only to find towards the end of the
season when his clusters were producing much fuller grapes than those of any of his neighbours.
He came to the field one morning and found that all of his vines had been cut down.
