He built a fountain house down in the Agora.
That may not seem like anything particularly significant to us,
but for an ancient community, as it is growing larger and larger,
the water supply, in fact, is a quite important issue.
And we get some measure of the importance of this
by the fact that many vases from that century in this period
show this very fountain house.
In other words, it had an impact on people.
They thought this man is actually benefiting downtown Athens.
I'm sure that the Athenian women who had to find water every day
and bring it back to their houses, there was no running water,
were very thankful that persistratus had built this new fountain house
in the Agora.
He started on an ambitious new temple to Olympian Zeus.
If you've been to Greece, you may have seen
that there are a certain number of buildings that are unfinished.
Well, the temple of Olympian Zeus, which was started in the 6th century BC,
was still unfinished in the 2nd century AD,
when a Roman emperor tried to finish it off.
Alas, it is still unfinished to this day.
Nevertheless, he started on that project.
He made loans to the poor at a low rate of interest
to try and encourage the growth of the economy.
And at the same time, like any good government official,
if he gives with one hand, he takes away with the other,
he also made sure that people were paying a 10% tax on produce.
Now, you may hear the word tax and your blood will curdle.
Taxes are not very popular in this country or anywhere else for that matter.
But think about it for a moment.
Taxes are actually important for one thing.
If you have no taxes, you have no state
because the state to exist must have revenues
and its revenues are only raised from taxes.
So by creating a regular system of taxation on produce,
he was giving the Athenian state a solid source of financial revenue.
In fact, he was probably responsible
for an extraordinary growth in the revenues of Athens
because not only did he introduce this tax,
he also vastly expanded the mining operations
taking place on the soil of Athens in southern Attica,
down at a place called Laurion,
where there was a very rich vein of silver,
which the Athenians now began to mint vigorously,
to mine and then mint vigorously.
And also in Thrace, where his own wealth had accumulated,
many Athenians moved into the area,
many Athenians acquired property in the area,
and they did so for its natural resources,
particularly for the precious metals that were to be found there.
The net effect of these changes,
particularly the growth in the mining of silver,
was to make Athens the centre of a trading and mercantile realm
that encompassed the Aegean.
It's at this time that Athenian coinage will turn up
in excavations around not just Athens,
but around the entire Aegean.
People are using Athenian coinage and the wealth of Athens
as the commodity for the trade of the Aegean.
In all these ways then,
he contributed to the expansion of Athens
and to the stability and harmony of Athens in the 6th century.
He was also responsible for quite an astonishing cultural transformation,
which I think was to have deep effect on the Athenians.
And I want to talk about some of the details of that for a moment.
The Athenian civic year was tied to the Athenian agricultural year
and to the Athenian religious year.
Festivals, harvest events and so forth were all tied together.
And part of this calendar was a set of festivals,
including the Dionysia and the Pan Athenia.
At the festival in honour of Dionysus,
dramatic contests would take place,
musical contests as well,
and at the Pan Athenia, similar contests would take place
in honour of Athena.
The very title of the Pan Athenia
gives you a conception of what its significance is.
It is for all Athens, the Pan Athenia Festival.
These festivals were greatly expanded
under the influence of Posistratus and his sons.
And what happened as a result was that festivals
which originally had been small or insignificant local festivals
under the Posistratus became major athletic and cultural contests
that drew competitors and contestants from all over the Greek world.
In many respects, the Pan Athenia,
in terms of its status, its prestige, its importance,
the wealth that it gave to winners as well,
was really equivalent in status to a Pan Hellenic Festival.
And you'll remember that we've already talked about
the significance of those festivals
for bringing together all of the Greeks.
Under Posistratus, an Athenian festival
now assumed that status as well,
bringing together Greeks from all over
to compete athletically and culturally.
