Lecture 11, The Origins of Democracy
Welcome back to this 11th lecture in a series on ancient Greek civilization.
Today we're going to be looking more closely at the origins of democracy.
In the last two lectures we've dealt with two of the reformers and statesmen of the 6th century
who had an enormous impact on the development of democracy in ancient Athens.
We first looked at Solon, whose archonship in 594 BC
saw a series of reforms that had a long-reaching effect on Athenian and Greek life.
I pointed out that he had been elected as an economic reformer
and that in the Scyzac Theia, or the Shaking Off of Dets, Shaking Off of Burdens,
he had instituted a series of economic reforms
and pointed out that he also had instituted constitutional reforms
by creating four census classes by which the Athenian state would now be organized,
which would give people access to various levels of participation in government.
But we did notice that in the reforms of Solon, the short-term effect was not particularly beneficial
because Athens remained mired in stasis, this rivalry and conflict
between factions that we've seen occurring in Greek history.
We saw then that the second great figure of the 6th century was Posistratus
and though he was not a constitutional reformer, in fact he was quite the opposite
in that he was in fact a tyrant who had seized power illegally,
we saw that nevertheless he had an immense impact on the development of Athens,
primarily by helping to more clearly articulate a sense of Athenian identity,
of Athenian commonality, if you will.
We saw this through the reforms that he had instituted economically
that had led to a much greater degree of prosperity in Athens.
We saw a cultural transformation of Athens
so that what in the 560s had been a city-state afflicted by stasis
and the conflict of various rival groups by the end of the decade
was now proclaiming itself and seeing itself as one of the most powerful Greek city-states,
not only of the mainland but also of the entire Aegean basin.
Now, if we turn then to the end of the tyranny and see what follows from here
we find something extremely interesting
because in the century or so after tyranny collapsed at Athens
the Athenians in their newly established democracy
tried to suggest to themselves that in fact the tyranny had been a terrible period
and that most of them had opposed it all along.
What we're going to find in the period after the end of the tyranny in Athens
is that there is a great deal of imaginative reconstruction
of what went on in the period before.
Let me illustrate that with a concrete example that's worth knowing about.
The popular tradition in Athens in the 5th century
was that two Athenian aristocrats had slain the tyrant
and had set Athens on the road towards democracy.
In fact, this was recalled even in a drinking song
that Athenian men would sing while they were drinking
at their evening dinner parties.
And in this song one of the singers holds up his cup and says,
I toast harmonious and aristogaitan who slew the tyrants
and made Athens a place of equal law.
Isonomous, Athens a place of equal law.
And yet that memory is completely wrong.
The tyranny did not collapse with the slaughter of Hipparchus in 514.
It actually continued for another four years.
Now before we go on, I don't want to simply point out
a misconception in the minds of the Athenians
but try to explain how that could come about
and what use it served.
And for that I need to explain the story of harmonious and aristogaitan
a little bit more fully.
This drinking song that I've referred to recalls the death of Hipparchus
and the circumstances of that death are as follows.
In 514, Hipparchus, the youngest son of the tyrant Posistratus, by now dead,
had fallen in love with a young Athenian aristocrat
by the name of Aristogaitan.
He had made advances towards Aristogaitan but he was rebuffed.
Aristogaitan was already in a relationship with another older Athenian man named Harmonius.
