Having been rebuffed, Hipparchus decided to take vengeance.
The way he did this was by having dismissed from an important parade in Athens, the Panathenaic Festival,
the sister of Arista Guyton, who had been scheduled to carry a basket
and to have an important role in this ceremony in honour of Athena.
Faced with this slight, Arista Guyton and Hermodius, his older lover,
came to the Panathenaic procession armed
and coming upon Hipparchus at one end of the procession on the outskirts of Athens
as he was preparing the various participants to begin the procession into town,
they slew the tyrant.
They were quickly caught and killed
and as we know, Hippius continued to rule for another four years afterwards.
But there was something about this story that caught the imagination of the Athenians
and I think what it unfortunately represents is that a good sex scandal
will probably last a lot longer in people's imagination than solid history.
People were quite happily believing 50 years after the event that the tyranny had ended on that day
when in fact all the solid evidence was that it had continued for at least another four years.
Now, this myth-making about the end of the tyranny is actually quite an important point.
Let me illustrate further.
Most of the leading families of Athens at later times
maintained that during the tyranny they had remained opposed to the tyrants
and one leading family, the family of the Alchmionids,
one of the most powerful families in Athenian history,
even went so far as to claim that during all the years of the tyranny
they had withdrawn voluntarily from Athens.
They would not live in the city while it was being ruled by the tyrant,
the persistratus and his sons.
Now, we had no reason to disbelieve that until 1939
when an American archaeologist and excavator and epigrapher
by the name of Benjamin Merritt
came upon a very small piece of marble in the Athenian agorah
which he was able to demonstrate was in fact a list of the archons of the late 6th century
and there, smack bang in the middle of the 520s
at the very height of the persistrated tyranny
was the name of one of the clan leaders of the Alchmionids,
the family that had supposedly been in voluntary exile the whole time.
This was good, solid, concrete, or I should probably say marble, proof
that the whole tradition that the Alchmionids had been out of Athens
during the tyranny in heroic exile was in fact not true
and was a later construct.
So it's no wonder then that the Athenians had such mixed ideas
and conflicting beliefs about the tyranny.
I've made the argument in fact that the tyranny was quite a good period
as far as the Athenians were concerned
and that it was a period of great prosperity.
But after the death of Hipparchus,
the remaining son of Persistratus, Hippias,
did become more tyrannical, more autocratic in his rule
and as a result it was in that final four years
that resistance to the tyranny began to solidify
and in fact then in 510 at the bidding of the Delphic Oracle,
once again we see the importance of Delphi
in helping to shape the affairs of the Greeks,
the Spartans marched in to Athens
and helped to expel Hippias the tyrant.
So we face an absolutely critical moment here
in the history of Athens.
What will happen now at this moment when in 510,
after half a century,
the Athenians finally find themselves once again liberated
and in control of their own future,
free to conduct their own affairs?
Well the answer depressingly is they immediately slipped back
into the same pattern of stasis and conflict
that they had been suffering throughout the entire century.
In this return to factional strife,
two new leaders emerged as the most powerful
in Athenian politics in 510,
Isagoras and Cleisthenes.
And as tension increased between the two clans,
the two factions,
Isagoras began calling for the expulsion of Cleisthenes
and his Alchemyonid clansmen
on the grounds that they were under a curse
from the god for a much earlier infraction
long forgotten by most other people.
Isagoras went so far as to call upon the Spartans
to assist him.
It had worked once, let's try it again.
And at this moment, around 510,
when Isagoras called upon the Spartans to assist him,
we find an event which I think marks
an extraordinarily significant step forward for the Athenians.
Remember the three attempts by Posistratus
to establish his tyranny,
where we'd seen how weak the central authority of Athens was
and how easily he had established himself.
On this occasion, now 60 years later,
50 years later, when the Spartans were called in,
the Athenians rose up against them
and resisted this invasion by the Spartans
and resisted having their affairs dictated for them
by this exterior power.
The Spartan force, sent under King Cleomenes,
was actually bottled up on the Acropolis
and was forced to agree to a treaty
whereby it would withdraw from Athens
and with them went into exile Isagoras.
Cleisthenes Triumphant.
