Each of these various thirds was itself made up of smaller units within its territory known as deems.
These deems might be villages, they might be large towns, they varied in size, from small villages to very large municipalities.
And there is a total of 140 of these.
The actual number of deems in each third varies, but the idea seems to have been to have something like an equal population in each of the thirds by clustering together different deems.
I'll talk about the significance of this and what it means in a moment, but let me go forward for a moment and talk about more of the reforms of Kleisthenes.
He also created a new council of 500.
This council of 500 was there to supervise the work of the assembly to draw up its agenda to make recommendations.
It played a very important role in the day-to-day running of the democracy.
This council of 500 was a new creation and its creation depends upon the ten tribes.
Why?
Because the ten tribes each contributed a contingent of 50 men to the council.
So that we say a council of 500, but a slightly more accurate description would be a council of ten times 50.
Ten tribal units of 50 men.
The Athenian civic year was divided into ten months, and for one month of the year, one of these groups of 50 would be serving as the council, taking care of the affairs of the democracy.
How was this council selected?
Well, it was selected by giving each of the deems a quota, saying to each of the deems, you must produce a certain number of councillors every year.
So the deems elect their councillors, these are then drawn together into the treatise and into the tribe, and this contingent of 50 serves for one month of the Athenian ten month year.
The effect of this system is to create a council which is not dominated by the great aristocratic clan leaders at all, rather it is one that represents a broad cross-section of the Athenian community.
It means, because of this system, that virtually every man is going to serve on the council, because once you've served, then you are not eligible for another ten years.
So every year there are people serving from all over Athens, and then they're knocked out of the pool for the next year, and a fresh batch has to be found.
You see, this system depends upon a principle of the annual rotation of power, new people every year, new people in the magistracies, new people on the council every year.
Furthermore, it relies on this principle, the sharing of power. You don't have a single councillor, but you rather have 50 of them from a tribe, and then they move on quickly into a place by another 50.
So by this rotation and by the sharing of power, you manage to spread the power more evenly through all of Athens.
And for some of these positions, rather than voting for people, for nominated candidates, you simply take those who are eligible and you put their names into a hat and pull out the winners.
This is election by sortition, by lot, rather than election.
What does this all mean, all put together?
It means we've had a sudden overhaul of the Athenian political system.
And what we've had put into place very quickly and very firmly is a set of principles of sortition, rotation, annuality, power sharing, all of which are designed to spread power through as many sectors of Athenian society as possible.
This breaks the power of the old clan leaders and the old aristocrats who have been running the affairs of Athens for the last century.
Now, the program that I've just outlined sounds very complicated. The simple reason for that is, it is very complicated.
It's extraordinarily complicated and for such a complex system to be initiated at a single moment in history, not to develop over years, but to be put into place at one moment, has led historians to ask what on earth was Klysteny's thinking?
What is the planning that lies behind this?
And there have been actually very conflicting interpretations of the Klystenic reforms and what I want to do now is to give you those three interpretations and tell you what I think is perhaps the correct one.
