It's quite clear that the victory of the Greeks over the Persians resulted in
their more clearly articulating in their own minds the idea of what freedom
entailed. And so the characteristic notion of Greek freedom that takes root at
this time is that it is the freedom of a community to exist autonomously, free of
the influence of an outside power. And this remained a powerful idea
throughout the rest of Greek history and remains a powerful idea and an
interpretation of freedom even today. This victory of the Greeks and the
clearest statement of a Greek identity entailed a kind of deliberate
misunderstanding of the Persians. But it's not hard to understand how this could
come about. The Persians were, as we've seen, in fact, a military elite that
ruled militaristically over a large empire and yet in the eyes of the Greeks
the fact that they'd been defeated meant that somehow they were less than full
men, that they were actually effeminate. This is far from the real truth but it is
the way that the Greeks chose to think about the Persians. And various markers
were used to show this so that when the Greeks exercised they exercised
heroically in the nude. Their statues show athletes heroically nude. Persians, on
the other hand, wore trousers, something extremely suspect and effeminate,
something that suggested the weakness and the softness of Eastern life. When
finds after this time now much more clearly articulated ideas of the
superiority of the Greeks, of a kind of ethnic and racial superiority, which one
doesn't find in earlier writings about the Greeks or about other peoples. In the
writings of the Hippocratic corpus, the medical writers of the 5th century
shortly after these events, one finds the writers saying that the Greeks are
fortunate because they live in the most moderate climate but in the softer parts
of Asia the climate then creates softer people. Now these pernicious ideas I
think have taken root and remain unfortunately a kind of racist undercurrent
in the way that we think about the West and the East. Edith Hall has used the
term inventing the barbarian to talk about the way in which from this time
the Greeks no longer think of barbaros merely to mean someone who speaks a
language that I don't understand, but someone who is actually inferior,
whose culture can be measured next to mine and be found wanting. A very clear
statement of this I think comes in a play written very shortly after these
events and I want to talk about its ancient reception and its modern
reception. The play is the Persi, the Persians, written by Escalus and first
enacted, first put on the stage in 472 BC and interestingly the producer of that
first performance was Pericles, a young Athenian statesman who would become
even more notable later in the century. Now this play is an interesting play
because it is one of the few early Greek plays that actually deals with
relatively contemporary events. The Greeks tended to put on the stage,
stories drawn from their mythology, stories of Oedipus and his incest,
the story of Clithomnestra's murder of Agamemnon, a Homeric story. But all of a
sudden, now in the aftermath of the Persian War, the Athenians have developed
a kind of confidence that says the events of our own immediate past are as
important, as resonant, as significant, as the great events of Homer and myth.
That play, the Persi, was produced more recently, some 20 years ago, at Epidaeus,
one of the best preserved and most magnificent of the Greek theaters. And an
American scholar who was present at the time of this production recounts an
episode, an anecdote, that I think is quite revealing. At one point in the play,
a messenger arrives from the defeated Salamis to tell Atossa, the Queen Mother,
the story of her son's disaster. And in interviewing the messenger, Atossa says
who rules these men, who do they call king, meaning the Athenians, to which the
messenger replies, they call no man king, they are a free people. When this play
was produced in the 70s, at the moment that the messenger uttered that line,
the audience erupted into such applause that the play stopped for five minutes.
And at the end of the applause, the audience insisted that he go back and
start the scene from the beginning and do it all over. I'd like you to consider
what it must have been like to have been in the audience in 472. Witnessing a play
about events of only less than a decade earlier, written by a man whose family had
been involved in the Persian wars, we the audience had been there. And now we were
witnessing a play not dealing with myth, but dealing with our victory, our victory
over the Persians, the victory that made possible the culture of classical Greece.
