But in this closed Spartan society that we've talked about in an earlier lecture, all of
a sudden there were now hundreds of Athenians roaming around, and these Athenians were
talking about democracy, and they were talking about power and the navy, and these notions
it was felt implied a threat, they constituted a real threat, in other words, to the orderliness
of Spartan society.
So Caimon and his forces were politely asked to leave in order to safeguard Spartans from
the threat of revolution, and in 461 we can mark the Athenian response to those events,
because in that year Caimon was ostracised, expelled from Athens for ten years.
Now that event, of course, only makes sense if there had been a popular backlash against
Caimon in Athens.
How outrageous, many Athenians must have been saying, who do those Spartans think they
are?
We offer them help, and they send us packing.
Well, this is what we think of the Spartans, Caimon on your horse and out of town.
The expulsion of Caimon in 461 made possible the emergence of a new leader in the Athenian
democracy, and this new leader, Pericles, would follow a very different course of action.
Now like Caimon, Pericles was of one of the old aristocratic families, so he's not a
demagogue in the sense of being a man from poor or lower class origins whipping up the
Athenians.
He comes from the same political class, if you will, of the old aristocracy, but he was
a younger man, and fairly clearly to him the major threat came not from Persia, but rather
from Sparta, the other Greeks, the Greeks who increasingly were coming to seem to be
ideologically different from and the opposite to the Athenians.
He sought to contain not Persian influence primarily, but Spartan influence, and he did
so by forming a series of alliances with other Greek states in the central part of Greece,
particularly in Biosha and in Fokus, the territory around Delphi, and the result of the alliance
between the central Greek states and the Athenians, at a time when Sparta felt that
it was really the dominant power of the mainland, was a war between the Spartans and the Athenians,
conducted sporadically over the course of 15 years from 460 to 446 BC, often known to
historians as the First Peloponnesian War.
This was a time when the Athenians were rethinking their place in the world.
Fairly clearly it was not just the Persians that they had to be concerned about, but the
Spartans as well, and I think a signal of this comes in the fact that it is during this
time that, for example, under Pericles' leadership the Athenians complete the building of their
long walls, the six-mile-long pair of walls that link the downtown city of Athens with
the port at the Piraeus, then linked to the walls running around the Piraeus.
What these long walls do is make possible thinking about Athens as a city that can withstand
siege permanently as long as it is linked to its port and as long as its boats can come
in and out.
That, of course, is going to be an important policy advocated by Pericles once the Peloponnesian
War breaks out.
It would be wrong, however, for me to suggest that there had been a simple and diametric
shift, no longer concerned with the Persians, only concerned with the Spartans.
In fact, at the same time the Athenians were still involved in activities that brought
them into conflict with Persia.
Between 460 and 454 the Athenians participated in an expedition to Egypt where they offered
support to an uprising of the Egyptian Inaros against the Persians.
Unfortunately, however, that expedition ended in complete disaster in 454 with the destruction
of the Athenian fleet in the Delta of the Nile.
Now, this defeat in 454 and the catastrophic end of this expedition expedition, this Egyptian
expedition, I think was to have a great impact in Athens and around the rest of the Aegean.
We find very shortly after this revolts, springing up again amongst the allied states
of the Dealian League, particularly in 554 when Eritrea and Miletus, two important towns
on the coast of Asia Minor, went into revolt from the Athenians.
This probably was occasioned by a fear that the Athenians had been so crippled that they
would not be able to withstand a fresh Persian incursion into the Aegean.
This fear probably also led to a symbolic action of around this time, 454, but a symbolic
action of enormous importance because at around this time the treasury of the Dealian League,
the war chest of this alliance was moved from the island of Dealos and deposited in Athens.
