Lecture 16 Sacrifice and Greek Religion
In our last lecture on Greek civilization, we looked at the democracy and I spent a great
deal of time looking at the organs of the democracy in some detail.
The reason for this was that I wanted to try to explore what the principles were that underlay
that system and I think we were able to see that the idea of collegiality, of the rotation
of office, of the annual holding of office were all important principles that were built
into the system so that power was spread as evenly as possible through as many sectors
of Athenian society.
So that if we then ask the further question, how do we judge this democracy in relation
to other systems, while it's true that it was an exclusive system, it was a club for
Athenian citizen males and excluded women, slaves, foreigners and so forth, nevertheless
it still strikes me as an impressive achievement.
It is to the Greeks that we in the West owe the notion of isonomia, equality before the
law, that is a fundamental democratic principle, if you don't believe that everyone is equal
before the law, it's very difficult to articulate an idea of democracy.
The Athenians also practice the regular scrutiny of their officials, both before they took
office and at the end of the year of office and this must surely have cut down on a great
deal of what otherwise would have been speculation and abuse of the system.
The Athenians in fact pioneered the idea that it was the function of government to guarantee
justice through a fair legislative system in which the laws were known and agreed upon
by the whole population in which juries were drawn from the entire population, even in
the marketplace and in economic affairs, their officials were there to make sure that fairness
prevailed.
So I would suggest that in many respects it was quite a remarkable accomplishment and
one to which we owe a great deal still today, one certainly that we can admire from the
distance of 2,500 years later.
We've looked so far in our survey of the 5th century at Athens as a democracy, we have
looked at Athens as an imperial power, we have looked at Athens as the victor in the
Persian wars.
Today I want to turn my attention to another aspect of life in ancient Athens and one that
is absolutely critical to our understanding of the Greeks and particularly the Athenians
and that is to the issue of sacrifice and Greek religion.
The belief systems and the ideas, the practices of the Greeks reveal a great deal of difference
between them and us and so harking back to a theme that I introduced early on in the
lectures, this is going to be an important lecture for us to try and grasp an essential
difference between the Greeks and then to see whether there is some similarity as well
between their concept and practice of religion and our own.
If we begin at the beginning, that is to say cosmology, questions of where the gods came
from and who the gods are, the belief system of the Greeks, what we find already is that
there is a fundamental difference between the Greeks and modern society.
Hesiod writes about the origins of the gods but his stories are not universally accepted
by all the Greeks and what is perhaps more important, they are even competing stories
about the origins of various gods.
Let me give you an example to illustrate this.
One of the stories concerning the goddess Aphrodite was that she had been born of the
union of Zeus, the father of the gods and a nymph, Dionii.
Now this idea of a divine birth thanks to Zeus and some divine or semi-divine consort
of his is of course very popular with the Greeks, there are many gods and goddesses that
come into existence precisely that way.
But interestingly the Greeks had a whole second story about the origins of Aphrodite
that brought no relationship at all to the story of Zeus and Dionii.
According to this other version of the birth of Aphrodite which we read about in Hesiod's
Theogony, in the second generation of the gods, Kronos cuts off the genitals of his
father Uronos and holds them into the sea.
And when those genitals wash up on shore, the foam made up of these severed organ and
the blood and semen and the seafoam itself at the edge of the sea gives rise to, it is
the birth of Aphrodite out of the foam and the Greeks etymologized this story by claiming
that Aphrodite came from the term aphros which means foam.
