Lecture 17 – Theatre and the Competition of Art
In our previous lectures on Greek civilization, we've been looking at Athenian society in
the 5th century and we've been noticing the way in which many of the institutions
of Athenian life, whether in politics or in religion, in cultic matters or whatever,
reinforce the idea of a democracy, a community made up of equal citizens.
We've seen the way in which the same units that serve in the Athenian army may be sitting
in the Athenian assembly side by side, sacrificing also together as their local communities
hold their festivals in honour of the gods.
There is another institution which also plays a very important role in tying the Athenians
together as a community, and it is the institution which has produced those works which are most
synonymous with the genius of classical Greece, I'm talking of course about tragedy and drama.
It is in the tragedies written in the 5th century and we'll also see in some of the
comedies as well that we have the clearest articulation of a genius that the Greeks have
as a result of the confidence of the 5th century, a genius for exploring human nature, of laying
bare the soul of human beings relentlessly and ruthlessly on the stage.
And yet, ironically, the plays themselves are quite simple in their structure and organisation.
So we are faced with an interesting conundrum, a cultural form which is extremely complex,
extremely challenging, and yet one which in other ways is also very straightforward and
simple.
And I think this leaves us with a question, is it possible for us today in the 20th century
to reclaim the kind of experience that the Athenians had in the 5th century as they watched
these plays, watching them as a city, as a community, and watching these plays that
dealt ruthlessly and relentlessly with human passions, murder, incest and so forth.
What will emerge I think from this investigation is that drama, tragedy in particular, and
comedy also expresses the egalitarian spirit of Athens.
It is a democratic art form.
Many of you may have been to Epidaurus.
It's a place we were talking about in the last lecture because I had occasion to mention
the sanctuary of Asclepius and the many inscriptions from there that attest to the power of the
God.
But most people who go to Epidaurus today are not going there to visit the God for a cure,
but rather to see one of the most magnificent examples of Greek theatres ever built.
If you go there now and see the plays of Asclepius and Sophocles and Euripides that
are still put on every year, can you reclaim that experience of the Greeks of the 5th century?
It's an interesting question.
Structurally, the plays themselves are very, very straightforward.
They grow out of an earlier form popular in the 6th century called the dithyram.
The dithyram is, I suppose, the nearest analogy that I can think for today would be of the
glee clubs that you see on campuses where a choir of boys or girls will sing often in
response to or in harmony with a single voice.
And choirs in the 6th century seem to have operated the same way, both boys and girls,
with their single singers either answering them or singing alone, usually singing hymns
in honor of the God Dionysus.
Now from that very simple form of a small choir and a single voice, the step that leads
to drama is a very, very simple one.
It is merely the addition of another single voice, so that what you end up with is what
the Greeks would call the protagonist, the first actor, the second actor or the antagonist
and a choir behind.
And in its most fully articulated form, drama, whether in tragedy or in comedy, is basically
that with simply a third actor, three single actors in conjunction with a chorus.
