These heavy robes then limit and disguise the actor.
The practical reason for this, of course, is that you want to have three actors playing all the roles in the performance.
So one actor who plays the king will go off and reappear sometime later as the messenger,
or come back later on as the prophet of Tiresias, or to come back even in a female role, for that matter.
So we have a quality in these performances which is very much unlike the kind of theatrical tradition that we're used to.
It has a quality that I think for want of a better term we can call heuratic.
It's like the robes of priests immobilized, not showing any expression on their face,
and relying only on the quality of their voices, and then the highly ritualized movements,
the dance-like movements of the actors.
If you've ever seen examples of No and Kabuki, the two most popular forms of traditional Japanese theater,
I think there you'll get a much clearer idea of what the performance must have looked like.
That is the aesthetic experience that the Greeks are having.
In that case, what is it that is at the core of these plays?
What is it that is moving the Greeks?
Well, the answer always is poetry, which is lost in translation, as Robert Frost would say.
The Greeks were, in antiquity, a people capable of listening carefully to a range and a variety of meters and rhythms,
very delicately aware of the patterns of language used by the poets to convey certain moods.
The great range of meters in Greek poetry each came with its own particular association,
and it is possible then to read the choral loads, or better still to listen to the choral loads,
as almost tone poems that resonate according to the way the meter works
and the associations that the audience has with those various meters.
Simply speaking, the aesthetic experience here is completely unlike anything that we have,
watching either theater, television, or even going to see a Greek play today.
And so in answer to the question that I posed at the beginning of the lecture,
I would say no, it is frankly impossible to reclaim the aesthetic experience
and to understand how theater would have felt in antiquity.
The nearest that I think we can get to it is in the relatively modern medium of opera.
That's the genre of performance which is somewhat like the ancient,
in that it again relies almost exclusively on the power of the voice,
the word in this case almost entirely sung.
Though again, if you can imagine watching an opera without any of the actors or actresses
expressing emotion in their faces, you would be getting actually closer
to the quality of a Greek performance.
Even the comparison with opera misses something critical about these plays.
In fact, it misses what is absolutely central to the plays,
and that is that theater in the Greek world took place as part of a religious festival.
Now, it was often the case in the past that when students were taught this,
they were told these festivals were religious in nature originally,
but that it is the plays that count and the religious background or context of it is relatively unimportant.
The more we look at the plays now, however, the more we think about this institution
and the role it plays for the Athenians,
the more it seems as if it is absolutely critical in our understanding of them
that we see them as religious events.
For example, think of it in these terms.
We can go to the theater basically any day or night.
We can watch TV any day or night,
but the Greeks could only go to the theater to see these performances
on a couple of days each year when the religious festival was on.
And the whole way in which the society put on these performances
again stresses the competitive nature of Greek culture.
The festival in honor of Dionysus is conducted over three days
and on each of these days, one poet alone is allowed to present his work,
the poet having been selected before the festival.
And that poet in presenting his work on that day
is actually competing with the poets of the second and the third day.
And those are the only poets and the only performances
that will be conducted as part of that festival in honor of Dionysus.
