Welcome back to this, our 19th lecture in this series on Ancient Greek Civilization.
In our last couple of lectures we've been looking at Athenian society in the period
after the Persian wars and I've been trying to describe some of the institutions that
helped to develop the democratic spirit of Athens at that time.
We talked about the organs of the democracy, we talked about the assembly and the council,
the rather peculiar practice of ostracism and we also looked at some of the other institutions
both in Greek religion and also in social life that managed to inculcate this democratic
spirit.
For example, at Greek theatre I noticed the way in which it allowed the community, collectively,
to express many of its anxieties out on the stage to purge them as it were from the community
so that people could be reintegrated once again back into their society to use Aristotle's
term cleansed of their passions and emotions.
This very confident and brilliant Athenian society that took root in the 5th century
was as we've also seen an imperial society.
Athens became the hub of an empire based on a Dealian league, a league which had originally
been formed as an alliance of states to carry on the war against Persia but as we saw had
very quickly turned into an Athenian empire where Athenians by the use of tribute and
by the use of clericies for example had established their authority all over the Aegean.
By the end of the 5th century, at least in the last quarter of the 5th century however,
the growth of Athenian power was checked and it was at the end of the 5th century that
Athens came into conflict with the other great Greek power, that of Sparta.
By the 430s virtually all of the states of the Greek world, the mainland and the Aegean
had become allies of either the Athenians or of the Spartans and the war which would
ensue in the confrontation between these two states.
The Peloponnesian war that lasted from 431 to 404 BC was a war that produced suffering
on a scale that the Greeks had never experienced before in any of their confrontations.
By the time the war was over, Athens had been defeated, a navy had been destroyed, her empire
had been disbanded, the democracy overthrown.
So the Peloponnesian war marks a truly cataclysmic event in the history of Greece.
It marks an abrupt halt to the development of Athenian society and the Athenian democracy
and it represents an epic confrontation between two very different Greek systems, the Athenian
and the Spartan.
So in this lecture and in the next lecture I want to concentrate on the Peloponnesian
war, both dealing with the causes of the war, the course of the war, the result of the war
and to try to see the war as a lens through which we can view some of the developments
that have been affecting the Greeks in the 5th century.
The entire war was witnessed by Thucydides, an Athenian general and an historian, one
of the most important and influential historians ever to have written and so necessarily in
treating the Peloponnesian war we're going to have to look also at the work of this historian
to see how he, an intelligent and thoughtful contemporary, interpreted the events that
he witnessed, events that often he actually participated in as an Athenian general.
So let's go back a little and see the political development of the two major states, Athens
and Sparta, to see how it is that a confrontation could come about resolving all of Greece into
essentially two camps.
Both had been allies of course in the wars against Persia and they very quickly after
that war, as we saw, followed two quite different patterns of development.
Athens, though democratic, was also an imperial power, the navy dominated the Aegean, it ensured
the military dominance of Athens around the Aegean, garrisons were often located in allied
territory and the Athenians exacted tribute from these allies who then became subjects
of an Athenian empire.
As we saw, 700 magistrates were dispatched every year around the Aegean, these were Athenian
citizens who were the front line men of the Athenian empire collecting this tribute and
bringing it back to Athens.
As we saw, there were numerous revolts in the course of the 5th century, but each one
of them put down by the Athenians, often using the very ships that have been paid for by
these allied states, revolts were suppressed and in fact quite often the Athenians then
would seize the land of a territory that had gone into revolt and it would be given over
to Athenians who were sent there not as colonists, not as people who left Athens and became members
of a new society, but as clerics, Athenians transplanted onto another soil but who retained
their Athenian citizenship.
