Now, this is a very key Greek concept, the notion of Eris. Life is a continual struggle.
We saw that in theatre, even in the stage scenes where two actors are facing each other,
this is seen to be an argon, a conflict, when Hecuba and Helen in the Trojan women address
each other. It is as the protagonist and the antagonist, the one and her reverse, arguing
with each other. And the athletic contests, which had done so much to give the Greeks
the ethos, the aristocratic code by which they lived, was of course a code, an athletic
and aristocratic code based on conflict, on competition. Life for the Greeks is a zero
sum game. If I do well, it's because you do badly. In the Platonic definitions that we
have from the 4th century, one of the definitions of goodness that is offered is, doing well
by your friends and doing as much harm as possible to your enemies. This is the Greek
conception of life. Now, we've seen this even in the politics of the Greek world from the
dark ages on, when stasis, internal conflict, often almost to the point of civil war, was
a continual state that led to the rise of tyrannies in various places, and we've also
seen the effect that it had in Sparta in setting them off in a different direction. So conflict,
competition, a rugby principle of life, if you see a head kick it, this is found throughout
every aspect of Greek life. The result in terms of warfare is that the states of the
Greek world are virtually permanently at war with each other. Peace is the exception, not
warfare. At any given time, any given Greek state is likely to be at war with one or
other of its neighbours or some other group, not to mention of course being at war with
itself in an internal civil war stasis. So, first of all, we have to admit that warfare
is endemic. It is not exceptional, but rather is the norm of Greek political life. But the
Peloponnesian war does represent something new, and obviously this will not be a satisfactory
explanation on its own. The Peloponnesian war was a war that would pit all of the Greek
states basically against each other in two great alliances, and so the difference here
is like the difference between the wars in Europe of the 19th century and the First World
War, a war that has ramifications of a much larger scale. Thucydides, who is a contemporary
of these events, clearly tried to understand what it was that lay at the core of this monumental
event. He calls the event the Megistekinesis, the biggest commotion, the biggest upheaval
ever to afflict the Greeks. And his explanation for its cause is that it was the growth of
Athenian power and the fear that it inspired in Sparta. Now, he was a man who'd witnessed
these tensions and the events of the war, so we have to give some weight to that explanation.
But despite the credibility that Thucydides has as a contemporary, some modern scholars
have argued that the responsibility for the war really lay not so much with Sparta because
of its fear of Athens, excuse me, but rather with Corinth, a wealthy city located strategically
at the Isthmus, able to dominate the trade routes of east and west that cross at that
narrow point. I want to examine this thesis for a moment, the notion that it was Corinth
which somehow was the centre of the causes of the war by examining the events that led
immediately to the war and seeing if we can find out what relations between Athens and
Sparta and Corinth are being played out here. The first event that Thucydides identifies
and he's surely correct here as immediately leading to the war was a conflict that took
place in 433 BC involving the island of Corkaira, modern day Corfu, up on the northwestern side
of Greece. And it was in this year that as a result of a conflict between Corkaira and
its own colony of Epidamnus which was located further north up on the Adriatic coast that
the Corkairians turned to Athens to seek an alliance. The Epidamnians of course in their turn
returned to Corinth seeking an alliance there with the state which was the mother city from which
Corkaira had come. The alliance of Corkaira and Athens joined two of the three largest
navies in the Greek world.
