So, the same fundamental attitude, you have an empire, it doesn't matter whether it's
good or bad, it is a reality and a fact, deal with that fact, that is put into the voices
of both Cleon and Pericles, and I think this dramatically illustrates the fact that Thucydides
was finally quite unconcerned about broader questions of morality in the political realm.
There is a central dictum, if you will, that sums this up, one of these axioms that I've
been talking about, when at one point in the Melian Dialogue the Athenians turn to the
Melians, who they are forcing to become their allies under threat of death, and the Athenians
simply say to the Melians, the strong do what they will, the weak suffer what they must.
There is no morality in political affairs.
It is as if the Athenians are driven to acquire more power and are forced almost by a law
of history to try to get more, to increase their empire.
Now this process of growth, of inexorable growth and imperial domination, clearly fascinated
Thucydides, that was the Athens he had grown up with, the Athens that he had seen, but
it was also a process which finally led to the Athenians undertaking the Sicilian expedition,
which would be a crushing disaster.
And so Thucydides, in turning his attention to this, was not only describing a significant
affair in the Peloponnesian War, but was also trying to understand the underlying laws of
history that lay behind the Athenian decision to go to Sicily and the Athenian debacle once
they got there.
We see these laws of history woven all the way through his account.
So for example, the people of Augusta approached the Athenians asking them for help.
This exemplifies the Thucydidian dictum that the weak need the help of the strong and actually
invite the domination of those who come to be their imperial masters.
So Athens doesn't just decide to go to Augusta or to Sicily, the Augustians invite them in.
Even more typical of the way Thucydides views history is the fact that he juxtaposes a supposed
reason with a true underlying reason in the decision to go to Sicily.
The Athenians apparently go to Sicily because the Egastians are their relatives.
They appeal to what the Greeks call syngonea, where blood cousins.
But Thucydides, that is merely a pretext.
And what really underlies the Athenian decision is the fact that they have seen a great deal
of gold while their ambassadors are in Augusta, and they are convinced that if they go, they
will be able to conquer a territory which will overnight make them twice as rich and powerful.
It is an attempt in one blow to double the size of their empire.
So these are the kinds of laws of history that Thucydides sees operating generally and
specifically here.
There's another side of Thucydides, however.
We've talked about him as a scientific historian, but he's also an artist.
All historians must face the question, how do you shape the events of history in order
to create a story with a structure and a shape to it?
And as a literary artist, what I think he's doing with the Sicilian expedition is drawing
on other genre, which is a Greek of the 5th century he's familiar with, namely, he sees
it as a kind of tragedy, as a drama, a psychological drama, if you will, where there is a conflict,
an argon, this time not between Helen and Hecuba, or between Antigone and Creon, but
rather between Nichies and Elcibiades.
These are the two actors in this tragedy of Athens.
Nichies, on the one hand, is the voice of reason.
He has common sense and sober judgment, and his advice actually echoes at various points
the words of Pericles when he says that the Athenians should not try to acquire a second
empire before they've actually secured their first.
So that very idea implanted at the beginning of the narrative with Pericles is now being
restated with Nichies in Book 5.
On the other hand, there's Elcibiades.
He's ambitious for command.
He's young.
He's attractive, but he's a little bit dangerous as well.
His position among the people, says Thucydides, led him to indulge his tastes beyond his means.
So he's a fast-living millionaire, and he represents, in a sense, the spirit of Athens
unrestrained, doing too much, biting off more than he can chew.
So when there's no restraining influence of a leader, this is what the Athenians could
become, and it is a dangerous, destructive tendency.
Although in fact, because of the actual conditions of history and the events in history, Elcibiades
did not make it to Sicily.
Just before the expedition was due to leave, there was a religious crime committed in Athens
as somebody went around mutilating some of the statues on the edges of the marketplace.
It was rumoured that Elcibiades and some of his friends had been involved in this as well
as in performing a profane version of the mysteries, and so he was meant to be put on
trial.
In fact, the trial was postponed, but Elcibiades knew that if he actually left Athens, his
enemies then would call the trial.
He would be found guilty and absent here, and so caught between this rock and a hard
place, he left Athens and eventually spent much of the war fighting on the side of the
Spartans.
