Now, in Aristotle's explanation, his account of slavery, the universe exists in a state
of tension between the dominant and the subordinate.
Now that hardly strikes us as a novel, we're back to the old Greek practice of antithesis,
one factor and its opposite.
The idea of the dominant and the subordinate of course is just like that of the argon of
two things in conflict and in tension, eras, strife, once again rearing its ugly head.
Now in Aristotle's formulation, nature is best served, that is to say that there is
a good natural function that tell us, as he calls it, and nature achieves this when
two conditions are observed in this relationship that we've spoken of.
That is that the stronger should rule the weak, and secondly that the better the part
is involved, the better the function that will be served.
In other words, if a person has a horse and has broken the horse so that the horse can
be domesticated and used, that is better than if there is a man and there is a wild horse
running around the hills, because in the latter instance there is no relationship between
them and the stronger does not rule the weak.
So domination of strong over weak is a good thing and secondly he would say, the domination
of for example a man over a hunting dog, while quite useful, is not as good as the domination
of a man over a horse.
In the latter instance these are better creatures and therefore the relationship produces a
better natural function, a better tell us.
In this formulation we are actually hearing ideas very similar to the kind of dynamic
we have seen in Thucydides as well, where again the more powerful states dominate the
weaker states.
For Aristotle harmony will exist when men rule over women.
It will exist in a heightened form when domesticated animals are used rather than when wild animals
are used because they are subserving to men, and again is an example of harmony.
And it is better to rule over another man than to rule over an animal because a man
is a superior creature to an animal.
In other words, in this Aristotelian formulation slavery is not wrong, slavery is nothing more
than the ultimate principle of domination.
Now he takes it further, if slavery represents the proper application of this principle of
domination strong over weak, the question that it raises in the Greek mind rather than
our mind is which men are fitted to rule, which ones are the superior ones, and which
ones are the ones who are fit to be ruled, the ones who should be subordinate.
It's going to be the dilemma about slavery from the Aristotelian point of view.
And here we move into a line of reasoning which is quite complicated and I think fundamentally
dishonest.
Let me take you through it step by step.
Aristotle claims that a man who works with his body and is capable of nothing better
than that, a brute, is worse than a man who has cultivated his mind, the mind being superior
to the body.
Now slaves, says Aristotle, have access to reason, I mean they're human beings so they
have the potential for reason like any other man, but they choose not to use it.
So all they're good for is manual labor, while slave owners have active souls, active minds,
and are therefore above work.
The only conclusion that's possible in this formulation is that a slave is a man who is
capable by nature of belonging to another because he hasn't chosen to use his faculties
and therefore does belong to another.
Now if you can follow the logic behind that line of reasoning, what it boils down to is
this, the final proof that certain men deserve to be slaves is that they are slaves.
The very condition of slavery in which they find themselves proves that that's where they
deserve to be.
Now I think you can poke holes in the logic of this but no Greek ever did.
It seems to me that this perfectly expressed what to the Greeks was the question of slavery
namely that it was perfectly acceptable and that it existed simply because it existed.
Some people ended up being slaves and others didn't.
