Now, this distancing of the slave owner, the idea that the slave owner was naturally superior
simply because he did own slaves and that the slave was inferior because he was a slave,
then led to further ideas and thinking about the relationship between slave owning
and the activity of that class to distance themselves from this natural inferiority.
Slaves are only brutes who can just do hard labor.
Free men then must cultivate those pursuits that mark them out as superior
and those activities must be those that therefore by definition show that they don't need to work,
that they are capable of using their minds and their souls for higher activities.
As a result, the leisure activities made possible by owning slaves such as attending philosophy lectures,
such as going to poetry recitals, such as participating in festivals,
such as going to the court or to the assembly,
in short, all the activities that we've seen were typical of Athenian citizens,
each of these becomes the living proof that you are naturally superior to the slave,
who, after all, can only work. That's all they're good for.
So, these activities, which are all the product of what the Greeks call their scollae, their leisure time,
are not the mark of an idle man at all.
Rather, they are the confirmation, the justification that you are a free citizen man.
So, in that respect, there's a mental operation that's gone here
that has connected slave owning and the existence of the institution of slavery
with a whole ideology that justifies being in the club of citizens
and being, at the same time, a slave owner.
Now, from free time, this free time in which one pursues democratic activities,
such as exercise at the gymnasium or taking classes with a teacher,
ultimately scollae will then become applied to the place where this activity occurs,
where you pursue the activities of a free person. This is school.
So, our English word school ultimately derives then from this Greek notion,
school was, excuse me, where you cultivated your soul,
where you affirmed your natural superiority this way over those whose only value was their capacity to work.
I think it is a pernicious connection, but I'm not going to pretend that this wasn't a part of Greek culture.
Now, as a result of this, since freedom from work became the defining feature of citizenship
and since that in turn reinforced the notion that slaves worked and they were only good for working,
as a result of this, attitudes towards actual work in the Greek world changed.
Now, land was still regarded as desirable. Land was always the measure of wealth in the ancient world.
Even if you made money on a trading venture, you tried to buy property
so that you would have something tangible to show for your wealth.
And farming was still viewed as the most legitimate source of wealth,
so that all the great Athenian statesmen owned property,
but the value of the actual hard work, the manual labor that worked the land, was itself demeaned.
And in this I think the Greeks lost something.
If you read the poetry of Hesiod you find in the 8th century and the 7th century,
the Greeks still believe in the notion that actually pulling the plow is good work.
There is, if you like, a Protestant work ethic in operation 2000 years before such a thing existed again.
The Greeks understood this work ethic.
In Hesiod's poetry, for example, in a poem called The Works and Days, which is really a glorified farmer's almanac,
he says such things as working is not a reproach, but not to work is a reproach.
These Hesiodic aphorisms are like the sorts of things that you'll find in the farms of the Amish in Lancaster County in Pennsylvania.
There's a very strong sense in early Greek poetry that you go out and you do that work yourself.
At one point when Odysseus is challenged, he claims that he can plow a field as fast and as straight and as good as well as any other king.
So early on in Greek culture there's been a strong connection between the land and what is valued in working the land.
But by now, in the classical period, instead, the land is still a source of wealth,
but the actual farming is to be left to slaves controlled by bailiffs.
