You famously said that mushrooms can help humanity to save the world.
Can you elaborate on that?
Well, I think those of us who've journeyed with a high dose of psilocybin, so I'm only
speaking to a subset of the audience here.
But those of us who've done these journeys, a very common theme is we realize that we're
a species that has an obligation to help save the planet, the biodiversity, the ecosystems
and nature.
Nature is calling out to us to open up our eyes to our responsibility as Earth citizens
to be responsible in protecting the commons.
And unfortunately, because of capitalism, religion, you know, all sorts of other factors,
our vision has become so narrowed for just self-indulgence, self-profiteering.
And the understanding of sharing for the commons has unfortunately retreated in the priorities
of many human activities.
You know, I do believe in the principles of capitalism insofar that individuals should
be rewarded for their extraordinary efforts.
So you have to be incentivized.
But once you are incentivized and you do get ahead, you have a very, I think a very strong
obligation to help others who are in need, because I think the lessons of evolution is
not the survival of the fittest, but the sharing of surplus beyond your own needs to help your
neighbors and help others who are less advantaged.
So the message that I'm getting from self-sabotten mushrooms is the important role that humans
play today in being able to provide for the health of the ecosystem for everyone.
The common phrase is that a rising tide raises all boats.
But it's much more sophisticated than that.
We have an ethical responsibility.
We are here now because of evolutionary smart choices over millions of years.
But we're at a time critical moment that if we don't make smarter choices now, then
species extinction for humans is very plausible.
Now some people might say, no, that's not possible.
Look at the evolutionary record.
More than 99% of the species that have existed on this planet are extinct.
Extinction is a natural consequence of evolution for those organisms who are not able to adapt
to change.
The fact that we are contaminating the ecosystem that gives us life is destroying our descendants'
future.
And so I feel a very strong obligation to our descendants, calling back in time, saying
we are at our pivotal moment to make a decisions that affect our future for literally thousands
of years going forward.
So now, from a practical point of view, OK, most people would accept that logically.
But what does this mean?
Our research with psilocybin and psilocybin analogs shows that it profoundly stimulates
neurogenesis, neuroplasticity, neurogeneration, neuroregeneration.
Those are four separate forms of neuron enhancement.
And we can see this now very clearly in vitro.
We are involved in microdosing.
We published in Nature Scientific Reports two articles on microdosing, the latest June
30th, 2022.
And it's extraordinary how many people are microdosing.
And this app that we co-develop called microdose.me, people self-report their behaviors, how often
they use psilocybin, what do they stack it with, what's their motivation, what's their
income, what's their race, what's their sexual preference.
So it's a very interesting population study.
And the reason why the peer reviewers at Nature were so excited about our manuscript as our
data set is very large.
The first paper, November 28th, 2021, had a survey of more than 8,000 people.
More than 4,100 were non-microdosers.
That was a shock to us.
Non-microdosers were motivated to sign up at microdose.me.
I think because they wanted to get a baseline, citizen scientists want to go, okay, before
I start microdosing, I want to see what my baseline level is.
And then you microdose without contrast.
So we had about 4,100 non-microdosers, a little over 4,000 microdosers.
Predominantly in North America, microdosing is with psilocybin.
Here in Europe is more common with LSD.
So in our microdosing study, over 55% of the people microdosing with psilocybin stack it.
What stacking means is that you have an admixture.
You add something else to the psilocybin.
And a variety of substances are added, chocolate.
I hypothesized a formula stacking psilocybin mushrooms with niacin, nicotinic acid, the
flushing form, and lion's mane.
And I proposed this stack because psilocybin is a vasoconstrictor, niacin is a vasodilator.
Also when you take the flushing form of niacin, your nerve endings get excited.
So I thought with neuropathies, oftentimes present themselves as deadening of the extremities,
the fingertips and the toes.
And so when you have neurodegeneration and neuropathies, you have vasoconstriction, blood
vessels choke off, nerves die.
So I thought with vasodilation with niacin, it could deliver the benefits of psilocybin
to the endpoints of the peripheral nervous system.
So then lion's mane, it's been well studied that lion's mane regenerates myelin on the
axons of nerves.
These are the conductive sheath.
So I bundled these together for the hypothesis that these would have an entourage effect
of stimulation for helping people with neurodegenerative diseases.
Now it's not just diseases, it's age.
New news to everyone.
We get older.
As we get older, unfortunately our nervous system declines in its health.
So there was a metric in microdose.me, and when we surveyed these thousands of people,
there was a statistic that jumped out.
Now it did not jump out with young people, you know, 20 to 55 year olds in that range,
but 55 plus year olds, there was a startling result that caught our researchers by surprise.
And when they did the analysis, there was a finger tapping test.
How quickly can you tap the first two fingers in 10 seconds?
So when you're young, you can do it really fast, when you get older, you do it slower.
This is a test that is used for charting neurodegeneration with Alzheimer's patients, dementia, Parkinson's,
traumatic brain injury.
This is a common test.
Many people listening to this have taken the tap test.
So the startling result was with psilocybin in any form, by itself with psilocybin mushrooms,
psilocybin with chocolate, psilocybin with anything else, nothing statistically increased
the frequency of tapping in 55 plus year olds, but one formulation, and that was called
the Stamets Stock.
Psilocybin, niacin, lion's mane increased the tapping frequency of approximately 49 taps
to 68 taps in 30 days relatively quickly, with a p value of significance of p equals
0.004.
That means one chance in 250 that it's just random noise.
So there appears to be a quote, unquote, cause and effect.
When we saw that result, then I thought, well, what's the mechanisms of action, the modes
of action, neurologically what's happening?
So we started diving deep into the literature of the proteins that code for neurofactors,
including BDNF, which is brain derived neurotropic factors.
This is basically how brain neurons then are stimulated into regrowth, and we found
something shocking, absolutely bizarre.
Now people can see my talk, I encourage that you do that, but here's an example.
At micro dosing levels, psilocybin by itself stimulated none of these nerve growth factors.
Niacin by itself didn't stimulate any, and lion's mane did not stimulate any, zero plus
zero plus zero equals zero.
Well, that's called the cumulative additive effect.
When we put these three together, it excited these proteins that then resulted in the stimulation
of nerve growth factors in BDNF.
So in this case, zero plus zero plus zero equals, for instance, 20.
So that synergy of the three components created something truly unexpected and surprising.
Now if you're a neurologist and a researcher, and you dose these nerve cells, for instance,
or these proteins with psilocybin at a micro dosing level, oh, no activity.
Moving on, because you think, oh, it has no activity.
I believe that niacin is a catalyst for nerve growth factors, stimulating the neurogenic
benefits of psilocybin.
This is also important because there's 11 clinical studies that are using niacin opposite
psilocybin.
So psilocybin over here, niacin is there a quote unquote placebo.
So there are actually 180 degrees in opposition to my idea, not purposely, they're looking
for an active placebo.
I am teaching opposite of that.
I always like to go to the path not traveled.
I'm a contrarian by nature.
I'm an inventor and an innovator.
I think about this, I've been doing this, my first book on psilocybin came out 44 years
ago.
I've placed numerous species in the genus psilocybe.
I am immersed in this knowledge.
And when you study a subject as long as I have, you begin to question authority, question
conventional thinking, and that's been a story of my life actually, but I respect conventional
thinking.
I think it's an important foundation, but it always has to be adaptable to change and
creativity.
And so my contribution I think is showing that micro dosing with psilocybin works when
you can catalyze it with something like niacin and lion's mane that amplifies the potential
benefit where psilocybin by itself at low concentrations may not.
So that's where we're excited about micro dose.me.
We have clinical trials now planned and these observational studies can help inform clinicians
on how to design very good clinical trials.
So we do not know whether this is going to be clinically relevant or not.
That is yet to be proven, but we have three pillars of evidence now.
We have the TAP test.
What can explain that?
It's not expectancy, the placebo is not appropriate, so I just challenge any listener.
What can result in the increase in psychomotor skills compared to psilocybin by itself or
non micro dosers?
The only explanation that's feasible in my imagination, those of many neurologists I've
talked about is neurogenesis.
There's an increase in the neurological health of the patients or the individuals taking
these substances.
So that's one pillar of evidence.
The second pillar is these map kinases.
These are proteins when the substances dock with them, stimulate BDNF and NGF, brain derived
neurotropic factors and nerve growth factors.
I showed in my talk four or five examples of zero activity of the components stuck together
of massive activity.
In fact, we have more than 50 examples of this where there's no activity and massive
activity and we have hundreds of examples of synergy where one plus one plus one doesn't
equal three, but one plus one plus one equals 16.
So it's the entourage effect of amplification.
So we have that pillar of evidence.
The third pillar of evidence, which I didn't have time to show, is in vitro with brain
nerve cells growing.
We can actually dose those nerve cells with this combination of psilocybin, lion's mane
and nicotinic acid and we can see the proliferation of the nerves growing beyond baseline of any
one of those other components.
So those three pillars of evidence are a strong argument for creating clinical studies to
test this.
Now, keep this in mind and I didn't get a chance to explain this during my talk.
Think about all the confounders in this observational study.
Where are people buying their psilocybin?
Underground market.
How was the potency of each one, each sample?
The majority, I think 78% of the people are taking a third of a gram to a tenth of a gram
of slosophy cubensis, golden tops dried.
So you have the variability of the dosage, you have the variability of the sources and
how much psilocybin is needed.
You have variability in the amount of niacin they're taking, you have variability in the
amount of lion's mane they're taking.
Now these three confounders logically would dilute significance.
The fact that we have such high significance for the TAP test suggests to me that the results
are understated compared to optimization.
If we can optimize each of those components, then the significance value should logically
increase.
So the fact that we have such a signal from the noise is truly, I think, an eye-opener.
And so my best supporters, by the way, many of you are skeptics, my best supporters have
been skeptics.
So I like to be taken to the mat, but I would advise all skeptics to be a little bit more
circumspect because I'm saying people say microdosing doesn't work.
Every study of microdosing doesn't follow the practices of microdosers in the real
world.
People are taking it for 30, 60 days, they're taking it three to five times a week and they're
doing sub-intoxication levels.
We report out of Brazil, you know, they're taking a half a gram.
They report 70% of the people could guess what the low dose was.
Well, that's unblinded.
We have 70% of the people knowing that they got the low dose.
By definition, a microdose is a sub-intoxication, but it's not sub-effect.
When you do microdosing, for instance, colors are a little bit more livelier, you're in a
better mood.
You're more compassionate.
Frankly, you're nicer.
So but it's not intoxication.
It's not like you slammed a beer or smoked a joint or something like that and you have
this change in your state of consciousness.
You have a heightened state of awareness and a heightened state of empathy and cordiality.
And this is why I believe that psilocybin makes nicer people.
And the meta studies that have come out showing that psilocybin is associated with a reduction
in crime, violence.
The only psychedelic associated with a reduction in opioid use disorder, and it's well known
that LSD and psilocybin use would reduce alcoholics use of alcohol.
Now there is a very good clinical study proving that.
So these observational studies do set the stage for clinical studies.
And think of this as paradigm shifting.
This is why psilocybin microdosing is available for the commons, it's affordable, it should
be available for the commons.
And if you go into a doctor's office, for instance, you go into a doctor's office to
get your blood pressure, very well established.
Just the act of going into the doctor's office elevates your blood pressure.
Well, that's expectancy, in this case negative.
You go to a doctor's office because you have an infection.
Your expectancy as a doctor is going to give you a medicine that's going to help your infection.
So real world effects of medicines are enhanced by the expectancy of you going to an expert
and the act of you trying to take charge of your health by doing something about it.
So the overlaying and coefficient enhancement of expectancy to a real medicine is part of
the medicine's potency and the therapeutic benefit of that.
So when I see these people trying to draw lines between expectancy and real world medical
effects, you know, this is not a black and white situation, it's on a spectrum.
Moreover, when you take psilocybin at a high dose to say 30 to 50 milligrams of psilocybin,
the half life of psilocybin is two to three hours.
So by the next day, you're in a microdose.
So why I like microdosing, an increasing narrative is a macro dose, therapeutically, followed
by microdosing, is that you can re-stimulate the neurological pathways that now you've
created for a new view of reality, of your PTSD's resolution.
The Johns Hopkins study found that 14 months later the very active re-remembering was therapeutically
beneficial.
Well, re-remembering is rekindling the neurological pathways that led to that memory and you have
a re-experiencing of it.
Microdosing also rekindles those pathways, not only for your memory of the experience,
but I believe from the activity, neurogenically, of visiting and reliving those pathways to
become more resonantly dominant and becomes now your new, you know, neurological system
for dealing with the world.
So this is a really exciting area of research.
I'm so honored to be a shepherd of this knowledge.
I really, really believe that this is generational knowledge.
We're all thought leaders.
The ecosystem here, the body intellect of knowledge at this conference, I think is really hopeful.
And at the same time, we have to be very careful about marginalization.
And marginalization is making these therapies too expensive.
You know, when you think about the root causes of so much of our crime, which much of it
is racist, much of it is the rich versus the poor, the people who have access to medical
system support versus those who do not, that's economic.
So it's important if we want to help heal society and to reduce crime, that the universality
of access of these medicines are made available.
Microdosing allows that.
So what's your vision of the future of psychedelics?
How do you see this failed in like 10 years?
I would see microdosing being a new tropic vitamin, be closely associated and proven
with a massive reduction in crime, saving governments and saving victims, saving families,
you know, hardship, money.
I mean, what government official here is opposed to the reduction of crime?
Hopefully there's none, right?
I would hope there's none.
There is one they should dose on psilocybin, they would change their mind.
So I would see the future that, you know, throughout society, people would recognize
that the use of psilocybin, macrodosing for PTSD and all these other traumatic mental
health challenges, but so much of us are healthy mentally.
And moreover, microdosing, I think, can prevent crime, prevent PTSD.
It's one thing to treat the illness after the fact, but it's a much greater benefit
to prevent that illness from even occurring in the first place.
If you are a person who, unfortunately, there is generational abuse, I've seen it, even
within my own family, children who are abused tend to grow up to be adults that abuse.
This is just a known fact.
If you can resolve your issues and not become a perpetrator to pass on this generational
violence behavior, then you can prevent victims in the future.
So I see psilocybin and microdosing as preventing PTSD, preventing criminal behavior.
And I'm moreover, not only do I think psilocybin makes nicer people, but I believe psilocybin
makes smarter, more intelligent people, especially as they age.
Do you think that you became smarter and nicer because you used psilocybin?
That's a very self-serving question.
You're asking my ego if I thought I'm smarter because they use psilocybin.
Of course I think I'm smarter.
But then I have to say, well, wait, is that delusional?
I mean, this is where you're asking kind of the impossible-to-answer question without
showing bias.
And speaking of bias, we're all biased.
We're all biased.
We all have egos.
We all have interests.
Show me a person who's not biased.
Even professors at universities, if they do not publish, they will not get tenure.
And they can put on their slides they have no conflicts of interest.
Yeah, they do.
Every single professor here who said they have no conflicts of interest are hypocritical.
They have to publish in order to have tenure.
So every person studying the subject has an internal bias because they have an interest
in the subject.
They're motivated.
They want to do studies.
They know if the studies get published, then their position of employment within the university
is better than that, which they would not.
So people should be a little more circumspect.
Take a step back.
If you are a human, you have bias.
You have bias for food when you're hungry, bias for medicines, bias for your friends,
bias for people you want to associate with, bias comes with a human condition.
The question becomes, is that bias such that it is not beneficial for the general population
or is it idiosyncratically specific to certain individual and personality types?
Now you can dial this down now.
This is something that probably will be disambiguated better in the future when we have more targeted
individual therapies customized.
But right now, throughout a general population, we're seeing that the effects are beneficial
with very strong signals right now from the noise and the chaos of the general population,
both with healthy normals and with individuals with mental health challenges.
We all have mental health challenges.
We're all in a spectrum.
Right now, don't you have a little voice in your head thinking about your next question?
Did you wake up and go, oh, when I was eight years old, I really wish I hadn't taken that
toy away from my friend and was so mean to him?
I mean, we're all self-reflecting.
We're all self-diagnosing.
It's just when your self-diagnostic tools are not adequate to treat the condition that
it's important you seek an expert's health.
So we're all involved in the spectrum, macro-dosing, the micro-dosing is a spectrum.
People should be much more careful in saying that micro-dosing doesn't work.
And I just wish people would be a little bit more careful in their languaging because
I think this is a spectrum.
You mentioned that your first book was published in 1978.
That was the year when I was born.
So you have been waiting a lot to this time when it seems that it becomes real, right?
So how do you feel about this new psychedelic renaissance and do you think there is a risk
of a new backlash after this?
Well, there's always a danger in renaissance.
Having by definition, it's a revolution against the conventional wisdom.
What is really different now than in 1978, when I published my first book, is the absence
of paranoia.
That's a stressor.
That causes anxiety.
With us early adopters, and even with indigenous people, when the Christians and the Catholics
came to Mesoamerica and they brought their diseases and their advanced weapons and their
sailing ships, that domination and suppression of indigenous wisdom and religion caused a
mass amount of course anxiety and harm.
And so societal pressures against us early adopters and people who are thought leaders
really carrying the torch forward of indigenous people all over the world.
We are not now under the same pressure from society to be as paranoid as we were back
then.
You do not know, and most people listening do not know, the state of heightened paranoia
and concern and anxiety that the government any minute could break down your doors and
arrest you.
And to me, the use of psilocybin and psychedelics is a civil right.
It's a freedom of consciousness right.
No government in the world has a right to your freedom of consciousness.
That is your born right.
And yet you espouse these rights and it challenges laws and religion and other people who are
in positions of power, they feel threatened by individual freedoms.
So to me, this is a civil right issue fundamentally.
You have a freedom of right to your own consciousness.
If you can improve it, then you have the right to make that choice.
No government should take that choice away from you.
Thank you very much.
Is there anything you would like to add or did I ask everything?
I would add one more thing.
What's very different about psilocybin mushrooms than peyote, for instance, and the peyote
way is something that I think should remain with indigenous people, the yaki and other
related, you know, first nations, especially in North America.
That plant is fragile, it takes a long time to grow, sustainability doesn't look likely
in the near term and over harvesting jeopardizes indigenous knowledge and indigenous practices.
Peyote is very different than psilocybin mushrooms.
There's 116 known species of psilocybin mushrooms that grow around the world, from the North
Pole to the South Pole, you know, and those margins.
And in each or many of those ecosystems, indigenous people from Mesoamerica, from Ireland, from
Germany, in Japan, psilocybin mushrooms are known as laughing mushrooms.
That's been a name that's been around for hundreds of years.
So every group who's lived in close associated with the ecosystem is likely to have a history
of contact with psilocybin mushrooms.
So Maria Sabina, the great Mazatec shaman, mycologist, she was a mycologist, it gives
a huge amount of credit, she introduced psilocybin zapatachorum to the West.
90% of the people using psilocybin mushrooms are using psilocybin cubensis, a mushroom
that Maria Sabina did not use.
And it grows in the tropics, from Florida, or subtropics, Florida, Guatemala, grows in
Thailand, it grows in Australia, it grows throughout Africa, the moisture reasons of Africa.
So when you understand that psilocybin mushrooms are not only more biodiverse than peyote, but
you can grow them sustainably.
It checks all the boxes in terms of not being cultural appropriation, having universality
of use across many cultures growing in many different regions of the world.
So I think this is a bridge between cultures and continents and throughout centuries.
There is a narrative new to me, but it came out out of British Columbia years ago, and
it's one of the elders of an indigenous clan in Canada was challenged by one of the parents.
Why should we send our indigenous children to be educated by Westerners, by the European
educational system?
And this elder who I think was very wise, he says, because we need two eyes to see, two
eyes seen.
We need the western eye of science.
We need indigenous wisdom for making sure that science respects nature and generational
knowledge.
So we went to a first indigenous conference and a good friend of ours who is a leader
in this movement.
She's indigenous.
She's actually half Irish, half Native American, and one of her elders stood up and she goes,
I love two-eyed seeing.
And she said, I'm not taking away my iPhone for my 12-year-old daughter.
That would create chaos in my life.
But I think this is an example where with two eyes we can see better.
We need to respect indigenous wisdom.
All wisdom is built upon by experience.
Everment contributes to the growing body and elective knowledge.
This is what this conference is about, and I think we have to always walk forward with
two eyes seen.
One of the characters in the new Star Trek Discovery was modeled after you, and in this
show there is the Mycelian network that helps people to travel through space and time.
Do you believe that one time this will be a reality?
Yeah, this Star Trek series discovery, the ten or so writers called me up and said we're
in the dungeon, we're running Star Trek, give us some ideas, and I told them to turn
on their tape recorder.
I'm a Star Trek fan, and I just gave them about an hour and a half, two hours of just
stream of consciousness talking about the Mycelian network and how networks are self-creating
in the Mycelian network, the neurological network, the computer internet network, the
organization of dark matter and dark energy and space, all are built upon this same sort
of structure that allows ease elasticity, that has many end points of contact, that can
constantly experiment with successes, and if there is a success, the information backchannels
and by definition it grows, and so I talked about then entering into hyperspace, into
the microverse, into the multiverse using psilocybin, and one of the messages many of
us get is the universality of being, that we exist within one giant consciousness, and
being able to understand that can allow us to be able to cross into different dimensions
without using the envelope of our bodies as a limiting factor.
So to answer your question, yes, I do believe that these are portables for us to enter into
the multiverse.
The very words that I'm using are constricted because I don't have the vocabulary to articulate
what that may mean, but I think that vocabulary now is being built.
Every single person journeying on psilocybin is contributing to that vocabulary, so I think
it is time for humans to ascend into a new species, it is time critical that we do so,
we have a moral, ethical, and evolutionary responsibility.
We've been handed this responsibility, it is ours to lose, and we're at an adjunction.
We make the decision to live or the decision to die, it is literally that binary.
And I think most of us want to choose the path that brings more babies and smiles on
people's faces and more camaraderie and more enrichness of culture and ideas.
I've always thought that wealth is not money, it's not materialism, it's the optionality
of having freedom of choices.
The more freedoms of choices you have, the wealthier you are because you have alternatives.
Restricting those restricts again your civil rights and your rights as a species to continue
to evolve.
