Lecture 5 Disenchantment and Depression
This lecture begins the second half of our series on the American Dream, and I'm calling
this particular part of the series, Dreams of Success, Disenchantment and Depression.
And the epigraph comes this time from an American poet named Edwin Arlington Robinson, who wrote
a poem that is contained in a lot of anthologies called Richard Corey, and one of the lines
in that poem says, So on we worked and waited for the light.
Just to refresh our memories a little bit about where we've been in the first half,
I want to remind you that we've been drawing from poetry and politics, from song and story,
from history and philosophy, journalism and commerce, and a lot of other sources.
And that will continue to be the pattern as we keep exploring from the past and the present
and on into the future what the American Dream has been and what it tells us about ourselves.
The inquiry we're engaged in is one in which we all have a part to play, a contribution
to make, because the story of the American Dream is really the story of our lives.
What the Dream's story will tell us, I believe, and I hope it's been shown already in what
we've done, is that we have by no means been a perfect people, and yet we are a distinctive
people with a history that confers responsibility not to despair and not to give up trying to
be better than we are.
As you are aware by now, I hope, it is not simple to focus an answer to the question,
what is the American Dream?
The Dream is hard to define simply and once and for all because it is not one thing but
many.
Yet it can also be said that there is a subtle unity amidst all the diversity.
One way to locate that unity is to concentrate on the fundamental American assumption that
new beginnings are always possible and frequently desirable.
Other cultures, of course, have shared that assumption, so that belief would not be a
sufficient reason for speaking of the Dream as anything distinctively American.
Unique qualities, however, begin to appear when one locates the major aims that have
governed attempts at new beginnings on American soil.
At the same time, when one begins to catalog those aims, it becomes apparent that a factor
of diversity is still very much in the picture.
If the essence of the American Dream consists of assumptions about new beginnings and other
ideas that cluster around that theme, aspirations in those directions have ranged from the highly
idealistic to the utterly materialistic.
Economic success has been a crucial element of the Dream from the outset of American colonization
and it remains so today.
At the same time, anyone who studies American history will be struck by the fact that ideas
and ideals, not just economic forces, must be taken into account to grasp what occurred
in the part of the New World that became the United States.
Senses of religious mission and thirsts for freedom of religious expression exerted early
influence.
Use to establish new forms of government, particularly those that would defend human
rights perceived as unalienable and as giving a primacy to the liberty of individuals were
even more powerful.
They did much to nurture a sense that Americans ought to be unique, that they should leave
the past behind and that they should seek their identities in self-reliance.
That hierarchy and aristocracy but equality became a key ideal, although the prizes went
to those who proved by their actions that they had excellence more than others.
At least that notion was the one that Americans liked to believe and taught to each other.
Granted, it did not always square with reality and some Americans demythologized the myth,
providing self-critical dimensions to the dream and the process, and challenging the
people to make good on the best ideals they claimed to serve.
Americans have not always used their freedom well, but the dream has stressed admonitions
to do better, particularly to do better in building a spirit of community that can forestall
the dangers inherent in narrow self-interest.
The dream and its dreamers then are related organically.
The dream became many as one strand seemed more important and another less so.
It grew and developed as it still does, but the relationship also worked the other way.
Americans did not only change the dream as their interests and inclinations dictated,
these interests and inclinations have been affected by the dream as well.
Because whatever diversity it contains, the dream also has an integrity that makes it
less than infinitely malleable.
That integrity enables the dream to be, among other things, a potent source of social and
political criticism.
Places of success are among the oldest and most enduring strands of the American dream.
And in America, success has always been defined, at least in part, by material prosperity.
Granted to the Puritans, success meant establishing a Christian commonwealth of God's chosen
people who were to be bound together by mutual affection and dedication to spiritual salvation.
Social well-being was nevertheless important to them too if only as a sign that God approved
of their endeavors.
Similarly, to Thomas Jefferson and his compatriots, success meant forming a more perfect union
free of the social and political ills of Europe in which men might exercise their unalienable
rights to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.
That life was linked to property, and it was clear that the pursuit of happiness entailed
the pursuit of material goods.
Indeed, in The Federalist, James Madison implied that the most unalienable right of all is
the right to private property.
Surely too, the impetus behind the westward movement was not merely a desire to escape
what Crevcourt called the ancient prejudices and manners of the Old World, perhaps more
than anything else, free land, and eventually the discovery of gold in California induced
Americans to venture farther and farther west.
As we've also seen in previous lectures, there were critics who began to address this
version of the dream of success, which they saw as being too much obsessed with material
gain and economic prosperity and the pursuit of wealth.
We've talked earlier about Emerson and Thoreau, for example, as people who spotted that trend
in American life and were critical of it.
There have been many others all the way through our society and our history who have played
that role too.
That strand has gone along with a continuing strand that has stressed the importance of
material prosperity and economic growth and development as an essential part of the dream.
I suppose to some extent these two things will remain in tension with one another as
long as life in the United States continues.
If some critics felt that a serpent had entered the American garden in the form of the machine,
industrial developments led to the formation of a new class of American wealth and to a
modified, if not entirely new, measure of success, in contrast with some of the early
visions that had existed here.
The Rockefellers, the Carnegie's, the Morgans built enormous fortunes by shrewdly capitalizing
on natural resources, the market, and the cheap labor of immigrants who as a class were
largely dependent on industrial employment for their survival.
To some Americans, these captains of industry were Titans, updated versions of the strong
self-reliant American hero, a superior breed exemplifying in human affairs the concept
of survival of the fittest.
To others, however, they were little better than pirates, robber barons as some called
them, who would sacrifice everything and everyone to their lust for wealth and power.
To these ruthless men, it was thought, and all too often rightly so, the view was held
that these men controlled not only the economy, but also they controlled the politicians who
were willing to overlook, in the name of laissez-faire, the entrepreneur's wrongdoings.
Even more disturbing to some observers, Americans in general seemed increasingly ready to accept
a strictly monetary concept of success.
This might be all well and good if riches could be achieved without sacrificing ethical
principles, but even if principles had to be shaded slightly, wealth was still the goal
advocated as the most worth striving for.
To be richer than a king, as Edwin Arlington Robinson described Richard Corey in the famous
1897 poem he named after him, seemed to make most Americans, as Robinson put it, wish
that we were in his place.
So Americans worked on and waited for the light, and probably most Americans were unpersuaded
by the demise that Robinson penned for Richard Corey, who one calm summer night went home
and put a bullet through his head.
One of the interesting people who was critical of the dream of success that was so heavily
equated with economic development and material accumulation was an early American economist
named Thorstein Veblen, and I would like to just say a little bit about him.
This economist was an iconoclastic social theorist and university professor who wrote
about the leisure class, as he called it in a rather famous book called The Theory of
the Leisure Class.
He did not restrict his analysis of that class, as he saw it, to its particular American
version, but his book clearly pictures the late 19th century American scene as he saw
it.
Veblen found the leisure class, flooding its high position through what he was the first
to call conspicuous consumption, which is a term that has found its way into our vocabulary
quite a lot.
That conspicuous consumption's relation to the economic process, Veblen wrote, is a
pecuniary relation, a relation of acquisition, not of production, of exploitation, not of
serviceability.
Out of instinct and self-interest, the leisure class, Veblen thought, is also inherently
conservative, opposing any changes in institutions, policies, or habits of thought that might
threaten to undermine its power.
This outlook, Veblen argued, is actually regressive, since the economic relations it
defends are holdovers from what Veblen called the predatory stage of social development.
By resisting change, the leisure class impedes the evolution of an entire society, he thought.
As for those classes that would gain the most from innovation, their creative energies are
exhausted in simply making a living, while their habits of thought, their ideas of what
is good and right, the symbols of success they esteem, are inculcated in them by the
very class that exploits their labor.
Veblen's theory was bitterly attacked, not only by members of the leisure class itself,
but also by his fellow academicians.
Nonetheless, it influenced American economic thought and contributed to a rising sympathy
for social control in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
It could be, and was argued, that the policy of laissez-faire criticized by Veblen had served
the country well at one time and should by no means be dismissed as obsolete.
Furthermore, any kind of governmental control, even if designed to promote the general welfare,
was bound to be viewed suspiciously by a people who prized individual freedom as highly as
Americans always have.
For even though the United States has probably always been a society deeply divided by class,
most Americans lack much in the way of class consciousness beyond thinking that they are
middle class, as some 80% of them apparently still do according to polls taken early in
this decade.
Believing that pluck and luck can make any of us, like Richard Corey, glitter when we
walk, Americans find it hard to accept that they cannot break constricting boundaries,
class or otherwise, and begin anew.
For if an Andrew Carnegie can rise from his humble beginnings to become a steel magnet
and millionaire, thereby realizing a prevailing dream of success, so can anyone else, or so
the thinking has gone.
One of the most staunch defenders of this outlook and of the laissez-faire economic philosophy
that often went with it was an influential professor of political and social science
at Yale University whose name was William Graham Sumner.
In a book called What Social Classes O to Each Other, Sumner's answer to the question
raised by his title was simple and forthright as far as American life is concerned.
Sumner said that the social classes owe each other nothing.
Believing that God and nature have ordained the chances and conditions of life on earth
once and for all, Sumner distinguished between ills which belong to the struggle for existence
and what he called ills due to the faults of human institutions.
Only the latter, according to Sumner, should be the concern of associated effort.
And since the United States already has a set of institutions that adjust rights when
one person's actions impinge on the freedom of others, the best thing to do is not to
tamper with those institutions.
Sumner held that American society just needs to be let alone.
Although within a natural social order there are bound to be unjust inequalities, some
of these argued Sumner will be remedied by natural adjustments, others by voluntary concessions.
However, the cost of trying to remedy them by other means, especially through direct
governmental interventions, is too high, he thought.
The price is loss of freedom.
A society based on contract, as Sumner insists is true of American life, is a society of
free and independent men, he wrote.
It follows that one man in a free state cannot claim help from and cannot be charged to give
help to another.
What the Puritans called brotherly affections are thus socially irrelevant, for Sumner believed
that in a state based on contract, sentiment is out of place.
What then is success on a view like Sumner's?
According to Sumner, it is making the best of oneself individually, which is not a separate
thing from the duty of filling one's place in society.
The condition for both social and personal success then is unrestricted freedom.
If Sumner put social Darwinism as the view came to be called into his theories, the life
of Andrew Carnegie embodied social Darwinism by personifying the rags to riches dream.
Carnegie wrote a very influential essay which simply had the title Wealth.
This appeared in 1899 and was widely read and taken to heart by a lot of people who
believed what Carnegie had to say.
In that essay, Carnegie wrote that upon the sacredness of property, civilization itself
depends, and he added that the problem of our age is the proper administration of wealth.
Carnegie agreed with William Graham Sumner that nature's laws should not be tampered
with.
Foremost among these is the so-called law of competition, said Carnegie.
Although he admitted that this law is sometimes hard for the individual, he also argued that
in the long run it is best for the race because it ensures the survival of the fittest in
every department.
Implicitly, the fittest individuals, according to this view, are those capable of amassing
the most wealth, and progress for the race consists largely, if not entirely, of improved
material conditions.
In short, Carnegie assumes that success is wealth.
He would have put it more elegantly, but I think he would have liked that bumper sticker
that says he who has the most toys at the end wins or something, just how it goes, but
there's something of that philosophy that's also to be found in both Sumner and Carnegie,
I think, with some qualifications, because unlike Sumner, Carnegie believed that the
wealthy are morally obligated to help the less successful who are willing to help themselves.
No advocate of indiscriminate charity, as well as somewhat of a Puritan in his own lifestyle,
Carnegie urged the wealthy to live un ostentatiously and to administer, philanthropically, their
surplus wealth.
He argued in particular that they should do so by providing parks, libraries, and other
institutions designed to improve the general condition of the people.
Thus the true gospel, according to Andrew, attempts to reconcile an unfettered individualism
with a social conscience, material success with moral, intellectual, and aesthetic values.
Ironically, the great industrialists of this late 19th century period were not in fact
as much opposed to governmental interference in the economy as they professed to be.
They supported it when, as in the case of high tariffs, it worked to their advantage.
By the turn of the century, it was becoming increasingly apparent to more and more Americans
that the ever-widening gap between rich and poor was not going to be bridged by philanthropy
nor was social justice going to be achieved by the kind of economic and political order
that the Sumners and Carnegie's advocated.
It was time, many felt, for the government to intercede on behalf of the have-nots as
well as the haves, not only because of the social problems involved, but also because
the principles of justice that America supposedly stood for were being violated.
Americans generally were no less enamored of materialistic success than before, but they
were less convinced that the prevailing economic system provided everyone with a fair and equal
opportunity to succeed.
Hence, as the 19th century came to its end, what we call the progressive movement in its
various forms was born.
Under leadership provided by the likes of Theodore Roosevelt and Woodrow Wilson, who
called for legislation that would look after the men who are on the meek rather than the
men who are already made, reforms were introduced, but not enough to keep disenchantment and
depression away for long.
During the Wilson era, the United States entered World War I to make the world safe for democracy.
The nation's participation in that conflict was brief and victorious, but the war and
its aftermath shook American idealism.
A number of people came to doubt that the United States had fought for moral reasons
in the first place.
Who after all had profited from the war?
Was it the common citizen or was it the big industrialist, the munitions maker, the House
of Morgan as novelist John Dos Pasos capitalized it?
It was certainly not those who had actually experienced the horrors of a technological
warfare, a warfare that called into question the very doctrine of benign scientific progress.
Like Frederick Henry, the hero of earnest hemming ways of farewell to arms, they were more likely
to see nothing sacred about a war that was supposed to end all wars.
However did post-war America lighten the hearts of liberal reformers?
For the decade of the 1920s was in general politically conservative.
The progressive movement of course did not die out altogether, there were still calls
for social reform and organized labor began to take an active political role.
The tired of causes and evidently suspicious of any idea that smacked remotely of such
foreign ideologies as socialism or communism, the voters including newly enfranchised women
sent to the White House three conservative Republicans, Warren Harding, Calvin Coolidge
and Herbert Hoover.
Despite corruption in the Harding administration, the victory of the monopolies over the trust
busters and the exclusion of factory workers and farmers from the benefits of the post-war
economic boom, it was not merely a conservative but in deceptive ways a confident decade too.
To the middle class at least, the nation seemed about to realize its dream of success, unlimited
prosperity for virtually everyone.
The conservatism of the 20s did not curiously enough extend to morals and manners.
The 20s also included what F. Scott Fitzgerald called the greatest gaudiest spree in history.
Starting with the younger generation but soon extending to its elders, a revolt against
19th century sexual taboos, frugality and self-restraint took place.
In novels such as The Great Gatsby and Tender is the Night, Fitzgerald dramatized the reckless
gaiety, hedonism, worship of money and moral irresponsibility of the period.
In an essay called Echoes of the Jazz Age in which Fitzgerald looks back on the 20s,
he treats the characteristics of that time with an ambivalence typical of his outlook.
Admitting to some nostalgia for the utter confidence of this decade, he wrote that even
when you were broke, you didn't worry about money because it was in such profusion around
you, and regretting that he and his generation will never feel quite so intensely about our
surroundings anymore.
Fitzgerald also recognized that during the 20s, America seemed to have abandoned its
dedication to work and moral decency and social justice in favor of the frivolous, the superficial
and the self-indulgent.
Looking at the beginning of the 20s, George Santiana, about whom I spoke yesterday, had
described Americans as idealists working on matter.
By 1931, Fitzgerald tended to look back on Americans more simply as materialists, period,
and noticeably vulgar ones at that.
The gaudy spree ended, as all sprees must, when the financial structure of the United
States collapsed beneath a tangled heap of stock market ticker tape.
Not long before, one of Herbert Hoover's 1928 campaign speeches had hailed the prosperity
that a rugged individualism and free competition brought to the nation.
His message turned out to be sadly ironic as banks and businesses failed, as the lines
of the homeless and unemployed grew steadily longer as cities became what Mary Heaton Vorce
called a school for bums.
Once confident but now dazed, Americans, disenchanted and depressed, could not quite
understand what had happened to their dream.
Prosperity might be just around the corner, as they were repeatedly told, but that corner
seemed to keep receding even farther down a lengthening street.
What had happened to the American dream of success, to the land of opportunity where
people willing to work could prosper according to their ability and industry?
Questions of that kind have not been restricted to the Great Depression of the late 20s and
30s.
Versions of them arise today at the beginning of the 1990s, a decade that is not part of
what Mark Twain called the Gilded Age, but if Newsweek's last issue of 1990 proves correct,
an age of anxiety instead.
When that issue of Newsweek appeared, the United States was well into an economic recession
that has been worsened by runaway deficits, both the highest rate of inflation and the
lowest growth rate in retail sales since 1982 and the worst unemployment figures in three
and a half years.
The Labor Department's count for December 1990 indicated joblessness for about 6.1 percent
of the nation's workforce, some 7.5 million Latinos and blacks disproportionately represented
among them.
That figure incidentally did not include 900,000 more men and women, so-called discouraged
workers, who have stopped trying to obtain work and are not included in the Labor Department's
statistics.
Meanwhile, the stock market, at least until very recent days, got off to its second worst
annual start in history, worried about the war with Iraq.
Leading the nation toward his problematic version of a new world order, there's that
new beginning theme again, George Bush was named Time magazine's Janus Faced Man of
the Year for 1990 because energetic and insightful though his approach to foreign affairs may
be, it stands in stark contrast to his lethargy about domestic ones according to Time's analysis.
Be that as it may, if the 1990s proved to be an anxious age for the American dream, that
will come as no surprise to those who are familiar with Kevin Phillips and his book
Politics of Rich and Poor, Wealth and the American Electric in the Reagan Aftermath,
a book which spent many weeks on the bestseller list in 1990.
Irony riddles the story that Phillips tells.
In the 1980s, the world seemed to be going America's way, he points out.
Berlin's wall came down, much of Eastern Europe rejected communism, embraced democracy
and invested hope in capitalism, even if nothing more substantial was available.
The Soviet Union became more friend than foe.
Self-congratulation however was premature, enthralled by international developments that
appeared to vindicate the United States, the nation's leaders underestimated socioeconomic
distress at home.
Now it threatens to turn the American dream nightmarish.
By the end of the 1980s Phillips argues home ownership, long a basic ingredient in the
American dream, was becoming just a dream for more and more Americans, especially for
those in their 20s and 30s.
That example is just one of many that Phillips had in mind when he began his first chapter
with an apt quotation from the Wall Street Journal of March 31st, 1989.
This quotation said statistical evidence already suggests that the American dream is fading.
This is perhaps apt following up on the advertising for the Wall Street Journal that I mentioned
to you early on where the Wall Street Journal proclaimed that if the American dream has
a diary, the Wall Street Journal is it.
Not everyone of course felt so gloomy.
For many Americans the Reagan years and even their immediate aftermath have been the best
of times or so they were led to believe.
Whatever the beliefs Phillips revisionist appraisal shows that the Reagan era produced
its own immense redistribution of wealth.
In that redistribution, the poor and working middle class lost ground, he argues, the rich,
especially the richest of the rich, gained it.
If Ronald Reagan's appeal subdued that intention at first, Phillips further shows how it eventually
became dominant.
Very late in the day Phillips contends the nation is starting to face the economic devastation
that plagues the Reagan aftermath.
A 1980's sea change took the United States from being the world's largest creditor to
being the world's leading debtor.
In the past ten years the national debt has tripled to more than three trillion dollars.
The great communicator will be remembered for many things but Phillips suggests that
few of his accomplishments will be more important than the toll taken by Reaganomics.
This is tally is that it will sap the nation's strength and standard of living for years
to come.
Contrary to the conventional wisdom of Reagan's most trusted economic gurus, George Gilder,
Arthur Laffer, and Milton Friedman to name a few of these capitalist theologians as Phillips
dubs them, depths and deficits mattered mightily and would not disappear as their theories
predicted.
No chorus of hosannas to laissez-faire could change that, nor could the tax cuts and tight
monetary policies that were healed as tickets to prosperity.
Some tickets to prosperity there were, but mostly Phillips argues they went to a favored
few.
Charitably, he thinks philosophy and policy dictated that outcome more than sheer greed,
but nonetheless he says the American dream was beginning to crumble, not just in inner
city ghettos and farm townships, but in blue collar centers and even middle class suburbs.
That realization portends political upheaval, for most Americans do not resent wealth per
say by any means, but they do resent its accumulation through favoritism.
Now Phillips' credentials make his deep concern about these results all the more interesting.
He is no Marxist or Socialist, he is not even a Democrat.
This keen observer and astute journalist was the chief political analyst for the 1968 Republican
presidential campaign.
His conservative identity is as solid as it is long standing.
Praising the Reagan-Bush 1980s, Phillips' voice is that of the responsible critic from
within.
While focusing on contemporary American politics, the politics of rich and poor Phillips' book
has added interest because it includes three important historical dimensions.
These all may be debatable, but I think they are interesting to contemplate.
First, stressing what even American political parties often overlook, Phillips sees conflict
over the distribution of wealth at the heart of our political process.
The genius of American politics, he says, has been to manage through ballot boxes and
electoral votes the problems that less fluid societies resolve with party structures geared
to class warfare and even with barricades.
In the United States, Phillips is saying politics is civil war by other means.
Power clashes, singly or in combination, they include regional, cultural, ideological and
especially economic interests, power clashes produce dramatic results.
According to Phillips, typically these clashes, whether Americans recognize the fact or not,
are between economic classes.
The wealthy, the poor and the middle classes may all be American.
They may all want greater wealth too, but these shared realities also keep them at odds.
The stakes in American elections are high.
Since the American Revolution, Phillips argues, the distribution of American wealth has depended
significantly on who controlled the federal government, for what policies and in behalf
of which constituencies.
Putting that point in a more colloquial way, Phillips quotes blues singer Ray Charles.
Them that's got is them that gets and I ain't got nothing yet.
Billionaires and the homeless, not by accident the United States got a lot more of both during
the Reagan years.
Phillips notes that Ronald Reagan had a personal antipathy toward income taxes.
He was far from alone of course and there was enthusiasm for his tax reduction programs.
Its most significant component, a key to the trickle down part of Reaganomics, involved
reducing the top personal tax bracket from 70 to 28 percent before his second term ended.
By Phillips's reckoning, however, that measure produced precious little trickling down.
The top one to five percent of the population, he claims, got the lion's share of the benefits.
For the vast majority of Americans, Reaganomics cost them.
If enterprise grew, much of it focused on leveraged buyouts, junk bonds, and other forms
of paper entrepreneurship rather than on more productive forms of investment.
Meanwhile, economic inequality also grew while increasing amounts of U.S. property, to say
nothing of jobs, left American hands.
As trade balances shifted in their favor, debt servicing interest receipts boomed and
the dollar's value fell, investors from Japan, Germany, and England, to name but three, found
America selling itself at bargain basement prices.
The Reagan aftermath finds less and less of the country owned and controlled by Americans
themselves.
For a time, even the terms of United States government contract put the concessions at
Yosemite National Park under Japanese control when the Matsushita Electric Industrial Company
recently completed its $6.6 billion takeover of MCA.
In the long run, the challenge will be for Americans themselves to keep from destroying
Yosemite's ecology, and even Matsushita thought Yosemite's operations should remain
United States owned, which is apparently more than many American business leaders feel about
their own operations.
Downtown commercial real estate illustrates the point.
According to Phillips, by early 1988, foreign owners held 21 percent of such property in
Manhattan, 32 percent in Minneapolis, 39 percent in Houston, and 46 percent in Los Angeles.
In one industry after another, foreign firms have been increasing their global leadership
by acquiring American companies.
The selling of America made some people rich, and Ronald Reagan helped the rich get richer,
Phillips argues.
They won the 1980s economic battle in American politics, but Phillips thinks that victory
cost far too much because it squandered the nation's future.
In terms of international purchasing power, he laments, the United States is now only
the ninth wealthiest country in the world in terms of per capita GNP.
We have been surpassed by Austria, Switzerland, the Netherlands, West Germany, Denmark, Sweden,
Norway, and Japan.
What has happened is unprecedented, but not entirely, which leads to a second historical
component of major importance in Phillips' analysis.
If American politics consists of power clashes often rooted in economically-based class disparities,
he believes it also has a distinctively cyclical quality.
Dating from Thomas Jefferson's election to the presidency in 1800, Phillips discerns
a series of 28 to 36-year waves inaugurated by watershed elections that have changed the
nation's direction.
Invariably, these elections targeted an elite that is considered to have gone too far.
The pattern, as Phillips sees it, goes something like this.
One party takes power from another through voter rebellion against an entrenched elite
that has lost touch with a broadly-based constituency.
In two or three decades, however, the party that took power gets trapped in a similar
way.
Empowering its own elite excessively, it becomes a target for a new round of populist
outsidership and reform.
If Phillips is correct, one conclusion might be that the Republican jig might be up in
1992, according to his way of reading the cycles.
Phillips sees Ronald Reagan as pivotal in what is the third cycle of a Republican version
of the pattern that I've just described.
Abraham Lincoln's election in 1860, William McKinley's in 1896, and Richard Nixon's in
1968, these were watershed elections, as Phillips thinks of them, that were based on a broad
appeal for national unity.
An appeal that was rooted far more in just a broader patriotism than in simple commercial
interests.
Before these Republican cycles ended, however, economic interests endemic to Republican ideology
took over.
Beyond its emphasis on the politics of national unity, Phillips surmises, dynamic capitalism,
economics, and the concentration of wealth are what the Republican Party is all about.
Ronald Reagan put it more simply when he said, what I want to see above all is that this
remains a country where someone can always get rich.
In any case, the Republican pattern that Phillips discerns entails a shift from broad middle-class
nationalism into capitalist overdrive.
This inflation limits on business regulation and government alike, tax reduction, high
interest rates.
These are among the traditional Republican measures that take effect.
If they appeal widely for a time, their success eventually creates disillusionment.
Phillips goes on with his critique, and he doesn't spare the Democrats either because
he says, among other things, that the Democrats are history's second most enthusiastic capitalist
party.
They tend, he thinks, to go along with the trend as long as it's going well.
The thing that they have failed to see, and this is really getting into the third point
that he wants to make in his analysis, is that the Democrats should realize that their
constituency is really more, as Phillips understands, that the people who are inclined
toward the have-not part of the political spectrum, the lower classes and the middle
classes, and that they failed miserably in 1988 to recognize that fact, and if they had
recognized it more overtly, they might have done better in that presidential election
than they did.
Now, does Phillips want a Democratic victory in 1992?
Not likely, but clearly he does want economic reform.
In the final analysis, and this is another key point to note in his book, his outlook
retains a traditional American dream optimism about the American people.
Phillips counts on them to do the right thing.
Echoing some of George Santiana's sentiments about character and opinion in the United States,
he senses they will not tolerate excess for too long, whether the excess is that of too
much government control and too many taxes or too much wealth in the hands of a few and
too many others left out and hurt.
Yet if Phillips retains elements of an optimistic American populism, he also senses that the
cycles of American politics may not recover and revitalize all that needs reclaiming.
His closing remarks observe that by 1989, concentration of wealth, mounting debt and
financial recklessness increasingly caused Americans to approach the future with foreboding.
Foreboding and actual experience, however, may not match each other yet.
At least that finding appeared in an early December 1990 poll that was taken by the Los
Angeles Times and whose results were announced on New Year's Day 1991.
Based on a randomly selected cross-section of about 2,200 American adults, that poll
found that Americans were dissatisfied about national life by a margin of 2 to 1 just a
year ago opinions split evenly on that issue.
Yet nearly 9 in 10 of the people polled reported satisfaction with their personal lives and
those of their local communities, virtually the same result as a year ago.
The question is whether personal experience will catch up with or continue to diverge
from broad perceptions that have been increasingly negative in the early months of the 1990s.
Among the factors in determining that outcome will be the nation's success in dealing with
issues rooted in race and gender, the topic to which we will turn next when we examine
some dreams deferred.
