Lecture 6 Dreams Deferred, Race and Gender
The title of this lecture, Some Dreams Deferred, is reflected in the epigraph, which comes
from Langston Hughes this time. In one of his poems, there is a line which simply says
what happens to a dream deferred. Two of the nation's founders, Thomas Jefferson
and John Adams, died only hours apart on July 4th, 1826. This is one of those really
nice coincidences in American history, I think. In a poem that he wrote in 1975 called Great
American 4th of July Parade, Archibald McLeish portrays Jefferson and Adams visiting, unrecognized,
a contemporary celebration of the signing of the Declaration of Independence. Jefferson
and Adams listened to the poem's orator, who delivers a patriotic pep talk. They also
exchanged views with his audience, observing that Americans now seem to find Jefferson's
philosophy too optimistic. Adams nonetheless concludes with the final words he uttered
on his deathbed a century and a half before, Jefferson still lives. On that day in 1826,
Adams' proposition was literally false. It was, however, figuratively true and still
is. But if Americans retain hopeful outlooks, their moods often contrast with the bombast
of McLeish's orator in his poem, which at one point becomes a hysterical yell, the USA
is number one. The reasons for that contrast have much to do with suspicions that the American
dreams expansive sense of possibility may have promised more than it ever could deliver.
Once the United States was a young country with such a vast expanse of fertile open space
and time before it that an infinite number of new starts was conceivable, today the nation
is no longer young and never will be again. Its open space is mostly taken, its wanted
natural plentitude clearly finite, its reputation as a land of opportunity, not quite as exceptional
as might be hoped. Once the United States prided itself not only on the freedom of its
individuals, but also on the nation's freedom from foreign entanglements. After all, Europe
was an ocean away and no one had heard of the Pacific Rim. Now things are different.
The individual's freedom to be what Walt Whitman called a simple, separate person seems increasingly
hamstrung by a bureaucratically regulated order, and the national interest entangles the United
States with every other state in the world. Once Americans may have been innocent enough
to dream that the nation could not only control its own destiny, but that the rest of the
world would emulate its brand of democracy and capitalism. Hopes of that kind have been
bolstered by the demise of communist regimes in Eastern Europe and by upheavals in the
Soviet Union. But recently we have learned that even less than superpowers such as North
Vietnam and Iraq can affect American life in ways that we cannot control completely.
As for global conversion to democracy and capitalism, American style, the most prudent
thing to say is that many chapters in that story remain to be written, and the ending
of the tale is as problematic as it is unknown. Nevertheless, the truth remains. Jefferson
still lives. He does so in particular because he wrote and believed that proposition we have
noted before, the one that was destined to be as inspiring as it was ambiguous, as troublesome
as American practices rendered it ironic. All men are created equal. To glimpse further
how those dynamics have worked on and through other strands in the American dream, consider
that the African American sociologist, W. E. B. Du Bois, believed that the problem of
the 20th century is the problem of the color line. He stated that conviction in his 1903
classic called The Souls of Black Folk, which utilizes an image of the veil to designate
the racial barrier that has separated whites and blacks on American ground. According to
Du Bois, the veil is not a stone wall. Contact occurs among those it hangs between, but it
also affects separation, thus leading Du Bois to remind Frederick Jackson Turner that America
is not another word for opportunity to all her sons. Speaking well before either Turner
or Du Bois, Sojourner Truth, abolitionist sister to Frederick Douglass, would have corrected
them both. Look at my arm, she had told the Woman's Rights Convention at Akron, Ohio
in 1851. Look at my arm, I have plowed and planted and gathered into barns and no man
could head me, and ate I a woman? I could work as much and eat as much as any man when
I could get it, and bear the lash as well, and ate I a woman? I have borne children and
seen them sold into slavery, and when I cried out with a mother's grief, none but Jesus
heard me, and ate I a woman? Like the brothers and sisters for whom they spoke, Du Bois and
truth claimed equality, especially equality of opportunity as their American birthright.
In Du Bois' case in particular, his reading of Thomas Jefferson would not let him settle
for less, and it put him at odds with the most formidable black leader of his day, Booker
T. Washington. Probably every American knows about George Washington, famous son of Virginia
and founding father of them all. Less well-known, but certainly of great significance, is another
Virginian who bears the same surname. George Washington was the first president of his
country. Booker T. Washington was the principal of an Alabama school. The former was a slave
owner. The latter, a slave. Booker T. Washington was destined to become a leader, not of a
revolution perhaps, and not of an entire nation. But like George Washington, he did
have a cause aimed at liberty, and he worked to achieve national unity by representing and
guiding his people on their way out of American bondage.
Booker T. Washington's autobiography, called Up from Slavery, and published in 1901, is
a puzzling and disturbing book. It portrays the movement of a race, but hardly its triumph
over injustice and discrimination. On a personal level, however, it is a success story to compare
with Benjamin Franklin's. Indeed, it is a chronicle of advice, ambition and compromise
that reveals its author, like Franklin, to be a man far more complex and controversial
than the simple narrative indicates at first. To most Americans, if Booker T. Washington
is known at all, it is for two things. First, he was the organizer and longtime leader of
Tuskegee Institute in Alabama. Beginning in 1881, Washington labored for 34 years to
build that school with its emphasis on industrial training. Their African-American minds would
be taught to think as well, but it was Washington's principle that the place to start, and indeed
the model for black education to follow everywhere, was that of giving people labor skills, plus
a basic knowledge of hygiene and home economics. Such instruction would enable them to obtain
food and shelter. It would make their lives more tolerable and speed up entrance into the
mainstream of American life.
Not yet 40, Booker T. Washington had the heavy honor, responsibility and problem of being
the foremost African-American leader of his day. That role was created for him largely
by white opinion, for the nation was weary of the ambiguities unleashed by emancipation,
the wreckage left by the Civil War, and the turmoil of reconstruction. Not so differently
from today, peace and prosperity were the chief concerns of the white majority, north
and south, and Washington appeared to be a voice of reason with his plans for educating
blacks. When white support for black causes was forthcoming, it tended to support the
policies he advocated. Thus, partly because there was little choice, and partly because
Washington could argue his case persuasively by pointing to progress at Tuskegee Institute
and similar institutions, an African-American majority was willing to follow him too.
Washington's second distinction then lies in this role. It was to be encapsulated in
words spoken on a hot September day in 1895 at the opening of the Atlanta, Cotton States,
and International Exposition.
As Washington's autobiography tells the story, this was the first time in the entire history
of the Negro that a member of my race had been asked to speak from the same platform
with white southern men and women on any important national occasion. Neither by disposition,
nor by conviction did Washington think that much was to be gained by a lashing denunciation
of the white man, or by crushing a speech that would crusade in favor of civil rights.
He would do the best he could for his race, and the best that he could see was a compromise.
In all things that are purely social, his fateful formula submitted, we can be as separate
as the fingers, yet one as the hand in all things essential to mutual progress.
For a long time such words defined a color line in the United States, and to an extent
they still do. Just a year after Washington's Atlanta speech, for example, the Supreme Court
gave its decision in a famous case known as Plessy v. Ferguson. That case was provoked
by an African American challenge, which argued that an act of Louisiana's legislature was
unconstitutional because it violated the 13th and 14th amendments to the U.S. Constitution.
The act in question required all railroads to provide equal but separate accommodations
for blacks and whites, and also for bade intermingling between them.
Writing the Supreme Court's majority opinion, Justice Brown concentrated on the 14th amendment.
Adopted in 1865, that amendment contains five sections. The first, in particular, has come
to be a vital strand in the American dream. That section states, and I'm sure these words
will be familiar to you, all persons born or naturalized in the United States and subject
to the jurisdiction thereof are citizens of the United States and of the state wherein
they reside. No state shall abridge the privileges or immunities of citizens of the United States,
nor shall any state deprive any person of life, liberty or property without due process
of law, nor deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws.
In Plessy v. Ferguson, the court acknowledged that the object of this amendment was undoubtedly
to enforce the absolute equality of the two races before the law. But then Justice Brown
went on to write that in the nature of things it could not have been intended to abolish
distinctions based upon color or to enforce social as distinguished from political equality.
With reference to what Justice Brown called the established usages, customs and traditions
of the people, the promotion of their comfort and the preservation of the public peace in
good order, the court could not find the Louisiana legislation unreasonable. Indeed, the decision
continued, if the two races are to meet upon terms of social equality, it must be the result
of natural affinities, a mutual appreciation of each other's merits and the voluntary consent
of individuals.
Meanwhile, Justice Brown pointed out that what the court took to be the underlying fallacy
of the plaintiff's argument, namely that the enforced separation of the two races stamps
the colored race with a badge of inferiority, is really something that should be construed
as an interpretation that exists simply because the colored race chooses to put that construction
upon it.
Significantly, the Supreme Court's decision in Plessy v. Ferguson was not unanimous. There
was a lone dissenter, Justice John Harlan, whose minority opinion anticipated what would
become more than a half century later in the Supreme Court's 1954 landmark decision in
Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka.
Echoing Justice Harlan's dissent, he had written in Plessy v. Ferguson in his opinion
that our Constitution is colorblind and neither knows nor tolerates classes among citizens.
In respect of civil rights, all citizens are equal before the law, that was Harlan's dissenting
opinion, and echoing that opinion, Chief Justice Earl Warren's opinion in the 1954 case spoke
unanimously for that court. By finding that in the field of public education, the doctrine
of separate but equal has no place and that separate educational facilities are inherently
unequal. That decision and its implications struck a decisive blow, though far from a
final one, against the color line entrenched by Plessy v. Ferguson.
Of course, that line had been entrenched well before Washington's 1895 Atlanta talk or the
Supreme Court's 1896 decision. Clearly, moreover, Washington's intention was to soften and blur
the color line by encouraging the idea that blacks and whites could work together, thus
hastening the end of inequality and injustice that social separation might imply. Many whites
were sympathetic to this hope as well, but their feelings were not strong enough to overcome
more determined elements of white society who eagerly interpreted Washington's formula
as a mandate for segregation, separate and unequal, and Jim Crow.
From the privileged position of hindsight, it is easy to criticize. Probably Booker T.
Washington did compromise too much. Ironically, perhaps he did play the hands of black people
into new forms of bondage by catering too naively to white attitudes that supported his own ambitions,
where those estimates are valid, however, they also underscore that too rarely did white
intentions mesh with black faith that the color line could and would fade away. Frustrated
black hope and trust, the revelation of white souls more racially prejudiced than perhaps
either race expected, those factors disclosed dramatically by the workings of Booker T.
Washington's American dream still cluttered the way up from slavery.
To be sure there is another side of the coin, Washington's highest hopes were not simply
unachieved. Skills were taught, respect was sometimes won, mutual progress occasionally
did occur, and from time to time separation was overcome. Slowly, some African Americans
made economic headway on the base that Washington sat down, and if the viciousness of racial
hatred was never far from erupting, Washington's policies at least did not aggravate it. He
gave breathing room, however cramped, to a struggling people whose lot might have been
harder under leadership more militant. Still, Washington's hopes were largely dreams deferred,
then and in some ways even now. While Booker T. Washington prepared his Atlanta
speech, a student worked on a PhD dissertation entitled The Suppression of the African Slave
Trade to the United States, 1638 to 1870. The writer was the previously mentioned W.E.B.
Du Bois, and as I have noted already, he was to become the chief African American adversary
to Washington's policies on education, civil rights, and economic advancement.
Their backgrounds were very different. Though he shared Washington's experience of never
knowing a white-skinned father, Du Bois was not born to slavery. He spent his youth in
Massachusetts, and his education took him to high school and to Harvard instead of to
salt mines and the industrial training of Hampton Institute where Booker T. Washington
had grown up. Both men were gifted and intelligent, but Washington's mind was honed more by the
need and development of trade skills than by the classical literature that influenced
Du Bois so much. They shared the same basic goal, the raising of consciousness and conscience
in black and white alike so that Americans, and indeed men and women everywhere, could
pursue happiness without color-line restrictions. They differed, however, on the means. Acknowledging
the importance of Washington's plan to work from the bottom up and to push African Americans
forward by making them able and cheerful workers, Du Bois nevertheless kept asking insistently
who is going to do the pushing, who is going to pull black people up from slavery. Du Bois'
proposal put him at odds with Washington. The Negro race, like all races, said Du Bois,
is going to be saved by its exceptional men. The problem of education then among Negroes
he argued must first of all deal with the talented tenth. It is the problem of developing
the best of this race that they may guide the mass away from the contamination and death
of the worst in their own and other races. This plan, as Du Bois understood it, meant
an emphasis on university instruction, a stress on liberal and scientific as well as industrial
arts. The issues between them, moreover, did not stop with education. When Du Bois thought
of a talented tenth, he envisioned a class of African Americans equal in ability and
intelligence, if not superior, to any segment of white society. For such leadership to emerge,
it simply would not do to allow civil liberties to be refused or stripped away. A talented
tenth of second-class citizens was not an American dream but a nightmare to Du Bois.
So he protested Washington's accommodating politics. Booker T. Washington died on American
soil still convinced that his dreams would come true. W. E. B. Du Bois died in Africa.
Early on, although in more guarded ways, he had shared some of Washington's optimism,
but long years of service as a scholar at Atlanta University, organizer and editor for
the NAACP, political candidate and writer, left him unpersuaded that the wreckage strewn
along the color line would be cleaned up and fairly redressed in the United States. As
he grew older, his political and economic principles moved to the left. Advocating socialism as
the best way to cope with poverty and exploitation, he was honored in the communist world while
coming under governmental suspicion at home. Shortly before his death, Du Bois joined the
American Communist Party and then left the United States to take up citizenship in Ghana.
He died there on August 27, 1963, the eve of a historic march on Washington that brought
a quarter of a million Americans to the Lincoln Memorial in the name of civil rights. This
is another interesting juxtaposition of events and dates. Perhaps Du Bois died unhaunted
by the ghost of his own untrue dreams in a way unimaginable for Booker T. Washington,
but just as the latter's visions haunt America with their simple hopes so easily betrayed,
Du Bois' objectives, at least his earlier ones, form an indictment still to be reckoned
with. Though Du Bois used historical and sociological studies to shed light on the predicaments
and promises of American life, his early training at Harvard was in philosophy. His teachers
included George Santiana and William James, whom we have met before in this series. Du
Bois remained a philosopher, but he also reports an early decision to turn back, as he said,
from the lovely but sterile land of philosophic speculation to the social sciences as the field
for gathering and interpreting that body of fact which would apply to my program. Du
Bois did pioneering social scientific work as he explored the lives of African Americans
in Philadelphia, the history and structure of religious life in African American communities,
and a host of other topics. Where Du Bois' alive in 1991, his sociological studies might
explore why the United States sends people to prison at rates four times greater than
most Western European or Asian countries. In particular, he might explore why no country,
not even South Africa, incarcerates more black males than the United States, one of many
factors that leads some contemporary social scientists to say that in spite of the fact
that there are presently over 14 million of them, African American males nevertheless
run the risk of becoming an endangered species. Or Du Bois might be drawn to consider how
universities and their big time sports programs get intertwined and snarled with that enticing
American dream of a lucrative career in professional athletics. Of major college football and
basketball players, only about 1% make it. Meanwhile, the big time football and basketball
programs that seem to offer black athletes a way out of dead end streets can turn out
to be dead ends of their own. Too often, no pro career is matched by too little education
worthy of the name and no diploma. The graduation rates for black athletes in big time college
sports are only about 25% for football players and even less in basketball. Whatever Du Bois
might have studied, one of his consistent aims was to show in his words how Negro blood
has a message for the world. The results were a sociology that combines statistics with
the emotions of song, sweat and struggle, a history that made the facts and feelings
of color illuminate each other. Thus, Du Bois concluded his book, The Souls of Black Folk
with a chapter on the sorrow songs, referring to many of the spirituals that continue to
influence American music, religion and politics. He used his epigraphs for his chapters in
that book, A Bit of Music and some text from Negro Spirituals. Du Bois' sorrow songs
sing about exile, poverty, flight and freedom, strife and death. But those themes are the
beginning, not the end. For through all the sorrow of the sorrow songs Du Bois writes,
there breathes a hope of faith in the ultimate justice of things. Du Bois' meditation proceeds
to ask whether that hope is justified, whether the sorrow songs seem true. His answer, however,
had been given before the asking. It is found in Du Bois' protesting grief over his son's
untimely death. His little boy might have seen the veil lifted, although Du Bois understood
the chance was slim. Refusal to settle for that outcome, however, ultimately shines through
in Du Bois' words. Surely, he protests, surely this is not the end, surely there shall yet
dawn some mighty mourning to lift the veil and set the prison free. A mourning when men
ask of the workmen, not is he white, but can he work? When men ask artists, not are they
black, but do they know?
Speaking nearly a century later, Shelby Steele echoes Du Bois, the author of a 1990 work
called The Content of Our Character, A New Vision of Race in America, which is controversial
because of its criticisms of affirmative action programs. Shelby Steele says, I want to come
in the door on the same standards that everybody else came in the door on, so that you then
have to look at my work and see whether it stacks up, and then I'll know if you have
a glass ceiling there, that it's racism.
Du Bois' and Steele's American dream has not been disproven, neither has it been fully
confirmed.
Experiencing the ironic gap between what America offered and what its black citizens received,
Du Bois contended with a dream deferred. That phrase was deftly coined by another African-American
Langston Hughes, who along with Archibald McLeish probably uses the concept of the American
dream more overtly and often than any other American poet.
America, Hughes wrote in 1938, never was America to me, and yet I swear this oath, America
will be its dream, lies deep in the heart of me.
Like Du Bois, Hughes knew the sorrow songs. He heard them Harlem-style in the jazz riffs
and blues that inspired his verse. Du Bois had told his white readers how discouraging
it was for blacks to live haunted by the ghost of an untrue dream. Hughes did not forsake
his vow, America will be, but by 1951 he had to ask, what happens to a dream deferred?
Hughes' response, steeped in an anger, frustrated, impatient, and yet hopeful, all at once supplied
the unsettling correction. A dream deferred, Hughes warned, might well explode.
Hughes' premonition hit the target. By mid-century the struggle for racial equality heated up,
erupting violently across the land in New York, Detroit, Watts, and elsewhere during
the 1960s. Early on, Hughes had identified some of the reasons. Then and now an American
dream deferred will keep the have-nots tantalized with hope. Still seeking what they do not
possess, a certain amount of nothing, as Hughes called it, makes their self-determination
impotent because the powers insist on asking not, can he work, or does she know, but are
they white? If all men and women, however, are created equal and granted certain unalienable
rights by God, including those to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness, such results
are bound to cause confusion. The confusion they breed moreover teeters between despair
and rage. Either is more than sufficient to unleash violence.
There comes a time when the cup of endurance runs over and men are no longer willing to
be plunged into the abyss of despair. Recent studies suggest that Martin Luther King Jr.
had his flaws. In his doctoral dissertation he may even have cited the words of others
without the proper scholarly attributions, but the passage I have just quoted is one
that is unmistakably his own, for it was written on April 16, 1963 in the Birmingham Jail
Cell, where King was under arrest for his civil rights activities. King was not opposed
to letting a dream deferred explode, but that explosion he counseled must be governed either
by despair nor by rage. It had to clear a path of resistance that would heal, not deepen,
the wounds of inequality. The time was ripe to take self-conscious, self-controlled action
to make America live the meaning of its creed, King thought. So he rejected the view that
he was pressing too hard and fast for fundamental changes in American life. Weight, which King
took to be the code word for never, meant a dream deferred. That painful realization,
he went on to say, contained an unforgettable lesson. Freedom, wrote King, is never voluntarily
given by the oppressor, it must be demanded by the oppressed.
King's campaigns of nonviolent resistance succeeded in rending part of the veil of race
in the United States, but his hopes too remained in part a dream deferred. As King himself
predicted, he never got to the Promised Land. An assassin's bullet in Memphis saw to that.
In the longer run, however, everything depends on whether King, despite his realistic views
of what happens when human life is infested with racism, was still too optimistic. In
spite of his tough appraisal that those holding privileges dependent on the color line never
give up their prerogatives easily, King proclaimed that I still have a dream. America's hard
one heritage of freedom, he believed, is ultimately more powerful than our traditions of cruelty
and injustice. Hence, King affirmed, justice shall prevail here. Thus far, events have
not proved King completely correct. But will King's confidence yet be more or less justified?
Will American ground from every mountainside let freedom ring? Answers to those questions
are ironically deferred because they cannot be written in black and white alone. The veil
of race is woven of many multicolored strands, nor does the complexity end with skin color
and race alone. American ground is peopled by Asians and Latinos of diverse traditions,
Arabs and Jews of varied persuasions, as well as by the multiple Native American cultures
that were here long before the hordes of ethnically different Europeans and Africans arrived.
The varieties of heritage and lifestyle in America have, of course, often been celebrated
in the United States. Indeed, Herman Melville, the author of that American classic, Moby
Dick, may have been correct when in another of his novels, one called Redburn, he proclaimed
the following.
There is something in the contemplation of the mode in which America has been settled
that in a noble breast should forever extinguish the prejudices of national dislikes. Settled
by the people of all nations, all nations may claim her for their own.
You cannot spill a drop of American blood, wrote Melville, without spilling the blood
of the whole world. We are not a narrow tribe. No, our blood is as the flood of the Amazon
made up of a thousand noble currents all pouring into one. We are not a nation, so much as
a world.
Nevertheless, the diversity of which Melville spoke often makes living together harder for
Americans not easier. Melville, to the contrary, notwithstanding, one reason is that these
domestic relationships, which are never very far removed from the color line, have international
implications. Americans see each other, not to mention their country as a whole, in foreign
affairs. American foreign policy is influenced by ethnic coalitions and rivalries within
the nation's borders.
The factors noted thus far would be more than enough to guarantee that the domestic
tranquility promised by the American Constitution is much more to be wished for than to be taken
for granted. Yet no appraisal of the State of the Union could begin to be complete if
it ignored the fact that Americans are divided not only by color and race, ethnicity and
culture, but also by that most fundamental, natural difference of all, the one between
male and female. Here, too, there are varied rivalries and coalitions, all of them affected
by the particularities of their constituents.
Lately, the resulting stew bubbles in a pressure cooker, suggesting that novelist Thomas Wolff
saw the situation clearly in his 1940 novel called You Can't Go Home Again. The true discovery
of America, wrote Wolff, is before us.
A century and a half after Alexis de Tocqueville took the pulse of democracy in the United
States, a writer named Studs Turkle made his own survey of American ground. Earlier,
in a book called Working, he had appraised American attitudes toward work. This time,
his project broadened to evaluate American dreams lost and found as his book was titled.
Reporting Turkle's interviews with men and women, young and old from diverse geographical
regions, economic classes and ethnic backgrounds, but each thoroughly American, the book displayed
what Americans in the early 1980s thought about their homeland and its future. Three
samples illustrate further themes pertaining to dreams deferred.
Seattle residents Aki and June Kurose, both American citizens, are Nisei, second generation
Japanese immigrants. Their civil rights were violated by internment in an American concentration
camp during World War II, but that experience is not the only one that has taught them how
far the veil of race extends. A school teacher, Aki Kurose, once asked whether her school's
library could get some books about Japanese American history. The librarian's not-so-innocent
response was a question. Why do you have to bring up the past?
Ramona Bennett, a Puyallup Indian, helps Mrs. Kurose supply the answer. They concur that
the typical history officially packaged for American schools is still white male dominated.
It obscures what most needs honest illumination, and ironically, too few are the wiser. Take
for example violated treaties. Trusting Puyallups accepted reservation status from the United
States government. In Bennett's experience, however, reservation never meant preservation.
The government persuaded people that its encroachments were at least virtuous necessities, if not
obviously warranted rights. Stripped of its irony, what happened to sense Ramona Bennett
simply is we had land the whites wanted. Land, Stephen Cruz might add, is not all they
wanted. His grandparents entered the United States when, as he puts it, controls at the
border didn't exist as they do now. Their grandson did well, graduated college with
a degree in engineering, where the bucks were in the early 60s, then did graduate work
in business. He got 14 job offers, took the one from Procter and Gamble, and was on his
way. Irony, and with his recognition of it ambivalence, began to intrude. How much did
his advancement have to do with his abilities, he wondered, and how much did it have to do
with his being a minority? No hypocrite, Cruz did not deplore the civil
rights acts that were raising his chances. He just was unsure whether his own success
reflected a real change of spirit in the United States, or whether it was an indication that
the letter of the law was being fulfilled so that white domination could be maintained.
Every time I turned around, he told Terkel, America seemed to be treating me very well.
Admitting that he felt a real internal conflict between the temptations of financial gain
and the lure of integrity, Cruz eventually decided that America was treating him a little
too well for his or the nation's good. Finding that established power conferred so much on
him, but so little on others who were on the wrong side of the color line, the young man
concluded that his success, unfortunately, was symptomatic that America is ruled, as
he put it, by the fear of losing. Convinced that a counter power was needed, Cruz set
aside his corporate image and became a teacher.
Edrian Rich, an ardent American feminist poet, stands similar to Rain from an old house in
America as she calls one of her poems, but she also views it differently. She likens
the body of a pioneer American woman to a hollow ship bearing sons to the wilderness,
daughters whose juices dream like mine into the arroyo of stillbirth massacres. As Sojourner
Truth and Harriet Tubman, Angelina and Sarah Grimke, Charlotte Perkins Gilman and Jean
Adams, Betty Frieden and Molly Yard would join countless others to testify, the nation
has not treated its women too well, at least not enough of them.
If W. E. B. Du Bois was correct to dissent from Turner, America has not been another
word for opportunity to all her sons. That indictment seems to ring even truer for their
sisters, mothers and daughters. The domestic separation of powers Rich contends left American
women in a lonely, savagely fathered land where they got more than their fair share of suffering,
less than their equitable portion of liberty to say nothing of satisfaction. Rich's poem,
however, is no man-hating recital of complaint and resentment. It celebrates the resourceful
endurance of American women, the know-how and determination embodied in and borne through
the frontier woman leveling her rifle along the homestead fence, urging the American woman
and by implication all Americans to come to terms with the women in the mirror. Rich hopes
they will activate untapped power to soften fairly if not to erase altogether the lines
that divide so much, so needlessly and destructively. To the extent that they do, we are, she suggests,
in the open on our way. Like that of many others whose voices have been represented in this
particular lecture, Rich's faith in the future shows that her old house has foundations deeply
grounded in the American dream. Whether they stand on solid rock or on shifting sand, however,
remains undetermined. The dream is still in the making and in disturbing ways, too, as
the next lecture suggests by probing American dreams and holocaust questions.
