The lecturer is Professor David J. Hellfand, Professor of Astronomy at Columbia University.
After his public high school education in Madapoiset, Massachusetts, Professor Hellfand
attended Amherst College as a scholarship student from 1968 to 1973. He received his MS in Physics
and his PhD in Astronomy in 1977 at the University of Massachusetts, working under Professor Joseph
Taylor, the 1993 Nobel Laureate in Physics. Professor Hellfand moved to Columbia University
as a postdoctoral fellow in 1977. He was appointed Assistant Professor of Astronomy in 1978, Associate
Professor of Physics in 1982, and Full Professor of Physics in 1987. He returned to the Department
of Astronomy in 1992, where he has served as Department Chair for more than 15 years. He
is also Co-Director of the Columbia Astrophysics Laboratory. Professor Hellfand spent a year at
the Danish Space Research Institute in Copenhagen in 1984, and was the Sackler Distinguished
Visiting Astronomer at the University of Cambridge from 1998 to 1999. His work has covered many
areas of modern astrophysics, including radio, optical and x-ray observations of celestial
sources ranging from nearby stars to the most distant quasars. Professor Hellfand primarily
teaches undergraduate courses, especially two courses that he designed in an effort to rectify a
long-standing absence of science from the core curriculum at Columbia University. One of those
courses entitled The Universal Timekeeper provided the basis for much of this course.
In 2009, Professor Hellfand took a leave of absence from Columbia to serve as the President of
Quest University, Canada, a new Liberal Arts and Sciences University he helped launch in
2007 to foster intensive interdisciplinary undergraduate teaching and learning. Professor
Hellfand's teaching awards have included Columbia's 2001 Presidential Teaching Award and the 2002
Great Teacher Award from the Society of Columbia Graduates. During the late 1990s, Professor
Hellfand appeared weekly on the Discovery Channel program Science News, bringing the latest astronomical
discoveries to the U.S. television audience. More recently, his television appearances have
included both Comedy Central's The Daily Show and the National Geographic Channel's The Known
Universe. Professor Hellfand prepared the course guidebook that comes with these lectures. The
course guidebook includes a detailed outline of each lecture, a timeline, a glossary, biographical
notes and a bibliography. To get the most out of this course, you may find it useful to review
the outlines before or after each lecture.
