20 seconds.
Columbia College, the Ivy League undergraduate school of Columbia University, where I teach,
has for 90 years had a true core curriculum in which all first-year students read the
same book in a given week and discuss it in 20-student seminars.
When I arrived at Columbia in 1977, I was delighted to discover that the Columbia faculty
had the temerity to actually specify courses that all students should take, to declare
that there is knowledge representative of human achievement that all well-educated
citizens should possess.
But I was simultaneously appalled to learn that the seven required core curriculum courses
included zero math and zero science.
So I set out to remedy this situation.
Now, being scientists, my colleagues and I conducted a number of experiments over the
years with the aim of constructing a self-sustaining science course worthy of inclusion in the
sacred core curriculum.
I'm pleased to report that there are now eight required courses in Columbia's core,
including Frontiers of Science, an innovation which took a mere twenty-two years to achieve.
The course I will present here, however, is not Frontiers, but it is one of the several
precursors which I dreamt up, one which continues to hold a fascination for me.
I hope you'll share my enthusiasm.
A prerequisite for any addition to Columbia's core was that it conveyed the essence of the
unique human activity we call science.
To fit in well with the other core courses in art, music, literature and philosophy,
it occurred to me that it would be advantageous to adopt an historical approach.
The other courses do things that way.
But I most certainly did not want to teach history of science.
First of all, I'm not qualified to teach history of science, and secondly, that would
have been a history course, not a science course.
I thought that perhaps instead I could teach history through science.
I could illustrate how techniques from physics, astronomy, chemistry, geology can be harnessed
to reconstruct both human and pre-human history.
So I began reading articles outside of my field of astronomy that were relevant to the
contribution science could make to writing history.
The more I played with this theme, the more I realized that cutting-edge techniques in
each field increasingly focused on the atomic scale.
No longer were investigators relying primarily on sifting through abandoned refuse piles
or measuring jaw bone shapes accurately or gazing at sediment layers or just counting
stars.
They were analyzing the objects of their study by counting atoms, by deciphering molecules,
and by applying radioactive clocks.
Thus emerged the theme of this course, a theme which offers a unifying view of science.
Reconstructing history, atom by atom.
Columbia was an appropriate place to contemplate introducing a course in which atoms were the
key to telling time, because on January 21, 1945, the great Columbia physicist I.I.
Robbie gave a lecture to the American Physical Society in 428 Pupin Lab, the very room in
which I teach.
In that lecture, he introduced the notion of an atomic clock.
Robbie had spent his entire career probing the ever finer details of atomic structure,
and recognized an opportunity for another major step forward towards miniaturizing timekeeping,
and thus improving its precision.
From the Sumerian calendar of 360 days, a year which didn't quite fit with the seasons
and required the regular edition of feast days to make sure it didn't get out of line,
to the huge water clocks, to smaller mechanical chronometers, to tiny Swiss timepieces, the
precision with which we tell time has increased as the clockwork mechanism shrank.
Robbie's idea was to use the precisely measured oscillations of individual molecules to construct
a time standard of unprecedented accuracy.
The evolution of his idea over the last 65 years has led to clocks that lose less than
one second in a hundred million years, less than two millionths of a second in a human
lifetime.
My idea, however, was more basic and more widely applicable.
I wanted to descend the level of individual atoms, but then to use everything we know
about them, their structure, their behavior, their interactions, and their origins, to
write history.
Indeed, from my perspective, the history of the universe and all it contains is written
in the particular arrangements of the fundamental particles which comprise atoms.
Given an understanding of the physical laws describing the behavior of these particles
and the energies with which they interact, we can read that history.
Just as given a vocabulary and the rules of syntax, we can read the record of human history,
consciously recorded.
Atoms, furthermore, are not culturally biased like human historians, although heavy ones
do move more slowly than light ones, and there are other distinctions which we must remain
alert to as we proceed along with our atomic guides.
More importantly, however, atoms provide us with access to times far earlier than those
human historians have recorded, allowing us to explore the rise and fall of preliterate
societies, to examine the history of Earth's changing climate and the evolution of our
atmosphere, to recreate the origin of the solar system four and a half billion years
ago, and even a little self-reflexively to write a history of the atoms themselves, beginning
with the formation of their constituent particles in the first few microseconds of the universe.
My survey of atomic historians makes no claim to being comprehensive or complete.
I have picked examples which appeal to me as being particularly clever of exemplifying
the best that today's science can offer in bridging different disciplines and arriving
at an elegant and unassailable conclusion about the way the world is, and more importantly
for history the way it was.
I will begin with five lectures that provide the necessary background in atomic and nuclear
physics. The remainder of the course is split roughly in half, history on the surface of
the Earth, and then the history of everything else.
So let's begin.
Atoms are tiny. Arranged in a single layer on the head of a pin, twenty-five trillion
of them can dance, even more impressive than angels. Their internal structure is indeed
an elaborate minuet of charged particles, and the rhythm of their dance produces radiation
that can be used to identify them across billions of light-years of space. Remarkably, the atoms
we see out there are identical, precisely identical, to those of which we are made.
These universal constituents of all matter, then, can be harnessed as a guide to all of
history. Now, atoms are not, of course, the usual historians. Indeed, the first four definitions
of history in the Oxford English Dictionary refer explicitly to people both as the authors
and the subjects of history. In the OED one finds, definition one, quote, a relation of
incidents in early use, either true or imaginary, later only those professedly true, end quote,
we'll try to stick to the ones that really are true. The second definition, a written
narrative constituting a continuous methodical record in order of time of important public
events, especially those connected with a particular country, people, or individual.
The history our atoms will help us write will be far more universal in scope. And so the
definitions go, three and four about people writing history about people. Until we get
to number five, which is, quote, a systematic account without reference to time of a set
of natural phenomena, end quote. This is the use of the word history as in the natural
history museum. But the natural history museum is not without reference to time. One can
walk from room to room to see the evolution of life, the evolution of the geology of the
earth, etc. And it's in that sense that we will use history. The root of history in
Latin is Historia, a narrative of past events. But the origin of that word is from the Greek,
Historia, a learning or knowing by inquiry. The type of inquiry we will employ, of course,
is science. And science is a quantitative subject, so numbers are important. Galileo
was the first, as he was in many areas of science, to point this out with pungent prose.
He wrote in the essay, The Assayer, the person who assays the universe, in 1623, and I quote,
philosophy is written in this grand book, The Universe, which stands continuously open
to our gaze. But the book cannot be understood unless one first learns to comprehend the
language and interpret the characters in which it is written. It is written in the language
of mathematics, and its characters are triangles, circles, and other geometrical figures, without
which it is humanly impossible to understand a single word of it. Without these, one is
wandering about in a dark labyrinth. So, let's make sure we have a light in the labyrinth
to read numbers. Furthermore, since we'll be dealing with size and time scales that
are very far beyond our everyday experience, we'll be using very big and very small numbers
as part of our constant vocabulary. Say you want to count the pixels on your computer
screen, you were having a particularly slow day. There's about a million of them, but
how big is the number a million? If you counted one per second, one, two, three, you might
think that's a little slow, but by the time you get to 684,432, 684,433, it's really
hard to get the number in in a second. So, if you counted once per second, you did it
eight hours a day, it would take you a month to count the pixels on your computer screen.
Your HDTV may have twice as many pixels. And yet a million is a very small number in most
of the contexts we will discuss. A billion is a thousand times a million. And to count
to a billion eight hours a day would take you 83 years, your entire lifetime, not an occupation
I recommend. And yet even a billion is too small for much of what we will study. A hundred
billion is a number that comes up frequently. There are, for example, a hundred billion
stars in our Milky Way. There are also, it turns out, about a hundred billion galaxies
like our Milky Way scattered throughout the visible portion of the universe. There are
also, curiously enough, about a hundred billion neurons in the human brain which contemplates
these hundred billion stars and the hundred billion galaxies. And there are also a hundred
billion atoms inside each neuron. Now my students look for deep meaning in this, but I assure
you it's just a coincidence. To count to a hundred billion though, if you counted 247,
would take you 3200 years. So it's a very big number indeed. We need a compact system
to represent these large numbers so we don't fill up our paper with zeros. And we adopt
the system called scientific notation, which you may be familiar with. It separates numbers
that are numerals, one through nine, from the number of zeros a number contains. So
the number 23,400 in this system would be written 2.34 times 10 to the fourth, where
the four in the exponent represents the number of decimal places one must move to the right
to recover the full number with all its zeros. Likewise for small fractions, 0.00000056,
one would write as 5.6 times 10 to the minus seven, where the x-bone seven is the number
of decimal places and the minus means you move to the left. Now obviously it's not
critical in these cases I've just cited, but if we wish to quote for example the mass
of the sun in kilograms, something that we would need to do, it's 1.99000000, I won't
bore you with all of them, but it's obvious that 1.99 times 10 to the 30th kilograms is
an easier way to proceed. This compact notation is important, but analogies are also useful
in trying to comprehend the scales that we'll be exploring. What is the range of length
scales, the range of distances that you can actually viscerally experience? Well I don't
do this very often anymore because I have very few of them left, but I would submit,
ooh I got three, that's very bad, I would submit that a human hair held at arm's length
is just about the smallest distance that you can directly see. The human hair is about
two tenths of a millimeter across. Why is that the smallest distance you can see? Why
is that the limit of your vision? The answer actually depends on two numbers which at first
blush have nothing to do with seeing a hair. The two numbers are the temperature of the
surface of the sun and the strength of gravity on the surface of the earth. That sets the
limit on the small scale of human vision and we'll explore this further in lecture four.
Now what's the largest distance you can viscerally feel? Don't tell me it's flying from New York
to California because yes you know that's three thousand miles, but you don't actually
experience the three thousand miles. I mean sitting on the runway for a few hours waiting
for the de-icing machine in a winter sleet storm is almost as unpleasant as flying to
Los Angeles and you haven't gone anywhere. So what's the distance you can actually feel?
I don't know if you've ever done this, but I have. Suppose you go on a week long hike,
like the Appalachian Trail or something like that. You might if you're in good shape, which
I used to be, hike two hundred kilometers in a week. That you feel, you feel it in every
muscle as a matter of fact. So I would say that's the longest distance that I have a
good visceral feeling for. Now if I take this hair and I laid hairs next to each other along
the entire two hundred kilometer distance of my hike, I would have a billion hairs.
The ratio of two tenths of a millimeter to two hundred kilometers is a factor of one
billion. It would take you thirty two years, counting twenty four seven, to count those
hairs along my trail. A billion seconds is an interesting number. If you need an excuse
for a party, and I'm always looking for one of those, remember that a hundred and fourteen
days before you turn thirty two, you've lived exactly a billion seconds. I'm now waiting
for the day two hundred and twenty eight days before I turn sixty four, so I can have my
two billionth birthday party. Now the point about this enormous range of distances, from
this tiny hair you can barely see, to the aches you feel at the end of a week long hike,
a factor of a billion, doesn't get us close to exploring the range of scales we'll be
discussing in this course. If I go a billion times smaller, I'm still on much too large
a scale to examine the atomic nucleus, which will be the key to uncovering so much of the
history we'll describe. And if I go a billion times bigger than the hike that I took for
a week, I'm still in the outer regions of the solar system. If I go a billion times
a billion times bigger than the hike, I'm still trolling around in the local universe.
Analogies then that are visual are useful in picturing things. Let's, for example,
take this orange and pretend it's the nucleus of an atom. Now the picture one often has
in textbooks is of a nucleus positively charged with little negatively charged electrons orbiting
around at a distance something like that. That is a hopelessly misleading picture of
what an atom is actually like, for if this orange represented the nucleus of a typical
atom, then the first orbiting electron would be five city blocks away, a quarter of a mile.
The atom is 99.999999999% empty space. It is quite remarkable then that if I take my
hand, which is made of atoms, and I hit this table which is made of atoms, it doesn't pass
right through. It's all empty space. And yet the forces which hold the atoms together
in my hand and in this table resist greatly the penetration of my hand into the table.
That we'll discuss in lecture three. If my hair were made of atoms where the nuclei
were the size of this orange and the electrons were orbiting five blocks away, the hair on
that scale would be three quarters of a million miles wide, three times the distance to the
moon. If the orange is the entire atom, that is if I shrink my electrons in so they're
orbiting on the surface of the orange and the nucleus is now some completely invisibly
small dot at the center of the orange, then the hair would merely be the width of New
Jersey. Those are the small scales we'll explore, but we'll use atoms on those tiny scales to
explore the whole universe as well. So let's go up in scale. Let's make the orange, a very
versatile prop, into our sun here in Washington D.C. Now the sun actually is about a million
miles across, but we'll shrink it down and pretend it's the size of the orange. On that
scale, if my orange is there, then the earth represents this fleck of chalk dust just about
that size, and it's over here about 15 feet away. The chalk dust orbiting the sun once
every 365 days. Jupiter, the largest of the planets, would be about the size of this baby
aspirin, and it's out there about 60 feet away. Neptune would be a couple blocks out,
that's the last planet from the sun now, Pluto has been appropriately demoted, and the next
star, and there's nothing between us and the next star, is another orange. It's very similar
in size and shape to our sun, and it's in Minneapolis, a thousand miles away. And then
there's another orange in Sacramento, and maybe a grapefruit in Hawaii, and a couple
more oranges in Singapore and Hong Kong, and a hundred billion others scattered around
at those kinds of distances. And we observe it all from that little bit of chalk dust
over there. Likewise, time is going to be explored on scales which we can't possibly
experience in everyday life. The electron orbits the nucleus, this nucleus out there
five blocks away, in 10 to the minus 17 seconds. It goes around a hundred thousand trillion
times each second, and the universe, the age of the universe is 13.72 billion years.
Well, again, how can we contemplate these vast scales of time, like the vast scales
of space we've just discussed? Well, we need to compress them into some limit of time that
we have a feeling for. I could compress it into a human lifetime, but I'm still at my
lifetime, and I don't know when it's going to end, and don't particularly want to. And
that's a pretty long time, I don't remember much from when I was four years old. Compress
it into a day would be too short, because I sleep through a third of the day. But one
calendar year works pretty well for this analogy. We imagine the entire universe, from its birth
to today, compressed into a calendar year. Well, my year in New York always starts in
Times Square, with the ball slowly descending until at the stroke of midnight it hits the
bottom, and a million people in Times Square kiss each other. We'll take that moment, the
moment the ball hits the bottom as the moment of the Big Bang, the creation of the universe,
which contrary to popular views, is not an explosion that happened at some point in time,
at some place in space, the Big Bang created space and time as well. But that happens at
the moment the ball hits the bottom. What happens next? Well, the nuclei of hydrogen
and helium, which will be part of our little atomic historian team, are instantaneously
present. And the first atoms, the combination of those nuclei with electrons into their
simple orbits, takes place about 15 minutes after midnight, the time you're pouring yourself
your second glass of champagne. At that point, the universe is incredibly uniform, the gas
is smeared around all over the place, and the space time of the universe is expanding.
But there are small little clumps, little excesses of matter over here, which have a
slightly stronger gravitational influence on the surrounding universe, and so a little
bit of matter falls onto them, which gives them more mass, which means they have a greater
influence and galaxies begin to form, chunks of mass weighing a few hundred billion solar
masses. Our Milky Way doesn't get around to doing this until around mid-February, six
weeks into the year. At that point, stars are born out of the gas from which the Milky
Way condensed. Stars live out their lives and die, generating in their cores atoms, the
other ninety atoms of the periodic table, which will also employ, to enrich the clouds
of gas and dust from which new generations of stars can be formed. So stars are born
and die, and born and die, generation after generation, until at ten thirty in the evening,
on September first, a particular cloud of gas, having been triggered by a nearby explosion
marking the death of a massive star, begins to collapse. Most of the mass forms a ball
in the center, and a little bit of detritus, less than one percent, is spread out in a
disc around it. That's our sun, turning on its nuclear reactions at ten thirty p.m.,
September first, two-thirds of the way through the year already, and an hour or two later,
the earth collects together lots of that junk left over from the forming sun, and begins
orbiting, as it has ever since, for the last four and a half billion years in real time,
for the last four months of our artificial year, every three hundred and sixty-five days.
Within three weeks, less than three weeks, life emerges on the planet. We don't know
exactly how fast life occurred, but we have fossil evidence for this, which we will explore,
that shows that by the third week of September, the earth was already teeming with life. And
that life evolves, mostly single-celled organisms, from the cyanobacteria and archaeobacteria,
up to more modern bacteria, and eventually the development of cells with nuclei, the
eukaryotes, which evolve yet further. This goes on for a couple of months.
On December fifteenth, the earth, for the last time, goes into one of its phases, where
because of the complex interaction of the oceans, the motion of the continents on the
surface, and the earth's atmosphere, which is constantly evolving over this time, as
we shall see, the earth goes into its snowball phase, where it freezes all over. Not just
ice caps at the poles, but the oceans freeze all the way down to near the equator, and
the only little refuges for life are near the equator, and perhaps where volcanoes are
burning holes through the thick layer of ice that turns the whole earth into a snowball.
December fifteenth. And then, another geologic or biological change occurs, we don't quite
know what, but on December sixteenth, the next day, we have the Cambrian explosion,
the remarkable blossoming of life. Flowering plants emerge, multi-celled organisms in enormous
variety, life moves from the ocean onto the land.
And for the next eight days or so, things evolve. Until on December twenty-fourth, about
ten forty-five in the morning, on Christmas Eve, those incredibly ancient creatures, the
dinosaurs, appear on the surface of the earth. Christmas Eve, the universe began on January
first, nearly twelve months ago. Then, the dinosaurs rule the earth for almost a week,
until December thirtieth, at five eleven in the evening, and we know that time very precisely,
a ten kilometer asteroid crashes into the Yucatan Peninsula of Mexico, instituting a
worldwide disaster of a blackout cloud around the earth which blocks the sun, of forest
fires which burn most of the organic matter on the surface, and which wipe out the dinosaurs.
With December thirty-first, the small furry little creatures that managed to survive this
apocalypse continue to evolve over the course of the last day. They are the mammals. By
eight fifty in the evening, about time to get dressed for the New Year's Eve party,
species of a new kind diverge from the line of chimpanzees and bonobos. Over the next
three hours, they become increasingly upright, their brains grow larger, their jaw length
changes, and language emerges. At eleven fifty-four fifty, that is, just five minutes and ten
seconds before the ball starts to drop in Times Square, the species Homo sapiens emerges
on the plains of the Serengeti. Then things pick up. At eleven fifty-eight twenty, with
a minute and forty seconds to go, the Ice Age cave dwellers of Europe paint the beautiful
Lascaux murals on the caves of France, art in a very cold time. At eleven fifty-nine thirty,
the ball begins to drop thirty seconds before the New Year. With twenty-five seconds left,
the ice, a mile thick over my home in New York, begins to recede, and the Ice Age ends
ushering in the most stable period of climate in the last half million years. With only nine
point five seconds to go, with the ball two-thirds of the way down, the ancient pyramids of Giza
are begun. A few seconds as we shall see after Stonehenge is built. At four point four seconds,
the Roman Coliseum is constructed. With only three point one seconds to go towards midnight,
the great lodge at Chaco Canyon shows the blossoming of the Anastasi civilization in
the southwest. With one point two seconds to go, Columbus discovers the New World. With
only half a second to go, the Declaration of Independence is proclaimed, ushering in
this long-lived democracy of ours, a half a second out of the year. With point one three
seconds left, I was born. A few of you may have a few hundredths of a second on me. And
at point zero zero zero zero zero eight seconds, less than a tenth of a microsecond to go,
I began this lecture. And it will only take a couple more microseconds to finish this
whole series. You probably have that much time for it. We will reconstruct all of this
history. Some of it in studying detail by studying atoms. We'll begin by exploring the complex
structure of particles which make up the atom and the forces which govern their interaction.
The interactions of atoms in the world with our sense organs represent the first step of our
observations that we must make. But we must clearly extend those organs because of the short
time scales and tiny distances involved with tools that we use to count, analyze, and manipulate
atoms individually, directly. The instability of some atomic nuclei, a process called radioactivity,
will provide us with imperturbable, beautifully accurate clocks. We will study human artifacts,
paintings, cave art, architecture, buildings, and bones, and date them precisely to put them
in the sequence of history. We will use tree rings, ice cores, ocean sediments, and rocks
to understand the pre-human history of all of Earth, its climate and its atmosphere.
We will use atoms and stars to trace their history all the way back to near the beginning
of time where space and time become inseparable. Light from the very first atoms to form will
allow us to write the ultimate history to the creation of the particles themselves in
the Big Bang. Welcome to the journey with atoms as our guide.
This is not a course on the history of physics, but one of history through physics. Our tour
through time and space will touch many fields of science, although I'm not attempting a
comprehensive survey. But everything is made of atoms, and their nuclei provide indelible
markers of their provenance and their destinies, as well as imperturbable clocks which provide
the times and the dates we need. Welcome to the quest of Reconstructing History,
atom by atom. To begin this adventure, we must understand thoroughly
what atoms are and how they behave. They are, most definitely, not what their Greek name
autonomous implies, indivisible. Rather, they are complex entities composed of several smaller
particles governed by three separate forces and capable of communication with the outside
world. Next time, we'll peel back the layers of this complexity to reach the leptons and
quarks, the subatomic building blocks of atoms, and thus of all matter in the universe.
