For the past two lectures now, we've been mucking about in the invisible and seemingly
abstract world of atoms and quarks and photons and other subatomic particles.
My claim is that this world has much to teach us about history, so it's time to step back
and reconnect to our world.
Why is the sky blue?
Why is the sunset red?
Why is a leaf green?
Why do we feel warm at a summer clam bake?
And why is an oyster cool and salty as we slurp it off its shell?
Why do we smell the contents of a drop bottle of perfume long after we see it hit the floor
and hear the shattering of glass?
Our perception of the world around us is limited by our sensory organs and the brain
which processes their signals.
We see all the colors of the rainbow not because those are the only colors that exist, but because
they're the only ones that evolution has equipped us to see.
We need an alarm to alert us in our houses for the presence of carbon monoxide because
our nose doesn't have a sensor that's receptive to that molecule.
We can't sort atoms as we would marbles because our fingers are way too big and clumsy.
In order to explore the realms beyond our direct experience, we must extend our senses
with devices that allow us to see other colors and to manipulate nature on scales that we
cannot explore directly.
We begin then with a look at the senses we have and the extensions they require in order
to embed ourselves comfortably in the world of the atom.
The reality you experience is created by electrochemical signals in your brain.
Now this may be a concept that's hard for you to accept, but it was stated most dramatically
by Francis Crick, the co-discoverer of the structure of the DNA molecule who later in
his career turned to neuroscience.
In 1994, he wrote a book called The Astonishing Hypothesis in which he opened the book by
saying your joys, your sorrows, your memories and your ambitions, your sense of personal
identity and free will are in fact no more than the behavior of a vast assembly of nerve
cells and their associated molecules.
Now you may or may not believe this, and it's not critical to the rest of this course.
I happen to believe that it is true.
But our interest here is to explore much more mundane perceptions, how the external world
acts through your sense organs to deliver information to your brain and the inherent limitations
this imposes on what we can perceive in the world around us.
The cell is the basic unit of organization of the body, just like the atom is the basic
unit of organization of all matter.
And the structure of the cell is absolutely critical both for responding to stimuli from
the outside world and in transmitting a signal that communicates that response to the brain
where it can be processed.
The cell is surrounded by a membrane which is made mostly of fatty molecules and the
purpose of this membrane is to control the flow of ions and atoms and molecules from
the outside world into the cell when they're needed and to reject from the cell things
that are no longer required inside.
There are specialized molecules embedded in these cell walls which open and close little
channels that allow atoms and ions to flow in and out.
It's sort of like a straw which twists shut and then in response to the right stimulus
opens up and allows a channel for things to flow from outside in or perhaps from inside
out.
This is called an ion channel because most of the things that flow in and out of the
cell are in fact charged particles, either single atoms or molecules.
Some of these ion channels respond to chemicals called ligands which can be in the form of
home hormones produced by your endocrine system, by drugs you take into your body, or by antigens
produced by your immune system which attach themselves to the cell membrane right next
to the ion channel and instruct it to either open or close.
Other channels respond to the cell membrane transmitted over the whole surface of the
cell by pressure.
Just pushing on a side of a cell transmits that signal all around the cell and these
particular ion channels open and close in response to such pressure.
Yet other channels are associated with little pumps that are powered by stored chemical
potential energy that actively move ions from one side of the cell wall out or from the
outside in.
Neurons are the basic cell of the nervous system.
They have a cell body like all other cells and a lot of complicated machinery inside
but that's not of interest here.
What we're concerned with is how these cells manage to transmit signals from remote parts
of the body to the brain.
They do so in that they have a long extension, say roughly circular cell body with a long
extension called an axon which extends out of one side of the cell and on the other side
of the cell hundreds, perhaps even thousands of smaller extensions called dendrites.
The axon of one cell communicates with its neighboring cells by sending a signal down
its long staff and at the end emitting tiny little packets of chemicals called neurotransmitters
across the tiny little gap that separates the long axon from the dendrites of the neighboring
cell.
This is called the synaptic gap and it takes a signal which is primarily electrical as
we will see down the axon and turns it into a chemical signal that communicates with the
cell next door.
That's why we call these things electrochemical signals.
Now the inside of the neuron is normally at a negative voltage with respect to the intercellular
fluid outside, roughly 70 millivolts or .07 volts negative because there are more positive
sodium ions outside the cell than there are positive potassium ions which tend to hang
out inside the cell.
The cell has an active pumping mechanism which finds sodium ions and ejects them out these
little ion channels.
Now in response to a stimulus, either a chemical one, the attachment of a molecule or a physical
one, a little push on a touch sensitive cell, the ion channels open and the sodium ions
come rushing in from outside because inside the cell is negative, the positive ions are
attracted to it and they suddenly raise the voltage from minus 70 millivolts to maybe
plus 70 millivolts.
A few milliseconds later, with all those positive charges inside, they start repelling each
other and the potassium channels open so the extra positive ions can start flowing out
again and the cell returns to its resting state of a negative potential.
This temporary spike in voltage is called an action potential and it propagates down
the length of the axon as the ion channels open and close in sequence, sort of like this.
Watch my left hand open and then close and this one opens and this one closes and that
one opens and this one closes and that one opens.
Propagating down the axon, continuously opening and closing channels such that the electrical
signal gets all the way to the end where the little neurotransmitters are released.
The signal travels at speeds varying from a meter per second, which is a casual walking
speed, up to 100 meters per second depending on the kind of neuron and where it is in the
nervous system.
All the sensations that you have are a consequence of specialized receptor cells interacting with
atoms and molecules of the environment and then transmitting the appropriate signal to
alert the brain to that interaction.
So let's take the senses one at a time and see how they behave at the atomic level.
Touch is the response of specific cells to physical pressure, the collision of atoms
with the receptor cell.
A special class of ion channel regulators respond, that is open and close, as a consequence
of being stretched or pushed on the outside cell wall.
Touch corpuscles below the skin respond to this kind of stimulus.
The degree of sensitivity is a result of a variable density of these kinds of cells over
your body.
You can convince yourself very easily of this.
Here I've taken a paper clip and bent it into the shape that it's two points separated
from each other by a couple of millimeters.
If you close your eyes and hold out your fingertip and press this into your fingertip, you can
easily tell that there are two separate points poking at your skin.
However, on the other hand, if you take a part of your body that's less sensitive, like
the back of your wrist, and you take the same paper clip with two points, close your eyes,
you can only detect a single point.
You think it's just one point, not two.
An even less sensitive part of your body on your back, you can separate the paper clip
by two full finger widths and poke it into your back, and you can't tell whether it's
one poke or two.
This is a consequence of two things, the variability in the number of pressure sensors there are.
There are lots in your fingertips because there's good evolutionary reasons for those
to be sensitive, and very few in your back because there's no good reason for that.
And the fraction of the brain is appropriated for each of those signals.
There's a large piece of the brain that's appropriated for a feeling touch on your finger,
a smaller piece for your wrist, and a much smaller piece for your back.
Sensitivity to temperature is located in a different set of specialized receptor cells
that respond to the kinetic energy of molecules in contact with the cell.
You recall that we said that heat was just a measure of the kinetic energy, the random
motion of molecules, whether in a gas or a liquid or a solid.
There are both cold sensitive and warm sensitive receptors.
These are threshold receptors so-called because they don't fire at all unless some threshold
is reached.
They're just sitting there passively in case it gets really warm and the warm sensitive
cells fire, or really cool, and the cold sensitive cells fire.
The cold receptors in fact have ion channel proteins that preferentially carry doubly
ionized calcium, that is a calcium atom missing two of its electrons, so it's got a plus
two charge inward that trigger the action potential.
Curiously, case cells in your mouth, which respond to jalapeno peppers, which we call
in our everyday English, hot peppers, also respond to high temperatures, and therefore
produce exactly the same sensitization in response to putting something very hot into
your mouth and putting something with capsicum, a chemical in your mouth.
Something presents the detection of pressure variations in the ear.
Sound is in fact a wave that travels through the ear, rather like a slinky.
It's not a wave that you're familiar with, like a water wave, where the disturbance,
that is the change of height of the wave, goes up and down while the wave moves along
in a perpendicular direction.
Rather, it's the kind of wave a slinky makes if I stretch this out and you look on your
right, where the signal is going to come from, it moves from there to there, then the disturbance
is in the same direction in which the wave propagates, the waves moving from here to here,
and the disturbance, that is the compression and expansion of the slinky, moves in the
same direction.
Waves are produced by any vibrating entity, a tuning fork, for example.
If I strike it, it vibrates, and when I push my hand against it, I can feel it vibrating
back and forth.
What's happening there?
Well, the vibration of the tuning fork first compresses the air molecules by slamming these
air molecules, and then, as it moves this way, leaves a vacuum behind.
So like in the slinky, they come together and come apart, come together and come apart,
and the wave moves in that direction.
Any vibrating object does this.
Guitar string vibrating, a drum head going up and down, vocal cords, which are just
little tendons to which air is forced over, and they vibrate back and forth.
You can hear my voice because of those vibrations compressing and expanding the air molecules.
The rapid vibrations, the rapidity of the vibrations, rather determines the distance
between the peaks of the wave, the wavelength, we call it, in which we distinguish by pitch
in our ears.
A short wavelength, that is, rapid vibrations, lead to a high pitch, and long slow vibrations
lead to a low pitch.
A change of a factor of two between the peaks of the crest correspond roughly to one octave.
The range of human hearing is from about 20 oscillations per second to 20,000 crests
going by each second, or about 10 octaves.
In addition to that, though, there is other sound.
There is ultrasound, which you're familiar with, if you have your jewelry cleaned, or
if you have your insides examined, which are sound waves above 20,000 cycles per second
beyond what we can hear.
But there's still sound waves, and there is infrasound below 20 cycles per second, which
is, again, wavelengths of sound compressing and expanding air, but just below what our
sensors are able to detect.
In any event, the energy in these vibrations in the air sets up a sympathetic vibration
in the eardrum.
As the compressed air strikes the eardrum, it forces it in, and then as the little vacuum
behind the peak comes along, the eardrum snaps back.
So the eardrum sets up a vibration in time with the rhythm of the air molecules.
The range of intensity, which we can sample, is quite extraordinary, nearly a factor of
a trillion from the smallest, faintest sound we can hear to the loudest sound that we can
hear without damaging our ears.
The structure of the ear is designed to amplify and translate the sound.
The waves set up these oscillations, which are then transferred from the eardrum into
the little bones in the middle ear, and ultimately to the cochlear canal, a little canal filled
with fluid and lined with little hairs called cilia that are attached to the walls of the
canal.
The vibrations cause the little tiny hairs to oscillate back and forth like this, and
as a consequence, as they move back and forth, they're connected to one of these sensor cells,
which feels the strain of the hair wiggling back and forth, produces an electrochemical
signal, and transmits it up the auditory nerve into the brain, where different parts of the
brain are recruited to interpret the sound you hear.
Unlike touch and hearing, both of which ultimately are a result of pressure applied to specialize
molecules in the cell membrane, smell is a consequence of specific molecules attaching
to specific other molecules in the receptors of the nose.
All organic molecules have a very specific three-dimensional shape, which governs how
they interact with all other molecules, and the olfactory system works basically on the
lock and key mechanism.
In your nose, there are a bunch of locks, and in the world around you, there are molecules
that represent keys, and if the key comes that fits in the lock, then an electrochemical
signal is stimulated and a signal is sent to the brain.
Humans have about 380 distinct lock molecules, all different shapes arranged in the little
bulb inside your nose there, ready to be opened by keys that come along.
But 380 is not really very impressive.
The mouse, for example, has nearly 1100 different smells which it can interpret.
Moves in the ear then drift in, and if they are the correct key for one of those 380 locks
in your nose, they open the signal and send it to the brain.
For example, if I pick up my orange, which used to be the nucleus of an atom or the sun,
and I break into it, I can smell billions of molecules going up in my nose and attaching
to these molecules in my nose, opening them up and sending a signal to my brain which
says ah, the smell of orange peel.
Now there's a good evolutionary reason for me to be able to smell orange peel and have
a pleasant sensei sensei associated with that, because oranges are good, they're good to
eat, they're nutritious, they're something that one would want to recognize readily.
There's no good evolutionary reason up until very recently for me to have receptors for
the molecule carbon monoxide, because there are no circumstances in the natural world
where one would encounter a large amount of carbon monoxide.
Where we have not evolved a sensor for that, but now living in hermetically sealed buildings,
we find that indeed that's a danger that we should have a detector for.
Taste is a consequence like smell of specific molecules attaching to specific receptors
in the tongue.
The taste system is really very similar to the olfactory system.
The key molecules in food fit locks in the taste buds that trigger the electrochemical
signal that goes to the brain.
However, there are only five sensors, five different kinds of receptors in the tongue
as opposed to the 380 that are in the nose.
Salty, sweet, sour, bitter, and one only recognized recently in the West called umami, known for
a long time in Japan, which is sort of a savory flavor.
If I take my orange here and peel it off and bite into it, I certainly stimulate the
sweet sensors in my tongue.
Flavor as distinct from taste incorporates cues from other sense organs in creating your
total experience.
For example, when I bit into that orange, not only did I taste the sugar molecules
attaching to the sweet receptors in the tongue, but many vaporized molecules went back up
not through my nose, but around through the back up here to the same place where the nose
has the receptors and gives a lot of signals from the olfactory system simultaneously with
those from the tongue.
These smells play a large role in determining the flavor that you taste from something.
Determined by the touch-sensitive sensors, which are different in your tongue, also contributes
to the experience.
You've probably all had the unpleasant experience of taking a freshly cooked clam and putting
it into your mouth and biting into it and finding a bunch of sand in there.
That gives you a distinctly unpleasant feeling as a consequence not of your taste-sensitive
cells but of your touch-sensitive cells in the tongue.
Even visual and abstract, like verbal cues, can be incorporated into the brain into the
experience of flavor.
There are a couple of remarkable examples of this, one of which I recently experienced.
There was an experiment done with several well-known enophiles, wine tasters, in which they were
thoroughly blindfolded and given each three glasses of wine, which they were told were
of a recent vintage from Bordeaux, beautiful red wines.
They tasted them.
They dutifully recorded in their arcane language of a scent of brambleberry with a touch of
cinnamon of what these wines were like, and then they were unblindfolded.
The wines were all white wines.
The mere suggestion to them that they were red had them tasting red wines.
An even more striking experiment I did in my class recently at Columbia.
I took two vials, two test tubes, put a tiny drop of the same chemical in each of the tubes
on a little cotton swab, exactly the same concentration, exactly the same chemical.
I then labeled one of them with a little sticky label that said parmesan cheese, and
I labeled the other one with a little sticky label that said vomit.
Without showing them the labels, I said, okay, you're supposed to rate these on a scale of
disgustiness, where zero is really quite pleasant and not disgusting at all, and a hundred is
totally disgusting.
I then opened them and passed the vials around my class, having each person do it independently.
Despite the fact that the vials contained exactly the same chemical, in exactly the
same concentration, and therefore was a key fitting into exactly the same lock in the
nose and sending an identical signal to the brain, the verbal cue that one was vomit and
one was parmesan cheese led to a difference of the parmesan being rated a 15 on a scale
of disgustiness and the vomit being rated an 85 on the scale of disgustiness.
So your experience of the world, or reported by your senses, can be heavily modified by
cues your brain has from other sources.
Sight represents the ability to detect waves of electromagnetic radiation or photons.
Any charged particle, whether an electron inside an atom jumping between its possible
energy levels that we discussed, or a positively or negatively charged particle running around
freely in the universe, if it accelerates will emit an electromagnetic wave.
And the wavelength of each wave, the distance between one crest to the next crest, is inversely
proportional to the energy of that little packet of radiation or photon.
Radiation wavelengths now range from hundreds of kilometers, so a peak on one side of a
state and a valley and a peak on the other side of the state, to trillions of a millimeter.
And the universe sends us more than 50 octaves of this radiation.
This electromagnetic spectrum, as we call it, includes things which we think of as very
different but are in fact all identical.
They're all a result of oscillating electric charges producing a disturbance of electric
and magnetic fields which propagates through space at 186,000 miles a second.
They include radio waves from which you listen to your favorite radio station, microwaves
with which you warm up your cold pizza in the morning if you're really hungry for breakfast,
infrared lights that you see in sort of cheap cafeterias that keep the food warm all the
time, visible light, the fraction that our eyes can actually detect, ultraviolet light,
the rays I hope you avoid by not attending tanning studios, x-rays with which your dentist
has that little machine that signs right through the skin of your mouth to examine your teeth,
and gamma rays, the highest energy radiation of all, that comes from nuclear processes.
All of these are exactly the same thing and are distinguished only by the distance between
the crests of the wave.
The human eye is sensitive to barely one of the 50 octaves that the universe sends us.
You think of your vision as wonderfully important and tremendously valuable and rich throughout
all the colors of the spectrum, but you're only seeing two percent of those colors.
One single octave.
Imagine how impoverished your view of music would be if you could only hear one octave
instead of the ten that our ears are designed to detect.
Well, in fact, you don't even have to imagine how bad it would be because I've actually
made a demonstration for you.
I've taken one of my favorite pieces of music, the fourth movement of Beethoven's Ninth
Symphony, and I have imposed on it blinders, like our eyes impose on the radiation from
the universe, so that you can only hear one octave at a time.
So here it is.
We start off with the entire symphony, the piccolo's, the sopranos, down to the baritones
and the double basses, ten octaves of glorious sound, then bang.
I put on a filter which only lets you hear the one octave around the A above middle C.
Then I put on another octave that hears only the A an octave below that.
All the music's still there, you're just blind to it.
Then I jump down even further.
Now it's so far down that you can barely hear a rumbling.
All of the high frequencies have been thrown away.
And then up to a high frequency, sounds like a bunch of angry crickets, because you're
only hear one octave at a time until all the music comes back together and you hear the
beautiful range that your ears allow you to hear.
Your eyes impose that same limitation on your view of the universe, and it's critically
important that out of this tiny range we manage to expand our vision to understand the universe.
This tiny range of sensitivity is set by two numbers, as I said in an early lecture, the
temperature of the sun and the strength of gravity on the earth.
How can they be relevant?
Well, the sun has a surface temperature of 5,800 degrees, and that means the charged
particles in its atmosphere vibrating at a certain frequency, because you remember temperature
is just the measure of the speed with which molecules move around.
That means most of those molecules are radiating in just the octaves that our eye has been
tuned by evolution to be sensitive to.
So it's not an accident that we view the radiation that's maximum from the sun.
Furthermore, the strength of gravity on the surface of the earth determines what molecules
are retained in its atmosphere, as we'll discuss in some detail in a future lecture.
And that tells us which wavelengths of light the atmosphere is transparent to.
Our atmosphere is opaque to infrared and ultraviolet light, so even if the sun emitted a lot of
that, we couldn't see it on the surface of the earth.
Thus, it's the combination of the temperature of the surface of the sun, which sets the
speed of its molecules and the wavelength of its radiation, and the strength of gravity
on the earth, which sets the transparency of our atmosphere, that has allowed over 400
million years of evolution our eye to evolve.
The front of the eye is designed to collect and focus light, while the retina at the back
captures this light and turns the electromagnetic energy of the photon into an electrochemical
signal which then travels up the optic nerve to the brain, where more than a dozen different
regions are involved in integrating the signal into the world that you see.
The brain collects, processes, and integrates all of these signals from all five of your
sense organs to create the reality you experience.
The brain consists of 100 billion individual neurons, each of which has on average several
thousand connections to other neurons.
And when stimulated, each sensory neuron delivers a signal to a particular region of the brain,
which then recruits several other regions, maybe up to a dozen or more, to join in interpreting
that signal.
So our opening questions can be answered as follows.
We see the sky as blue, because molecules in the air scatter sunlight in all directions.
The yellow light from the sun comes directly down to our eyes, and so you see the sun as
a yellowish white.
But the blue light from the sun bounces off air molecules and so comes at you from all
different directions.
When it enters the eye, that wavelength triggers chemicals in the retina which are tuned to
absorb blue light, and they initiate a signal down the optic nerve which says, I see blue
coming from that direction of the sky.
The leaf is green because the colors of the sunlight striking it are all absorbed by the
chemicals in the leaf, with the exception of green, which is reflected back again.
And if one of those reflected rays happens to enter the little black spot in the middle
of your eye, your pupil, it is absorbed in the back of the eye by the receptors that
are sensitive to green, just as the blue light receptors are sensitive to blue.
The warmth at a summer clam bake comes from the high velocity air molecules striking your
skin and triggering the temperature sensitive neurons that send signals up your spinal cord
to your brain saying, ah, what a lovely warm evening it is.
The oyster is cool as you slurp it off the shell because its molecules have been kept
jiggling more slowly by their contact with the ice, which is jiggling more slowly still
with which it was sitting, and the oyster tastes salty because it has sodium and potassium
chloride ions in it, which when they indicate with their key the correct lock in your tongue
sensitive to salt sends a sensor to your brain and communicates that you're eating
a salty oyster.
We see the perfume bottle break as light reflects off it to our eyes and we hear the crash as
the jiggling air molecules carry it to our eardrums and thence to the cochlear's canal,
but a molecule of perfume has to, having escaped from the bottle, has to bounce off thousands
of air molecules as it slowly jiggles its way across the room until it can find its way
into our nose and open that particular lock and send a signal of smell to the brain.
It's atoms and molecules at every step of the way.
But as I've indicated, our senses are not enough to fully explore all of the physical
reality.
We need to get down to the atomic scale.
And so we create detectors that expand our vision by 50 octaves, radio receivers, infrared
and ultraviolet cameras, X-ray and gamma ray detectors allowing us to capture and analyze
all parts of the electromagnetic spectrum emitted by all kinds of atoms moving at all
kinds of different speeds.
We devise traps that act as receptors for specific kind of molecules that our smell
sensors don't recognize.
We manipulate electric and magnetic fields so as to break a piece of material into its
constituent atoms and then sort those atoms out one by one, separating them into different
containers depending on their mass and as a consequence allowing us to count them.
We hurl atoms at each other at incredibly high speeds in accelerators creating collisions
which shatter them like a pinata revealing their internal structure.
And we employ all these tools as we set about our task of reconstructing history atom by
atom.
Our experience of the world is limited by our senses.
There are wavelengths of light, octaves of sound, tastes and smells which are perfectly
real but which completely escape us.
Science has provided us with the tools to greatly expand our vision of reality by detecting
light and sound and molecules that our bodies can never sense.
And it has also allowed us to explore and to manipulate the world on scales of length
and time that are far beyond our direct experience.
As such, science can expand and enrich the view of history that our forebears, limited
by their senses that evolution provided, have been able to record.
Now a prerequisite for any history is a method for keeping track of time.
Atomic nuclei are able to provide this, owing to the peculiar penchant that some of them
have of spontaneously transforming themselves from one element to another.
Next time, we'll explore these convenient natural clocks as we delve into the realm of
the radioactive nucleus.
