While our senses ultimately arise from atomic scale interactions, we have seen that they
are far from adequate for the task of detecting and distinguishing individual atoms.
So if we are to construct history through atoms, we need to develop techniques to identify
and count them.
We have done this.
We have machines that can take a substance, tear it atom from atom, and sort the atoms
into individual boxes so we can count them.
But unfortunately, that leaves the material under study destroyed.
By using photons and neutrons, however, we can simply excite atoms in place, where they
are, or perhaps transform them into radioactive versions of themselves, and then, as they
admit their characteristic particles and radiation, we can identify them without significantly
altering the material in question at all.
An obvious area in which such non-destructive techniques are invaluable is in studying works
of art.
Non-destructive analysis of a substance can reveal directly and unambiguously the atoms
and molecules from which it is made.
Neutron irradiation is one of the most powerful of these techniques.
One fires neutrons at the object of study, and either excites a nucleus to emit a gamma
ray from a simple collision, or transforms the nucleus when it absorbs the neutron into
a radioactive species of another element, which then decays on a predictable time scale.
The great advantage of using neutrons over other subatomic particles is that they are
neutral, and therefore they don't feel any force from either the orbiting electrons or
the protons in the nucleus of the atom.
And this allows them to get in close and comfortable.
The first problem is to make free neutrons.
Because it turns out, while in the nucleus of an atom, a neutron can live for the age
of the universe, if you take it out and set it on the table, a neutron has a half-life
of only about 10 minutes.
It falls apart into a proton, an electron, and an anti-neutrino.
And so therefore, if one wants to use neutrons to examine things, like paintings, for example,
one has to generate the neutrons where the painting is.
One can't put them in a bottle and travel across the state and walk into the museum
and do it.
So the painting goes to the neutrons rather than neutrons going to the painting.
In order to maximize the likelihood of an interaction, one wants the neutrons to remain
in the neighborhood of the particles they're interacting with as long as possible.
Thus rather than producing high-energy neutrons, which are moving rapidly and therefore zip
right through the substance, one wants to slow them down so they have velocities that
are comparable to the velocities jiggling in place of the target atoms, typically meaning
they have energies of about one-fortieth of an electron volt.
Very slow neutrons indeed.
Originally, neutrons were made by bombarding light elements with helium nuclei, such as
helium colliding with beryllium making carbon, plus spinning out a neutron.
But these neutrons have energies of millions of electron volts because they've just been
ejected from an atomic nucleus, and they must be slowed down before reaching the target.
Furthermore, the maximum production rate of neutrons done in this way is about 10 million
neutrons per square centimeter per second.
That may sound like a big number, but when we see how unlikely it is for a neutron to
actually hit its target nucleus, you'll see that falls far short of what we need.
The advent of controlled nuclear reactors, fueled by radioactive heavy nuclei like uranium,
greatly boosted neutron fluxes, that is the number of neutrons we can get out traveling
in a certain line for every square centimeter of painting for each second.
And that number is now easily up to a hundred trillion neutrons per square centimeter per
second, 10 to the fourteenth.
Now, that sounds like an overwhelming number, but it turns out it's really hard to have
a neutron hit a nucleus.
The reason is simple.
You remember from lecture one that with the orange as the nucleus, the electrons were not,
as they did in your textbook, orbiting like this, but they were orbiting five city blocks
away.
Thus imagine firing something where the target is the size of an orange sitting in the middle
of five city blocks.
You'd have to throw a lot of neutrons down to have a chance of actually hitting the nucleus
and not just passing through the atom.
This target size is called, in physics, the cross section.
And the cross section for neutron interaction with nuclei is incredibly low, 10 to the minus
24 square centimeters.
A trillionth of a trillionth of a square centimeter for each square centimeter of canvas.
Thus we need these enormously large fluxes if we're going to generate enough radioactive
nuclei that they can signal their presence.
We should do a little calculation to limber up your mathematical ability with scientific
notation and see why this is so.
Let's say we have 10 to the 14 neutrons per square centimeter per second coming out of
our reactor and a cross section of only 10 to the minus 24 square centimeters per atom.
That means for each individual atom, even with a hundred trillion neutrons being fired
at it, there's only one chance in 10 to the minus 10 of the neutron actually being captured.
Now let's suppose we have a painting that has in it some pigments that contain the element
sodium.
This will be one of the examples we'll be using.
Say the painting has a tenth of a gram of sodium in the particular piece that we're interested
in studying.
Well, we can calculate how many sodium atoms there are in a tenth of a gram by simply knowing
how many nuclear particles there are in sodium, 23 in this case, and the mass of each proton
and neutron, which is a very tiny number, but a well-known constant of physics, 1.67
times 10 to the minus 24 grams per atomic mass unit, as we call it, the atomic mass.
And so we divide that into a tenth of a gram, and we find that a tenth of a gram, just a
few grains of salt, contained 2.6 times 10 to the 21 atoms.
So now we multiply our 2.6 times 10 to the 21 atoms times the probability that each atom
will actually capture a neutron, 10 to the minus 10, and we find out that some 2.6 times
10 to the 11th atoms, 260 billion atoms, of sodium will capture a neutron and turn into
the element magnesium.
Now this element of magnesium is radioactive, and it has a half-life of about 15 hours.
Over 15 hours, you will recall one half-life, it means half of those magnesium atoms will
decay and emit the characteristic radiation, which will signal to us that sodium was in
the painting.
So, with 2.6 times 10 to the 11th magnesium nuclei, half of which decay in 15 hours, if
we divide by the 15 hours and the 3,600 seconds in each hour, we find that we'll get a couple
of a million decays every second, plenty of gamma rays to count for our detection.
However, had the number only been 10 to the minus 7 as many neutrons as they were in the
original production mechanisms, we'd only get a few or one every second, and it would
take many hours to get an accurate measurement.
Neutron activation consists then of a free neutron coming in and combining with an atomic
nucleus to form a radioactive isotope.
As in the process I just described, a neutron plus sodium-23 becoming sodium-24, which is
then unstable and decaying to an excited state of magnesium-24 in a beta decay, therefore
spitting off an electron and an anti-neutrino, and then relaxing, as all such decays do,
to the ground state giving off a gamma ray.
It's the gamma ray we can detect.
And because every nucleus, just like every atom, has a unique set of energy levels, precise
and unique to it alone, the energy of the gamma ray, the transition from one level to
the other, tells us immediately which atom was present.
And so, if we see gamma rays of the right energy, we know that sodium was present in
the pigments of the painting.
Gamma rays are what come out rather than lower energy photons like light or ultraviolet rays
because the binding energy of nuclear particles is huge.
It's millions of electron volts, and therefore a relaxation gives you photons with millions
of electron volts.
Now, this may not sound non-destructive, as I advertised it in the beginning.
After all, you're taking neutrons, you're firing them in, and you're changing the elements.
Some of the sodium has now become magnesium, and it's decayed away.
Clearly you've changed things.
Well, we have.
In this kind of experiment, when we have a painting and we fire hundreds of trillions
of neutrons, we change so few of the atoms, it can't possibly make a detectable distance.
The example is as follows.
Suppose you had a warehouse that covered a full city block and was 20 stories high.
And suppose you filled it with marbles, regular marbles.
So a city block, 20 stories high, full of marbles.
Suppose are the atoms of sodium in this painting.
Seven would have been changed by this process.
And surely you believe that if you have a warehouse that's 20 stories tall and a city
block on each side, if you pulled out seven marbles, it could hardly make a difference.
So it is fair, I think, to call these non-destructive means of testing paintings.
Each individual gamma ray can be captured and analyzed, so this very tiny fraction is
sufficient.
I have a few examples where these techniques have been used on real works of art to uncover
forgeries, to reveal underpaintings, and ultimately to date things.
The Spanish forger was an artist who maintained a whole workshop in Spain in the late 19th
century and specialized in elaborating medieval manuscripts so they could be sold for higher
prices.
His work was definitively exposed by neutron activation analysis.
One of the illustrated manuscript pages in question is from a 15th century book of hours.
It was purchased by J.P. Morgan in 1900 and still resides today at the Morgan Library
in New York City on Fifth Avenue.
The borders are thought to be original, the illustrations around the edge of the writing,
while the fancy illustration in the center of the page we can show to be a modern forgery.
When this page was irradiated with neutrons, gamma rays from nine different radioactive
species appeared.
The isotope half-lives had a very broad range.
There was manganese at 2.6 hours, copper with a half-life of 12.7 hours, sodium at 15 hours,
arsenic at 26 hours, gold at 2.69 days, chromium at 27 days, mercury at 47 days, antimony
at 60 days, and zinc at 244 days.
These different half-lives are critical for determining where in the painting different
pigments were used.
So the isotopes all undergo beta decay, emitting electron or a positron.
What we do is put medical x-ray film, smack up against the painting after it's been irradiated,
and these positrons and electrons start coming off, and we leave it there for hours or in
some case for days recording the exposure.
The print we get when we take it away is called an auto-radiograph, and again the exposures
last from a fraction of a day to several weeks.
Each electron that comes off, or each positron that comes off, exposes the film in exactly
the same way that film in old-fashioned cameras was exposed.
Film consists of layers of silver halide on the surface of an emulsion, and when a photon
of sufficient energy, or in this case an electron or positron, strikes one of those molecules,
it breaks it apart and that effectively exposes the film.
So what one does is irradiate the painting, create all these radioactive isotopes, lay
on the piece of film and take it off after a day, wait a few days till some of the short
half-life elements decay, lay on another piece of film, leave it on there for a few days,
take it off, and continue this process throughout the year.
The point is that while we can measure the individual isotopes by their gamma-ray signatures,
the gamma-rays come off in all directions, and so we don't know where in the painting
that particular element is located.
By placing this film directly against the painting, the electrons come out and immediately
strike the film, they don't have a chance to go off in other directions, and we can
see where on the painting each of the isotopes is located.
This has been done to this painting, allegedly by the Spanish forger, which sits in the middle
of this true old manuscript.
A series of auto radiographs was taken at one, five, eight, and twenty-five days after
the irradiation.
If you compare the first two panels, the blue flowers are seen to contain a copper-bearing
blue pigment, a pigment that was available to medieval artists in the border, while
the blue sky in the inset contains a sodium-bearing pigment that was first synthesized in the
nineteenth century, clearly something added later.
Comparing panels three and four shows that the green border and the green in the flowers
around the edge persists after the green fields in the inset have faded away, suggesting
that the inset contains a green pigment copper arsenate that has a half-life of twelve hours
and therefore after a few weeks is essentially gone, and this pigment was first made in 1814.
While the border green is from some unknown pigment, but whatever it is, it contains some
very long-lived isotopes because even after a month it's still darkening the film successfully.
That element could be chromium or antimony or zinc, which has a half-life of 244 days.
The unambiguous conclusion then is that this illustration is a modern forgery inserted
into an old manuscript after the beginning of the nineteenth century, and art historical
evidence suggests that it is attributable to the Spanish forger and his workshop.
This technique can not only identify the pigments in various parts of the painting, but it can
allow one to see under paintings that an artist has made over which he has painted another
picture.
My wife is an artist and she does this all the time.
She'll start a painting, she thinks it's not going well, she'll throw it aside for
a year or so.
One day, decide she needs a canvas, pull out it again and say, oh, I don't worry about
that, and just start painting oils over the top of it.
That under painting can now be revealed with neutron activation analysis.
Van Dyke has a famous painting entitled St. Rosalie Interceding for the Plague Stricken
of Palermo, which is a beautiful painting in the Van Dyke style.
An auto-radiograph, however, has shown that on the same canvas underneath is a self-portrait
of the artist, and I must say, having seen it, it looks too good to have painted over,
but I guess Van Dyke was not satisfied with his initial self-portrait.
In addition to throwing neutrons at paintings, one can also throw photons at paintings, in
particular x-rays.
And directly x-raying a painting allows one to probe the atomic composition of the painting
without changing any of its constituents at all, because all one is doing is exciting
electrons or perhaps nuclei with these x-rays.
Now x-rays can generally pass through a painting and the canvas on which it's painted, and
they can be recorded on film or with a digital detector, much like dental x-rays are.
Have you ever wondered how dental x-rays work?
X-rays have wavelengths that are short, about a tenth of a nanometer, about the same spacing
of atoms in a solid.
Therefore, while visible light can't shine through my teeth and be detected by a camera
inside, the x-rays just wiggle so quickly they wiggle right between all the atoms and
can be recorded on the film.
Again, the x-ray energy is used to break apart the silver halide or whatever other molecule
is used and expose the painting, but expose the film.
My dentist now has moved to digital cameras, as most people have in their everyday life,
and puts a little computer chip in my mouth when he shines the x-rays in on my cheek.
The little computer chip, like the one in your digital camera or your cell phone, consists
of tens of thousands of little wells, little electronic wells, in which, if stimulated by
an x-ray, a bunch of electrons collect, and then, on command, electronic signals have
these little piles of electrons bucket-brigaded down until they read out as a signal, and
therefore you can tell where the x-rays were absorbed.
Electrons closest to the nucleus of an atom can be excited or even ejected by absorbing
an x-ray because, again, the binding energy of those inner electrons are hundreds to thousands
of electron volts, the range of x-ray energies.
Given the unique binding energy of each electron in each type of atom, the energy of the x-ray
absorbed reveals precisely what kind of atom is involved.
For example, lead-white, something that one's often primes canvases with, absorbs at 0.071
nanometers, and if that wavelength is missing as the x-rays pass through the painting and
through the canvass on the other side, one knows that lead-white must have been in the
painting.
X-rays can also excite electrons, which then fall back to their original orbits, re-emitting
the x-ray of an energy characteristic of that particular element.
The comparison between the spectrum of the emitted x-rays from a verified work for a
particular artist, something that you know is actually painted by that artist, can, for
example, reveal whether other putative works by that artist are real or fakes, because
the exact combination of pigments and pigment suspenders and varnishes and everything else
that one artist used is very unlikely to be the same as what another artist would use.
Also, being able to tell from which parts of the painting the x-rays emerge can reveal
touch-up work that was done at a later period, or painting over an original work.
Finally, shining ultraviolet light on a painting can make the surface layer atoms fluoresce.
Fluorescence is a peculiar property of some kinds of atoms, where atoms in the outer energy
levels get bumped up to a higher level by, say, ultraviolet light, but then, because
of the particular arrangement of the energy levels of the atom, they get trapped there,
rather than existing only for fractions of a microsecond before they fall down, they
can sit there for a long time, hours or even days.
So UV photons excite electrons up to these higher levels, which eventually fall back
down, giving optical photons, visible light, light that we can see.
Linseed oil and varnish, for example, both fluoresce very efficiently.
As varnish layers oxidize, that is, combine the chemical composition of the varnish with
oxygen atoms from the air, the molecular structure changes, and as a consequence, the fluorescence
yield declines.
You get fewer of these photons back for the ultraviolet light that you shine on it.
This technique has been used to show, for example, in some Rembrandt paintings, that
there are four separate layers of varnish layered on at different times, separated by
many years in some of this artist's work.
Cave paintings are another kind of art that we would like, of course, to know more about,
because unlike regular paintings, they're never signed, and they're usually never
dated either.
The most pressing need for cave paintings is actually not to determine whether they're
forgeries, because of course we don't even know who the original artists are, but to
date them.
And unlike normal paintings, we can't take them to a neutron reactor, they're stuck
in the wall of the cave they're in, and we can't bring the reactor to the cave.
But we probably can, in the case of these large cave paintings, afford to fleck off
a little fragment of the painting and take it to the laboratory for analysis.
This is, in general, challenging, because our standard dating technique for things that
are tens of thousands of years old is using carbon-14, as we have mentioned before and
we'll discuss in the next lecture, and carbon-14 doesn't work on the inorganic dyes that are
used in most cave paintings.
However, cave artists often used organic materials like blood and eggs and seed oils and plant
resins and milk and honey and fat to mix with their pigments as binders and to help the
pigments stick to the walls, and so some of them can be carbon-14 dated.
Unfortunately, it's a little tricky to do this, however, because these paintings are
often on limestone caves.
Limestone is the substance CaCO3, calcium carbonate, calcium carbon and 3-oxygen atoms,
and that, of course, contains carbon.
Calcium carbonate is from the microscopic shells of foraminifera, a little plankton that live
in the ocean, which accumulate on the bottom of the ocean, and then as a consequence of
tectonic activity end up on dry land in caves.
That carbon is very old, tens of millions, hundreds of millions of years old, and as
a consequence, all of the carbon-14 that was ever in those little organisms when they were
alive has long ago decayed away.
So when one scrapes a little painting, cave painting, off a wall, one inevitably gets
with it some limestone, and as a consequence, one is mixing very old carbon, from which
all the carbon-14 is gone, with the young carbon, relatively young, a few thousand
years old, of the cave, of the painting that was put on the wall of the cave.
Some clever people have figured out a way around this, however, to isolate the pure
organic carbon.
You start with a vessel that's very tightly sealed and creates an excellent vacuum, and
you attach to it a vacuum pump, and you pump out all the gas molecules that are in there
that you can, down to this less than one part per billion of a normal atmospheric composition.
You then add absolutely pure oxygen, oxygen gas, to this substance, to attract the carbon
atoms to make carbon dioxide, and the hydrogen atoms to make water from any contaminants that
are left on the walls of the container, on the seals, on the pump oil or whatever, and
flush the system again, pump it out again.
You then take this paint chip from your cave wall, or perhaps a shard of pottery from the
floor of the cave, and you put it in the container, add pure oxygen again, and heat it to about
a hundred degrees centigrade, about the boiling temperature of water.
You will again, out of that shard of painting, get carbon and hydrogen released, and so again
will form carbon dioxide and H2O, water.
To separate these two, you slide in a finger that's at about zero degrees, so water freezes
on it, and all the wall of molecules find this cold finger, stick to it, and make a
little layer of ice, you withdraw it, and all the water vapor is gone.
You then stick in another finger, but rather than cooling it just to zero degrees the temperature
at which water freezes, you cool it with liquid nitrogen, something like 320 degrees below
zero on the Fahrenheit scale, which is cold enough to collect all the carbon dioxide as
well.
You then pull that carbon dioxide out.
You add to the carbon dioxide hydrogen gas, and that makes H2O, the oxygen goes with the
hydrogen, and the pure carbon is left behind.
Typically this process yields about 12 milligrams, 12 thousandths of a gram of carbon, for every
gram of material that you put in.
You then use this pure carbon from the substance itself for carbon-14 dating, which we'll
explore in detail next time.
The contamination in this process, according to the authors who did the experiment, is
very low.
They believe they have cleaned the chamber so the contamination is essentially zero.
The contamination from organic material that might have stuck to the painting after it
was done, rain that fell onto it, mud wasps that stuck to it or whatever, they estimate
is less than five percent.
But most importantly, the principle source of contamination one is worried about, the
calcium carbonate or limestone that the paint was stuck to is zero, or at least less than
a few percent, because the carbon in calcium carbonate won't be liberated until the temperature
is above 200 degrees, and you only bake this paint chip to 100 degrees.
So that carbon remains safely locked away.
That old carbon, which would contaminate your measurement, is taken out of the equation.
In West Texas, a cave painting was dated this way, whose origin was unknown to at least
a thousand years, and the answer came out 3865, plus or minus a hundred years.
That is almost 4,000 years ago, we can tell which century this painting was done.
A lower limit on a cave painting's age can also come from deposits that are put on the
painting after the wall was painted.
Mud wasps are a favorite example.
Mud wasps build these nasty little pyramidal nests of wasps, which they carry in their
mouths and stick together until the nests become very large and contain thousands of
wasps.
As the wasps sweep up this mud, they inevitably incorporate little grains of pollen from the
time the nest was built.
Little grains of pollen, of course, are rich in carbon-14, being organic material, and
the carbon-14 begins decaying away as soon as the pollen enters the mud wasp nest, because
the grain is no longer alive.
This gives you a clear date when the nest was built, which tells you a lower limit to
when the painting was made, because clearly the mud wasp nest was installed after the
painting.
Furthermore, an analysis of the type of pollen grains present, something not so difficult
to do, gives you simultaneous information on the climate at the time that the mud wasp
nest was built, perhaps somewhat after the painting was made.
A well-known Australian cave painting has been dated in this technique to be more than
17,000 years before the present, because the mud wasp nest was of that age.
Using neutrons and photons then to excite and transform atoms, we can non-destructively
manipulate works of art, both prehistoric and historic, to yield information on their
provenance.
Using naturally occurring radioactive nuclei provides an even less invasive approach, of
course, to reconstructing the history of human artifacts.
And this is the approach we will explore in the next lecture.
