The
rich history of our atmosphere, oceans, landforms and life that we have deduced from our atomic
historians, had a finite beginning.
More than nine billion years after the universe came into existence, a smallish cloud of interstellar
gas and dust coalesced to form a sun, and the detritus left over from this event produced
the revenue of planets that orbit it today.
Now it's important to note that this didn't just happen once in the history of our galaxy.
Until 1995, we didn't know whether or not our solar system was unique.
We knew there were many other stars like the sun, but we had no clue as to whether or not
these stars also hosted planets.
Now we do know.
Many of them have planets.
In the last 15 years, over 330 other solar systems have been discovered, and a new one
is now found almost once a week.
It's not a trivial thing to uncover planets orbiting a distant star.
Recall from lecture one how if the sun is represented by an orange, the Earth was just
a grain of sand about 15 feet away, and the next orange, the next star, was in Minneapolis
with a little grain of sand orbiting it just 15 feet from it.
Taking a direct picture is extremely difficult because the star is so bright and the planets
so dim, and so we've reverted to indirect methods to attempt to see whether our solar
system was unique in the universe.
One of these is to take advantage of the slight tug from gravity that a planet exerts on its
parent star.
Now one might imagine that the star sits still in the center of a solar system, and the planets
orbit around it.
That's the picture one gets in a textbook.
However, the two objects both have mass, and each attracts the other.
And so when the planet is over here, it tugs on the sun, and when the planet is over here,
it tugs the opposite direction on the sun.
While the planet makes a big circle, the sun makes a tiny little circle.
That tiny little circle amounts to a velocity of only a few meters per second, but using
careful observations of the spectral lines from the atmosphere of the star, we can actually
detect these very modest motions, and in this way have discovered most of the several hundred
other planetary systems.
In certain special cases, the planet orbiting its star is aligned almost perfectly with
our view such that when it passes in front of the star, it blocks a little bit of the
star's light, typically much less than one percent.
So one needs very precise measurements of the light from the star, but that eclipse
allows us to measure not only the time it takes the planet to go around, but the diameter
of the planet as it moves across the star and other parameters of its structure.
Several dozen of these eclipsing planet star systems have already been discovered.
While there are biases in our observations of these other solar systems, it's clearly
easier to detect very large planets, which have a big pull on their parent star, and
or when they pass in front of them, block a significant fraction of light.
Most of the planets we've discovered to date are the size of Jupiter, I'll give her take
a little bigger, a little smaller.
A few are the size of Neptune, but that's still massive compared to the Earth.
During the coming year, however, 2009, NASA will launch a satellite named after the astronomer
Kepler, which will be able to actually detect eclipses of Earth-like planets around sun-like
stars.
We will then know for certain how common planets like ours are.
However, even if planets are common, it would be nice to know more about our own and how
it came to be.
Speculating about the birth of our special case, the age of the Earth itself, is a pursuit
that's probably as old as the human species.
Today, thanks to a pair of rare atoms, we know the answer quite precisely, 4.56 billion
years.
Assertions as to the age of the Earth have come from many sources.
The Babylonians and the Greeks both assumed the universe and therefore the Earth were
infinitely old, obviating the question, if something's been around forever, its age is
a meaningless concept.
The earliest known quantitative estimate for a finite age of the Earth is found in Hindu
chronology, and it put the age very precisely at 1 billion, 972 million, 949,000, and 91
years in 150 B.C.
Curiously, in fact, this is closer to the true value than any subsequent estimate for
the next 1,700 years.
I don't impute any special meaning to this approximation by the Hindu chronologists,
except to say perhaps that they had a better perspective on their significance in the
universe than Western philosophers seem to have done.
In monotheistic religions, one requires almost by definition a creator, because one has an
all-powerful creator.
Most of these religions made much shorter estimates for the age of the Earth.
Zoroaster, in ancient Persia, estimated the Earth to be 12,000 years old in about 1400
B.C.
Hebrew, Christian, and Islamic scholars made the Earth younger still.
Theophilus in 200 A.D. estimated 7,531 years, rather precise.
St. Basil in 350 A.D., 6,006 years.
St. Augustine, 100 years later, at 6,333 years.
The level of precision of these estimates lies outside the ethos of modern science,
where we only quote numbers to the number of figures to which we believe we have the
answer.
In other words, we leave some uncertainty.
But these biblical estimates, of course, were based on summing up the baghats in Genesis
and the ages of each of the ancients whose lives were reported there.
The official biblical estimate that has stood for a long period of time for the Earth's
creation date is from Bishop Usher in 1650.
James Usher was the Anglican Bishop of Armora in Ireland and the Primate of All Ireland
for the Anglican Church.
And over a long scholarly period, he made the most precise estimate for the day of creation.
It was at nightfall on the day preceding October 23, 4004 B.C.
Now, with the rise of science in the 17th century, new methods were brought to bear
on the question of the age of the Earth.
The astronomer Kepler actually made the first scientific estimate, where scientific is in
quotes here, based on the change of the apogee, or maximum distance, of the Earth and Sun
in the Earth's orbit around the Sun.
But of course, as we must always be aware, scientists even can be influenced by the philosophy
of their time, and his answer was 5,993 years, not very far from Bishop Usher's.
Both the data on which he based this estimate and the model he used to compute it were wrong,
and so was the date.
Benoit de Maillet, a French natural philosopher in the 18th century, noted that there was
a prevalence of fossils of seashells on land, and therefore, not unreasonably, assumed
that the Earth was once covered by water.
He made annual measurements, regular measurements, outside his house near the sea, and concluded
that the sea level was gradually going down.
Calculating from how high the sea must have been to cover the Alps, and given that it
was receding at this very slow rate, he estimated that the Earth was at least 2 billion years
old.
Now, his measurements of the decline of the sea was bogus, of course, because the sea
was in fact not shrinking, at least to the levels that he could measure it, but nonetheless,
we finally got back to a number measured in billions of years.
In the 1800s, other methods, presumably scientific, were also applied.
The accumulation of salt in the sea, for example, washing from the land, gave an estimate also
of order of billion years.
And the tidal effects of the Moon on the Earth were viewed as another method of calculating
the age of the Earth.
Now, in fact, there's an interesting note here that the Moon is affecting the Earth
and affecting its rotation.
As the Moon moves around, and the Earth spins on its axis, as you know, a tide is raised
each day, twice a day, as the water rises in its direction of the Moon and falls 90
degrees away.
This actually creates a friction on the Earth, which is slowing its rotation.
Simultaneously, the Moon is moving farther from the Earth to compensate for that slowing
of the rotation.
The Moon used to be much closer to the Earth, and the Earth used to spin in much less than
24 hours.
Several billion years from now, the Earth and the Moon will reach a state where they
are locked together such that the face of one always faces the other.
The day will then become 47 days long.
That is, it will take 47 days for the Earth to rotate once on its axis, and the Moon will
always be over the same hemisphere of the Earth.
So it'll give a new definition to the idea of a honeymoon.
To go see the Moon, you may have to take a trip halfway around the world.
It'll become a new tourist destination, whichever side of the world the Moon ends up on.
Nonetheless, so this tidal effect is important, but it doesn't allow us an obvious age for
the Earth.
In the mid-19th century, an enormous debate erupted between physicists on the one hand
and geologists and biologists on the other.
Lord Kelvin, who was certainly the leading physicist of the Victorian Age, argued from
the cooling rate of the Earth that it could not be more than about 100 million years old.
Well, the geologists and biologists, believing their observations required slow evolutionary
processes, argued for an age of at least 2 billion years back to that Hindu number.
Kelvin did his calculation in the following way.
He assumed the Earth was formed hot, and that it had simply been cooling off since.
This is largely a correct assumption.
Any of you who has been down a deep mine knows that it's warm down there.
In fact, as we've seen, the center of the Earth is a temperature of nearly 5,000 degrees,
and the metals there, iron and nickel and others, are molten.
So indeed, the Earth is warmer as you go in, and it is cooling off, gradually radiating
its energy to space.
Kelvin had to figure out first what mechanism was involved in transporting heat from the
center of the Earth to the outside.
Now there are three ways in which heat, which you will recall is just the energetic jiggling
of atoms, can be moved from one place to another.
The first is radiation.
That's the way heat gets from the Sun to the Earth, electromagnetic waves of energy,
which carry energy away from one source to another.
A second method is convection.
That's what you see when you boil a pot of water on the stove.
The flames of the stove heat the bottom of the pot, which makes the atoms in the pot
jiggle very rapidly.
Those collide with the water molecules that are adjacent to the bottom of the pot, making
them jiggle very rapidly, and making them want to expand.
And so, in bulk, the water at the bottom of the pot rises to the top of the pot, and you
get a convective turnover, a big motion of macroscopic quantities of matter, because
in one place it's hot and in another place it's cool.
The third mechanism of heat transport is what we call conduction.
And that's the microscopic jiggling of atoms next to each other, pounding into each other,
and moving heat along.
That's the effect you feel when you put a silver spoon into a cup of hot tea and touch
the end of the spoon.
It's very hot.
That's because the tea, the water molecules have been jiggling rapidly, pounding into the
molecules of the silver, making them jiggle rapidly, and then bumping into their neighbors,
transferring the heat up the spoon.
Kelvin assumed that the latter, conduction, was the mechanism by which most of the energy
came out of the Earth.
Again, a correct assumption.
There were then three more bits of information he needed.
One was the initial temperature of the Earth, which he not unreasonably assumed was about
3,900 degrees, because that's the temperature in which laboratory experiments had shown
that rocks become molten.
Second was the gradient in temperature, the amount of change for every meter you went
up from the center of the Earth to the edge.
This could be actually directly measured in mines or deep wells, but of course only
in the top mile or two of the Earth what the gradient was inside he had to only speculate.
He measured this gradient to be about 4,100ths of a degree centigrade for every meter traveled
up from the center of the Earth.
And finally, he had to measure the conductivity of the rocks, the rate at which rocks would
transfer these jiggling atoms and move the energy up that he did in the laboratory by
measuring rocks on the surface.
But of course, as we saw, surface rocks are not representative of the Earth as a whole.
Surface rocks have a density of a couple 2 to 3 grams per cubic centimeter, whereas the
density of the center of the Earth is more like 10 grams per cubic centimeter.
So that was another uncertainty in his measurement.
In any event, he did the calculation and came up with a number of 98 million years, although
unlike some of the biblical accounts, he did give a range which was extraordinarily large
from 20 million to 400 million years.
He did miss a critical thing, of course, and that is that while the Earth was formed warm
and is cooling off, it also is kept warm by the radioactive decay of atomic nuclei.
Since atoms weren't firmly established and nuclei were certainly unknown, Kelvin is to
be forgiven from missing this important contribution to the energy balance of the Earth.
Nonetheless, being a physicist, he was quite confident of his prediction, and he wrote,
quote,
It seems, therefore, on the whole, most probable, that the Sun has not illuminated the Earth
for more than 100 million years, and almost certainly has not done so for 500 million
years, this is as some geologists had speculated.
As for the future, we may say with equal certainty that the inhabitants of the Earth cannot continue
to enjoy the light and heat essential to their life for many millions of years longer, unless,
and this is a critical qualification, unless sources now unknown to us are prepared in
the great storehouse of creation, Lord Kelvin, 1862.
He stuck to this throughout his life, 35 years later he did a separate calculation to reinforce
his notion that the solar system was less than 100 million years old, and that was
to calculate the lifetime of the Sun.
There were three possible mechanisms he could think of for the energy that the Sun constantly
radiated into space.
One was that the Sun was literally shrinking, that when things fall down they give off energy,
and so if the Sun had started out very large, which we'll see in a future lecture that it
did, and it was constantly shrinking, gravitational energy would be given off, and that could
be given off in the form of light, which would illuminate and warm the Earth.
A simple calculation shows that the amount of energy the Sun produces requires a tiny
amount of shrinking of this massive body, such that it would never have been observed
in a single human lifetime or even throughout human history.
So it wasn't a matter of being inconsistent with seeing the Sun going shhhhhh like that.
However, when you do the calculation and see how long it takes to shrink all the way
to zero, the answer is only a few tens of millions of years, not inconsistent with his
measurement from the cooling of the Earth.
The second idea he considered was that the Sun, like the Earth, was simply born hot and
had been cooling off.
Well, if you measure the surface temperature of the Sun and assume it's that temperature
all the way through, it's not hard to come up with an estimate for how long it would
take for the Sun to radiate all that thermal energy, that jiggling of atoms, away.
And again, it comes up with a number that's in tens of millions of years.
The third alternative, the only other energy source he could think of, was some equivalent
of burning, whether it was the combining of other elements with oxygen or some other
chemical process, some chemical rearrangement of atoms in the Sun that would, as burning
does, give off energy.
Again, taking the typical amount of energy given off when two atoms or molecules come
together and form a new one, one again comes up with an estimate of only a few tens of
millions of years.
So taking all these three sources into account, the only ones he could imagine, in 1897, 35
years after his first estimate, Kelvin published another estimate of the lifetime of the solar
system based on how long the Sun could have been shining from each of these methods, and
that was 30 million years.
Throughout his life then, he stuck to the notion that physics would only allow the solar
system to be 100 million years old, despite the urgent need of evolutionary biologists
and geological theory of the time that slow, uniform changes in the Earth would take billions
of years.
In fact, it wasn't until 1921 that we had our first realistic estimate for the age of
the Earth.
The astronomer Henry Norris Russell, who we will encounter in a future lecture, was the
first to use radioactivity, discovered in the first decade of the 20th century, and
in particular the radioactive decay of uranium to lead, to estimate that the crust of the
Earth must be about four billion years old.
This of course was by far the best estimate to date, and since then, refinements in this
technique had converged on today's answer.
With accumulation clocks that I mentioned in lecture five, work very simply by looking
at the ratio of the parent radioactive nucleus to the daughter isotopes that it produces.
The total of the parent plus the daughter gives the amount of parent originally present
in the sample, and then knowing the half-life, the fraction that have decayed gives the age
directly.
This procedure must assume two things however.
One that there was no daughter present at the start, otherwise that would mess up the
ratio, and two that no daughter nuclei have escaped once produced from the sample over
its entire lifetime.
A good example of an accumulation clock is potassium-40, which we've encountered earlier
in the course.
It undergoes a beta decay to argon-40, 89% of the time, the rest of the time it decays
to calcium-40.
The half-life of this dominant potassium to argon decay is 1.25 billion years, a convenient
number if we want to measure something like the life of the earth, which we now think
is billions of years old.
Now since argon is an inert gas, one of the noble gases, it undergoes no chemical reactions
of any kind, and it tends to stay trapped in the rock until the rock in some way melts.
This makes it a very useful tool for the relative dating of rocks on earth from the time they
first solidified to the present, and has also been used for rocks on the moon.
But it makes for a poor determination of the age of the solar system as a whole, since
all the rocks were originally molten, and therefore the original decay of potassium
to argon would have missed some of the daughter nuclei which would have escaped.
The analysis of moon rocks brought back by the Apollo astronauts helped to reveal the
origin of the moon itself.
The ratio of the mass of the moon to the mass of the earth is unique in the solar system.
Most moons are much smaller compared to their parent planets.
Mercury and Venus have no moons at all, Mars has two pathetic little moons, 12 and 22 kilometers
across respectively, not too much bigger than the asteroid that killed the dinosaurs, and
therefore have a much tinier ratio of the mass of the moon to the mass of the planet.
Some of Jupiter's moons are comparable in size to our moon, but Jupiter itself is 318
times the mass of the earth, so again the ratio of the mass of the moon to the mass
of the planet is a much smaller number.
The earth and its moon are unique in this regard.
We date the moon rocks with a new radioactive sequence that we haven't met yet in the course,
the samarium to neodymium decay.
These two elements are joined in a parent-daughter relationship by an alpha decay from samarium
147 to neodymium 143.
The half-life is an extraordinary 106 billion years, plenty long enough that there's a whole
lot of samarium still around.
This dating technique, the simple accumulation clock of comparing the ratio of daughters
to parents, shows that the oldest rocks on the moon, that is the oldest rocks since they
were last molten, are 4.46 billion years old, as we will see only 100 million years after
the earth's formation itself.
All of the moon rocks are characteristic of rocks in the earth's crust, rather than
being a mix of the primordial material of the solar system.
Recall that the earth rocks are much lighter or less dense than the earth is overall, but
the moon, the entire moon, has a density similar to the crustal rocks on the earth.
The conclusion for this, which slowly built up over the last several decades, is that our
moon formed when a giant planetesimal, a giant protoplanetary chunk of material floating
around in the solar system that was nearly the size of Mars collided with the earth just
as the earth was completing its formation, spraying off enough material to produce what
ultimately became a planet-sized moon.
Uranium-235, Uranium-238, and Thorium-232 are also good accumulation clocks, because
each of them decay to a unique isotope of lead.
This takes many radioactive decay steps, as I mentioned earlier.
For example, Uranium-238 takes 14 steps, 6 beta decays and 8 alpha decays, to get all
the way down to lead 206.
The intermediate steps are relatively fast, such that a secular equilibrium is set up.
By secular equilibrium, I mean that the number of nuclei of each of the intervening isotopes
is equal to the lifetime of that isotope.
A simple analogy with visitors to a museum helps make this picture clear.
In New York, at least, when there's a special show, say, at the Metropolitan Museum, they
don't just open the doors and let the hordes of people come in, you get a ticket that's
stamped with a time and says you must show up between 9 o'clock and 10 o'clock, say,
on Wednesday morning, if you want to see this special exhibit.
Let's say the museum hands out 100 tickets for each hour of the days that the special
show is going to be open, and the special show occupies four rooms in the museum.
And let's further assume that the average visitor spends an hour in the first room,
two hours in the second room, because it's got more stuff, only 30 minutes in the third
room, because they're getting tired, and an hour in the last room, which shows the
ultimate treasures of the exhibit.
If that's the case, and people enter at the rate of, say, one a minute in the first room
of the exhibit when the museum opens in the morning, then in the first minute, there'll
be one person in the first room, in the second minute, there'll be two, and then three, and
then four, and then five, until at 60 minutes, there are 60 people in the first room.
So in the 61st minute, another person enters the museum, but having spent the average of
an hour in that first room, the first person who entered moves on to the second room.
They therefore still are 60 people in the first room, but now one in the second room
as well.
This process continues, with people shuffling down the line, until after three hours, where
people spend two hours in the second room, there are 60 people in the first room and
120 people in the second room.
Three hours in one minute, the first person who entered the museum moves from the second
to the third room, where he or she will spend only 30 minutes.
And we continue this conveyor belt until we see we will have 60 people in the first room,
120 people in the second room, only 30 people in the third room, because they only stay
there for 30 minutes, and 60 people in the last room before the first person who enters
the museum leaves it three and a half hours later.
What does this mean?
This means that the number of people in any room in the museum is just proportional to
the amount of time they spend in that room of the museum.
That's what I mean by a secular equilibrium, and the same thing occurs in this radioactive
sequence from uranium-238 to lead 206.
The time an isotope spends in the state, that is, its half-life, determines how many of
that isotope exist in the sample.
And by measuring all 14 different isotopes in this chain, one can get a rather accurate
estimate of the age of the rock.
Now the problem with all such accumulation clocks on Earth is that tectonic activity,
volcanoes and plates moving around and colliding with each other and diving under the ocean,
over the lifetime of the Earth, means that there are no rocks on the surface of the Earth
that are as old as the Earth itself.
The oldest unchanged rocks in the solar system are asteroids, interplanetary rocks that never
managed to form into a planet.
Chunks of these fall to Earth occasionally as meteorites, and can be used to date the
origin of the solar system itself.
Over 30,000 meteorites from the size of tiny marbles to the size of beach balls fall to
Earth every year, although only about one percent are ever recovered.
The clock that has been most helpful in dating these original components of the solar system
is the strontium-rubidium clock, which I mentioned earlier.
Rubidium-87 constitutes 30% of naturally occurring rubidium and decays to strontium-87 via a
beta decay with a half-life of 48.8 billion years, four times the age of the universe,
so there's still plenty of it around.
Now this cannot be used as a simple accumulation clock, since the amount of strontium-87 present
to start with is unknown.
This problem, however, is cleverly circumvented by establishing a procedure using isochrones,
lines derived from taking the ratio of both strontium-87 and rubidium-87, the parent and
the daughter, to the stable, non-radioactive product strontium-86.
When I first encountered this technique, it was a stimulation to look further into the
subjects I've discussed in this course, because it is elegantly simple and yet remarkably
clever.
What one does is make a graph, a plot, by measuring the ratio of strontium-87 to strontium-86
and rubidium-87 to strontium-86, plotting the first on the y-axis and the second on
the x.
Then, through some relatively straightforward algebra, which I won't trouble you with, but
we'll supply upon request.
Using this plot, number one, we measure the two ratios directly from the meteorite, so
those are measurements that are unequivocal.
Number two, the amount of strontium-87 present at t equals zero, the moment the meteorite
first condensed out of the solar material, is given by the point on the y-axis where
the line connecting the measurements of strontium-87 to strontium-86 crosses the y-axis, the so-called
y-intercept.
The slope of the straight line that fits all these measurements gives the age directly.
These measurements have been done over two dozen meteorites, and they all give results
consistent with one another.
The age of the Earth is 4.56 plus or minus 0.025 billion years, that is accurate to better
than half a percent.
Now this is the age of the solar system, and to a very good approximation, the Earth.
Not 6,000 years, not 2 billion years, not an infinite age, but 4.56 billion years, roughly
one-third the age of the universe.
This elegant technique provides the answer to a question we did not originally ask.
It tells us the age of the meteorites.
But how long did they take to form?
Was the Earth's formation contemporaneous?
And perhaps even more fundamentally, why did the Earth form?
What triggered the formation of the whole solar system in the first place?
I hope by now you won't be surprised to learn that our little atomic historians are up to
the task of answering these questions as well.
