For our mathematicians or physicists,
the network is a very simple object.
It's just a bunch of nodes connected by links.
There are many examples of networks around us.
Think of the World Wide Web, whose notes are web pages
connected by the URLs, the type of things
that you click on to go from one page to the other one.
Think of Facebook, or the social network in general,
whose notes are individuals, and links
correspond to the friendships and acquaintances
we have among each other.
Or even think of what happens within ourselves,
the 20,000 genes that we all have,
and the linkages between them that
are responsible for life, as we know it.
The bottom line, we are surrounded by networks.
Much of our technology, learning, and existence
depends on network, and our very biological existence
really depends on multiple networks.
We need to understand them, because without them,
we cannot make sense of the complex world around us.
Networks were around us for billions of years,
and the study of networks is not particularly new either.
In the 1960s, mathematicians, graph theorists,
have been fascinating by how to describe complex network.
And that was a time when what we call today
the random network theory was born,
thanks to the work of two Hungarian mathematicians, Paul
Erdös and Alfred Rene.
What they assumed is that we as physicists or mathematicians,
we do not know how the notes really
connect to each other, that how nature and technologies chooses
to link its notes together.
However, we know that it's very complicated,
so the best way is to assume that these linkages are random.
Hence, random network theory was born,
which assumes that you have a bunch of notes
and you randomly place links within them.
For example, you meet randomly people on the street
on May, and may not be friends with them.
Your molecules may randomly encounter another molecule,
and may or may not be able to react to them.
Once random network theory was born,
it made a number of fascinating predictions
about how real networks should look like.
One of the most important predictions it made
was that despite the fact that every node randomly chooses
its links, at the end, the overall network
will be very democratic.
This means that the vast majority of the nodes
will have approximately the same number of links.
It follows what in mathematics we call a Poisson distribution.
The Poisson distribution makes a prediction
that the vast majority of the nodes
have approximately the same number of links,
and it's impossible to find outliers,
nodes that have many more or much fewer links than the average.
If the society would be random, as Erdos and Rene
envisioned through their model, then most of us
would have approximately the same number of friends.
We would not have hugely popular individuals,
and no individual would be left behind.
When in the late 90s, I started to think about networks,
I realized that despite the existence of an existing theory
about random networks, we know very little
about how real networks look like.
Partly because random network theory was never
confronted with reality, was never
compared to the structure of real networks.
So in the late 90s, we started to map out real networks
Our first choice was the World Wide Web.
We wrote a little robot, a piece of software,
that started from a certain web page
and found out what are the links.
Where can you go from that page?
Then it followed those links and found out what are the pages
that you write to and what are their links,
and step by step reconstructed the certain region
of the World Wide Web.
We did that because we thought that the World Wide Web
was a very complex, complex, complex,
and we did that because we thought that the World Wide Web
to a high degree is random, so we wanted
to check the predictions of the theory of Erdogan Rini.
To our surprise, the network we found
was drastically different from the one
that the theory predicted.
Instead of finding many web pages who
had comparable number of links, we
found that the vast majority of the web pages
had only a few links, one or two, pointing at them.
There were a few hugely connected nodes,
like Yahoo and Google, who had hundreds and thousands,
millions, and in some cases, hundreds of millions of links.
This type of network, this very inhomogeneous network,
where many small nodes coexist with a few very, very large
hops, could not be explained within the random network
theory.
We call these networks scale-free networks.
The best way you want to think of a scale-free network
is think of the airline network that you see
on the back of the airline magazines,
the back of your seats, when you fly.
You see a few major hops holding together
many, many small airports.
That is what we saw on the World Wide Web,
and that's a structure we later discovered
to characterize many real networks.
What does it mean to have a scale-free network?
The mathematical definition is that the distribution
of the links per node follows what we call a power-low distribution.
That is very different from the Poisson we found
or random networks.
One of the most important prediction a power-low makes
is that there are outliers in the system.
There are a few very, very highly connected nodes.
These are not exceptions, but they are expected
to be there in these distributions.
These outliers correspond to what we recognize
as hops in complex networks.
And in the coming years, we and others
discovered that these hops and these scale-free topologies
are present in many, many real networks.
These hops are the very popular actors in Hollywood
who play in a couple of many, many large movements
and through them they link to many other actors.
These hops are ATP and ADP within ourselves,
molecules that are essential for providing energies
to the reactions that our cells require,
and through them they interact with many other molecules.
These hops are Google, Facebook, and Yahoo,
the very, very pages that we all know about
on the World Wide Web.
And once these hops are present,
they really fundamentally connect
they really fundamentally influence
the way the system behaves
and the way the network looks like.
Soon after the discovery of the scale-free property,
we asked the question, is it possible
that we have hops in the systems,
mainly because humans like to build hops?
We like popular people, we like major airports, and so on.
So therefore, we wanted to check whether our networks
out there that we did not consciously build,
and they may also have hops.
Such networks are within ourselves
and within bacteria and other simple organisms
whose metabolic and protein interaction networks
could be mapped out, have been mapped out,
and once we analyze them, we realize
they have roughly the same architecture
as the World Wide Web, the internet,
or many other technical networks.
This was rather surprising if you think about it
because the World Wide Web has a history of about 20 years.
The internet may be 50 years,
airline network 50 years.
The networks within ourselves
have however a history of four billion years.
And over four billion years,
the architecture that the cell develops
is identical to the architecture we see today
in the internet or the World Wide Web.
This study, however, has taken us
in a very interesting direction.
How do we think about human diseases
in the context of the networks that describe the human cell?
Through that, we realize that the best way
to describe a disease is not through the mutations
that the genes have, but rather to think
about the networks that break down
once a gene is not working properly.
Let me provide a simple example.
When you try to start your car in the morning
and your lights don't come up,
that could be viewed as a disease,
like a cell is not doing some of its functions right.
If you want to understand what's the problem,
you take it to the mechanic
and he or she could immediately discover the problem
by inspecting the network
through which the electricity gets to your light bulbs.
And the reason why the mechanic
can fix right away your car is
because he or she has the wiring diagram of your car,
knows exactly how the pieces connect to each other
and there are multiple places
where it could be a broken component,
could be a broken fuse,
the battery could not be working,
the light bulb could be out,
and very quickly can be checked and eventually fixed.
The disease is not so different
from the lights not going on in the morning in your car.
At the end, most diseases are caused
by some network within your cell.
Some subnetwork is not working properly.
And because all diseases can be reduced
to different subnetworks of the big cellular network
that we have in each of our cells,
the diseases are not independent of each other.
So one of the works we did in the lab
is to understand how different diseases link to each other.
Why do they link to each other?
Because they have common genetic
or acting the pairs of diseases
that have a common genetic origin
and therefore should be viewed
and perhaps treated together.
There were lots of surprises on this map.
It showed us linkages between diseases
that are normally treated by different doctors
in completely different departments of the hospital.
It also showed us avenues
how the same drugs could perhaps be used
to treat diseases that were originally not designed for
because the genetic origin of the two diseases
is very common.
The network approach also allows us to address
a big dilemma of modern medicine and genetics.
We have discovered many diseases-associated mutations,
yet we're finding that these mutations are responsible
for only a very small percentage of the disease occurrence,
a very small percentage of the effect.
The question is, where does the rest come from?
Let's take, for example, cancer.
Two individuals with the same cancer
could have completely different mutations
in completely different genes.
Yet they have exactly the same phenotype,
that is the same manifestation of the disease.
How could we explain that?
The network gives us the first step in this direction.
It is not genes that matter,
but rather the function that is not there
when a certain disease manifests itself.
And there are many ways of breaking down the network
such that a function disappears.
In the same way as there are many ways
of breaking down the electric diagram of the car
arriving to the same disease,
which is the lights don't turn on.
The network approach also allows us to integrate
many other components that are known
to be responsible for a disease.
We know a very important component
is the environmental factors, the social factors.
There is evidence that the social network, for example,
could affect the obesity level of individuals.
And by mapping out the disease modules,
understanding the network behind the disease
and integrating within the network,
the environmental factors, the effect of nicotine,
the effect of various gases in the environment,
where do they interact with the molecules?
Are they really in the vicinity of the disease module?
We are able to think of methodologies
to systematically integrate this vast amount of knowledge.
This part is still in dreams.
And the reason why it's still a dream
is because we don't have yet ways
of quantifying the environment of factors
with such a preciseness
as we can talk about the networks within ourselves.
But at least we see what we need.
And the knowledge of what we are missing
is very important for filling in this gap.
Traditionally, academia works in silos,
which means that we have our departments,
our research groups, and we tend to focus
on the particular narrow subject that we are expert in.
The problem is that disease doesn't look at those silos.
It doesn't care about that.
And many complex systems that are around us
are really not particularly infected by those silos.
They're emergent.
Their behavior is determined by many different factors
that do not reside within a single discipline.
So therefore, to address complex problems,
like cancer, like environmental issues,
the speciation, and so on,
we need to have a truly interdisciplinary approach.
It requires medical doctors
to help us understand the nature of the disease
as we know it.
It requires computer scientists to quantify the data
and collect and organize the data
that we can get about that particular disease
and about the patients who have it.
It requires for the system mathematician
to organize this information into predictive laws.
And it requires, once again,
experimentalist, biologist, geneticist
to test these predictions in the real environment.
So science is really converging towards an environment
in which much of the big questions cannot be solved
unless we work together.
Naturally, the scientific enterprise,
the organization of science,
is to a certain degree resisting these attempts
to bring different groups together.
But I think in the last kind of 10 years,
there have been major advances
to try to make this interdisciplinarity
and cross-disciplinarity possible.
In the last decade, my group has worked
in a wide variety of problems
from economic problems,
understanding import-export relationships
between countries to human diseases
all the way to human mobility, social problems, and so on.
Through that, we collaborated with lots of individuals.
And the question is, how can we do that?
Because obviously, I'm not a sociologist,
I'm not a medical doctor,
and neither do I know much about human behavior
other than observing what's happening around me.
What I used to say at the beginning of these collaborations
is that a truly successful interdisciplinary work
should not assume that the role of every single participant
is to solve the problem of one particular discipline.
There's no way myself as a physicist could ever cure cancer.
And you don't want your cancer to be cured by me.
You want to see a cancer specialist for that.
The best interdisciplinary research is done
when different disciplines come together
and they arrive halfway and identify problems
that are of importance for both disciplines,
challenge for both of them,
on which they're actually willing to work together.
Much of the network-created work we did in the last decade
were not part of the traditional core
neither of biology nor of physics.
They are part of it now.
And they have their own intellectual challenges
and their own interesting questions.
And we arrive to these questions
by working with different disciplines,
by understanding their needs,
understanding the set of tools
and their development that we have,
and finding the next frontier
that is worldwide to attack
for which both or multiple disciplines could benefit.
I started thinking about networks
fresh out of graduate school.
A big impetus was an event to IBM in 1994
and I became curious what IBM does
and through reading computer science books
I realized there are major questions related to networks,
that we physicists or in many other disciplines
we don't understand.
Yet, it took me five more years
to publish my first paper on the subject.
It wasn't because I didn't try.
My first paper on networks was written in 1995, I believe.
It's out there on the web.
It's available, but never got published officially.
Not because I didn't submit it to journals.
I did submit it to five journals.
But all the referees said, why do we care?
Yet, I persisted and five years later
we managed to publish a series of papers on networks
that in many ways have changed our perspective
of how we think about complex systems.
In my mind it shows that if you think
that you have a good idea,
you should not expect that the community
will jump up and down a happiness
of what great idea you did had.
The instant success comes only in areas
where you are solving a problem
that everybody agrees ahead of time,
that that is a major problem.
And if you manage to find a satisfactory solution to that,
you will get perhaps instant reward.
But the most influential discoveries are those
that were not known problem at the time
when they were addressed by the community.
If you think about it,
when Einstein came out with reality,
he was not addressing an imminent need.
Nobody was thinking about relativity,
about the problem he was addressing.
But by him addressing the problem,
posing it in a mathematical way,
years later, and it took many years
for that novelist to percolate,
people realized this was a very fundamental contribution
that without which we cannot be.
And now, obviously, it's part of the core of those physics.
And so therefore, if I believe that,
and this is something that I tell to my students,
if you think that you really have an idea,
don't get yourself discouraged
by what the community will tell you.
Because if that idea is really new,
then it's very unlikely that you will get support
from the community,
because the community is not ready for that.
In the same way, as in 1994 and 1995,
the scientific community simply was not ready for networks.
But they were absolutely ready five years later.
It is always difficult to call my own work a paradigm shift.
So let me tell you what I think that we did in this case.
We provided tools to people
which people could view the subjects
and the problems they care about in a new perspective.
We did not discover networks.
Networks were there way before us,
and many other people thought about that in Svei or the other.
What we did is that we provided the narrative
of how you look at the network, how you analyze it.
Once you are given a network,
what are the type of questions you would ask
that really matter,
and what are the questions that don't have an answer at all,
or may be irrelevant to the network context.
Through that, the set of tools that we,
and why we, me and my group,
and as well as the network science community at large,
has developed in the last 10 years
and we have been able to do that.
So what the network has developed in the last 10 years
has managed to revolutionize a number of fields
from cell biology,
where network thinking is a day-to-day tool now,
to computer science,
which cannot be these days neither in the worldwide
nor in the Facebook area
without thinking actively about networks.
And I believe that it will also come around
and revolutionize many other fields,
from economics, for example,
where the network is dealing with
very interconnected economic entities
and where the network aspect has been largely ignored
by the community,
through other disciplines that have not yet been quantitative enough
to embrace networks,
what once the data emerges,
they will have to develop a network
that is thinking about their area.
Every time you feel that you made a discovery,
you hope that the community would come around and embrace it.
But the reality is much more nuanced
and much more complicated.
The more important the discovery is,
the most likely there will be some who will embrace it,
but at the same time,
there will be some who will either call it trivial
or we knew it all along
or simply not important.
After the discovery of scale of networks,
we had the full spectrum.
We had lots of individuals who embraced the subject
and they cared it further
and thanks to them we have a field of network science.
And then we had some who questions both its correctness
as well as its long-term importance.
It's not for me to judge whether they were right,
but I also know that many of the critics
and faced at the beginning really were rooted
in not understanding what we're talking about.
And I could really associate with that feeling
whenever someone comes along and say,
hey, I'm telling you something fundamental about the subject
that you've been thinking about for a long time,
you know, the first question is,
what is that you would know that I wouldn't know?
Let me take the example of sociology.
The truth is that sociologists since the 1930s and 40s
have taught a lot about networks.
They have published many papers.
They had journals called social networks.
And for good reasons they felt social networks
in particular and networks in general is their own discipline.
And it is, there's no question about that.
And we borrowed lots of tools that developed
during these decades that now incorporated
into network science.
But at the same time, back then sociology
had a major methodological limitation.
They could not collect data about large social networks.
This was before the era of Facebook,
before of the era of social networking and internet.
So much of the sociological research on networks
has focused on small communities, 10, 20, 30 people
and the social links they had between them.
So there was no way with this data
that they could have discovered the type of things
that we focused on network science,
which is the properties of large networks.
And it's not that there were a bunch of geniuses
coming around at the end of 1980s and telling everyone,
hey, there are networks over here.
It's simply the data became available
for us to look at the properties of these networks.
And once we did, certain properties were obviously there.
And it was kind of unmistakable
that you have to rewrite the way we think about networks.
Given that background, I'm not at all surprised
that early on there was resistance to these ideas.
But now, 10 years later, 15 years later,
what we learned is that the different ideas about networks
can and must coexist in a very helpful way.
As I mentioned earlier, we did borrow in network science
lots of tools that sociologists and graph theorists
have developed way before we even started thinking
about networks, as well as these communities
have learned to appreciate that the type of questions
we're talking about is not superseding the early at work.
It rather complements it.
I'm Hungarian.
To be precise, I'm Transylvanian.
I grew up in Romania, but I grew up in a Hungarian family
and my culture is fundamentally Hungarian.
And of course, it goes without saying
that in particular in network science,
there have been a number of major mathematical contributions.
Starting with Poja, who's one of the fathers of graph theory,
to Erdos and Reini, who in the 1960s
introduced the random network theory,
to more recently, Las Lolovas,
who just got the Japan Prize for his contributions
to graph theory, as well as Anders Szemeredi,
who got the Able Prize, the Mathematics Nobel Prize,
just last year, again, for contributions to graph theory.
Within that background, one would think
that I must have had a great training in graph theory
and I'm a natural continuation of this school.
I do consider myself being part of this school,
despite the fact that I've never in my life
taken a course in graph theory.
Nor did I know about these contributions
when I started to think about networks.
I learned only later through the work of Bela Bolovas,
another giant of graph theory,
once I was already thinking about the problem
and I was learning the tools
that really Hungarian mathematicians
had such a great contribution to the field.
Was it an accident?
It's really hard to know that.
What I know for sure is that in Hungary,
science has always been viewed as something,
it's a matter of pride for the nation.
So I consider myself primarily a scientist
who happened to stumble across the problem of networks,
which happens to be well populated
by very famous contributions by Hungarians.
I grew up in a family of writers.
My mother was a literature professor
who became later a children's theater director.
My father was a historian who's written many books.
So writing was somehow part of what our family did.
Literature was part of what our family did.
Soon after high school, when I was in college,
as an undergraduate,
I started working for a Hungarian daily in Romania,
the only, well actually Hungarian weekly,
writing about science,
interpreting the results of science
towards a general public.
So when network science came along,
I felt a need to translate the novelage.
That we were gaining within the labs
towards a general public.
I really felt that there are a number
of hugely important discoveries that are being born
through my colleagues in my lab
and through papers that I had access to
that are very important to everyone
who deals with networks,
and that's virtually all of us,
yet they have not really broken out
of the narrow discipline that we're a part of.
This was the motivation
why I ended up writing linked,
my first general audience book.
And eventually it was followed by bursts.
Link focuses on networks,
the network science, network structure,
and how they change our life.
Burst would focus what we call today big data,
even though it doesn't call it that way
because it preceded that term.
And it focuses about the questions
that are really on everybody's mind these days
with the NSA spying scandal
about what data really tells us about us,
how we can really extract human behavioral mobility
from this big data, how predictable we are.
When I wrote linked,
I always thought that this would be part of a trilogy.
And two volumes are out, the third is to be written.
And let me keep the subject separate for that,
but there's a plan for that.
In addition to general audience writing,
I also write for my narrow technical audience,
my colleagues in network science.
And now I'm actually engaged in a very interesting project
of writing a technical introductory course
about network science.
Six chapters of that are already available
because I'm making it available on the web.
We have an iPad version that is interactive
and there's paid versions as well.
And I'm hoping that by the end of the year
we'll finish all 10 chapters.
For me, this is a paradigm change
because I realize that I simply don't have the time anymore
to sit down and write from the beginning to end a book.
And what a waste of not really sharing
what I already written with the community
that people want to teach this material.
So that's why I started to share the material chapter
by chapter and that became in a way a project of its own.
Now the project has taken its second phase.
Once I realized that I am already sharing
this material to everyone,
we realized why are we doing only this in English?
Why don't we do it in all possible languages?
So now all of our work,
groups, volunteers are forming
who are translating the book
as the chapters come out on their own languages.
The first pilot project in Hungarian
is already available, chapter one.
And we have about seven countries
who are already signed up to form groups.
And eventually the goal is
to have a network science introductory book
with interactive examples, homeworks,
slides and everything that would be available
in every language where there's interest in the subject.
So my first technical book was really my PhD thesis.
It was called Fractal Concepts in Surface Growth
and I wrote it together with my advisor, Gene Stanley.
And it was part of my three year PhD,
the last year I really kind of focused entirely
on writing this introductory textbook
of teaching how to use fractal concepts
to think about rough surfaces and so on.
In a way, that was a wonderful lesson.
I learned a lot from Gene Stanley
and also lesson to myself.
I was barely 25 years, 26 year old,
that A, I can do it with professional help
like Gene Stanley provided to me
and B, that there is a value of communicating
the knowledge that we collect towards our colleagues.
In many ways, the network science textbook
that I'm writing is an intellectual continuation
of that process.
