Peacefield, and his talk is going to be on Origin of Life Systems Chemistry, and go ahead, thank you.
Okay, thanks everybody. Good morning and my apologies for not being able to be there in person, but I'll do my best to give you a presentation from the UK.
So I'm going to talk about origins of life systems chemistry.
And what I mean by systems chemistry is the realization that the chemistry associated with the origin of life must really be to do with mixtures, mixtures which have properties which ultimately emerge and give rise to the property we know as life.
In the past, I think many of us have focused on individual reactions that there's been a growing realization over the last 10, 15 years that individual reactions, whilst important, have to be incorporated into an overall network, if you like.
So, without any further ado, let me start by considering the sorts of feedstocks you might have available on the early planet, and whether those feedstocks would be suitable for the synthesis of molecules destined to become biological.
Now, if you look at these molecules displayed here, the sort of representative examples of biological molecules, you'll notice that they contain multiple carbon atoms bonded to each other, as well as heterotons such as oxygen and nitrogen.
So, the task faced by the synthetic chemist whilst trying to understand how these molecules might have come into existence is to think of ways in which carbon carbon bonds could be formed easily, as well as carbon heterotons.
To try and get things such that we end up at approximately the right redox state for biology to start, and if you consider carbon in biological molecules, it tends to average an oxidation level round about that of formaldehyde.
So, it's a crude approximation, it's not desperately important for what follows, but it's roughly the oxidation level of formaldehyde, whereas if you take nitrogen, nitrogen tends to be at the oxidation level of ammonia.
Biology, of course, now accomplishes these two amazing tasks, one of fixing carbon from CO2, and the other of fixing nitrogen from N2.
Now, in the early days, of course, fixing one without the other wouldn't have been any good because biological molecules required for life, require both nitrogen and carbon.
And so, a very, very early assessment just based upon this kind of analysis that is that if you could use hydrogen cyanide, it has a carbon atom which is close to the oxidation level required, it requires some reduction.
And it has a nitrogen, which is at the right oxidation level. So if you fix hydrogen cyanide, or if you take hydrogen cyanide as a feedstock, you're fixing both carbon and nitrogen, one at the right oxidation level and one at close to the right oxidation level.
So that's an important consideration, I think.
And just to sort of, if you like, compound that is the fact that if you start with formaldehyde, you actually have a problem, which is that if you want to join two formaldehyde molecules together, it's like trying to get two north poles for magnet to come together, it's difficult,
because they repel each other. In organic chemistry speak, that means it's difficult because it needs oomph along.
In contrast, the addition of hydrogen cyanide formaldehyde is a very easy reaction. It's the formation of a cyanohydrin. It occurs spontaneously in water and has a very high equilibrium constant in favor of the formation of the cyanohydrin.
The key observation in our labs here was that you can actually take hydrogen cyanide and reduce it to formaldehyde. And so you don't have to start with formaldehyde and hydrogen cyanide, you start with cyanide and reduce it and you end up with a mixture of cyanide and formaldehyde.
The reduction, it turns out, is best done via two sequential one electron reduction reactions. And that's because hydrogen cyanide has an innate propensity to undergo one electron reduction because of the stability of an intermediate known as an immunal radical.
So we generate those electrons by using ultraviolet light to dislodge an electron from a soft anion such as hydro sulfide. The electron once dislodged becomes solvated in water.
And in conjunction with a proton, either, you know, at the same time by proton coupled electron transfer sequentially, or after the reaction of the electron with the hydrogen ion to become hydrogen atom, you get the formation of the immunal radical.
And this then picks up a hydrogen atom becomes the immune of formaldehyde and is hydrolyzed to give formaldehyde, which then in situ reacts to make the cyanohydrin, like on a nitrile.
Now this nitrile group is electron withdrawn, it's called an electron withdrawn substituent next to it, so it too can undergo reduction.
And then you hydrolyzed the resultant immune you generate the first homologated compound the first company with the carbon carbon bond at the level of formaldehyde, which is glycol aldehyde.
Repeat the process and you make glissal aldehyde.
So the take home from that is that you take hydrogen cyanide hydrogen sulfide optionally a metal, such as copper in its oxidation state one, which photo redox cycles with between one and two that facilitates the process is not obligatory, but it assists the process.
So hydrogen sulfide hydrogen cyanide optionally a bit of a transition metal irradiated you make the C2 and C3 sugars, you ultimately need to make ribose this constituent of ribonucleic acid RNA.
Now if you build on that reaction, you scope it out you see you know where would it logically go if you apply it to other substrates that might be available.
Then you actually build up a reaction network and that network of reactions shown here is complex, whatever that means but it's, it's a network which produces approximately half of the canonical amino acids produces ribonucleotides and glycerol phosphate,
so just to home in on a couple of aspects of that here's the reaction of hydrogen cyanide to start with making the two carbon sugar, and then the three carbon sugar to come sugar reacts with cyanomide to make a two amino acids all which can then under your CC bond form
glyceraldehyde, you assemble the ribonucleotides here by a sort of counter intuitive process where you take half a sugar at half a nuclear base at the other half sugar, then at the other half nuclear base.
And this gets around the problem of the difficulty of adding a preformed nuclear base to a preformed sugar.
So, there's a reaction network it's not complete yet we're missing still a good route to the purine nucleotides.
But we think that the amino acids are probably limited to about half the canonical number because the others actually look more recent by a number of criteria.
So we think that the fact we haven't made them by prevarically plausible chemistry is probably consistent with the fact that they might not have been or weren't available on the early earth.
So, let's not explore some consequence of this.
One of the consequences is is the need to actually have a geochemically plausible scenario.
So we have a piece of synthetic chemistry to an audience and asked them to believe that it could have occurred in the early earth.
And they rightfully ask you, you know, to explain how could that happen without people in white coats, doing all the things that synthetic chemists do like adding reagents sequentially, purifying products, doing work ups and then mixing
together again and what we've worked out over the years is that the only way we can really think of achieving this is a surface scenario where you have things being dissolved sequentially as streams passed over the surface.
So stream pass over a surface which contains soluble materials it will in sequence dissolve those. And you can then imagine that equates to the sequential addition of reagents.
If the flow of water is limited then occasionally solution will get concentrated and crystallization can take place. And if the flow separates the mother liquor from the crystal.
That gives you a way of purifying materials and so certain intermediates on the synthesis for example of RNA, one of the intermediates is a highly crystalline material, which actually additionally crystallizes in the form of a conglomerate, which
offers some interesting opportunities about the potential to resolve it.
To generate Homer carol or an anti American pure rubbing Euclid acid, which would be an important aspect of any early synthesis. So, in summary, this is how we think it could have taken place on the surface environment.
Gradual flow of water, and all of the requirements of synthetic chemistry met by this sort of scenario. You couldn't, for example, do this sort of thing in the deep ocean, because the deep ocean would dilute things to a great degree.
No opportunity for crystallization and very difficult to imagine how you could separate and purify things in any other way.
Now, another consequence of the production of nucleotides at the same time as amino acids is the suggestion which I think many of us in the field have felt, which is that RNA chemistry and protein chemistry must be very closely linked.
And so that link in modern biology is perhaps strongest when you look at the genetic code and the process of translation. And just as a reminder, the genetic code essentially is written by interaction of an enzyme, the amino acid and the synthetase, both with its
amino acid, and with its cognate RNA, and it recognizes the amino acid because of its specific shape. It recognizes the tRNA by one or two, maybe a few, so-called identity determinants, which specify that that tRNA is destined to become amino isolated with a particular amino acid.
The amino acid tRNA synthetase then writes the code, makes an amino acid tRNA, and the code is read very simply by Watson Crick decoding in the 30s subunit of the 30s of the bacterial ribosome, the decoding center of the small subunit of the ribosome.
Now, we got drawn into this by thinking, well, if amino acids and nucleotides are produced at the same time, then any attempts at doing RNA replication chemistry would have to contend with the presence of amino acids.
The favorite intermediates for RNA elongation chemistry, imidazolites, are known to react with amino acids, either with the amine at high pHs or with the cuboxylate at lower pHs.
And so this produces a phosphoramidate, this produces a mixed anhydride. So we've looked at the chemistry of phosphoramidate, some mixed anhydrides in detail, and turns out, long story short, the chemistry of the mixed anhydrides is I think the most interesting.
It turns out that if you make a mixed anhydride between the amino acid and the five prime phosphate of an RNA, which looks like the acceptor stem of an RNA molecule, which is a duplex with a short overhang.
If the overhang has the right sequence, it turns out that it can adopt a folded back confirmation, which enables the amino acid to be transferred from the five prime phosphate to the dial to make the amino acylester.
It turns out using intermediates made by conventional chemistry just to see what would be the consequences.
And we immediately got attracted to the idea there might be some sort of coding some sort of recognition between the nucleotide sequences and the amino acids.
First of all, decided to do this by high throughput experimentation we randomized the overhang sequence and used a selection procedure to determine those sequences which were most efficiently underwent the transfer of amino acid.
And what we found was in conjunction with Andres Yeshka's group in Heidelberg, then in fact, the preferred sequences, here's the top 10% preferred sequences and the sequence, the 100% all sequences.
There was very little difference between the sequence that was preferred to transfer L alanine glycine proline valine or leucine.
And that was somewhat disappointing, but but in retrospect we think not too surprising. And what was interesting was that when we came to then, this is unpublished but will soon be published.
We then varied the terminal try nucleotide of the stem with determined in preliminary experiments that fourth and fifth residues had a little effect on chemistry, but the first three did.
And we then found that there is a remarkable dependence on the efficiency by which certain amino acids are transferred, and it relates to the terminal try nucleotide sequence.
So alanine alanine is best transferred by UA or UUG.
Glycine by CUC proline by GCU and leucine and valine which are related amino acids are actually best transferred by related sequences.
This is data derived from sequencing. We confirm this by HPLC.
You look at the sequence with a try nucleotide CAG alanine is the best transferred L is much better transferred than D so it's stereo selective.
Change that try nucleotide. You find a sequence that transfers proline best change it again. You find one that transfers leucine best.
We're using here a pentaneucleotide to do the transfer, but we can do this with actually with a tetra nucleotide, or even with a try nucleotide with a try nucleotide it turns out the selectivity is even higher.
And we think that the evolution of ribosomes could facilitate this being carried out with even smaller phosphorylated and amino isolated nucleotides even down to the monomer.
And of course the monomer, the mixed and the mixed and hydride monomer is what biology currently uses.
So we think this actually explains why in modern biology the identity determinants in tRNAs are still clustered not just in the anticodon loop but also in the acceptor stem, because that's where they would have first been.
It doesn't explain why amino acids are assigned to the codons that they are, and very briefly we think that they're assigned to these codons because of a relationship between binding of
occupy the so called fanny boxes the fourfold degenerate boxes of the genetic code, and those fourfold degenerate boxes are characterized by having by having an extra hydrogen bond.
In the case that they don't have all GC they have an extra hydrogen bond between the two prime hydroxyl of you 33 and the inter nucleotide phosphate indicated here.
So we thought that would probably mean that the family boxes are those which best associate most strongly associate with the corresponding codons, and it turns out this is the case.
We can look at family box anticodon codon interactions they bind very tightly non family box and decodon codon interactions are approximately 50 to 100 times weaker.
And it turns out that if you have two contiguous family box codons on a message, you can actually bind these tRNA anticodon stem loops sequentially, or at the same time, to that message.
So, here's one example using boiler interferometry where we combined one anticodon stem loop and then bind a second one and then unbind the first unbind a second, and another example, where we can do the same.
And we think that the reason that the amino acids were first assigned to family box codons is because the tightness of binding of the family box anticodon to the codon would have assisted the process of bringing two tRNAs together.
If you bind them onto a message you're effectively bringing them into the same room.
And then all you need to do is bring the three prime ends of amino isolated tRNAs together to get the proximity required for transpeptidation.
So the idea is that the first peptides could only have been produced if there was proximity between the two tRNA, and that tRNA proximity would have been facilitated by having tight binding family box anticodons binding to the corresponding contiguous codons on a piece of message.
So there you go systems chemistry suggests the amino acids and nucleotides would have been made together, and the assembly chemistry of nucleotides and amino acids when viewed together, we think gives you additional benefits and suggests an underpinning of the the the central
part of the central dogma that Francis quick described, whereby information is transferred from nucleic acids to proteins via translation and the genetic code.
So, a long story made short my apologies for that.
I just like to say that that actually agrees with some suggestions made by some very smart people.
A few years back, and to then thank the people in my group who've been responsible for this those in bold the ones who are still present in my group those not in bold the ones who also contributed to work I've described colleagues who've assisted and the funding agencies who've supported this.
And lastly, I'd like to thank you for your attention.
We obviously have time for questions.
When you want to go first down there.
This is Anton Petrov from Georgia Tech Atlanta.
So I have a question about the second part of your work on genetic code. So if I'm not mistaken, you had a construct in which at the three prime, you had five nucleotides you use CCA.
And here is for nucleotides position 73 discriminator, and then CCA.
So, can you make any comments on that why do you have five nucleotides.
Yes.
That's a good question, Anton, and we arrived at the five nucleotide overhang in in a sort of kind of strange way. We, like many others we subscribe to the opinion that tRNA looks like the product of duplication.
So, if the tRNA is a duplication product, then 76 residues which is the canonical length is two times 38, and that places the join in the in the anti codon loop.
It also suggests that there would have been a symmetry where the anti codon loop resembled the overhang at the three prime term is so the anti codon loop is seven nucleotides.
The canonical overhang is four.
So we went for an overhang of five, because that suggested we could actually buy small changes we could either recapitulate the modern overhang, or recapitulate the anti codon loop.
We then used sequence comparison between conserve bases in the anti codon loop and the overhang to try and arrive at a consensus sequence that could have given rise to both.
And believe it or not, we when we tried that first five base overhang we immediately found amino acid transfer.
Because when we actually use other overhangs, we don't see the same transfer, and a comment on the modern situation AA sorry ACCA that ACCA adopts a linear confirmation that if you mutate it to you CCA.
And as he showed many years ago by NMR techniques that the UCCA can adopt a folded back confirmation whereas the ACCA can't.
So our overhang has that you in place, basically to give you the, the if you like the proto pi turn the U turn motif to give you the folded back confirmation.
So the idea then is that as biology changes over time, you can mutate the overhang, make it one base shorter, either by truncating it or elongating the five prime.
And then you mutate it such that no longer adopts the fold back confirmation.
There was a question down there yes go ahead.
So thank you for the talk. So I have two questions the first one is a naive question from an astronomer.
Could you explain what is the difference between RNA and T or RNA exactly. So that's my first question. And the second question so you said that you know the these
the chemical reaction you explained at the very beginning were favored in a surface environment we flow on water and you said that it could not happen in a deep ocean and thermal vents.
And I was wondering, because for this thermal events we could expect like a porous material with small pockets where you could have some fluid inside.
And could, could this be some way to circumvent the problem of the low concentration and, and maybe, yeah, okay thank you.
Okay.
Again, both good questions the first one, there's no such thing as a naive question, it comes to this it's an interdisciplinary topic. We need to communicate with each other.
RNA is RNA, and the T the prefix simply refers to the fact that it's an RNA molecule, which is involved in the translation process transfer RNA transfers amino acids.
So it's a subscript which just denotes a specialized task for a particular RNA molecule.
When it comes to sufficient environments versus deep sea environments, I'm an experimentalist so I'm more convinced by experimental results than theories.
And the ideas about chemistry and deep sea vents versus the surface have been bouncing around for a long time.
There's plenty of evidence now that you can do sequential reactions in sufficient environments, but to my knowledge there is no evidence that you can do this in simulated deep sea environment so whilst you're right to point out that there are some
potential ways in which you can imagine things happening.
I think we would all be happier in believing those if there was some experimental demonstration that they could actually take place.
Okay, is that actually I had a quick follow up question to that which is, I've heard, I'm also from a naive perspective. We've heard about the stream idea at least in principle several times.
There have been experiments in something like a microfluidic analog of a stream geometry where you mix things and they repeat, we create these intersections and you do sequential chemistry of the type that you're postulating could have been responsible for doing that in the early
years. So we've done some very, I would say, crude and preliminary experiments using flow apparatus that our colleagues in synthetic chemistry use for sequential chemistry like that, they call it in flow.
So if you can argue about just how close to that approximates the surface environment, we would very much like to do this in a more realistic way. There are some safety issues dealing with gaseous HCM and H2S.
So you have to build a rig in which you could do this safely. The alternative will close things in tubes and do it by proper microfluidics, but then again that faces the critique that it's not as close an approximation as one could make.
So short answer, we're getting there, but we haven't yet done it as convincingly as I think we'd like to do it.
So hi, John, great talk here. Here's Thomas Henning from Heideberg. You started with HCM and of course that is a wonderful molecule and a key molecule as you all know.
But let's assume for a second that there would not be enough HCM available. So what would be your next best choice?
Hi, Thomas. Good to hear from you.
So let me turn the question around a little bit and say, you know, there are two ways of approaching this. One is to say that planetary science and geochemistry can give us clues about what might have happened.
The second is to say that the requirements of chemical synthesis can point to the need for certain materials to have been present.
And I would say we've now gotten to the point where, you know, going back to Juan Oro's experiments with HCM making adenine, for example, we've now got the point where I think there's a very substantial body of chemical evidence that
would bring us HCM so specifically that we as chemists would say HCM had to be there in sufficient abundance to do this. And we then turn the question around to you and say, so please give us ways in which it could have been there.
You know, we know it can be made during impacts. We know it can be made by lightning. You know, we know it's abundant in the universe so it could have been delivered early on or could have been subsequently delivered but please let's use the chemistry as a clue to sort of persuade people in the planetary science community to come up with even more convincing ways in which we can get to HCM because doing it without HCM is going to be real tough.
My name is Dimitri Konev. I want to ask you, you showed very clear stereochemical transfer and amino acid relations based on a specific sequence. And this is quite amazing. I mean, lots of scientists dream to show that experimentally and you show it now.
Is there any insight of the mechanism of this stereochemical process? That's my first question.
Oh, Dimitar, that is a really good question. And we have approached a whole series of really good modelers and they've all had a go at this and they've all come up with suggestions and to be honest, you know, molecular modeling is powerful now but it has its limitations.
And we just don't know what to believe. We don't see an obvious explanation for it ourselves but the data's real. It's surprising but it's, you know, it's in triplicate, it's done by HPRC, we've got, you know, all sorts of additional backup data that suggests the stereoselectivity is real, you know, up to 10 to 1.
And so the answer to your question, to that question really is, it is a real observation. We cannot easily explain it. We're looking to try and get structural data to explain it.
But the compounds involved are fairly labile and, you know, getting them to survive long enough to acquire proper NMR data or, you know, crystallographic data is a challenge.
Hi John, this is David Katling. So you mentioned in your network for making the monomers that you didn't have a good path to the purines yet.
And earlier you just mentioned the work by Juan Oro on adenine going back to the 1960s. So could you just talk to why, because to my mind, you know, I don't know so much about what the problems are with the purines but could you just talk to that and how you think that could fit in.
Hi David, sure. So I think with the pyrimidines we assembled the nucleotides, half sugar, half base, half sugar, half base.
With the purines, you're dead right. There is this real clue in the literature from Juan Oro that says adenine, which has a constitutional formula, H5N5C5, is indeed a pentamol.
And you can make it by allowing hydrogen cyanide to react. If you take hydrogen cyanide in formite, you can get, you know, really high yields of adenine.
And formite is just a hydration product of cyanide. So adenine looks like a very predisposed molecule.
And so we think, you know, we've been thinking this for a long time unsuccessfully, but we think that the answer will lie at an innovative and allowing that to intercept the pyrimidine nucleotide synthesis.
But we haven't yet achieved this, but we think that the observation of Oro and those who've elaborated on that, we think those are extremely valid.
Okay, well thank you very much again for a talk.
And we'll move on to the second talk.
