So one thing I'm done, I was listening to a conversation you had with somebody else and you were talking about realism and the moon, you know, and this idea that the kind of the whole interface theory and all that.
And this idea that what's what's what's happening to the moon when we're not looking at it, right, and it's not being rendered and all of that.
So I'm interested in you talking about what what on your model what does it mean that the next appearance. So let's say you know the moon goes, you know, behind some occlusion or something.
And then the next place you're going to see it is you can actually guess where it's going to come out next by with a model that assumes that it actually does exist and it's tracing out a particular path.
Right. So there's some, there's some some explanatory value that you get from from a model that does think that even when you're not looking at it it's doing a set of steps that will lead it to be where when when you do look at it here's where it's going to be.
So I was curious about hearing you talk about that and then you know kind of Richard side on the his take on the realism of it and what the delta is between what we do what we do see and what's actually going on behind the scenes.
But that's a great question like and I get it all the time in emails, usually with the kind of gotcha kind of attitude toward you know you clearly you haven't thought about this one.
And so it's actually quite easy just as long as you think about virtual reality in a VR multiplayer game you'll get the right answer so so listen instead of the moon listen let's talk about I'm doing Grand Theft Auto virtual reality with a bunch of people and I see a red Ferrari.
Well, in this example, the reality I'll assume is some supercomputer right just for sake of argument.
Right.
And if you looked inside that supercomputer you would never find a red Ferrari. So there's there's no, there's only a Ferrari when you when you render it now however, there's something going on on the supercomputer that's not a red Ferrari.
And because what's going on in there is it's lawful and so forth. I can use Newtonian physics intuitions to guess if I look back where the red Ferrari is going to be next based on the speed I saw and the direction it was going.
I can, I can predict so. So, in other words, we can use all of our space time intuitions as we should to to predict where things are and none of that affects the realist realism claim.
But we're so used to thinking that way that that we we miss the the logical leap that we're making just because it's a useful way to do things doesn't mean it's true.
And the VR the VR game really sort of brings that home.
And, and by the way, my guess is that these questions are going to go away in about a less than a generation because a generation raised on VR games are just going to go deaf.
I'll bring up one one thing here that that I heard you talk about before and I think is interesting as well in this long the same lines of what's real and what's not and that is the distinction between living and non living.
I know you were talking with Bernardo about that and the two of you disagreed a little bit and usually I agree with Bernardo but then this, this is one case where I disagree with Bernardo.
So it's, and so it'll be fun to talk with him at some point about it, but I think there's no principle distinction between living and non living.
If you really take idealism seriously, as Bernardo does, and you take the dashboard or interface theory seriously, then the distinction that we make between living and non living is merely an artifact of the limitations of that dashboard or that interface.
And it's a use again it's a useful distinction to make inside the game.
But, but when we when we step back and say but our is it really a principle deep distinction that's true. No, it is just useful for the game, you know the space time science game.
But it's not a more deeply true thing so so I throw that out there I don't know if you mean you I mean I get any pushback from you because I think that was your position as well.
Do you think that is so.
Okay, so in moving from let's say Newtonian paradigm to say the relativistic paradigm. Do you think that that entails in any sense, getting closer to the actual dynamics going on on this on the supercomputer behind the scenes or you like like is there, you know, are we in fact getting closer to that at all or is like what what is the arrow if there is one there.
That's another very great and important question. And, and it gets to the very heart of what it means to have a scientific theory.
So, so a scientific theory, and this is just like the ABC so it's very, very simple stuff.
We always start with assumptions, and we say if you grant me these assumptions I'll explain all this other wonderful stuff.
Now clearly, a scientific theory cannot be a theory of everything because it's not a theory of its assumptions, its assumptions are miracles for the theory.
Now you can say, well, I'll give you a deeper scientific theory that explains those assumptions. Indeed, that's what we do.
But your new theory will have its own assumptions which are your new set of miracles, and this goes on ad infinitum.
Now, so that that's I think just, you know, standard, you know, elementary philosophy of science kind of stuff.
It has important implications but here's where I take it I think that that entails the ad infinitum I take seriously.
That means that our science is infinitely far, always from a complete theory of everything infinitely far, because this is like your kids when you're when they're growing up to say,
but why is that why is the sky blue and you say well it's because of this but why why why do photons have that that that wavelength.
Yeah, at some point you just say they do that's that's just the way it is and shut up.
And so the game the kids play which is why why why always questioning the assumptions is something that I think we can go on ad infinitum and and in principle, we should take it seriously that we go on ad infinitum.
Now one thing that gets us psychologically on this is that we think that of course, space time is fundamental.
So there is some assumption, it is an assumption, but it's the truth.
So we think, okay, space time is, you know, we have that psychological feeling that space time is the truth and not, you know, but science has moved on space time is doomed, energy theoretical physicists are saying that.
And so we actually have to learn how to think entirely outside of space time itself.
So, so the one thing that I think has sort of kept us from really grasping how important it is that there's an infinite regressive scientific theories ahead of us.
And so, so it's horrible for those want a theory of everything that's this bad news. It's great for, you know, job security for scientists.
But but in terms now to get to your question like I think it means that there is a sense in which Newton is not as useful in many cases as Einstein and quantum theory.
But that I don't think means is getting closer to the ultimate truth and in any sense, I think that best what science is doing is giving us a description of a perspective on reality.
A one of an infinite number of different possible perspectives so so this is just the opposite of the theory of everything kind of attitude.
You have a theory of a trivial perspective, the one that homo sapiens happens to take out of the out of the infinity.
And my own feeling is that that the one we take which is a four dimensional space time kind of view of things is probably one of the more trivial headsets.
I mean, why four dimensions is about as minimal as you can do and have it be functional. Why not have 10,000.
There's something more general than dimensions. So as my guess is, you know, we're dealing we're on the dumber part of the hierarchy of headsets that are being used perspectives on on reality.
So, so so my attitude, Mike and I would love for pushback is that, of course, I, as a scientist, I want us to get better and better scientific theories.
But that doesn't mean that they're getting closer and closer to the ultimate truth. That just means that they're better and better descriptions of the particular perspective we happen to be looking at reality from and making useful insights into that particular perspective, which is just one of an infinity of perspectives.
So it's very, I say it's a very humbling way to view on all this.
I kind of help noticing, Tom, that when you wave your hand with your fingers spread, we get a little glimpse of a reality behind the dashboard that zoom creep is there.
The background blurring doesn't, you know, like, oh, I just I can see the room is in for a minute.
Case behind me and doesn't have an orchid in it.
So obviously we have the sort of standard way of of assessing whether one scientific theory is better than another is because the number of assumptions that it makes is less.
And the dream of a grand unifying theory is almost as though we just reduce the number of fundamental forces or fundamental constants or fundamental assumptions we need to make until they're almost aren't any as though it's always just like it's just just, you know,
assume the true mistrue and false is false and everything else will follow from that.
That's that's the goal we want as few miracles as possible.
Ideally, I'm sure most in their heart of hearts would like no miracles at all but but that's when you look at the nature of scientific explanation, you always have to start with with some miracles.
Occam just says, use as few miracles as possible. And by the way, this has a really important implication for how we progress from three to three.
So, so your suggestion is that the space time perspective might have a grand unified theory with less miracles than those that we have so far and we can as we can assess the value of one theoretical framework with respect to another within that perspective of their quality.
But we could have taken another perspective in which the same things might have been explained with a lot of miracles or with a little with a little number of miracles and there's an infinite number of perspectives we could have taken.
And how many miracles we're using to explain our predictions doesn't tell us which one of those perspectives was true.
That's that's that's correct or or if not true.
Useful from our particular headset perspective on reality.
Can I come back to the VR and the red Ferrari for a minute.
So you suggested that the answer to.
I'm not looking at the Ferrari, but my model that assumes that there is a Ferrari.
Gets a reasonably good prediction about where it's going to be next time I look perhaps hasn't moved actually perhaps it's still there next time I look that's a model of what the Ferrari is.
And you said well that's because the supercomputer has a law like a law like physics for want of a better word for it.
Even though there isn't a Ferrari and there isn't any redness and there isn't any rendering happening until I look at it.
I guess it feels like there's a bit of a.
Something a little bit slippery about well when I model the Ferrari being in a new position at a particular time.
Was I making the assumption that it was a that it had object permanence and that it was moving through space, or was I simply making the assumption that it was that his behavior was law like.
So it's, it's about the.
What am I perceiving when I perceive space time, am I perceiving space time or I'm receiving law like stuff which is consistent with space time.
And of course the inclination of most of us, including smart scientists is to take our perceptions of space time as real that as you know object permanence the moon really is there when no one looks me someone as bright as Einstein believe that.
So that's that's what we typically do and, you know, child psychologists tell us that that's wired into us from three or four months of age.
So, so it's not a, you know, an intelligent reasoned intellectual decision that we make. It's something that that we can't help it happens to us at four months of age.
And then it takes a lot of education to outgrow it as adults.
So, so yeah, so I agree that we, that's a good question. I think most of us just pre theoretically and even theoretically assume the moon is there when no one looks and that is that is real.
And it's a real shock. That's why idealism is such a shock to most people's sensibilities.
So, let me extend the Occam's number of miracles thing to is it is it possible to go meta on that and say well let's use a similar principle to assess the quality of taking one perspective or another.
In one particular perspective we might find that we have a grand unifying theory that gets down to a small number of miracles but in another perspective would be equally, it might be equally explanatory and might have the same number of miracles or it might have less.
But if there was if there was.
Is there really a difference between saying this theory is better than that theory within this perspective and saying this perspective is better than that perspective.
Because you know a theory is just taking a perspective anyway isn't it.
Yes, and, and so yeah the distinction between a perspective and a theory of a perspective is an interesting one because it's hard to even talk about a perspective without sort of already having a theoretical idea.
Right of what you're talking about. And there is at the core of all this a deep point which is if I'm saying that no scientific theory is the final word and we have we're going to have an infinite sequence of theories and an infinite number of perspectives.
What is the ultimate nature of the reality that we're taking perspectives on and and my my own view is we have to think of it like in terms of like incompleteness results like girls and others that that the reality whatever it is transcends concepts.
It's so so those who tell us if you want to know the truth, you have to be the truth by letting go of all concepts and face it head on. I think there's something there that that that's.
But that's not a conceptual knowledge that's that's entirely a non conceptual knowledge and and and so that starts to get to sound mystical but but it seems to me like a direct shot from what is a scientific theory.
Can you tell me more about the difference between conceptual and non conceptual knowledge.
Well, yeah, non conceptual knowledge would be any words you use to describe that any predicates are necessarily wrong.
So, so if you it's like the the Tao to Qing, basically, at the very the very first line of the Tao to Qing is the Tao that can be spoken is not the true Tao.
In other words, if you can talk about it, that's not it. And that's that's sort of the attitude I have now, looking at the nature of scientific theories is reality is whatever it is.
And we've conflated our little theories for true descriptions of reality and I think that that's immodest and actually not understanding what we're doing.
It's, I think a more modest position is to say theories are theories and concepts are concepts they're human concepts.
And that's not the truth.
So is that is that a bit like a Gestalt perception, right? You that's, it's, it's all there all at once. And anything that you do to try and cut it up categorize it describe its parts that that's not it.
Yes, and in fact, now this might sound contradictory, but I'm trying to do a mathematical model to capture that kind of thing. Right.
But I'm going to be doing it in the spirit of humility that saying, this is just a model that tries to capture that idea that that there's some kind of deeper synchronicity that that is non causal and so forth but from a perspective it looks like there's causality and and and so forth.
And so, so, so, immediately I'll say right up front that what I'm about to say, I'm not saying is anywhere near the truth is just that it's an interesting mathematical model that helps us think out of that live.
In other words, it helps us get out of a little box that we might be stuck in. And so, so the idea is that there are these Markovian dynamics that are stationary.
And that means that the, the entropy doesn't increase from step to step is the same entropy at every step.
So there's no entropic arrow of time.
But it's a bit like saying it'll, it'll always, it always was and it always will be. It's just what it is.
It is what it is and you can it's just a shape it's not a process run it forwards or backwards you see the same thing.
You know, long term. And, but it's a theorem that if you take a perspective you take a projection, what conditional, you know, conditional probability on this.
So, three line proof really trivial, you get a new, new dynamics new Markovian dynamics and the entropy will be increasing as a result of the loss of information in the projection.
And so my own take is that our view from, from inside space time. So, for example, of evolution of organisms fighting for resources and competing and the fundamental resource that's limited is time.
If you don't breathe in time, you die. If you don't made in time, you don't reproduce. If you don't eat in time, you die. Time is the fundamental limited resource.
And, and as you probably know, I've done a lot of work on evolution. I love it. It's a wonderful, wonderful theory. There's no better theory of biological organisms inside space time than Darwin's theory and evolutionary game theory.
Having said that, I think that time is an artifact and it's the fundamental limited resource in evolutionary theory. So I think that all of Darwin's theory, as beautiful as it is and as perfectly suited to description inside space time.
All of it is an artifact of the space time projection. None of it is a deep insight into the nature of reality. We could have this deeper reality. And again, I'm not saying my Markovian model is, is reality.
I'm just saying it's there as a way to help us think outside of a box. So this model shows how you could have a synchronistic, you know, in the union sense of a synchronistic system.
The entropy is not increasing. No limited resources, no nature, red and truth and claw. But when you take a perspective on it, all of a sudden, you get nature, red and truth and claw, you get organisms fighting, you get entropy increasing, you get Markov blankets, you get predictive processing, you get all that stuff.
So what I'm saying is predictive processing Markov blankets and that whole way thing. Absolutely brilliant. I'm not putting it down. It's absolutely brilliant. It works really well inside space time and every bit of it is an artifact of projection of a deeper system that's
synchronistic and doesn't have, you know, doesn't need predictive processing and so forth. It has nowhere of time. So, so I'm saying that again, not to say I'm right, just to say here's some mathematical model that can help us blow open some boxes that we might have, you know, in our conceptual system.
So there will be a deep connection then between time entropy, causation, right, if there isn't any time then there isn't any cause, right, there's just, it's just what it is. Nothing's causing anything is around any events if there isn't any time.
And there'll be a deep connection between that and where you are, where you are in time, where you are on this shape taking a perspective and having a first person experience of it, right, there'll be some, some deep connection between taking a first person perspective, having a first person perspective and
experiencing a ride on this shape, right, I imagine the kind of shape you're talking about, like a high dimensional curve, that by the way, I'm thinking is probably a knot.
And the, when you take a particular projection of it, suddenly it looks like there are events, there are causes, there is entropy increase, there's an arrow in time.
The notion that the subjective field is the sort of the primary, I don't know what to call it because all the words use space time.
The primary thing.
There must be some deep connection between that assumption and the, and this idea of taking perspectives in a way that have a particular point in time or seed time as, as, as a real thing rather than a non thing.
Yes, and I think that, you know, there is the question that comes out of your, your, your discussion there that, you know, we experienced things in space and time, but there is, you said this first person perspective and that just I and the sort of the I am experience I am.
And it's striking that I am always only now.
Nothing happens except now.
There is a sense in which we actually directly experience the fact that time is an illusion, because there is no time there's only now, and time is something that I make up to to describe the changes in my experiences now.
So it's, and by the way, you can see I'm not terribly comfortable in this area right now is that I don't have a mathematical model of the now and that kind of thing so it's, but, but from a first person perspective and also when you look at, you know, various spiritual traditions that that that talk about this kind of thing there is
pretty good intuitive evidence that now is all there is, whatever that might mean and it does seem to to interface nicely with the ideas that we were just talking about that there could be a deeper synchronistic model that we could give a mathematics for that has no
arrow of time.
And in some sense, since there is no arrow of time is always now.
If I imagine this complex high dimensional shape or curve which represents everything that always was and it was will be in that isn't moving through time it just is right.
I can imagine projecting it like projecting 3d to 2d but I can also imagine a projection that is a bit bit more interesting that a projection that is because the object that we're talking about is going to be fractal.
So there's a there's a possibility of a projection that something to do with taking every other dimension from it or taking every, like, I'm thinking about viewing it with different frame rates instead of viewing it at different viewing in different spatial projections.
Which is a strange thing to say since we just decided that it isn't moving in there isn't any time.
But if if I imagine myself moving on a on a complex high dimensional curve, then my experience of that curve as I move around it is going to be varying that I can see.
I'm writing and writing on a subway train and I can see that the carriages in front of me are doing this or they're not doing that depending on whether I'm going around a sharp curve or I'm going along a straight.
It doesn't that doesn't feel like moving but it feels like the future in the past are waving around in front of me right if I'm writing on the train going around this curve.
If I change the frame rate or change the speed at which the train is moving, I could hit the same part of the curve with the same curvature again a moment late and it would look like it wasn't waving around in front of me would look like it was stationary again because I hit a harmonic of that curve.
That made everything stationary again right so there would be multiple speeds I could travel that would make the world look non eventful and
I'm reaching I'm reaching for something to make the the projections you talk about that that when you take a projection of this shape it it looks like it has time and it looks like it has events and it looks like it has causes and a further
some way of thinking about it and a way to make time fractal do that do that and give it back to me.
Well, so it's I think that's a great project and it's quite interesting.
There's some work. Have you heard of the universe plus initiative from the European Research Council.
I think you mentioned it before yeah.
And it's there what they're doing is they're finding these new timeless structures outside of space time called positive geometries.
Among them are the amplitude hydrant cosmological polytopes associate hydrant and so forth and and then some combinatorial objects called decorated permutations that classify these structures.
So here they here these they're not dynamical they're they're these platonic solids and so if you will, although in some cases they're not polytopes like the amplitude hydrant need not be a polytope.
So it's so just a little more complicated than just, you know, polytopes out there.
But these structures give rise to the correct predictions of scattering amplitudes for particle processes inside space time like two gluons smashing into each other and six gluons spring out that you know some big collider.
If you if you do that computation inside space time using quantum field theory and Feynman diagrams, it's hundreds of pages of algebra, millions of terms for one one interaction.
These new objects outside of space time, three or four or five terms, you can write down by hand, you get the you get the right answer without all the mess.
And you see new symmetry something called the infinite Yang-Ying symmetry that you can't see inside space time.
So already, and this is only in the last 10, 12 years that the physicists, the high energy theoretical physicists have discovered these structures, published in 2013, the archive from 2014 in a journal, the first of these positive geometries.
So, so it's 10 years old, basically.
And so it's a brand new field, but they're doing exactly what you are asking Richard they're they're they're they're starting.
I mean, it's not the final word, but it's like they've taken a step outside of space time.
And by the way, outside of quantum theory.
There are no Hilbert spaces in these structures.
But what they're showing is that you get space time and quantum theory both joined at the hip as a projection and a fairly trivial projection.
With the amp with the amplitude, he'd run.
There are these.
It's, it's a geometric object that has three parameters and K and M.
And, and then a matrix that you need to call Z that an M for our little universe, you know, space time and was for.
But, but this positive geometry allows them to be any, any positive number that you want.
So, what we call our universe is just the M equals for trivial example, one of the more trivial examples of an amplitude he'd run, you know, that that can go off to M, you know, and M could be a billion.
So we're stuck with M equals for that's why when I say, you know, I feel like we got cheated we got the cheap version.
We got the M equals for version of the amplitude he'd run.
But the amplitude he'd run itself in the very definition of it says M could be any positive integer you want, you know, and four is about as small as you can be, and have a thing just not be trivial.
So, so, so there is efforts in the direction you're talking about in the positive geometries.
I think are a really good thing to, to, to, to look at there.
Um, but, but I should say one, one other thing maybe this is slight, slightly off the track, but, but I think it's importantly related, because it, given that we're doing all these different scientific theories, right.
And I'm not saying none of them are the truth, all of them are perspectives and so forth.
How do we, as scientists actually go from one theory to another.
Well, if we have a good mathematically precise theory, then that theory will give us the tools to explore the scope of that theory.
And the point is, every theory, because it's not a theory of everything, there is no scientific theory of everything, because you have assumptions.
Your, your theory, any theory will have a limited scope, period.
So there is no theory of everything. That means every theory, no exception. Einstein's theory of gravity, everything, everything has a limited scope.
A good theory gives you mathematically precise tools to explore all the wonderful things in the scope and what it can do in the scope.
A great theory gives you the mathematical tools to precisely find its limits.
And that's what's, that's how science, a really great theory gives you the tools, the mathematical tools to say when the fundamental concepts of that theory no longer hold.
So in Einstein's theory of spacetime, when you bring it into, say, quantum field theory, you get, Einstein's theory assumes that space and time are fundamental.
And that's a great assumption until you get to 10 to the minus 33 centimeters.
And at 10 to the minus 33 centimeters, 10 to the minus 43 seconds, game over for spacetime. It has no operational meaning.
So Einstein's theory together with quantum theory is a great theory because it gives us the mathematical tools to actually find precisely what its limits are.
And that's how science works.
And the reason I bring this out is there are many philosophers who think otherwise.
Many philosophers who would say that what I've just said is actually illogical. I'm shooting myself in the foot. I'm making a logical mistake.
And the argument, and by the way, I'm saying this because they've actually published this. So these are published.
This is not just informal discussions over beer, published.
So they'll say, look, for example, I published with my, you know, Chaitan Prakash and Manish Singh and a number of other graduate students and so forth.
Some work showing that evolutionary game theory entails that physical objects like organisms and resources cannot be fundamental.
And so several philosophers have published articles saying, well, Hoffman is a poor guy. He shot himself in the foot.
I mean, and the argument goes like this, either evolutionary game theory faithfully represents Darwin's ideas, or it doesn't.
If it doesn't, Hoffman couldn't use it for what he's doing.
And if it does, evolutionary game theory couldn't possibly contradict the fundamental concepts that Darwin used in this theory, namely organisms in space and time, competing for resources in space and time.
And that last claim is where they go astray.
They think that a mathematical model will never, for good scientific theory, will never contradict the fundamental conceptual entities at the heart of the theory.
And what I just said earlier was, no, that's how science progresses.
A great theory actually gives you the tools to find the necessary limits because they will be limited. And that's the point.
This is not optional. Your theories, basic concepts are not true.
They have a limited scope.
And what science does that we haven't had before is the ability to have a theory that tells you the limits of its own concepts.
So this is not a minor point. And apparently, it's non-trivial enough that a lot of brilliant, actually very, very smart philosophers have made the same argument in print that you necessarily are shooting yourself in the foot if you make this kind of argument.
But so incompleteness is just such a theory, is it not?
So incompleteness says, I'm going to give you a really nice logical argument that proves that really nice logical arguments can't tell you the whole truth.
And that's beautiful. That's really what is so great about scientific theories, as opposed to just verbal theories.
So before science, we had verbal theories, and you could wishy-washy, move around, evade, you know, avoid getting people, in scientific theories, that's really, is mathematically precise.
And a good theory, you can say, aha, Einstein, your stuff stops at 10 to the minus 33 centimeters, aha, it doesn't work. And what can you say?
Except, I don't like it, but yes.
In fact, Einstein didn't know that there were black holes. You know, Schwarzschild came back in 1916 and told Einstein, hey, your theory has predicts black holes.
Einstein didn't know that. And of course, black holes are the thing that ultimately are the doom of the scope of space time.
So that's an important aspect about science that apparently some philosophers, I'm not going to say all philosophers, but philosophers who wanted to comment on my work about evolution and evolution again,
they have systematically said that a mathematically precise theory of a scientific system like Darwin's could never contradict the fundamental concepts of that theory.
Based on the idea that no theory can prove its own assumptions, but no theory would contradict its own assumptions either.
That's right, on pain of being shooting yourself on the foot logically.
And I'm saying, no, that misunderstands the whole scientific game at the core.
The whole point of scientific theories is to give you the tools to find out the limits of your fundamental concepts. That's the point.
We didn't have that ability before. We could just dodge and weave and dodge and weave. We would never figure out what were the limits of our theories.
So science gives us the wonderful mathematical cure for dogmatism.
If we apply the cure, of course, there are many scientists who are dogmatic.
But as a field, as a field, come on.
I can't be right.
Name one.
No, Joe, I think as a as a as a social field, science is non dogmatic, it may, it may be slow moving, it may take, it may take several centuries to let go of space time.
But I'm confident that science will let go of space time because the evidence will become overwhelming.
As you know, I think it was Plank who said that science progresses one funeral at a time and ultimately that's that may be why science is not dogmatic is the younger generation will be very happy to show that the older generation didn't know what they were talking about.
Well, and, you know, Chris, Chris Fields has a slightly more positive version of that where he says that only technologies settle arguments.
Right. So at some point, presumably there will be something that is irresistible because of its utility that rests on some other, you know, non space time, whatever.
And then the new generation will put it into their little, you know, whatever and then that's it. That's the end of that.
I agree with that. Chris is a very deep thinker and my own guess is that these positive geometries are first step outside of space time as we as we really, I think of space time is just our headset.
It's our little VR headset that we use in reality, whatever it is is outside the headset.
We're getting in some sense, you can think of it as like the first layer of software outside the headset that's controlling our headset.
Once we understand that software, we can play with a headset.
I mean, if I know the software and Grand Theft Auto, I can do things that the wizard inside the game would be blown away.
I could I could take I could take all his tires off I can take out of his gap.
I can take the geometry of this whole space and change it however I wish because I control the software.
So my guess is that one killer app technology will be once we understand the software outside of space time.
We won't have to travel through space time. We can travel around space time, right?
The nearest galaxy Andromeda is like 2.4 million light years. That's our nearest galaxy.
Well, good luck. I mean, your great, great grandkids won't get there on a ship.
But what if we don't have to go through space time? What if we realize space time is just the m equals four, amplitude, and now we know, you know, but that's a pretty trivial little m equals four is the trivial case.
We now know of a little bit of the software outside and we can now actually just change your position inside that little headset from here from Earth to Andromeda Galaxy.
Just change your pointer.
But that's very interesting, right? Because, you know, the conventional theory also points out what the what the what the actionable control knobs are.
So, right. So, so within the space time, we know, you know, there's mass and there's some other stuff that those are experimental control knobs.
Do we know, you know, if we're dumping all that, what are what's the next set of practical control knobs that we get to that we get to twist.
Well, and that now gets into the like the nitty gritty of these new positive geometries.
And that's only going to be a first step because there's no, they have no dynamical systems here. This is, these are just like static geometries. And so, so in some sense, and no surprise, it's only been 10 years.
So, so I'm, you know, yeah.
I think that they'll want to go there. But they are giving you some different knobs. The knobs now are the, the, the face structures of these geometries and the volumes of the various sub parts of these geometries.
So those are sort of the new kind of knobs. And you, you get things like the uniterity of underlying quantum theory comes out of sort of again the way that the faces divide into smaller faces.
And the
And you also get, now I forget how this happens, you also get
So you get
also coming out from the geometry. So you locality and uniterity are are are something that you get, you see directly in space time, but they're they're sort of artifacts of the geometry of these objects beyond space time.
So we're going to see that kind of thing that the what are the explicit knobs for us are now just part of the geometry and there's something else that's more interesting about these bigger geometries.
So what I'm trying to work on with my team is trying to get a Markovian dynamics that would give rise to these where we could then really start to have to really get to your question like, you know, have different kinds of knobs that we could turn.
That would be much more interesting and actually be able to play with things like mass and momentum and energy because we would know what those are.
So I think mass might correspond to the entropy rate of communicating classes of these Markovian dynamics and so forth. So we have specific knobs that we're starting to to propose right because the standard model of particle physics has to put the masses in by hand.
If our theory says the entropy rate of a communicating class is going to project to what you call the mass.
Then all of a sudden we can make predictions about masses from first principles in this theory so we will have new kinds of knobs that are predictive, whereas before we had to just put them in my hand.
We'll see. I mean, this is where we're headed. I'm not saying we've done it.
I have a wacky analogy and so this is probably pushing pushing your video game analogy too far.
But in my search for control knobs, you know what one interesting thing about video games is that often there is there are combinations of key presses that unlock meta properties of the system that are not about so you know so you've got your control that makes the
Ferrari go faster or slower, but there's a combination of button presses that mean that does not mean anything within the game it's completely it's you know it's nonsense with within the game, you know, the five times to the left and then really quickly right you know that kind of stuff it
doesn't doesn't do anything really in the game. But what it does do is unlock a meta debugger or something for the you know that that was put in by the you know by the designers that let you tweak things for the purposes of
you know improving gameplay so it's like, you know you can go in and you can change the mass or you can whatever right and you and you unlock it with these things that have no meaning within.
So, so I wonder if we're going to find that if we take this this this whole thing seriously. I wonder if in the future you're going to find there's some that the control knobs are some kind of sequence of some kind of action that under the old
model doesn't do anything, but actually then somehow, you know in a meta way change lets you know that that's that's my conjecture right is that they're going to be knobs that are, they're made of conventional actions and yet they only make sense from the next
level up, you know they don't make any sense at the level that you're looking at. So maybe that's another way of looking at, you know the control knobs may look if you zoom in they look while that's just the conventional you know magnetic fields that we've been.
But if you do this or that suddenly it like, you know, you crack some kind of some some aspect of the simulation you know that that kind of thing.
I think that's very likely Mike I think that that's and that again would be part of the new technology that would probably, you know, you swayed everybody that yeah we need to move beyond space time.
But one little hint in that direction is you know I mentioned the the m equals for aspect of the amplitude hydrant and m equals four is just the meta parameter for our little four dimensional space time, but there's already a parameter they found outside of space time that you can crank it up and have a better
headset. So why not an m equals eight headset right that the question is what's the cool like what's the actual crank right and there are examples of this so so I'm you know here's one silly example like I don't know if it's silly I'm
something like feng shui right so so so somebody says oh you've got to have a corridor that looks like this and then you'll have you know financial where and say, What the hell is the connection between the you know this the the the angularity of my corridor and the and the finance system that's going to bring in
more and say don't worry about it that's you know this this is this is what it is. And right so that kind of, you know, that kind of thing that only makes that that doesn't make sense within the model, but somehow activate some kind of large scale
meta pattern patterns that do change how the the the virtual reality operates, because of things you do in it.
But I agree, I think that that's going to be one of the more fun, promising and wild, probably, because we're going to have to really think outside of the space time box, but we see, even in our current science within space time we get little hints of this like that.
With, with Newtonian physics and Einstein's physics, you don't get the notion of entanglement.
And also with quantum theory you get this thing that says,
You can do certain things and objects will be entangled over long distances of space.
And it takes decades before you know we're scratching her head and we're thinking about it takes decades before you figure out how to actually use that knob and and all of a sudden we realize, Oh, when we do it actually, well, there are useful things that we can do with this knob.
So we, the math told us that there was this knob way back in 1926.
It took several years for us to realize it was telling us that there was this knob, and then it took several more decades to start figuring out how to turn the knob and all of a sudden we're realizing, Well, that's a really important knob.
So yeah, but, but I think that the the problem is our brains have a hard time thinking out of their old boxes.
Yeah, even a brain like Einstein's, I mean, he pointed out entanglement, in some sense, because he thought that there was wrong.
Richard, do you want to say anything about the the circularity of time sort of thing right we've talked about a little bit before.
Yeah.
So, I've been thinking about, you know, everything is a everything is a vibration everything is an oscillation and things which appear to be objects are just oscillations of particular combinations of harmonics that create high dimensional
high dimensional curves.
But really, or every all of it is just a, it's just an ordinary equal curvature circle in a high dimensional space there's no special kinks or anything in in this orbit.
It's just that when you project that orbit down into lower dimensional spaces it doesn't look like a circle anymore.
So for example, when you you project it down from from one dimensionality to another than it looks like it doesn't have equal curvature all over.
And you regain something that looks like an ordinary regular orbit that circular again, when you find a harmonic projection that's it's taking a particular time slice through that temporal thing.
And if, if the reason that I can see you is because I'm an oscillation that's at the same frequency as you, and that if we were at slightly different frequencies you would just look like a blur to me.
And I would look like a blur to you but if we were at the same frequency we can see each other.
You could also see you if I was at twice the frequency or half the frequency would you know that if I was at a harmonic of you or I would also be able to see you would look stationary in those as well right.
And then the thing that's useful about that, potentially, is that if I was reacting to things that you do.
If everything that you are is a is an oscillation and everything that I'm is an oscillation then when I react to things that you do that'll look like my reactions come after the stimulus.
But if I do it the right amount of late.
Then it's as though it appears to be just before the stimulus like wagon wheels going backwards in the strobe of the TV right.
So by doing a if everything is cyclic then by doing a reaction that's just the right amount of late actually becomes a prediction.
And what I'm reaching for there is that when we act on future consequences that we would like to have right when agents appear to act when a when an organism appears to act with agency.
It appears to do something because it wants a particular future outcome.
But what it's really doing is responding to something that has already happened in the past with just the right amount of late for it to appear to becoming just in time in advance of it occurring again.
But that only works if everything is cyclic.
You know if events are really unique and time is really linear.
Then you don't get you don't get to do agency that way you don't get to have anything that looks like it's in advance of the causes.
So you know and then you get things like nested agency nested selves from the harmonics of the of the of the of the oscillations that we're we're looking at the same thing but at a faster timescale and then you get a self inside a self that sort of thing.
Yes, I don't know what you're supposed to make of that but that's what I've been thinking about.
Well, I think that that's we're on the same page.
We're doing exactly that kind of we're attempting exactly that kind of thing where the Markovian dynamics when you when you look at the the asymptotic behaviors is it's characterized by the eigenfunctions of these kernels.
And when you look at what they are there in many cases they're identical to like the wave function of free particles and in quantum theory.
So they're all about waves, the whole thing, in some sense everything we're doing with the Markovian dynamics of conscious agents theory is is all all about fives harmonics and ones that are compatible ones that are not.
We talked I think last time a little bit about this trace logic that we we've discovered and we're continuing to work on you know the paper to publish on that but that that gives us a way of combining.
And also disunifying you know disassociating consciousness is based on their compatibilities or incompatibilities. It's a non Boolean logic of consciousness.
And it also gets at something that you talked about earlier which is in some sense you talked about like temple windows.
We have some kind of notion of temple windows and and we're actually looking at that in two different ways in this we can actually take sampled.
Chains so we can and so we can have different temple windows of the sampling.
And that will we actually are hoping that that will actually help us in predicting for example the inner momentum distributions of the proton.
So, so inside the proton, when you're at the, the, the most low resolution, what they call your connection Q score, which is the temporal and spatial resolutions that are inside the proton you'll see three dominant valence quarks.
As you increase your temporal and spatial resolution, you start to see yeah and quark anti quark pairs appearing and a bunch of gluons, and at the highest resolution it's basically just a gluon seat.
You're just seeing that's all gluons all the energies and gluons and we think that we can get this by looking at smaller and smaller temporal windows on our Markov chains.
That'll be getting the, the, the better and better resolution of Bjork and X and in our model, what happens is as, as you reduce the temporal window, you, you bias towards particles that look like they're massless spin one particle in our model.
And that's just from the, the, from sampling.
It just is all an artifact of the sampling. So, so what we're, what we're going to propose is that as we, you know, from our model.
When you're looking at this finest resolution side the proton, and you're seeing these gluons see it's not that you're getting closer and closer to reality, you're seeing noise you're seeing statistical noise, and you're seeing that noise as massless spin one particles.
So, so it's, so there we're actually hoping to take this, this temporal resolution idea and actually make hard nose predictions about the momentum distributions of particles at different Bjork and X and Q squared inside the proton.
So, so absolutely.
And we're working on another interesting idea.
But does that, sorry, does that connect with a notion of, you know, so if, if events are circular, if time is circular, then the idea of taking actions because you had an intention to produce a particular future, or taking actions because it's a consequence of a particular past.
Those things are symmetric now, or like we can go forwards or backwards on this circle it doesn't really matter.
And if you take it if I observe what's going on at a particular frame rate it'll look like a prediction and if I observe it a little bit later it'll look like it was a consequence.
So those, it's, yes, you know, looking at things that close a temporal resolution is, is very close to, you know, not just not just looking inside physically but looking inside temporarily but also, it's very close to the notion of, you know, exactly the kind of
thing that's weird about agency exactly the kind of thing that feels weird about consciousness is that this thing like I feel like, you know, I feel I know that I exist now, as you say and now is always here and I'm all.
