Thank you for the opportunity to speak to all of you
and to share some work and get your feedback.
So if anyone would like more details
or to get in touch with me, all the papers,
everything else is at these websites here.
And so there are four basic points
that I would like to get across today.
The first is that there are really
some very significant knowledge gaps
about the control of large scale anatomical homeostasis.
And this is roughly, it encompasses our understanding
of the relationship between the genome and the anatomy.
And I'll show you why things are quite puzzling there.
And I will claim that fundamental advances
and new biomedicine are going to require
not only understanding the molecular mechanisms
that are required for this process to happen,
but actually also the decision making
by cellular collectives that is sufficient for it to happen.
And that a key medium for computation and living tissue
is something that is called non-neural bioelectricity.
Now we've developed some techniques
to manipulate this layer of basically physiological software
and I'll show you why I say that.
And fundamentally looking towards the future,
I will argue that cracking this bioelectric code
that will enable a kind of novel approach
using electroseuticals for applications in birth defects,
regenerative medicine, cancer and synthetic bioengineering.
And boiling down the whole talk into basically two sentences,
what I'm going to tell you is that like the brain,
your body tissues form electrical networks
that make decisions.
These are decisions about dynamic anatomy
and that we now have the ability to target the system
to control large scale editing
that can even override all kinds of genomic default states
with lots of advantages and opportunities
for regenerative medicine and synthetic bioengineering.
And I show you one of our five-legged frogs
to just point out that you're going to see
all kinds of weird creatures today.
None of this is Photoshop.
These are all actual living things
that represent our attempt to test some of the models
that we have.
So let's look at these knowledge gaps.
If we think about what is the end game of our field?
Where are we going?
At what point can we all go home?
What we would like to have is something
that we call the anatomical compiler.
The deal is that you ought to be able to sit down
and draw the animal or plant that you would like to have
at the level of the anatomy.
So not at the level of pathways,
but at the level of final anatomy,
the way that we do with machine parts and things like this,
then you would be able to draw this three-headed worm.
And if we knew what we were doing,
we would have the capability of having the software
which would then compile this anatomical description down
into a set of stimuli that would have to be given to cells
that would cause them to produce whatever it was
that you just drew.
So here's this three-headed flat worm.
Now, the reason that this is fundamentally important
is that almost all of the problems of biomedicine,
so except for infectious disease,
pretty much everything else, birth defects,
traumatic injury, cancer, aging,
all of these things would be solved
if we had the ability to tell cells what to build.
If we had the knowledge to control what it is
that cellular collectives cooperate towards building.
So all of these things are in some important sense,
problems of information processing.
How is it that cells work together to build these things?
And so, of course, we are very far
from having anything like this.
And only in a few very special cases do we know anything
about how to make specific shapes come up.
So let's think about why that is.
So where is anatomy specified?
I mean, we all start life roughly like this.
So this is a collection of embryonic blastomeres.
And then shortly thereafter,
you get something like this.
This is a cross-section through a human torso.
So look at this incredible invariant order.
All of these organs are the correct shape, size,
position, orientation, everything is next to the right stuff.
It's absolutely staggering amount of order.
And so we would like to know, first of all,
where is this information coming from?
We're tempted to say DNA,
but of course we know what genomes specify.
The DNA specifies proteins.
There's nothing directly in there
that specifies any of this.
So we would like to know how is it
that cells use the genomically specified hardware
that they have to know what to make.
And when to stop.
In regenerative medicine,
we would like to know if a piece of this is missing,
how do we get the cells to rebuild it?
And as engineers,
we ask what's actually possible to build
given any particular default genome.
And so the reason that in my group,
we frame this thing as a basically
a collective intelligence problem
is that individual cells are extremely competent.
So here you see one cell.
This is a single cell organism.
This is called the lacrimaria.
And there is no brain.
There's no nervous system.
There are no stem cells.
There's no cell-to-cell communication.
Just one cell handling all of its local goals.
So it's handling its physiological goals, anatomical,
control, metabolic, behavioral.
Everything is handled by this one cell in real time, okay?
And so the amazing thing is that these cells,
which are extremely competent in their local,
very small sort of environment,
when they work together to make a metazoin body,
they can work on much bigger goals.
So what you see is an inflation, not only of body size,
but actually of their ability to pursue states
in various kinds of problem spaces,
including anatomical morpho space,
physiological space and so on.
So a single cell can give rise to a collection of cells
that self-assembles into some incredibly complex morphology.
And we know that simply understanding
stem cell biology is not going to be enough
because here we have a teratoma
and this thing might have hair and teeth and bone
and muscle and skin.
And so the work of the stem cells has proceeded fine.
You have all your derivatives.
You have your various tissues.
What you don't have is this three-dimensional structures.
We need to understand how this works.
And in a standard developmental biology,
the story that we're told
is a kind of a feed-forward open-loop system
which is very much based around emergence.
So the idea is that there are gene regulatory networks,
so genes turn each other on and off.
Some of these genes are effector code for effector proteins.
So they are sticky or they diffuse
or they exert force or something like this.
And then there's this physical process
where all of these things interact with each other
and then through the things that are studied
by the science of complexity and so on,
outcome these amazingly complex results.
So like the salamander here.
So this now, the story is certainly true
in the sense that these things all happen,
but it's incomplete, I think,
and it has a fundamental difficulty
which is this inverse problem.
The idea is that if we're committed
to this feed-forward emergent story,
then making changes here require us
to exert our interventions down here
at the, for example, at the genetic level.
And that means that we have to try to invert
this process of emergence
which is fundamentally insolvable.
So most of these inverse problems
are just too difficult to solve.
How do you know what genes to tweak
to make desire changes
at the three-dimensional anatomy level?
So the current state of affairs is basically this.
We're very good at things like this,
at figuring out the lowest hardware level
of which genes and proteins interact
with which other genes and proteins.
But what we'd really like to understand
are things like this,
the ability of planaria to regenerate from pieces,
the shape of the hand and the shape of the foot
and why they're different
and what you would have to do
to get these specific shapes back.
It's very not obvious what you would do at this level.
So the amazing thing is that
some animals are very good at this
and their bodies show remarkable plasticity
in this kind of collective activity of the cell.
So for example here, this animal is a salamander.
It regenerates its limbs, its eyes, its jaws,
its portions of the brain and the heart.
So if they're amputated, they will grow back.
And what's cool is that not only
is this process incredibly flexible,
meaning if you amputate at the shoulder,
you grow the whole thing.
If you amputate at the wrist,
you start here and you just grow the parts you need.
But then it stops.
And that's the most remarkable part of all of this.
And so lots of people work on trying
to kickstart regeneration,
but actually how does it know when to stop?
Because when it stops is when it has built
a correct salamander arm, that's when it stops.
How does the system know
when it's built a correct salamander arm?
Now, it's important to note
that this is not just some weird quirk of salamanders.
So the human mammals can do some of this.
The human liver is highly regenerative.
That's been known for a long time, unclear to me
how the ancient Greeks knew that, but they clearly did.
The human liver is regenerative.
Deer regenerate huge amounts of bone
up to a centimeter and a half of new bone per day, okay?
Every day over a centimeter of bone growth.
So bone, vasculature, innervation, skin,
and even human children can regrow fingertips.
Usually it stops at a particular age,
but if you just keep it clean,
the amputation will give rise
to a cosmetically perfect finger.
So the champions of this process
are these guys, these are planaria, these are flatworms.
They have a true brain, central nervous system,
the same neurotransmitters that you and I have.
And the amazing thing about them
is that you can cut them into lots of pieces.
The record is 275.
And every piece will regrow exactly what's missing,
no more, no less,
to give you a perfect tiny little worm.
While the new stuff is growing,
the remaining tissue is actually shrinking
so that they will as quickly as possible
get to correct proportionality.
And the other thing about them is they're immortal.
There's no such thing as an old planarian.
So if you're interested in aging or these ideas
that things inevitably wind down and accumulate errors
and so on, planaria are telling us
that that is not absolutely required.
Here's a life form that's basically immortal.
And the thing to understand about all of this
is that we really are,
not despite all the amazing progress in molecular genetics,
we're really not very far along
in understanding how the cellular collectives
make decisions.
And one of the easiest ways to see that
is to just think about chimeric organisms.
So here's a simple example,
which we're making in my lab right now.
Here's an axolotl larvae, axolotl larvae have legs.
Here's a frog larvae, a tadpole, tadpoles do not have legs.
And one can ask a simple question.
If I combine axolotl tissue with early frog tissue,
so in early embryogenesis,
I make a chimeric embryo, they're perfectly healthy.
These are, we call them frog allotls.
We have the genomes, we have the axolotl gene
and we have the frog genome.
And now we ask a simple question
to frog allotls have legs, right?
And even though we have all this information,
we actually have no idea how to predict in advance
whether frog allotls will have legs.
And if so, will they be made entirely of axolotl cells
or both types of cells or what?
So these are the kinds of things
that we would actually like to understand.
And one thing that's very important
as part of this process is specifically the algorithm
that enables robustness and the handling of novelty.
And I'll show you a simple example of that.
So we discovered this a few years ago.
So here is a tadpole and it has eyes here,
it has nostrils and a mouth down here.
All of these things have to move around
in order to get to a frog face, okay?
So during metamorphosis, the face has to deform.
The jaws have to come out, the eyes have to move forward,
everything has to move.
So it was thought that somehow what the genome did
was to give each piece of the face a particular direction
and amount of movement.
And that way standard tadpoles become standard frogs.
What we did was we created what we call Picasso tadpoles.
So everything's in the wrong position.
The eyes are on top of the head,
the mouth is off to the side, everything is mixed up.
I'll show you in a minute how we do it.
But the amazing thing is that these animals become
pretty much normal frogs
because all of these different organs move around
through unnatural paths and sometimes they go too far
and actually have to back up,
but everything moves around until it gets
to a correct frog face and then the remodeling stops.
So in fact, what the genetics does specify
is not a bunch of hardwired rearrangements,
but a system that executes
a really flexible error minimization scheme.
It's able to start off at incorrect or abnormal positions
and still get to where it needs to be.
This apparently matches William James's definition
of intelligence, which is the ability to reach
the same outcome despite perturbations
and starting from novel, starting configurations.
So how does this system know what a correct face is
and how do we get there?
So we've been thinking about this problem
and we would like to, my background is computer science.
And so to me, all of this looks like a problem
of information processing at different levels.
And what I would love to know is could we go beyond
the hardware and operating at this level
and ask about the algorithms?
How are these decisions being made?
What do the cellular collectives measure?
What are their modules or subroutines?
How are these global patterning goals specified and stored?
And in particular, how reprogrammable
is any piece of biological hardware?
So in computer science, there was this really interesting
journey that we took from, this is what programming
looked like in the 1940s and 50s.
In order to get the computer to do something different,
you physically had to rewire it.
You had to rearrange the hardware,
you had to move the wires.
But what computer scientists realized is that
if your hardware is good enough,
and I'm gonna argue that biological hardware
is definitely good enough,
what you can do is something really interesting.
You can reprogram the machine without touching the hardware
basically by giving it stimuli or experiences,
basically inputs.
And that will allow you to program
in a much higher level language,
where you're not drowned in the details of the hardware
or even the machine language,
which are actually able to take advantage
of some really high level types of programming strategies
to get very complex kinds of outcomes.
And I'm certainly not arguing that living things
are computers in the sense that they're,
of course they're not built to the same architectures
that our current computers are.
But this idea of reprogrammable hardware
and of controlling a system by inputs and stimuli
as opposed to physical rewiring is very powerful.
So what we try to do is to come up with a scheme
where there's more feedback here.
So that basically when the system is deviated
from its normal target morphology,
be that with injury or teratogenic drugs
or pathogens or whatever,
when the system is deviated from this,
feedback loops kick in,
both at the level of genetics and physics,
and we're gonna talk about this physical one here,
that try to minimize the error,
the delta between where we are now and where we need to be.
This is a classic homeostatic loop.
It's what the thermostat in your house does.
It measures against the set point.
And if error is beyond the tolerable amount,
it will undertake corrective action.
So several things to note here.
The first is that, of course,
feedbacks are not new in biology.
Everybody knows we have feedbacks.
But there's something different here.
The first is that the set point of this process
and every homeostatic system has to have a set point
towards which it tries to reduce error.
The set point here is not a single number
or a scalar like pH or a metabolic hunger rate,
is a hunger range or something like that.
It's actually a fairly complex set of information
that in some rough course-grained way
describes what a correct anatomy should be.
So it's kind of a complex piece of information.
The other thing is that
this is very much a goal-directed process.
Now, when I say goal-directed,
I don't mean something magical or mysterious.
It's goal-directed in the cybernetic sense.
We've had devices that are goal-directed agents
for since the 40s and 50s.
And all it means is that it's able
to execute this error minimization loop.
But the cool thing about systems that work like this
is the following.
When you want to change what they do,
you don't have to be rewiring the hardware back here.
If you understood how the set point was encoded,
you could change the set point
and get the exact same cells to build something different.
And that's the amazing thing about any system
that utilizes this kind of architecture
that you can actually make changes
without even necessarily knowing
how all the parts of the loop works.
All you have to do is rewrite the set point.
And so our strategy for some years now was this.
We tried to identify some of the mechanisms that work here
in particular, understand the homeostatic set point.
How does the tissue store the pattern
towards which it tries to remodel?
And let's rewrite that pattern and let the cells build.
And that's part of trying to decode this aspect
of the collective behavior of these cells.
So let's talk about how we've been doing it.
So we have started looking at something called
developmental bioelectricity.
And what I'm going to show you now are,
first of all, the methods.
So how do we do this?
And then show you some proof of principle application.
So why is this interesting?
And I want to point out at the beginning that,
all cells in vivo sit within this complex morphogenetic field
of information that tells them what to do
as part of a larger unit.
This information comes in many flavors.
So chemical, extracellular matrix,
tensions and stresses or biomechanics,
all kinds of things.
And of course, bioelectricity.
So bioelectricity doesn't do this alone.
It works with all of this other stuff.
I'm just going to focus today on bioelectricity
because I think it has a particular aspect to it,
which is that it's not just another piece of physics
that you need to know to understand anatomies.
It's actually a computational layer
that gives some privileged access
to the control of complex anatomical features.
It is the medium in which the computations are being made
to make decisions about the length and the size
and the shape of things.
And so accessing this bioelectricity
gives you a remarkable insight into what's going on
beyond bottom up molecular mechanisms.
So the kind of inspiration for how to think about this
we took directly from neuroscience.
In neuroscience, this story of course
will be familiar to everybody.
The hardware is simple.
You have a collection of cells.
Each cell has ion channels in the plasma membrane.
They set voltage values across.
That's the resting potential, which can go up and down.
And it can propagate to the neighbors
via these electrical synapses.
So that's what's there.
And those kind of networks underlie this amazing software.
And here you can see this physiology
in a living zebrafish brain as the fish is undergoing
whatever cognitive activities zebrafish can do.
And you can see here the electrical activity.
And the commitment of neuroscience
is that if we were able to decode this,
if we understood how to read this information,
we should be able to, through a computational approach,
we should be able to figure out
what the animal is remembering,
what it's thinking about,
what decisions it's making.
The semantic and functional cognitive structures
are to be read out from the electrical activity of the brain.
That's what we believe.
Well, it turns out that actually all cells do this.
All cells have ion channels.
Most cells have electrical synapses
known as gap junctions to their neighbors.
And we have undertaken this project
to try to do the same kind of decoding.
So here's an embryo.
And we would like to read all the electrical conversations
that bind the individual cells into a collective
that can undergo anatomical homeostasis
towards large states like build a limb,
build a kidney and so on.
And on the one hand,
it's strange and surprising to many people
to think about somatic cells
as having this kind of neuroscience-like aspect to them
as if they're processing information,
they're having goal states and so on.
On the other hand, if you ask where did neurons come from,
of course, they didn't just appear out of nowhere.
The evolution just speed optimized
things that cells have been doing for a really long time
since around the time of bacterial biofilms.
All of the components of neurons
that are really important for this,
the channels, the neurotransmitter machinery,
all this stuff existed even before multicellularity.
And even bacteria were using this
to coordinate information across the film.
So we developed some tools to study this.
The first is just how to detect and model them.
This is a voltage-sensitive fluorescent dye,
which basically just reveals in the living state,
non-invasively, so you don't have to poke the cells
with electrophysiological tools.
Every cell is now reporting around its membrane,
all the voltages.
This is an early frog embryo in time-lapse sorting out
which cells are gonna be left and right
and dorsal ventral and so on.
And in addition to that,
we do a lot of computational modeling.
So try to say, well, if we know what ion channels
and pumps are in the membrane,
can we explain why the voltage is the way it is
and why it changes as a function of time the way it does?
And so let me show you a couple of native bioelectrical patterns.
This is what we call the electric face.
This was discovered by Danny Adams in my group
and she used voltage dyes to look at the frog embryo
putting its face together, okay?
And so this is, of course, is a time-lapse.
And what you can see, this is one frame taken from that movie.
What you can see is that long before the genes come on
to regionalize the face into the eye, the mouth,
and everything else,
all of the bioelectrical properties set up a pre-pattern,
a scaffold that tell you where everything is going to be.
So here's where the animal's right eye is going to be.
The left eye will come in shortly.
Here is the mouth, here are some placodes.
This bioelectrical pattern
is a native instructive pattern for gene expression
and for anatomy.
And the reason we know it's instructive
is because if you go in, let's say with optogenetics
or with other tools and change this electrical pattern,
not move any cells, but just change the pattern,
then you can get, for example, those Picasso tadpoles.
You can move organs around at will.
And I'm going to show you that in a minute.
So this is a normal pattern that is necessary
for correct craniofacial development.
Here's a pathological pattern.
So this embryo was injected with a human oncogene.
And so something like a KRAS mutation
or something like that.
And here it's going to form a tumor, right?
And the tumor is going to start to spread.
But before that happens,
before it becomes histologically apparent,
you can already see with this voltage dye,
here are the cells that have depolarized
and shut off the electrical connections to their neighbors
in a way that's going to basically revert them back
to their unicellular ancient lifestyle.
Once you're electrically disconnected from this grid,
the rest of the animal becomes just external environment,
that computational boundary,
whereas before it was large,
it was a group working on a liver or a kidney
or something like that.
It now shrinks to the level of a single cell
and all your goals become single cell goals,
proliferate, migrate to where life is good and so on.
And this ends up being metastasis
and conversion of metastasis.
So this is a pathological pattern.
So what we then developed was a set of tools
that were designed to allow us
to manipulate these bioelectrical gradients in vivo.
So if we thought they were functional,
we ought to be able to control them
to get the collective to do something different.
And so this is important to say
that we do not do any external field application.
We don't have any electromagnetic components here.
There are no electrodes, there are no waves,
there's no magnetism.
It's all molecular physiology
and the way it works is you can,
you have two things you can control in any tissue.
You can control which cells electrically
coupled to which other cells.
And so we target these gap junctions,
we can mutate them, we can open them, close them.
Or, and this is basically synaptic,
the controlling synaptic plasticity,
or we can control the various ion channels opening,
again, opening and closing them
to actually set the voltage of the individual cells.
And this would be the equivalent
of some sort of intrinsic plasticity
if this was neuroscience.
And again, we can use dominant mutations of channels,
we can use drugs, we can use optogenetics, light and so on.
And so when you do this,
something very interesting happens now.
When I first, this was, you know, back,
while around the year 2000,
I was first setting up these tools
and we wanted to control these bioelectric states.
It was thought that resting potential
is a housekeeping parameter.
And basically the standard assumption
was that if we perturbed the cells would die
and you would get uninterpretable toxicity,
that was the thought.
So I'm gonna show you that,
in fact, that's not at all what happens
because these bioelectrical states are not just readouts
and they're not just,
just yet more molecular machinery,
but they're actually the information bearing medium
for these large scale modifications.
So one thing you can do is you can take some cells
in the frog that are going to become gut.
So they're endodermal cells
and you can inject one of several types of ion channels
that will set up or in this region
that's going to be part of the gut,
will set up a voltage pattern, a distribution of voltage
that's very similar to what happens
when the native eyes come in.
And sure enough,
if you recapitulate that pattern somewhere else,
the cells are using that pattern
to decide what they're going to build
and that pattern tells them to build an eye.
And here they go,
they will build an eye out of endodermal cells.
Now in the textbook,
we'll say that only anterior ectoderm is competent
to become eye up here.
And that's true,
if you use canonical inducers like PAC-6,
the master regulator transcription factor,
but if you go upstream of that
and actually re-specify the bioelectric pattern,
then you can induce these eyes anywhere on the tail
and the gut anywhere you want.
And if you make these tails, these eyes rather,
they can have all of the same components
that normalize have.
So they'll have lens and retina and optic nerve and so on.
And here's an interesting thing.
If you label the cells
that you've directly injected with the scion channel,
let's say we'll label them with beta galactosidase,
so they're blue.
And this is a cross-section through a lens
sitting out in the flank somewhere.
What you'll see is that there are two inductions here.
The first induction is by us
putting in imposing a particular bioelectrical state
that causes these cells to decide to become a lens.
That's the first induction.
The second induction is that these cells
with their aberrant voltage potential
actually recruit their neighbors.
The brown cells here, which are not labeled,
which were never directly modified by us,
recruit them into this project
of building this larger scale structure,
this nice round lens.
So it's a non-cell autonomous effect.
And when we see this again and again,
that there's this ability of these bioelectrical signals
to not just to specify cell fate,
but to actually specify organ type and position
and things like that.
So we can make eyes, we can make ectopic hearts.
Here's a secondary heart.
We can make limbs and brains and some other things
and then many things that we can't yet make.
Now, let's look at another example.
Here's a planarian.
And one of the most interesting things
is that if you chop off the head and the tail,
this middle fragment knows exactly
how many heads it's supposed to have.
It puts one head here.
It puts a tail here.
And the way it does that is because as soon as you amputate,
there's this voltage gradient that's set up
where the red, the depolarized region tells the worm
how many heads it's supposed to have.
So what we can do is we can go in and target this region
using drugs, using basically ion channel modifying drugs
to depolarize this region.
And when you do that, you get a two-headed animal.
These cells are perfectly happy to make a head.
The information of how many heads you're supposed to have
comes from this electrical gradient.
If you change the gradient, they'll happily make two heads.
You can make two-headed animals.
You can make no-headed animals.
All kinds of interesting behavioral experiments
to be done that we can discuss if there's time.
But what's important here is that there are much like...
There's no genomic editing here.
So this is purely physiological.
And not only can I ask this animal
to make a second head of the correct type,
I can actually ask it to make heads belonging
to other species.
So here's we started off with a triangular-headed worm
like this, amputate the head per-turb
for about 48 hours, the ability of cells
to talk to each other electrically.
And what happens is the electric circuit is unable
to settle to the correct attractor.
And when they do settle stochastically,
sometimes they settle to the correct shape,
but sometimes they make round heads or flat heads.
And in doing so, they recapitulate the state
of flat-headed species like this Pifolina
or round-headed species like this S-Mediterranean.
It's not just the shape of the head,
it's also the shape of the brain
and the distribution of stem cells
that is exactly like these other species.
Again, no genomic editing here, perfectly wild-type genome.
And these animals, once the electric circuit settles,
there's a good chance that it'll settle
into an inappropriate attractor
that's actually associated with a completely different head
shape that in fact other species are using natively.
Now, you can also knock the system into attractors
that are not being used to my knowledge by any system.
And you can really get far from the normal planarian shape.
You can make animals that are spiky like this.
You can make animals that are cylindrical like this
or a combination of a flat animal
with a tube growing out into the third dimension.
Now, I'm gonna show you in a minute
that what this is all about
is predictive control over large-scale anatomy.
This is not about making weird aberrant teratologies and so on.
The idea is that we can show how much of this
is actually under bioelectrical control
and then use computational techniques
to gain good predictive control over it.
And so this is a good time to think about the role
of the genome in the anatomy of this whole process.
The typical metaphor that we hear is that
the DNA or the genome is the software
and that the cell is the hardware that interprets this.
And that's not a bad analogy at the single cell level
when you're thinking about phenotypes of proteins
and pathways, but at the level of anatomy,
I would suggest a different metaphor.
And the different metaphor that works better
to understand anatomical control is this.
Actually, what the genome does is specify all of the hardware
that the cell gets to have.
So all of the specific ion channels that are here
are determined by the gene expression.
But we know from basic neuroscience
and also from computer technology
that if you make a very simple circuit,
this is a flip-flop circuit right here,
if you nail down the hardware,
what you can have is a circuit
that can store multiple different pieces of information
depending on the current flow through the system
and store it stably, which is a memory,
a flip-flop is a basic kind of memory.
And you don't need to move or change any of the hardware
in order to store a zero or a one
in this very simple electrical circuit.
So in fact, with our modeling,
you can see that the same thing is true
if you set up a field of cells with a particular
where every single cell is expressing
exactly the same set of ion channels,
what you actually make is an excitable tissue
where very rich patterning can take place.
It's a little bit like touring patterns, right?
There's self-spontaneous symmetry breaking
and self-organization,
but all of this happens with a completely constant proteome.
You don't need to change these ion channels
because they can open and close.
And so now all of the dynamics
are at the electrical circuit level,
not with the proteins underneath.
And so the prediction of this way of thinking about it
is this, you should be able to edit the software,
meaning change the information stored in the system
while keeping the hardware constant.
And in particular, just to remind you,
the piece of information that we want to change
is the set point.
We want to change the set point towards
which cells are working in this error minimization scheme.
So let's think about how to do that.
So here's our normal planarian.
We've cut off the head and the tail.
We got the middle fragment.
We perturbed the electric circuit
according to this model that we've developed.
And here's your two-headed animal.
Now we ask a simple question.
Here's our two-headed animal.
We give it a couple of weeks to get everything settled down,
cut off the primary head,
cut off this crazy ectopic secondary head.
Some people think, oh, you somehow epigenetically reprogram
this posterior tissue.
Fine, we'll cut it off, we'll throw it away.
All that remains is a normal middle fragment here
that didn't have any head tissue in it.
We do this in plain water,
no more manipulations of any kind.
The genome is wild type.
We haven't edited the genomic sequence at all.
So surely the prediction would be that you should have,
but you should get back to a single-headed worm.
Once you cut off this thing,
you should be back to a single-headed worm.
Now the interesting thing is that if you actually model
the state space of the electric circuit that's involved here,
what you find is that there are multiple stable points.
One is here, a very stable point
around the single-headed shape like this,
but there's another stable point
around the double-headed shape.
And so that suggests an interesting idea
that is it possible that when you amputate this thing,
the bioelectrical circuit will still remember
that it needs to make two heads.
And sure enough, that's exactly what happens.
When you amputate these in perpetuity,
as far as we can tell forever,
two-headed animals will continue to give rise
to two-headed animals,
even despite their wild-type genome in plain water,
no more manipulation.
And we can, in fact, if we want to,
we can set the bioelectric circuit back to normal
and it goes back to being a single-headed animal.
So a normal planarian body, as you're going to see,
is able to store a couple of different,
at least probably more,
but we've nailed down to ideas
of what a correct planarian is supposed to look like.
And this is how you can see this.
So here's a single-headed planarian.
And if we look at the molecular markers,
the anterior marker is here in the head, not in the tail.
And if you amputate,
you get a perfectly normal single-headed animal, fine.
Here's another anatomically normal animal.
Again, molecular markers are all normal,
anterior in the head, no anterior back here,
that no anterior marker back here.
But if you amputate this one,
suddenly you get a two-headed animal.
Why would you get a two-headed animal?
Because in the meantime, what we've done
is we've bioelectrically changed the stable pattern
to say, no, now you need to have two heads.
Now, here's the critical part of this.
This electrical map here
is not a map of this two-headed animal.
This electrical map is a map of this one-headed animal,
meaning that the bioelectricity distribution
is not simply a map of whatever the anatomy is doing.
The same single-headed anatomy
can store at least one of two different
stable representations of what it's going to do
if it gets injured in the future.
If you're interested in neuroscience
and how counterfactuals are remembered in the brain,
this, I think, is sort of the evolutionary precursor
to being able to remember things that are not happening now,
either things that happened before
or might happen in the future.
It's a counterfactual memory.
It's the ability to store a representation of a worm
towards which the fragment is going to build
if it gets injured.
So it sits perfectly comfortably
as a single-headed animal with this pattern until you cut.
And at that point, that memory is no longer latent
and it's actually becomes functional.
And that's how we get this propagation
of these two-headed worms.
So we are building some very sort of quantitative,
molecular, biophysical models
to really understand the state space of the circuit,
to understand how the circuit minimizes free energy
and eventually lands in one of these attractors,
hopefully the right one,
but not necessarily the right one,
and tying it into exactly the same formalism
for how people in machine learning think about networks,
electrical networks that can store patterns
and can actually repair those patterns
when pieces of the information are missing.
This is all very well-trodden ground in machine learning.
And we think that some of these same strategies
that we use now were discovered by evolution long ago.
And beyond worms, this is the beginnings of our roadmap
for regenerative medicine.
Because what we found is that, for example,
if you have a frog and the frogs do not regenerate their legs
the way that salamanders do, you amputate the leg.
45 days later, there's basically nothing.
There's no blastema and there's no regenerate.
What we can do is we can apply a cocktail
of ion channel drugs that serve as a stimulus
to kickstart a very complex cascade.
So what you see here is immediately the MSX-1
blastema marker becomes turned on.
The leg starts growing.
Already you have the toes and here's a toenail
and eventually you get a very respectable leg here
and it's touch sensitive and motile.
Okay, so the animal can use it.
There's a couple of interesting things about this.
One, is that much like when we created an eye
or induced a second head on the planarian,
inducing this leg, we don't provide all the information
to micromanage the process, right?
We have no idea how to build a planarian head from scratch
or how to make an eye or how to make a leg.
What we have found is a trigger for a subroutine
that this tissue already knows
how to do and the decision for what it's going to do,
scar or produce various types of organs can be,
is part of an electric circuit that we can guide.
We can manage.
So that's the first interesting thing.
The second thing is that in keeping with this idea
from the beginning that one of the hallmarks
of the collective intelligence of these cells
and responding to novel situations is that they can get
to the final outcome through novel paths.
And if you actually look at this intermediate stage
of this leg, this is nothing like what frog legs look like
when they're developing in the first place.
So it eventually gets to a very good frog leg shape here,
basically indistinguishable from the control,
but the intermediate path through morpho space,
the ability of the system to navigate
that anatomical morpho space is amazing
because it does not follow the same path
that frog limbs normally follow where they make a paddle
and then they, you know, there's apoptosis
that kills off the space between the digits and so on.
It's not what they do.
They grow, it's almost like a plant meristem
where you get the central stalk with this nail
and then off to the side, you get these toes
and eventually the whole thing remodels into a leg.
So the remarkable ability to get its job done
in a different way.
So now we, this is not just things that apply
to frog and worm, we've done some work with David Kaplan
and Lauren Black and others on human mesenchymal stem cells
and cardiomyocytes.
And you can control the kinds of things
that you can see in vitro differentiation,
proliferation, wound healing,
but I think that's not what the bioelectricity is for.
What the bioelectricity is really for
in terms of why evolution uses it
and why we should be interested in
is because it allows us to exploit the modular nature
of the anatomical decision-making
because we can control very large scale outcomes
not micromanage the details.
And here I have to do a disclosure.
So David Kaplan and I are both co-founders
of this company called Morphosuticals Inc.
where we're trying to take the things that we learned
about frog leg regeneration and move them towards mammals.
So our goal is where we're now in rodents
trying for limb regeneration using the same strategies
and using these wearable bioreactors.
And the idea is to again, kickstart regeneration,
not micromanage it, not try to babysit all of the
different cell types and growth factors
and everything else has to go in.
But kickstart a trigger very early on
and convince the cells with an aqueous protective environment
that it's basically that regeneration can proceed
in the way that it would in a salamander
or in an embryonic mammal during this adult phase.
So that's kind of where one of the research programs is going.
I should point out this that it is already known
how it is that voltage change impacts
the transcriptional machinery.
People often sort of say that it would be great
if we understood how voltage controls gene expression.
We basically do, we already know about six ways
that voltage change transduces down
into second messenger pathways and controls gene expression.
And this has typical mechanisms like calcium,
which neuroscience is very familiar with,
other things like voltage sensitive phosphatases,
neurotransmitter transporters.
We already know how this works at a single cell level.
This transduction machinery has been dissected.
In fact, also some of the downstream targets
have been identified.
So the genes that are controlled by this,
all of your favorite BMPs, sonic hedgehogs, FGFs,
all of these kinds of things are in fact,
the redistribution of morphogens
and the examples that I showed you.
All of this is known both from specific candidates
and through unbiased, let's say RNA-seq
and the microarray types of things.
We know this, but what's interesting is that
these answers as to how it works on a single cell level
have been fairly unhelpful in understanding
the large scale picture that we're really interested in.
And it's very much analogous
to this multi-scale problem in neuroscience.
You can track the pathway and we do.
And in every paper, you have to sort of go
from the channel to the transduction machinery,
which genes are downstream, so you can do all this.
But that actually leaves open some much deeper questions
about how the collective makes decisions.
And so for that reason, we've made the simulator,
and this was created by our center member
and collaborator, Alexis Pytak.
And what allows us to do is to build models
of both molecular networks like GRNs
together with the various biophysics steps that happen.
And you can simulate every cell having these various circuits.
And then you can try to build a full stack model
that integrates from the molecular steps
to the tissue level physiology,
like every cell has various channels.
What is the electrical pattern
and they're gonna be in this tissue?
What does that look like on an axial polarity level?
You know, where's the head, where's the tail?
And then can we extract from this
the actual rules of the decision-making?
Can we turn this into a kind of algorithmic description
that looks like this that makes it much easier
for us to control the process?
Because now this is almost to like
a high level programming language where we can see,
okay, here are the measurables
and here are the decision points that the circuit is using
to control large scale patterning modules
like make a head, make an eye.
And so what we're doing is literally integrating
every part of this so that you can build it up
and then exert all your manipulations at this level.
So you could have your simulator and ask questions like,
why does the head-tail gradient rescale
when you cut the planarian into four pieces?
You know, how does that work?
And you can't see that by drilling down into single cells.
You have to come back out with that information
and build these collective kinds of models.
And the other nice thing about these models
is that they are the perfect fodder
for machine learning approaches
to do two things, to infer better models from data.
Okay, and we've done some of that.
And also then to interrogate those models for interventions.
And so here's some software that anyone can play with
if you want to download and kind of simulate all this.
And we've shown that you can actually use machine learning
to find models that are really good
at explaining functional data sets.
In other words, you know, you did something to the system
and then something else happened.
What is a model explains that?
And then find these kind of needle in a haystack interventions
that are ways in which you could perturb it
to get it to do what you want.
Okay, so that I think is the kind of the future
of using this for regenerative medicine.
So let's talk specifically about a couple of applications
in the last few minutes.
The first thing is again, the cancer issue.
So I've shown you that you can track the
shrinking of these kinds of computational boundaries
from data for the organ or whole body scale to single cells.
And you can use this as an obvious application here
as a kind of diagnostic modality, right?
It's screening for cancer and so on.
But functionally, what's really important is that first of all,
you can induce basically a conversion of normal melanocytes.
So here they are, these little black dots
are pigment cells, they're melanocytes.
If you depolarize a very specific cell population
in the animal, not the melanocytes themselves,
but a different cell population,
we call them instructor cells for an obvious reason.
They, those cells tell the melanocytes what to do,
in particular to stay nice cooperative melanocytes
under control, if you block their ability to signal,
what happens is basically metastatic melanoma.
These normal melanocytes convert to these crazy
really, really kind of a long stringy things
that start to crawl away.
They dig into the brain, they dig into the neural tube,
they start to invade.
Here they are all through the blood vessels.
This is basically exactly like a melanoma type of behavior.
And you can see here, these blue cells,
these are the ones that we actually depolarized.
They are the ones that are now failing
to keep the normal melanocytes behaving correctly.
And the melanocytes are just at this point,
they're going on their own.
So it's a voltage change in the environment.
There's nothing genetically wrong with these animals.
There are no oncogenes.
There were no carcinogens, nothing like that.
But this voltage change is a physiological switch
away from the cooperation of cells toward embryogenesis
and towards single cell behavior.
Now, what's cool is that you can override this.
So if we inject an oncogene and they make these tumors,
of course they're labeled with the red fluorescent protein,
what you can do is co-inject the channel
and you can force these cells
to stay electrically coupled to their neighbors,
despite what the oncogene is trying to get them to do.
And here, while that dominant negative KRAS P53,
whatever, while they're blazingly expressed,
there's no tumor, it's the same animal.
There's no tumor because these cells
are coupled to this electrical network
that forces them towards a proper tissue fate.
So that's where our sort of cancer applications are going,
and we've done this with light, with optogenetics and so on.
And now we're in human cells to try to use this
to target carcinogenic behavior in human cells.
The other thing that is important is, again,
to think about the level of control
that's possible with this.
Here is a normal tadpole brain.
So you see forebrain, midbrain and hindbrain.
And what you can do is if you, for example,
introduce a mutated notch protein.
So notch is a very important neurogenesis gene.
You can mutate it and introduce a dominant mutation.
You can see forebrain is basically gone,
midbrain and hindbrain and just a bubble.
These animals have no behavior to speak of.
They, you know, they lay there, they do nothing.
You can do the same thing with alcohol, nicotine,
various teratogen exposures.
What you can do is build a computational model.
And again, this is the work of Alexis Paytak,
Pay, who's a staff scientist in my group
and a few collaborators.
What you can do is you can build a computational model
that asks a simple question.
What determines the shape and size of the brain?
And there's a particular bioelectrical pattern
that's required for the brain.
And then on these backgrounds of teratogens
or even notch mutation, you can ask the model a question.
You can say, if this pattern is disturbed,
such as it is here, what channels would I have to open
or close to get back to the correct pattern?
And the model told us and it said,
there's a particular channel HCN2,
which can help us sharpen these boundaries,
even though there are massive defects in the notch signaling
and, you know, with these various other pathways,
you can still reinforce these boundaries by opening HCN2.
And sure enough, if you do it with drugs,
or if you do, or if you just mis-express HCN2,
you can get back to a normal brain shape,
a normal brain gene expression, and in fact, normal IQ.
These animals get their behaviors back
and their learning rates back.
So here's what this is.
This is using a very specific computational model
to rationally manipulate the electrical signaling
to get back to a very complex organ morphogenesis.
And so the whole sort of roadmap
looks a little bit like this.
If we already have expression data, profiling data,
on which tissues in the body express which channels,
so that's already known.
This needs a lot more work,
which is if you knew what the voltage pattern
was supposed to be in various healthy tissues
under various conditions,
so basically physiomic profiling is needed.
Then we have this computational simulation engine,
which is able to say if you want to go
from the incorrect pattern to the correct pattern,
which of these channels would you have to open and close?
Okay, and that tells you immediately
what cocktail of ion channel drugs you would need to use.
And so we've developed this pipeline.
You can, again, you can play with it here
and choose your tissue and so on.
And the idea is that something like 20% of all drugs
are ion channel drugs.
And these things form an incredibly convenient toolkit
of what we call them electroseuticals,
because if you have the right computational model,
you can repurpose these,
which and the human safety data is done on these things.
People already take them for all kinds of uses
and they have a massive applicability
in tweaking the bioelectrical signals.
Now, another nice thing about this kind of approach
is that once the bioelectric circuit has made its decision,
the downstream steps that are in second messengers,
then gene expression, everything else,
you can be as long as you want.
So for example, in the case of the frog,
a one day 24 hour application of a particular cocktail
gives you 13 months of leg growth, right?
And you don't have to micromanage that whole process.
It's just figuring out what electrical state
is gonna shift the tissue towards a particular goal state
that all of the cells are going to work towards.
So I'm just gonna close here and summarize as follows.
There's this really important layer
of physiological decision-making
that sits between the genotype and the anatomy.
And it's becoming a really tractable target for biomedicine
and also synthetic bioengineering,
because we can now see how the electrical dynamics
that are operating in that tissue encode
particular anatomical layouts
towards which the cells continue to build.
And evolution apparently discovered very early on
that this electrical signaling is a really convenient medium
for computation and global decision-making.
It's not an accident that all nervous systems use it
and all of our computer technology uses it.
Ion channels, especially the voltage-gated ion channels
are basically voltage-gated current conductances.
They're transistors, right?
And that's a very powerful architecture
that evolution found long before we did
for forming feedback loops, memory circuits, and so on.
And we think that cracking this bioelectric code
can help reveal how cell networks
make decisions in large-scale anatomy,
not just how individual cells decide
what type of cell they're going to be,
but actually the real question of growth and form,
where do these complex patterns reside?
And we can now rewrite some of these patterns,
such as, for example, in the planarian or in the frog.
And new machine learning tools are coming online
to help us design strategies
for all kinds of applications.
So I would like to thank the people in my group
who did the work.
These are all the postdocs and students.
And others who did the work that I showed you today.
Here are some of our collaborators
who are working with us.
Of course, the model systems that we work with,
all kinds of animals.
And our funders, very grateful to them.
Again, Disclosure, Morphosuticals Inc.
is the company for our frog limb regeneration work.
And just in the end,
I always like to show a video of these two-headed animals.
The first time I reported these data at a meeting,
someone stood up and said,
that's impossible, those animals can't exist.
And so now I make sure that I bring a video.
