So this is going to be conceptually pretty similar to what we talked about last time,
but it's a little more condensed and focused onto just the core price economics are the absolute
basics of understanding the economics of collective intelligence. And so I'm just going
to basically go through it. It's fairly dry and abstract, but the idea is if you can understand
everything in this talk, then you've got the bare minimum. And anytime you want to jump in,
just feel free. And we'll just go through it. It's about 20 or so slides. It should take about
half an hour. And then we can discuss for the rest of the time. Great. Yeah, go for it. Fantastic.
Cool. So this is a talk of prices as cognitive glue and introduction to the economics of
collective intelligence. So here are our goals. Our primary goal is to learn the bare minimum
economics for understanding the general abstract principles of collective intelligence.
So there's a couple of things going on there. First, regarding bare minimum. So obviously,
I don't know a lot about biology, but I do know some absolute basics. I have a basic concept of
what a cell is, a basic concept of what DNA is. And this is helpful for understanding your work.
Similarly, what this presentation should do is give you the absolute bare minimum for understanding
the basic economics of collective intelligence. If you can basically grasp everything in this
presentation, then you should be good to go. And regarding the abstract side of things. So biology
is very useful for understanding collective intelligence because it lets you see concretely
that, you know, you start as a single cell, you're just physics and there's no magical transition
where you become like a real intelligence or something like that. Economics allows us to do
the complete opposite where it naturally gives us a bird's eye view and we can see the whole forest
without having to navigate through all the trees. And so that's going to bring in the other side of
this and having the concrete and the abstract is going to be very powerful. So specifically,
we're going to understand three ideas. The first is that economic production, even building something
as simple as a pencil, is actually incredibly complicated. You have to coordinate across millions
of people, dozens of countries and tens of years. You obviously need some way of managing that.
The way that gets managed is through the price system. The price system is the cognitive glue
that makes this possible by connecting people across space and time. And mostly what we're
going to be focused on is how the price system works within emphasis on the idea that prices
erase the distinction between other people, stresses and rewards and your own, turning one
person's problem into everyone's problem. And so the hypothesis backgrounding this talk, which I
cannot prove, but I think is quite plausible, is that all collective intelligences work according
to the same basic economic principles. So on the surface, they might seem very different, like a
cell versus a person versus an economy. But I think underneath the hood, it's all just the same
economics. So let's get into it. So let's talk about making a pencil. This is a very familiar
object, which we're hopefully all familiar with. This down here is a little diagram of what happens
once you've got a nice block of wood. And it seems very easy, you know, you cut down a tree,
you, you know, sort of divide up the wood into these slats, you slide some graphite in,
you glue the slats back together, then you, you know, dice it up, and you attach some brass and
rubber at the end, and you get some nice lettering for Dixon, Ticonderoga, who are not sponsoring
this, but just a little free advertising. So it seems very easy to do. But in reality, making a
pencil actually requires an immense degree of coordination. That seems virtually impossible
once you start breaking it down. So to chop down a tree, you need a saw. So to make a saw, you need
some ore, and these are going to be in different places. So maybe your trees in like Oregon,
but your ores in like West Virginia. So all of a sudden you're on like opposite sides of the country.
And so then you need refining processes to take that ore and make it into steel and manufacturing
processes to take that steel and turn it into saws and helmets and so forth. And just as you
keep iterating, it grows like this. All of these processes are very complex. They take a lot of
people, a lot of training, a lot of knowledge, and somehow all of it has to come together
in a very complicated way. And this isn't just true for chopping down trees, but it's true for
the graphite, the brass, et cetera. All of the elements of a pencil are very complicated to
actually acquire. And each and every one of them requires an immense degree of coordination. And
not only are they individually very complex, but they all have to come together at the same point
in space and time so that you can actually combine it into a pencil. So they all need to be coordinated
with each other. And in the modern age, these processes don't even exist in the same country.
So you might have manufacturing in China, wood from Brazil, your rubber from Mexico, et cetera.
These processes take years to complete and they're not on any kind of shared timetable. So managing
this process seems incredibly complex. And you have to manage it without a pencil because you
haven't built a pencil yet. So you can't even write things down. So the question is, how are you
able to do this? And what's most incredible about this process is that the degree of coordination
necessary is achieved with so much robustness and reliability. But I can take this incredible
pencil, which we now know takes millions of people and decades to produce. I can snap in a half and
nobody cares because these pencils are so widely available. The system works so well that its outputs
are entirely unremarkable. And you can easily predict that you're going to have access to them.
So there has to be some kind of system managing everything. We obviously can't leave this up
to random chance. And whatever that managing system is, it seems reasonable to call it intelligence
because it does what we expect intelligence to do, which is to navigate around obstacles to
reach a goal space. So like when COVID-19 broke out, you didn't rush to the store to buy a bunch of
pencils because you knew there would be pencils if you ever needed one. One hypothesis is that
there might just be a set of instructions in the economy somewhere telling everyone what to do.
But in economics, there is nothing analogous to DNA where we might think a set of instructions are
hiding. There are just R-no instructions full stop. So then we've got to really figure out
how is this possible? And the answer to that is the price system. So this is going to be our
primary focus for this talk is just the basics of how the price system works. So this is the
famous supply and demand graph. This is going to be the supply and demand for pencils. All the
numbers are made up just to illustrate. And so the basic way this graph works is on our y-axis,
we have the price of pencils. And on the x-axis, we have the quantity of pencils. And the graph
is done backwards for historical reasons. So the y-axis is going to be our independent variable.
The x-axis is our dependent variable. So quantity is a function of price. And we've got our two
curves here, our demand curve in red and our supply curve in green. And how each of these
curves work is, first of all, the demand curve is the sum of everyone's plans to buy pencils
at every price point. So how this curve is constructed, if you could just like peer inside
everyone's mind, what you would do is you would say, okay, at a price of five dollars,
how many pencils does everyone plan to buy? And the total amount of that is the market
demand for pencils at five dollars. Then you just iterate down. So the demand curve slopes down,
because as the price goes down, people, of course, want to buy more. So the price goes down and the
quantity goes up as we shift out to the right. And then the supply curve is the same in the
other direction. It is the sum of everyone's plans to sell pencils at every price. So you do
the same thing. You just take the total amount of pencils that everyone plans to sell at each price.
And the supply curve is going to slope up because as the price goes up, people naturally want to
sell more pencils and make more money. And there's one special point here, the equilibrium point for
supply and demand intersect. This is the point where everyone's plans match up. No one is trying
to sell a pencil that can't be sold or buy a pencil that can't be bought. So you can see
that the quantity of supply and the quantity of demand are the same at this equilibrium point.
And this right here, it's a very simple graph, but I think it actually does illustrate the basic
concept of how you could have a system that could build a pencil and how you could have a system
that's a collective intelligence, because if you can arrange a system so that everyone's plans are
mutually consistent, or even in the limit, if everyone has the same plan, that's the key to
large-scale coordination. Everyone is going to be naturally working together rather than conflicting
or at odds with each other. One final thing to notice is that the reasons behind the plans
don't matter, your goals stay private. So why you might want to buy a pencil or why you might want
to sell a pencil, none of that matters. So maybe you want to write something down, maybe you're
making pencil art, it doesn't matter. Like this system works for any kind of plans, any kind of
goals, it doesn't need that information. Given your plans, which only you need to know, it's
able to coordinate everyone regardless. So this is the basic concept of how prices enable this
sort of large-scale coordination. But the question is, why would an individual be interested in
participating in this system? It's good for the collective, is it good for the individual?
And the answer is yes, because prices help you plan. So to plan effectively, you need to know how
available one resource is relative to another. Like if you want to eat fruit and you're thinking
if I want an apple or an orange, you need to know how available are apples relative to oranges.
If they're very available, they're probably easier to get, and so you'll have to give up less time
and less energy to acquire one. Maybe you like the other one more, but you need to know how the
trade-off works. So what economists say is that when a resource is less available, it is more scarce,
and the scarcity of one resource relative to another is called relative scarcity. And the
brilliant thing about prices is that prices track relative scarcity. So when people plan to buy more
of something, which is demand, or plan to sell less of that, which is supply, the resource becomes
less available and therefore more scarce. And so by planning on price, you can plan based on
scarcity. So it would be hard for you as an individual to figure out how available are apples
relative to oranges, but it's very easy for you to figure out how costly, what's the price of
apples relative to oranges, because you can just go to the store and see that. And just to see that
in this graph here. So this is our original equilibrium point that we saw previously, where
they supply and demand curve intersects. So if demand goes up, it now intersects here. So the
price is higher, or if supply goes down, it intersects here. So again, the price is higher.
So when things become more scarce, because people are trying to use it more or make it less available,
the price goes up. And similarly, if the demand were to go down or supply would go up, that would
make it more available and therefore cheaper. So prices naturally track relative scarcity,
which is what you need to know. And the elegance of this system is that you can plan based on your
budget. So you have an amount of money, let's just say like $100 or something, you can naturally
combine that budget with the existing set of prices that you can easily observe at the store
to tell you every possible bundle of resources you can purchase, right? It's all just,
at that point, very elementary linear algebra. You can just see all the combinations you can buy.
So at that point, it's just up to you and your competencies to pick the best of all available
combinations of resources that you want to purchase, which is in fact, what intelligence is all about.
You have a lot of alternative ways of achieving a goal state, and you're trying to pick the best
one. And the price system makes that very easy. You just say, how much money do I have? How much
does everything cost? And that really simplifies the problem. And so if equilibrium prices actually
do reflect relative scarcities, then that allows you as an individual to confidently choose your
favorite available bundle of resources, secure in the knowledge that your plan will not conflict
with other people's plans, as long as the prices are in fact accurate. And we'll talk about what
happens when they're not. So what happens if plants are wrong? So we know that the price
should be at this equilibrium point where they intersect so that what everyone wants to do
is consistent with what everyone else wants to do. What happens if the price is too high?
Let's say it's at $4 here. What we can see by going over to the right here is that the demand
for pencils people want to buy or plan to buy, about 20 of them, and people plan to sell about
30 of them. So what this means is that sellers are going to have this issue where they're planning to
sell all these pencils and they're going to use that money to do other things, and no one's going
to buy these pencils because they're too expensive. So you're going to have an issue where people can't
accomplish their plans. And similarly, if the price is too low, it's a $2, sellers want to sell
maybe only 16 or so, but buyers want to buy about 35. So you're going to have an issue,
this creates what economists call a shortage. Everyone wants to buy a pencil and there just
literally aren't enough for everyone to accomplish their plan. So the systems and conflict people's
plans aren't consistent with each other. And that makes it difficult to achieve allostasis.
So there, this is really matters in real life. It's not just abstract graphs. So this is an image
of the famous 1970s gas lines. I don't know if this is something you necessarily, yeah, but so this
is hopefully a familiar image to some people. And you can see what this issue was in the 1970s.
The price of gasoline was kept too low. There were some price controls on it. And so people were
seeing low prices and planning to buy a lot of gas, but people weren't planning to sell a lot of gas.
And so you had these issues where people were waiting in line for hours to buy gas,
and then often they couldn't even buy gas because the place had run out. So when you get the price
wrong, you really do have this issue where people's plans are in conflict with each other. Not everyone
can accomplish their goals simultaneously. And the system really gets jammed up in a very physical
way because people are trying to do things that don't make sense based on what other people are
trying to do. So we know why it's useful for prices to reach equilibrium, but why would they reach
equilibrium? And the answer is simply because of people's self-interest. So if you're a seller
and you're trying to sell pencils, but the price is too high, you actually want to lower the price
so that you can make at least some money selling the pencils. You make zero money selling the pencils
for too high of a price. So sellers want to lower the price. And buyers, if the price is too low,
actually want to raise the price because if you're offering too low of a price,
the seller just won't sell to you. So you want to raise the price so you can get something. So
sellers are pushing the price down. Buyers are pushing the price up. And the only logical stopping
point is equilibrium. So just by people's natural self-interest, the price is going to be pushed
to the equilibrium point. And the basic idea here of what's going on is that your plans are
functions of other people's plans. And so to accomplish your plans, you need to make your plan
consistent with everyone else's plan, not because you care about them, but just because you're selfish.
And the price is the variable you can manipulate to make everyone's plans congruent with everyone
else's. So everyone's just naturally trying to bring things to equilibrium.
So what happens if there's a new stress? And this is really going to be kind of the key
section here. So let's say that you are writing something down and all of a sudden your pencil
breaks and you need to go buy a new one. If the system's in equilibrium, then as we saw,
every pencil plan to be sold is already planned to be bought. So there's not an easy way for you
to get a pencil based on existing prices. So what you need to do is bid up the price of pencils to
outcompete other buyers. You need to convince a seller to sell you a pencil by raising that price.
And so what we get is this diagram. So this was the old demand. And then because you want to buy
more pencils now, there's new demand based on your new plan. And there are two key facts about this.
One is you can see the intersection point, which is the equilibrium price has moved up.
And the quantity of pencils in the market has also gone up as well from about 25 to about 30 or so.
So price goes up and quantity goes up when you plan to buy more pencils.
And what this does is this is the stress sharing mechanic. So you bid up the price of pencils,
just because it helps you gives you better chances of acquiring a pencil. But because you're connected
to everyone else, the price system, this transmits your stress to them. So an increase in price
stresses out buyers, right? They see the higher price, they go, whoa, I was planning to buy a
bunch of pencils. Now that's harder to do. So I don't want to buy as many pencils, which is
exactly what you need. That leaves more pencils available for you. And similarly, an increase in
price excites sellers, they go, oh boy, I want to sell a bunch of pencils now and make money,
which again, makes more pencils available for you to buy. So just by bidding up the price of
pencils, you're communicating your stress to everybody without you necessarily even realizing
you're doing so it just happens anyway. And it looks like they're generously choosing to help
you out. But in reality, what's going on is they just can't tell is this stress mine or his. In fact,
they don't even know about you. So they're not even asking that question. They're just seeing
I'm stressed out. So I got to behave differently. And that takes care of you. And so this is the
diagram, right? So your stressed out price goes up, everyone stressed out. So if this diagram
makes intuitive sense at this point, then we basically accomplished the primary goal.
So what we can see is that prices achieve mind melding and the expansion of perceptual fields,
which is what we need for large scale collective intelligence. So as we've seen when you bid up
the price of a pencil, your stress becomes the buyer stress and the reward you would receive
from a pencil becomes the reward of sellers because they make more money. So we've got stress
sharing, we have reward sharing. And what this does is it causes perceptual fields to get bigger.
Everyone acts as if they know about your plans and they change their behavior to fit with what
you're doing just because the price went up. And this is basically what lets people make pencils.
The task of creating a pencil is too large for any one individual on their own to understand.
But because of the way that perceptual fields get expanded, everyone's able to see
what they need to see to make the system work. And one important thing as well is that the system
depends on competition among the subunits to achieve this cooperative outcome. So suppose a
pencil seller tries to cheat the system and pretend that there's a new stress in the economy and
raise the price of pencils to make more money. What this would immediately do is incentivize
all of the other pencil sellers to undercut them and steal their customers. So lying and
trying to cheat the system in some way, immediately you get punished by your competition, we're going
to take advantage of your poor decision to make more money. And so my hypothesis is that all
collective intelligence has worked this way. We're all bound together by cognitive blues,
such as bioelectricity that are in some way mathematically analogous to the price system.
I think there's one way to do this. It's this basic abstract economic system. So
what justifies calling this I think a collective intelligence is a shared model perspective.
So prices are a set of publicly available electronically transmitted numbers that condense
a huge amount of decentralized information, which means they constitute a model of relative
scarcities. And it's a shared model because we all see the same set of prices. And so if we just
think about like an active inference internal model thing, it seems like you can associate a
self to an internal model. So if everyone has the same model, then everyone's part of the same
self. So it's a collective intelligence. And what this enables to happen because everyone's
sharing the same model is everyone perceives the predictions and an active inference sense of the
expected perceptions and planned behaviors of everyone else, which makes it very easy to figure
out how to achieve your goals while not interfering with and therefore being interfered with by
other people's goals. So to return to the original question of how we're able to build a pencil,
this is the basic picture of how that works. So all of the facts necessary to coordinate people
across space and time are things that some individual is aware of. Maybe it's someone,
a worker on the ground, or a CEO high up in the company, but everyone has some piece of the puzzle
and they incorporate that piece of the puzzle into their plans because they're just that's what
people do. They take their information and they plan on that basis. Then those plans, as we've
seen through supply and demand, are condensed into prices such that updates to relevant information
cause updates to plans, which cause updates to prices. So this is this diagram. So information
causes plans, causes prices, and then changes in information yield changes in plans, which make
changes in prices. And so then all people have to do rather than having to think, how do I make
my information congruent with Mike's or how to make my plan congruent with his? All I need to do
is make my plan congruent with prices, which is easy to do because I know what the prices are,
and I know how much money I have, which then unwittingly makes my behavior congruent with your
behavior as well. And so the simple signaling system allows everyone, you know, in the US,
Mexico, Brazil, China, et cetera, to coordinate with each other without realizing they're doing so.
And fascinatingly, this causes a massive scaling of plans and goals. So an ordinary human on their
own just plans to like acquire food and shelter so they don't get eaten. But when you combine people
into the system, all of a sudden people start planning to create millions of commercial grade
pencils every year. So this system really scales up people's goals by making it highly attainable
to achieve those goals. One interesting note about this is that if you can prove that this
is how organisms work, then you would prove that cells are agents, because one obvious way to think
about agents is that agents are entities that take information and turn those agents, turn that
information into plans. So if you can see that the biological system is doing this, then the only
way to make sense that would be that cells are agents. So just a fun little note there. So one
important point as well. So we can see how helpful prices are to us. Why are they so helpful to us?
And the answer, of course, is their own self-interest. They're just trying to help themselves.
So the price system has two goals. It's to be an accurate model, and it's to be a rational model
of the relative scarcities of all goods. And I suspect that's the goal of all models to be
rational and accurate. So just a reminder, scarcity is the availability of a good relative to people's
plans. The more people plan to use it, the less of the more scarcities. Relative scarcity is the
scarcity of one good compared to the scarcity of another good. So what accuracy means in this
context is that if apples are priced twice as high as oranges, so if apples cost $2 and oranges cost
$1, then accuracy means that apples are actually twice as scarce as oranges. The prices really
are attracting the relative scarcities. And rationality just means rationality in the Bayesian
sense, like prices should update as a random walk, not moving in a predictable direction.
And the way we know prices have these goals is because they pay people to improve its accuracy
and rationality. If you're a stock trader or a commodity trader or something, and you can make
the system more accurate or make the system more rational, you can become very wealthy. So the price
system effectively pays us to make it more accurate and rational, which is exactly what we need in
turn to enable a large-scale coordination. So this takes us to a primary conclusion, and then we'll
have a couple of miscellaneous slides after. So what I think is the basic things you need to have
collective intelligence, and I think this should be a universal principle. You need some kind of
system that collects all relevant information and condenses it into a single shared set of
mathematically useful objects, like prices, which are numbers. Numbers are very convenient.
You want these objects to be something that interacts with the subunits of the collective,
such as the humans or the cells, whatever, such that they persuade people to behave in the intended
way, which then allow you to manipulate these prices or whatever other objects to get the
system to do anything it can conceivably do, as we'll see on the next slide. You need the system
to incorporate new and updated information and have that transmit rapidly and accurately through
the system, which is what the stock market does. You also need a process for inducing honesty and
accuracy in communicating information, such as competition. And the result of all of this needs
to be a shared model that is an accurate and rational model of relative scarcities,
relative scarcities being what sums up the congruences and conflicts between everyone's plans.
So if everyone can see something that models the relative scarcities,
everyone's going to be able to act in ways that are consistent with how everyone else is acting.
So this right here, I think, is the basic details any collective intelligence needs to
have and is going to have. So a few couple miscellaneous points here. So I'm arguing prices
are analogous to bioelectricity, which means they should be the morphological code of the economy,
and indeed they are. So this is an example I got off Twitter. So taxes are like an artificial way
of manipulating the price system. You can raise the price above what it would otherwise be.
And as we can see, if you tax windows, you don't get many windows. If you tax roofs,
you don't get many roofs. If you tax frontage, you don't get a lot of frontage.
And if you tax finished buildings, you don't get a lot of finished buildings.
So economists believe that in principle, you can get the economy to do anything that could
conceivably do just by manipulating the prices up and down, which is very convenient if all you
have to do is manipulate prices, because that leaves the problem solving up to the subunits.
So a high price says supply more of this and buy less of this, but how to supply more of it and how
to live with less of it is left up to the subunits and their competencies. So just as an example,
if you want less carbon dioxide in the air, as we all should, then you can just raise,
put a tax on carbon dioxide. And then the challenge of how to adjust to that new price
is left up to people's and businesses. So managing the system in principle is very easy,
as long as you can move prices up and down. And then the final point here is what if there's
a flaw in the system? What if there's a missing link? So the system works very well as long as
everything relevant is being tracked, accounted for, and condensed into the price system. But what
if there's something that doesn't get into the price system for whatever reason? Whatever that is,
it's called an externality. So an example is just, you know, carbon dioxide like we just saw,
it's not priced properly. So the effects of it aren't included in the price. So people end up
doing stuff they shouldn't do, like over consuming, like buying SUVs and things like that.
I believe that externality is analogous to cancer. Cancer is an example of externality.
So a firm producing excess pollution is doing so because that activity isn't tied to the rest of
the economy via the price system. So it treats the rest of the economy like the external environment
as something to dump waste into rather than to take care of. So I believe basically externality
explains economic tumors and relatedly, externality causes developmental disorders.
So if there's something like weird going on in the firm, that doesn't make sense. Or if the
economy is creating goods and services that it shouldn't create, that's always going to be because
of an externality. And externality is kind of my thing. So if externality interests you, check
out my paper on my website, the problem of externality in 2024 for more information about
how that works. That takes me to the end of this. Thank you very much for sitting through this.
Here's my contact information. And if this sort of theme interests you,
I have an essay on my website, Prices as Memories, which goes into more detail about
some of what's going on here. So thanks very much for sitting through that. I hope that was
interesting and educational. And I'll just turn it over to you now. What do you want to discuss?
Thanks. Wow. Yeah, extremely interesting. A couple of things. First of all, in this system,
which we consistently with our multi-scale competency architectures, the individual subunits
that are acting on the price, buying and selling, they're rational agents. So they have a little
bit of intelligence themselves that allows them to execute these policies based on the price.
Can we talk a little bit about, or say what you think about, what's the minimal set of
things that they need to know and be able to do for this all to work? How smart do they actually
need to be? I believe it's extremely minimal. So the basic concept of rationality is a preference
order. Let me see if I can draw something for you. Maybe this is unnecessary, but let me
pull up, and I don't need to do it on a computer. Let me just show you. So the basic concept of
rationality is you have preferences as set, and then rationality is a complete and transitive
order. So I'm just drawing something here. If this is, I don't know if this is visible,
but if you can just see these three dots connected by these lines, this is a rational preference
order. This is an extremely simple structure that exists literally everywhere. If you have this,
you have rationality. This is the minimal competence necessary.
So yeah, part of why, this is something that I noticed very early in undergrad,
and part of why I'm attracted to your work. It's like, rationality should be everywhere.
It's in no way restricted to humans at its core. It's a very simple, very basic thing.
So yeah, so I can see, can you just connect the dots a little bit more? Definitely a
preference order is something that is common in biology. Why do you get from preference order to
draw the loop for me? So the price, you have a sensor that can sense the current price,
something like that. You have some kind of an other interstate that says, how much do I need,
whatever this is. Can we just sketch out what's the minimal agent here that you need to participate
in the system? Yes. So you would have preferences over, well, in principle, potentially every
possible state of the world, but at least when we're considering a standard shopping example,
preferences over different bundles of goods. You've got the amount of money you have,
and then let's say you've got $10 and like apples are $1 and oranges are $2. You could buy like 10
apples and zero oranges or like, you know, four apples and three oranges, et cetera. And so
the basics of economics is you arrange all of those possible bundles into an order based on
preference where you're most preferred at the top all the way down, then you just buy your most
preferred options. That's the basic competence. Can you take your options such as your shopping
bundles and arrange them in a list where you can then select your favorite one on that list?
And if you have any ability to do that in any sense, and actually working on a couple of papers
arguing that that power does exist to a much greater degree than people realize. So actually,
this is interesting. I'm working on some stuff about how human beings are diverse cognition
in human beings themselves. Cognition does not work the way people think it does.
And economics exists in human beings in places where people don't realize. So
you don't necessarily need to see people making like shopping lists, as long as there's some
ability to create an ordering over things that in some way map to options, you're good to go.
But presumably there's some, if you were trying to implement this,
somebody makes an offer, I want to sell you this for this price, and you can compare that with
what's the, what's the calculus that you then do to decide what are you actually willing to pay?
So there's two things there. So the basic calculus is you're really comparing it
to your opportunity cost. You're comparing it to your other best option and saying,
is this worth doing? If I do this, I don't do something else. Is that worth doing? So that's
what you're comparing is your two different plans, your two different predictions. The price itself
is all relative. So this is actually a key point. I'm glad you brought it up.
Prices just track relative scarcities. So the only thing that matters is the relative prices.
So if apples are $2 and oranges cost $1, or if apples are $4 and oranges cost $2,
it's the same situation. So the price is almost secondary in a way. The only thing that matters
is that it should be in some way a mirror of the relative scarcities as an ordering.
But in order to, that's very interesting, but in order to do what you just said to say this
over that, you have to have what? Counterfactuals. You have to have the ability to consider
counterfactuals or store memories of other options or like. Yes. So what I'm basically
working on in these papers, do you know, Paul, I think it's pronounced cheesek, Paul cheesek's
work at all? Sure. Yeah. So he's got this action selection hypothesis, I think is really congruent
with some, some recent findings in neuroscience. And basically what's happening in the human brain,
and I suspect similarly in other organisms, though I don't know, is you are, when you're
considering an option, you're actually constructing several options simultaneously. So like a motor
behavior, I'm constructing a bunch of different possible motor behaviors all at once in my brain
and anticipating how they're going to plan out. And basically very, very quickly, the brain compares
all of these different options by just, they, they, they compete with each other like literally
in your head and like kind of fight almost for dominance over the brain, whichever one wins
that competition is probably your best option. And then that gets implemented as a result of
winning that competition. So you do literally construct alternatives and have them compete.
And this is actually interesting because economists for a long time, you don't feel
yourself doing that. So economists thought, well, this is just like an as if you're not
really doing this, but it's just useful for modeling you. I think actually neuroscience
shows that this is literally happening. And so I'm actually, I have a paper title,
beyond as if kind of describing some of this stuff. So I do think this literally happens.
You do construct alternatives in your head. I suspect cells do the same thing, although I,
I don't know. Yeah. Yeah, it may, it may well be, I'm thinking now we should take a look at how to
cash out that kind of model in terms of, for example, transcriptional decisions, physiological
decisions. What does it look like to be teeing up a bunch of different transcripts like gene
expression, change responses in, in, in a following some sort of stimulus or a stressor
or something, and then having to choose one in this, in the idea that they can compete with
each other. It's, it's, it's interesting. Well, we'll have to, we'll have to see what that would
look like for, for cells. Okay, let's see what else. It's really interesting to me that
that the pricier plays a number of different roles, which is much like what we've been
thinking about for some of the things in, in, in the biology, the kind of morphogenesis field,
which is, so in a certain sense, it's this, it's, it's the middle node of some kind of bowtie,
right? Because it encompasses in a, in a very compressed representation, a huge amount of
other information, but also from that, it has all these fan out consequences that it sort of
encodes, encodes that. To what extent, so, okay, so, so, so there's that, then, then there's a
thing you pointed out about the shared model, right, that it, that it's also encode some kind of
shared, shared view of, of the world and it's binding, binding everybody together into the
same, same picture of the world. At the same time, it's a control knob, because by impacting,
I probably should get to have all sorts of interesting consequences more widely. And as
you point out at the end, it's, it also has a perspective and a degree of agency because the
price itself has, has certain interests in this, which I think is one of the most interesting
things that, that aspect, like watching how things can run that spectrum and can be simultaneously
though, all of the play, you know, play all of those roles, I think is, is, is very interesting.
And I wonder, you know, I wonder if we can say more, could we, could we say I'm in the system
you've described, there are a number of layers that you can try to imagine taking the perspective
of, right? So obviously, the easiest for us is the individual humans that are the individual pieces
that react to the, to the price. But could we say, for example, what does the world look like
from the perspective of the price itself? Right? What is its world? And I'm, I'm talking about
the kind of thing that, you know, when, when, when Randy Beier does this cognitive domain
of a glider, that kind of thing, when you, when you're looking at, at really unconventional
agents and minimal patterns and things like that and asking what does the world look like from
their perspective? Yeah. What, why don't we just start there? What do you think the world looks
like if you, if you're the price? Yes, I have given that some thought. I don't think I've come up
with anything terribly useful. But what does occur to me is that, you know, what the price
seems to naturally want to do is to preserve itself. It wants to preserve its relationship
with other prices. It doesn't want to change in any kind of predictable way, just like an organism.
And it naturally achieves that just by the equilibrium price just incentivizes people
not to mess with it, except as new information comes in, which then should update the equilibrium
price. So it does seem to me there is at least some kind of minimal model which you can think of
about prices, something like an organism that's trying to maintain allostasis and buyer. I have
no idea with that. Did I cut out? Yeah, there's something I can, but there's something going on
with your Wi-Fi, I think. Yeah, it might be a little unstable. It seems better now. I mean,
did I cut off there? Did you get all that? I think, I think I got it. Yeah.
Is there, is there any notion of, you know, like right now the price is a single scalar
and that's great for many things because it's an enormous compression into a simple thing.
Is there any idea about what would happen if it were richer, some kind of a higher dimensional
concept? Yeah, people have talked about that. I'm not too familiar with any specific models.
Right now, just getting everything incorporated into the scalars is hard enough. I do think that's
a rich area for potential exploration, but I don't have any specific ideas about it.
Okay. And similar to the question about the perspective of the price itself, what do you
think, you know, usually in biology what we have is we have the organism and then we sort of start
asking questions about the cognitive blue and how the pieces actually add up. So in this case,
we're kind of going backwards because everybody believes that the individuals are our agents,
but then, you know, there's this cognitive glue that you've identified that binds them together.
What do you think the collective is doing? In other words, again, looking at it from the
perspective of the collective, having been bound together by this, by this economic model,
what are the goals, the preferences, the competencies, what does it, you know, the economy,
I guess is what we're talking about. What do you think, what does the world look like from its
perspective? I think the answer to that is analogous to the answer for an individual,
which is less semantically clear than people believe. Like as an individual, when we talk
about our goals, it's easy to say, oh, my goal is to like do some economics thing.
But in reality, that's not really what's going on. My goal is to achieve allostasis by managing my
metabolism and like energy regulating the ins and outs of what's going on with my body. I think
that's also true of the price system. You could say, oh, like it's trying to make pencils or
trying to do this or that. Really, it's trying to achieve allostasis, which it does by coordinating
all of the subunits, getting everything to work together. That is in principle, its only goal,
I believe. Do you think that there's the active inference perspective, like something like
surprise minimization would be applicable to that agent? Absolutely. And I borrowed a lot from that
perspective. And it was moving away from economics to some neuroscience, like I keep bringing up
Lisa Feldman Barrett. I have a quote I have to mention my name once every time we talk.
Her work helped me make a lot of progress and then prepared me to understand your work as well.
So I think that's big and I wish more economists were aware of that.
Do you think that the system as a whole is trainable? In other words, is there a notion
of memory here that you could, you know, future behavior, some kind of hysteresis,
historicity, like future behavior would be different based on the history of prior stimuli?
Yes, it's a bit tricky to give a clear answer to this because I think it gets so mixed up with
the trainability of humans and firms. Like the economy is trainable, but that's not surprising
to economists because people are trainable. So there is a great deal of research about how firms
learn and like based on previous instances, they'll then change how they're going to behave
in the future. The trainability of just the price system itself, I suppose it's conceivable that
maybe certain, I don't know, like elasticities might be influenced by past behavior, but I don't
have any specific ideas. So right now I'd say it's a little tricky to disambiguate that
from just the trainability of people and people made organizations such as businesses.
I think we actually, so this might be an interesting thing for us to do some research on
because I think actually you can disambiguate it by analogy to what we did in gene regulatory
networks. So if you have a model of gene regulatory networks, which is just a set of
coupled differential equations that say how each gene turns the other genes on and off,
we showed six different kinds of learning, including pavlovian conditioning in that model,
but specifically the pieces A were completely dumb, so they did not learn. So unlike in what
you're talking about now, the nodes themselves have zero learning capacity, all they have is state,
so they just have whatever their current, they don't have any memory, they don't have any of that,
they just have whatever my current state is, that's all I know. So zero memory. And that's A
and B, what you're also not allowed to do in these models is change the topology of the network. In
other words, how strong are the connections? So the typical things you would do to train a network
like that, which is to adjust the synaptic weight, right? And the connections between the nodes,
you're not allowed to change that, the network is completely fixed. So no intelligence in the
nodes, no changes of the topology. And yet, just from the dynamical systems behavior of that,
of certain not all, it's not a universal thing, the way that you know, some of like, for example,
Stu Kaufman's origins of order in that network stuff is which is just like widely applicable
to random networks. This isn't like that random networks don't do this as well as biological
networks. So I think evolution actually has probably selected for ones that are good at this,
but nevertheless, there are plenty of networks that can learn without with the pieces being
being completely done. So, so I wonder, I wonder if we had an economic model where you clamp so
an in silico computational economic model, you clamp the behavior of the individual so they
cannot learn. Probably we can even we can even clamp the relationships between them. But we
examine the behavior of the system after stimuli that are patterned in the way that behavioral
scientists do it for, you know, for testing habituation sensitization, pathology and conditioning,
whatever. I wonder if we would if we would see learning there my conjecture is that that we would
I think this this my guess is that this is a very widespread capacity. And I think we could
potentially show that if you if you if you clamp, you know, if you clamp the behavior of the individuals.
I'd be inclined to agree because I do just think these systems should be analogous.
I'm wondering now so there's a Nobel Prize winner Vernon Smith who became sort of known for doing
economic experiments which we usually can't do very well. I wonder if there are some analogies
in his work. So maybe I'll try to read up a little bit on the gene regulatory stuff
and see if I can find any connections to anything Vernon Smith has done.
Maybe not, but it's exploring. Yeah, yeah, that's cool. You know, and I wonder as you look at the
GRN stuff, I wonder if we can define, for example, in these networks, what would be the equivalent
of the price? Right? Could we say that by watching their behavior? Actually, how about this? Do you
think that watching it's like a it's like a weird touring test. If if if I showed a bunch of economists
the behavior of some system, some distributed system, could they say that hey, this absolutely
looks like any like an economy or no, it does not. Is that something that or or can you make
anything look like an economy in which case we could actually do the mapping and figure out,
you know, what what does the price? What is the price in this in this GRN?
That's an interesting question. I never thought about that. I suspect that most economists would
just because you know, their academics just be cautious about drawing any conclusions that
haven't been like hard verified. But that's an interesting question. I'd be very interested
in seeing the results. Yeah, I don't know. That's very interesting. It's that's worth exploring for
sure. Yeah, I mean, one one one way to get started with that is if you identify for me,
what does it what does an economic data set look like? That is, what does an economist
fix? So if you were going to say to a colleague, okay, I'm going to show you the the parameters
of this economic system, what do they expect to see? You know, what what does the what does the
data look like? What what what are they looking for? Is it, you know, prices over time or distributed
buys and sells or what are they looking for? I bet if we understood the format of that,
I could give you a data set. I would, you know, we could do a blind thing where I wouldn't tell
you what it really was. You can show it to people and they say, oh, a classic case of,
you know, an economy of this type. And then we could find out that actually this is this is,
you know, a bunch of cells communicating during, I don't know, axial determination or something.
I think I think it would be interesting to to to to use that as a as a way of finding these
kinds of mappings, you know. Yes, that makes a lot of sense. I will look into that. That's a really
good idea. I think that'd be fun. All right. And I guess, okay, the last question that came to my
mind is this, does all of this does everything we've you've said today, assume a perfect efficiency,
like, like, like immediate, you know, instantaneous transfer of information, all that kind of stuff.
No, but of course, you won't, you won't achieve like perfect outcomes without it. But no, you
don't need that to have something that the perfection within a body, but I still feel like
myself. And I believe the same is true of the economy. And then as technology improves, we will,
of course, improve the efficiency of it. Right now, a tremendous amount of people are not terribly
bound into the economy. I mean, billions people are in poverty and so on. And so over time, that
will increase greatly. But yeah, in the first world, like, certainly the stock market or something
like that is bound together tightly enough. I think it's reasonable to think of it this way.
And I'll tell you why I asked, but I'm also thinking about, you know, kind of information
efficiencies, like, you're when you buy and again, I'm I know nothing about economics. So this
could be nonsense. But to me, it seems like when you're when you're when you're when you're
selling something, you want to get rid of it. And you think it's a good idea to get rid of it.
For that to work, somebody else needs to disagree with you and think that it's a good idea to buy
it. And so right, so there are going to be differences in how informed people are. And
somebody's going to make money because they're more informed than somebody else. And, and of course,
then people can make bets on what's going to happen with the economy and things like that.
Right. So, so the reason I bring this up is because if you think about, so let's think about
the biological case, you got a, you got a set of cells, and the cells are now coupled by gap
gap junctions, right? Now, so, so that's a kind of cognitive blue, because the biotech signals
are now spreading through the through the continued through the through the tissue. And
it's now harder for any one cell to be an ally or in terms of its memories, and it's a model of
the world because it's sharing physiological parameters exactly directly with its neighbors.
But in the real world, it takes time for information to propagate through that tissue.
And so much like, you know, the speed of light is a kind of like this limit in the in the in
physics that binds the ties together space and time, there's going to be a constant like that
in any tissue that basically tells you how fast can information propagate, right? And how fast it
can, it can can can can signals and information get across the thing. So you're going to have
scenarios where for some amount of time, there are going to be regions. So let's say so, so, so,
so here's your cellular network, your tissue, something happens over here to trigger it,
there's going to be some time where the ones over here know about it and the ones back here don't
yet. So I wonder to what extent, and you can also think about that delta, having something to do
with the thickness of the cognitive now moment, right, that that you're not instantaneous, there's
about a couple of hundred milliseconds in neuroscience, they tell you that that is when when
the things are propagated. And below that, you can't really answer questions. Did I see it? You
know, am I was I aware of it? You only you can only answer those questions from the definitively
from the perspective of the larger, larger cognitive agent from a certain, you know,
after the information has had a chance to propagate and all the subsystems have had their say,
and eventually you can say yes, you did, or you didn't. So there's a temporal resolution,
right, below which you can't really slice yourself that temporal thickness. So I wonder if
something like this is going on here, and I wonder if it's also helpful, if there's any kind of a
helpful mapping, if the things that economists, I assume economists know a lot about what happens
when there are discrepancies in information in the in the economy and ability to act and so on.
I wonder if some of those things could help us understand development or morphogenesis more
roughly. I suspect so. I mean, information asymmetry is a huge field of research where
like you're trading with someone who knows more than you about the good. So you have to ask like,
why are they selling this to me? And that can make it very challenging to create markets.
You also have things like no trade theorems, where like if we're all, you know, trading the
stock market, potentially the only reason you're selling to me is because you think it's going
down. It's like, why would I buy it? So there are instances where differences in information can
really make it very difficult to trade, even though at the same time, the whole point of
trading is to ultimately bring everyone's information into sync with each other. So yes,
there is a tremendous amount of research about that in both finance and information asymmetry,
economics. That's absolutely something that could be incorporated in some way.
Okay, yeah, the Wi-Fi is really good. Maybe I cut out again. Yeah, yeah, it's really
accurate. I guess the last thing I'll just suggest, and this is something we can do in later work,
is like I think you've painted an amazing picture of the parallels between the two systems.
And I think the other complementary thing we can do is look at the parallels of the disorders.
Yeah, so the various ways that economics goes bad and has various breakdowns of optimal functioning.
I wonder if we can map that onto specific disorders in other spaces in living systems.
I wonder if there's a version of, I don't know, developmental defects, cancer,
failure to repair, all those kinds of things. Yeah, I think cancer is an externality,
and externality is sort of the generalization of all of those issues. Currently, economists
have a very hard time talking about externality. It's actually hard to make it consistent with
economics. So I have a paper on my website talking about that issue, actually citing some of your
work as to how we could try to make progress on that. So I believe those parallels are definitely
there, and I have been thinking about it. And what we might actually need is biologists to
figure out cancer and then use that so we can solve externality. So the direction might flow that way.
Yeah, I think that's very interesting to think about which direction, probably both, but the
insights could flow. I mean, we've had some luck normalizing cancer, at least in the amphibian
models, we're moving on to mammals now, and to human cells now, but we've had some really good
luck in frog models. So we could think about what that might be. But I think in general, some
research that we could do together would be to get hold of a computational model. I assume
there are computer models of simple or maybe not simple economic systems that people can play with.
So actually, computational models have not been huge in economics because they haven't been able
to tell us anything that's surprising. And so actually, what I've been thinking about, because
you mentioned this before, is maybe they could make like a comeback, because it would be surprising
just to see economics in biology. And so I'm not familiar at all with computational economics,
but I do believe that is a very useful path. And relatedly, one thing I've been thinking about is
there's a field called economic geography, which explains like why does finance end up in New
York and like tech end up in San Francisco. I think that could be useful for explaining like
why does your heart end up here and like your kidney end up where it is. So I think computational
models could be interesting in that context, but I currently don't know anything about them. So I
definitely have to do some studying. Yeah, let me know what you what you turn up. I think it would
be cool. I mean, I remember, you know, from 100 years ago, like lemonade stand, right? Like you
could easily something as simple as that. And probably that one, I'm guessing is too simple,
but there must be things for students to play with. And that where if we, if we, you know, rip
the graphic interface off of it and use the underlying computations, we could test things like
can we can we induce and repair various disorders in the biology focus way? Can we try the learning
and the training? Can we use it to generate data sets to compare to other things and see if
economists can actually pick out which one's the economy and which one's the
morphogenetic signaling, all those things. I think we should we should look into it.
Absolutely. I think so too. Yeah, that'd be super cool.
