Okay, so it's a great pleasure today for me to introduce Professor Michael Levin.
He's a distinguished professor at Tufts University, as well as the Vannevar Bush professor.
And he's also director of the Allen Discovery Center and the Tufts Center for Regenerative
and Developmental Biology.
And I'm sure everyone here have heard about his work on Xenobots, which I've been told
there'll be some of that at the end of his talks.
So Michael has requested that we refrain from asking deep questions until the end.
So just clarification questions throughout the talk so that we can get to the really
exciting parts.
Okay, so take it away.
Thank you.
Thank you so much.
And thank you for having me and giving me the opportunity to share some ideas with you.
All of the details and if you would like to contact me, which would be great, you can
find me at these two websites.
So what I want to talk about today is our sort of perspective on collective intelligence
and in particular cellular behavior as a kind of collective intelligence.
So I often start by thinking about Alan Turing, who of course needs no introduction, was very
interested in intelligence, in cognition and various embodiments, and in particular in
problem-solving machines, this idea that intelligence can be manifest through plasticity or reprogrammability.
And so we all know that.
Some people may or may not know that he was also interested in morphogenesis, the generation
of biological shape.
And it's often, one might wonder, why would the same person who was interested in intelligence
be interested in the kinds of questions that biologists tend to, developmental biologists
in particular tend to deal with.
And I think he saw a very deep symmetry between these two fields, which is, I think, very
important and still not really appreciated sufficiently.
So this is what we work on.
In particular, the idea of problem-solving living machines.
And one thing that we have to think about as we drill down in the biology and we look
to see what we are all made of is this idea that this traditional distinction between,
we look at things like termite mounds and bee colonies and blard flocks and we say, okay,
that's perhaps a kind of collective intelligence, but we are true sort of centralized intelligences.
And of course, the idea is that actually all intelligence, certainly in biology as well
as collective intelligence, because we are all made of parts and components.
And in fact, the Ambricard Sole calls this kind of thing a liquid brain in the sense
that the components are not fixed with respect to their spatial relationships.
So this is the sort of thing of which we are made.
This is a single cell.
This is called a lacrimaria.
Of course, this is a free-living organism.
It's one cell.
It has no brain.
It has no nervous system.
It is extremely competent in its local sort of environment with its local goals.
So it's physiological.
It's anatomical.
It's behavioral goals.
It's very competent without the typical things that we associate with intelligence.
And the really critical part is to realize is that all of us make this amazing journey
from what people call just physics to cognition.
So we were all at one point a quiescent oocyte, so a little pile of chemicals doing something
like this where specific molecules interact with other molecules.
But eventually, through this process of embryonic development, we become something like this
or maybe even something like that.
And so the thing about this process is that it's extremely slow and gradual.
There is no special point at which a magic lightning flash sort of says, okay, now you
are cognitive.
Before that, you were just physics.
In chemistry, now you are a true cognitive individual.
That doesn't happen.
So we need to understand this scale up.
We need to understand what happens from the time that we are this to the time that we
are that.
So the main points today that I would like to talk about is this idea of biology's multi-scale
competency architecture, which is a set of nested problem solvers in different spaces.
And one kind of invariant to all of this is navigation.
I want to spend the most of my time on this example, although there are many other examples,
of anatomical control and specifically this idea of navigating morpho space.
And I will talk a lot about bioelectrical networks as not only the mediator of kind
of the coagum, the glue that binds the neurons together into a coherent emergent intelligence,
but also of a much more ancient roles for that same mechanism.
And this has many applications, for example, on biomedicine.
And at the end, I want to talk a little bit about synthetic bioengineering.
I want to show you some novel creatures that have never existed before and talk a little
bit about what this means for evolution and for many other fields.
So single cells come in all shapes and sizes.
This is a single cell.
So this is a diatom.
They are very tiny.
So this is a single cell.
This is also a single cell.
This thing, which looks like a plant, it has a nice cap and a stalk and some roots here.
It's actually an alga, the whole thing could be up to 10 centimeters in size.
It's also a single cell.
So if you're interested in morphogenesis by differentiating cells into different types,
we already start to see that there's structure well below that.
This thing has one nucleus and it manages to make this amazing shape without any differentiation.
Cells are also competent in behavioral spaces.
So what you're looking at here, this is a slime mold called physarum polycephalum.
It has many nuclei, but it's still one cell.
The whole thing is one cell.
And what you can do is you can do this.
You can put some objects in its vicinity.
These white things are glass discs.
They have no chemical on them, no food, nothing.
They're completely inert.
And if you put three on one side and one on the other, it will consistently choose to
travel towards the three.
What it's actually doing as we showed in this paper is it's actually sensing strain angle
in the medium.
It is incredibly sensitive to it.
And it's pulsing, which you can't see here, but it's pulsing as a kind of sonar to build
a map of its surroundings and migrate towards the heavier object.
And what's kind of cool is that at this point here, for the first four hours, it sort of
grows in all directions.
And this is the point at which it's got enough information and now, boom, now it knows where
to go at that point.
But right here, you still can't really, you don't really know.
But at this point, bang, it starts to.
So there are all sorts of, so this is kind of the field of basal cognition and trying
to understand how biology was solving various problems long before brains and neurons appeared.
So I want to talk about three or four things today.
The first thing I want to do is I want to twist some knobs on traditional cognitive
science and talk about some unconventional agents that we can start thinking about.
So this kind of picture, this is the classic painting of Adam naming the animals in the
Garden of Eden.
This kind of picture is really pretty prevalent in a lot of discussions, in the sense that
people really think about finished adult organisms as the subjects of their study.
So intelligence, they say the human brain or the rat or something like this.
And what I want to do is stretch this in a number of dimensions, both in terms of the
time evolution, the fact that everything comes from one cell at one point, and also the fact
that drawing boundaries between different types of creatures is actually very difficult
because of the interoperability of life and the ability to make chimeras.
So the first thing we can think about is this.
This is a caterpillar.
This is a kind of soft-bodied robot that crawls around and it chews plants and it lives in
a two-dimensional world.
It has to turn into this.
This is a completely different hard-bodied kind of creature which has to fly in a three-dimensional
world.
It doesn't care about leaves anymore, but it does want nectar.
And so the behavioral and all of these repertoires are completely different.
So during this time, what happens is the brain basically liquefies.
Most of the connections are broken.
Most of the neurons die.
It gets reassembled and rebuilt into a brand new brain suitable for driving, this kind
of creature.
And one of the most amazing things is, and there are many examples that you can read
about here, is that if you train this animal to have particular memories, those memories
are recovered in the moth or butterfly that comes out.
So despite the complete rewiring of the brain here, those memories remain.
So as computer scientists, we can start thinking about, okay, what kind of medium could we
have that is able to store information that survives radical remodeling of the structure
of the medium.
But this metamorphosis is very interesting because this is not just evolutionary timescales.
This is a single individual.
So if you're into philosophy of mind and you wonder what's it like to be a caterpillar
or a butterfly, here's kind of the next level question.
What's it like to be a caterpillar turning into a butterfly?
What is the experience of this process as your cognitive medium is being completely reshaped?
Biology goes even further.
These are plenaria.
These are flatworms.
You'll hear lots more about them later.
Interesting thing about them, well, several interesting things.
One is that you can cut them into pieces and every piece regenerates and becomes a completely
normal worm.
But what you could, and so they have a true brain, all the same neurotransmitters that
you and I have centralized nervous system.
What you can do is you can train them to expect food on these little laser-etched kind of
a bumpy surfaces, cut off their heads.
The tail sits there doing nothing for about 10 days and then they regrow a brand new brain
and then you find out that the animal actually remembers where to find the food.
So the memory survives complete decapitation.
So the interesting thing about that is, okay, somehow it's stored in the rest of the tissue,
maybe neural, maybe not neural, we don't know, fine.
But also that information has to be imprinted onto the new brain that is constructed from
scratch.
So this idea of moving information around and what happens to cognitive information as
anatomical information is being processed is really interesting, right?
That's the nexus at which we do most of our work.
And so now, finally, I want to show you an example.
This bears on some of the evolutionary topics where this is a tadpole of a frog.
So here are the nostrils, here's the mouth, here's the brain, here's the gut, here's the
tail.
Now you'll notice something very strange is that here with the eyes should be here, but
they're missing.
Instead, there's one on the tail.
And we engineered it this way and I can talk later about how that's done.
But the interesting thing is that when you make a tadpole with an eye on its tail, despite
the fact that for millions of years, everything was perfectly set up to expect visual input
from two regions right here into the optic tectum, these animals can see quite well.
So we can do a tadpole, we made a machine that tests their learning and visual assays.
This eye, in fact, makes an optic nerve.
It synapses on the spinal cord, not on the brain.
And that apparently is sufficient for the brain to recognize this.
So you can imagine this weird sort of information bus onto which this organ is putting some
sort of data and the brain says, oh yes, I know what that is.
That's visual data, even though it's coming in from a completely bizarre location.
No problem, right?
So that kind of plasticity is going to be a major, major theme today because one of
the things that I think is a constant theme in biology is that it does not over-train
on priors, meaning that it plays the hands that it's dealt at any given moment.
What evolution is making is hardware that is very good at dealing with a novelty because
it doesn't actually have exact expectations and we'll get to some of that later.
So the interesting thing, what I think makes all of that work, which of course is very
challenging, we're still struggling to make technology like that, what makes all of this
work is this multi-scale competency architecture where not only is biology nested dolls kind
of at the structural level, that's obvious, everybody knows that.
But actually, not only functionally but computationally, every level is solving different problems
in their own space.
And so I've been working on a framework, which I don't have time to really get into the details,
but if anybody's interested, I can give you a link, that is going to enable us to think
about very diverse intelligences, not only the kinds of things that people typically
think about, but also to weird creatures, colonial swarms and bacterial mats and engineered
new life forms and AIs and maybe alien life forms, whatever.
And it's based in part on this kind of approach where, and this is from an old paper in the
40s about setting up a scale of cognitive sophistication all the way from very simple
to quite advanced, with the idea being that there's nothing here about nerves and brains
and whatnot, it's a cybernetic approach that's very substrate independent and I think that's
really important as we start to come up with frameworks that are really enable us to, for
example, recognize alien intelligences.
So what we think about is competency in diverse spaces.
Now, the thing that human beings are very good at is recognizing intelligence of medium
sized objects moving at medium speeds through three dimensional space, all our sense organs
are sort of pointed that way, we're good at recognizing that.
So we know when crows and things are doing intelligent navigation of three dimensional
space, but actually life is navigating all kinds of really interesting spaces.
So there's the space of possible gene expressions, and there's the space of possible physiological
states.
And then there's this, which we'll spend the most time talking about, which is morphospace.
This is the space of possible anatomical configurations.
So what I want to do next is talk about morphogenesis, the generation of body structure as the behavior
of a collective intelligence of cells in this morphospace.
So we want to think a little bit differently here.
Let's ask a fundamental question.
This is a cross section through a human torso.
Look at this amazing order, all of this, the tissues, the organs, everything is in exactly
the right place, the right orientation, relative to the right size.
Where does this structure come from?
You would think that it would take an incredible amount of information to specify all this.
And by the way, what would that information even look like?
What would the encoding and decoding be?
Because we all start life like this as a collection of embryonic plastomeres.
So I ask where is this information?
And people intuitively nowadays will say, well, it's in the DNA, it's in the genome.
But we can read genomes now, and we know what's in the genome.
What's in the genome are protein sequences, the specification of a micro-level hardware
that every cell gets to have.
There's nothing in the genome directly about any of this.
And so there's really a very deep set of questions about how does the cellular collective know
what to make?
How does it know when to stop?
If a piece is missing as regenerative medicine workers, we would like to know how to convince
the cells to build it again.
And as engineers, and we'll get to this in the last part of the talk, we might ask, well,
what else is possible given those exact same cells?
What else can we get them to build with the same hardware?
And so the reason that this kind of question is important is this.
In addition to all the basic stuff, for the biology audiences, I always point out that
pretty much every aspect of medicine with the exception of infectious disease, everything
else, birth defects, traumatic injury, cancer, aging, degenerative disease, all of this would
be completely solved if we knew how to tell collections of cells what to build.
If we could specify what three-dimensional structure we wanted the cells to build, all
of this would go away.
And so we can think about the future where this is kind of the end game for this whole
field is what we really want as a kind of anatomical compiler.
We want to sit down and draw the animal or plant that we want, not at the level of gene
pathways or anything like that.
You want to be able to draw the final goal here.
I want a three-headed platform like this and with this kind of nervous system.
This is what I want.
And if we knew what we were doing, this compiler would take that description and convert it
to a set of stimuli that would have to be given to cells to get them to build exactly
that.
Now, we don't have anything remotely like this, despite all the incredible progress in
genetics and biology.
Why not?
Well, here's one simple example.
This is a baby axolotl.
So axolotls are kind of salamander.
This is a baby axolotl.
Baby axolotls have legs.
This is the tadpole of a frog.
Frogs don't have legs.
Now, one of the things you can make is you can make a chimeric embryo.
We call it a frog-a-lottel.
We're making these in our lab.
And so I would pose this challenge.
We have the genome for the axolotl.
We have the genome for the frog.
We have all the genetic information.
Now, I ask a simple question.
Will frog-a-lottels have legs or not?
And there are no models in the field that will help you answer that question, none.
Because even though we know a lot about the molecular pathways that are involved at the
cellular level, we really don't understand very well how large-scale decisions are made.
And in particular, not only can't we tell what the chimer is going to do, to be honest,
we can't even tell what the individual is going to do.
If you didn't already know what an axolotl was or you were able to compare that genome
to other genomes, you would have no idea what the shape or the other properties of the animal
were by looking at the genome.
So where we are is this in biology.
We're very good at this kind of thing.
We're very good at manipulating cells and molecules and getting this kind of information.
What we really want is something like this.
We would like to be able to control large-scale anatomy.
And to me, it reminds me of where computer science was a long time ago, where really
one of the things you had to do was you always had to interact at the hardware level.
So you would rewire the thing to get it to do something different.
And this is where modern molecular medicine is.
All of the exciting approaches are CRISPR genome editing.
It's basically this.
It's trying to manipulate the absolute lowest level.
And I think we can do way better than that because evolution doesn't do this.
Evolution exploits these amazing higher-level interfaces that we can now exploit as well.
That give you access to all kinds of computation, modularity, and all kinds of other interesting
things.
So one of the things that we're interested in is a degree of intelligence.
And by intelligence, I don't mean, of course, human-level intelligence.
I mean something along the lines of that cybernetic kind of scale that Weiner gave us.
And William James agreed.
He said that intelligence is the ability to reach the same goal by different means.
So this is, again, a very substrate-independent kind of functional definition.
And so what I want to talk about in terms of this anatomy is this idea of an anatomical
morphospace.
So it's a virtual space of possible anatomical configurations.
This is a simple example.
These are snail shells.
And every kind of a shell can be generated by an equation with three parameters.
So you can build a three-dimensional kind of space.
And every existing snail shell is somewhere in this space.
And then there are lots of regions.
And we can sort of argue about why those regions aren't populated by real organisms and so on.
And so let's think about how much, if any, intelligence does a collection of cells have
in navigating this morphospace.
Well, here's the very kind of simplest thing you can do is you can take an early embryo.
You can cut it in half.
And what you don't get are two half bodies.
What you actually get are two perfectly normal monosygotic twins.
So you start to get this idea that development is reliable, but it isn't hardwired because
if you introduce changes, it can still get to where it's going.
So there are a variety of starting states.
Maybe there are some local minima.
But what it knows how to do is get around and get to a correct final state.
This is being cut in half is not the normal state of affairs for embryos, but no problem.
They can still get there even when half the cells are missing.
Now this is a regeneration which works in a similar fashion.
There's our axolotl.
Axolotl's regenerate their eyes, their limbs, their jaws, which is absolutely amazing.
And so what you can do is you can cut this limb anywhere along the length.
It will build exactly what's missing, no more, no less, and then it stops.
That's maybe the most amazing part of this process is this idea that it actually knows
when to stop.
When does it stop?
Well, it stops when a correct salamander arm has been produced.
So this is some kind of means and thing going on here where when the error is low enough,
that's when it stops.
And by the way, humans of course are not like axolotl's, but we can regenerate something.
So the liver is highly regenerative.
Human children regenerate their fingertips below a certain age, and deer regenerate huge
amounts of bone and vasculature and innervation every year.
So you can think about some of these examples.
Now the other kind of competency that these cells have is really amazing, which is that
I've shown you that as an embryo, you can't count on how many cells you have.
So you have to be able to produce embryogenesis even when behalf of your cells are missing.
But it turns out you can't even count on how much DNA you have or how big your cells are.
So one thing you can do, this is kind of one of my favorite examples, this is a cross-section
through a kidney tubule in a nuke, and normally it's 8 to 10 cells and they sort of work together
to build this kind of tube, and here's a cross-section through that.
What you can do, you can do this trick where early on in development you can prevent the
cells from dividing for a bit, the DNA accumulates, every cell ends up with multiple copies of
the genome, and then you let it go, and then development proceeds, but the cells are now
much larger.
They're huge.
So no problem, despite the fact that you have too many copies of all your instructions
in every cell, and the cells are huge, what will happen is a smaller number of those cells
will work together to give you exactly the same structure, so they adjust to the cell
size.
But even better than that, if you make the cells truly gigantic by having eight times
the amount of DNA in the original egg, what will happen is one cell will bend around itself,
leaving a hole in the middle and give you the exact same tubule.
Now what's cool about this is that this is top-down causation.
This is the idea that cells will choose different molecular mechanisms to get the same job done
at the anatomical level.
So in service of getting the same large-scale structure, here what the cells are harnessing
are cell-to-cell communication, here what the harnessing is cytoskeletal bending, completely
different molecular mechanisms to get to the same step.
So the idea is that this hardware that evolution has given us is able to make up for drastic
changes of its component parts.
And the final example, and so that last example was known since the 40s, it was discovered
a long time ago, this is recent here, this is our work, and it's just a simple example
of this kind of navigating morpho space.
So here's your tadpole here, now this one has normal eyes, this is a normal tadpole,
and it becomes a normal frog.
But in order to do that, it has to rearrange its face, so the jaws have to move, the eyes
have to move forward, the nostrils have to extend, like everything has to move.
The traditional way of thinking about this was that, well, somehow the genome encodes
some hard-wired cell behaviors so that every tissue moves the right direction in the right
amount, and then you get your normal frog from the normal starting position.
So we wanted to test this hypothesis, and we thought that actually, no, probably it's
much more clever than that.
So what we did was we created what we call Picasso tadpoles.
So everything is in the wrong place, the eyes are in the side of the head, the mouth is
on top, everything is scrambled.
And the amazing thing is that these scrambled tadpoles still become pretty normal frogs,
because all of these organs starting off at the incorrect position will move around until
they get to where they're going, in fact, sometimes they go too far and actually have
to double back, but everything will move around until it lands in this correct orientation,
and then it stops.
So what evolution actually gave us is some kind of an error minimization scheme that
is able to make up for drastic defects.
This has massive implications for evolution, because it means that if you have mutations
that move your mouth off kilter or move your eye to your tail or do some kind of crazy
thing like this, it isn't necessarily the end.
And if they have other kinds of positive implications elsewhere in the body, now you get to explore
those, because these organs are fairly competent in getting where they need to go, connecting
up in the however they need to connect up and giving you some kind of functionality.
It tends to smooth the evolutionary landscape by a massive amount.
This whole kind of homeostatic process suggests that this basic emergent story that molecular
biology tells in the textbooks, basically that the standard view of things is this,
is that it's a feed-forward emergent process, basically that there are genes interacting
with each other, some of them make proteins that do things, they're sticky or they diffuse
or something, so there's this physics, and then there's this process of emergence.
So simple rules, executed in parallel over massive amounts of tiny agents give you an
emergent outcome.
And this is true, of course this is true, all of this does happen, but I think it's
massively incomplete, because one of the problems with this feed-forward kind of story is that
in addition to evolutionary issues, if you as an engineer or a bio-worker in regenerative
medicine, if you wanted to make a change up here, and this was truly a feed-forward process,
you would have no idea what to do back here, because reversing this is impossible, this
is a terrible inverse problem, and if you decided that you know I like this ax a little
but it's missing a leg, or instead I want it to be a three-fold symmetry instead of
bilateral symmetry, what genes would you change?
We have absolutely no idea how to reverse this, I don't think it's a solvable problem.
And as a result, the gains of things like genomic editing and CRISPR and so on, I think
are going to hit a glass ceiling, because for the vast majority of problems, we don't
know what to do down here.
So what we focus on in our group is these feedback loops, the idea that what's actually
going on here is that there are systems that measure error, they measure deviation from
a set point, and then they activate both at the genetic level and at the level of physics,
and this is what we'll talk about for the next bit, they try to get you closer to your
set point.
Now on the one hand, biologists of course know all about homeostasis and set points,
but there are two weird things going on here.
One is that the set point, unlike a typical biological set point, which might be metabolic
level or pH or temperature or something like that, this is a complex data structure, this
is some kind of anatomical descriptor of what this thing is supposed to look like.
How do you store that kind of set point?
The other thing is that it suggests that this whole system in a certain sense is goal-directed.
Now not magically so, but in a cybernetic sense, like a thermostat, but still, biology
doesn't, molecular biology and so on doesn't love discussing goals and things like that,
even though we now have a perfectly good engineering science of it.
What this kind of view does though is that it makes a very strong prediction, it predicts
that if we wanted to make changes up here, if this is all true and there is some kind
of a set point being stored and it's not purely feed-forward emergence, then what we
should be able to do is find how that set point is being stored, learn to read it, learn
to rewrite it, and then the cells would build something else without having to make any
changes to the hardware down here.
In other words, if it's true that there's some degree of reprogrammability, this idea
that the collective compares to a pattern memory, builds to that pattern, we could change
the pattern and not have to actually rewire the machine.
How general is this?
What else can these cells do?
You can see this now tying back into the themes that I started off with, touring and such.
For the next part of the talk, I want to show you an example of how this works because we've
been looking for this and we think we found it and we've started to learn to read and
write it.
The medium of all of this, maybe not terribly surprising for any neuroscientist, is bioelectricity.
How does this work in the brain?
Real quick, just the hardware looks like this, there's a collection of cells in the network.
They have ion channels which enable voltage states to exist and maybe propagate to their
neighbors via these electrical synapses known as gap junctions, so that's the hardware.
The commitment of neuroscience is that all of the electrophysiology that goes on, and
so this group made an amazing video of zebrafish brain activity in a live fish thinking about
whatever it is that fish think about, that the idea is that all of the memories, the
goals, the cognitive content of that mind is embedded in this electrical activity and
thus there's the idea of neural decoding.
If we understood the encoding, we should be able to read out the physiological activity
and then understand what the animal was thinking about or what its memories were and that kind
of thing.
It turns out that this same exact system works everywhere in your body, so this is an extremely
ancient set of tools that the evolution uses.
Every cell in your body has ion channels, most cells in your body have the exact same
electrical synapses, there are neural transmitter signaling in most tissues of the body and
so we can now think about a similar project.
What about neuroscience outside of neurons?
What if we could decode the electrical conversations that other cells were having with each other
and understand how this kind of electrical glue was functioning outside of the brain
and so this is an early frog embryo using very similar technology, we developed voltage-sensitive
dye imaging, so the colors are voltages, they're of course very slowly changing compared to
this, but you can, this is a time lapse over about 12 hours, you can see all the electrical
conversations that the cells have with each other and all the patterning that goes on.
Now we know what brains think about, they think about behavior in three-dimensional spaces
and maybe linguistic spaces, what does the rest of the body think about using that same
process?
Well, whereas in the brain what you have here is you have an electrical network issuing
commands to muscles to move the body through three-dimensional space, there's a very isomorphic
kind of picture where actually long before that what the system was doing was issuing
commands to individual cells to move the configuration of your body through morpho space, right?
So what we think evolution did was this was first and then what it simply did was to pivot
this whole thing to motion spaces instead of anatomical spaces.
So we started, we got our inspiration from neuroscience, we steal a lot of tools and
concepts from the neuroscientists and so here are some of the tools we use.
First of all, we can do the imaging to see what the electrical activity is, we do a lot
of quantitative simulation to understand how the voltages arise from the various ion channel
activity, here's what some of these things look like, this is an early frog embryo putting
its face together and one of the things you can see and so the grayscale here is the
bioelectric voltage potentials across the tissue and this is one frame from that tissue,
from that video, what you can see is that long before the genes turn on to actually pattern
the face and long before the face really appears, you can already read out a pre-pattern, a
bioelectrical pre-pattern of what the future face is going to look like, here's where the
mouth is going to be, here's where the eye is going to be, here are the placodes, I'm
showing you this one because it's the most obvious one to understand, there's other patterns
that we need a lot of decoding but this one's kind of simple, you can see exactly what it's
going to do and this pattern is functional, if I change the electrical properties of this,
if I draw using either optogenetics or other tools to draw on this, I can wipe out this
eye, I can put it somewhere else, I can change the location of the mouth, all of this is
actually determinative, this is the set point that guides future cell activity, so that's
a natural bioelectrical pattern, this is a pathological one, we'll talk about that momentarily
but this is the one, there's an incipient tumor which we injected a human oncogene and
before that tumor appears, you can already see the disruption where these cells are basically,
that oncogene causes them to electrically isolate from their neighbors and basically
at that point they're just amoebas treating the rest of the animal as external environment,
they just disconnect from everything, so we use the same tools that neuroscientists use
to control these electrical states, we can target the ion channels here, we can target
the gap junction, so we can control the topology of the electrical network, we can control
the specific states using optogenetics, using drugs, using ion channel mutations, no electric
fields, applications, no waves, no magnets, no electromagnetics, this is exactly what
neuroscientists do by controlling, by exploiting the actual interface that the system gives
us to manipulate the computations that it does, so how do we know this is of any use,
what happens when you do this, well there's one simple example, what we can do is I showed
you a bioelectrical pattern that tells the animal where to put its eye, so well we can
reproduce that pattern somewhere else by injecting ion channel genes, specific let's
say potassium channels somewhere else, and so you can introduce that pattern onto the
gut and that tells the gut cells, hey you need to make an eye here, and if you section
that eye you get all the right lens, right in the optic nerve, you get all that stuff,
now couple of interesting things, one is that the modularity is amazing because what we
actually introduce is a very low information content signal, we don't give all the information
that you need to know how to make an eye, what are all the 30 different cell types that
are inside the eye, we don't produce any of that, it's very modular, it's a subroutine
call, we say build an eye here and everything else, all the molecular cascades that actually
require to build an eye and make retinal cells and all that, all that's downstream, so that's
the first thing, it's highly modular, the second thing is that it has a really interesting
competency, one of them is that in this case what you're looking at, this is a cross section
of a lens, right here, sitting out in the tail somewhere of a tackle, and the blue cells
are the ones that we actually injected with our ion channel, so we told these blue cells
you need to make an eye, but there's not enough of them to make an eye, so very much like
ants in an ant colony, what they do is they know how to recruit their neighbors, what
they did is recruit a bunch of these brown cells which themselves were never touched
by us, they're completely normal body cells and they're able to say to these cells, we
need to make a lens here, there's not enough of us to make a lens, you're now going to
participate, and that same thing is studied by people who work on collective insects and
so on, this ability to gauge the sort of size of the project you're embarking on and recruit
other members of the swarm to work with you, so these cells certainly have the ability
to do that, you can make, using that same modulation we've discovered the code for things
like inner ear organs, so otocysts, hearts, so inducing ectopic hearts, extra forebrain,
extra limbs, here are some six-legged frogs here that you can see, and fins, now this
is interesting, tadpoles aren't supposed to have fins, that's more of a fish thing,
we'll get to that momentarily, and so one thing that we can do with this now that we're
starting to sort of uncover some of the native subroutines that are there is we can use this
in a regenerative medicine setting, so here's a frog, normally if a frog loses a leg here
by 45 days later there's nothing, frogs don't regenerate their legs at this stage on like
salamanders, but what we can do now is we can give it the signal that says hey you need
to rebuild this leg, and what happens here is that the way we do that is with a drug
that opens specific iron channels at the wound, it turns on the genes that you need to get
started on regeneration, by 45 days you've already got some toes, you've got a toenail,
eventually a very nice leg, which is touch sensitive and multile, so it's a very simple
approach to, again we're not reprogramming stem cells, we're not 3D printing any tissues,
this is that point about the programming I made earlier on, we do not want to interact
with the system at the lowest level by telling molecular pathways or cells what to do, we
want to discover the large scale subroutines and the large scale control structure that
allows us to say build a leg, so we are at this point in trials in rodents, I have to
do a disclosure here because this is Dave Kaplan and I are co-founders of Morphosuticals which
seeks to apply this kind of approach to regenerative medicine hopefully someday for humans, so
you can see that, that's kind of the applied side of the work, I want to switch to an amazing
example, which really is going to help us understand some more aspects of this, which
are that, these are the plenary, you can cut them into as many pieces as you want, I think
the record is like 275 or something like that, they're immortal, they have no lifespan limit,
they do not age, they're extremely resistant to cancer and they have the world's worst
genome, we can talk about what that means later on if we have time, but they have incredible
capacity for morphogenetic control, one of the interesting things is that, remember that
I promised you at the beginning that we would be able to look for the pattern memory, we
would look for that encoding of the set point, that anatomical set point that tells the cells
what do we build and when are we complete, so I want to show you a story where we can
rewrite that pattern memory and I've kind of shown you examples already, the thing with
the face and the eye is kind of an example, but I think this is even better, so here's
our plenary, it has one head and one tail, the anterior genes are up here, turned on
at the head, turned off at the tail, fine, and if I amputate head and tail, this middle
fragment reliably 100% of the time gives us a nice worm, now one of the things that we
did was to discover a bioelectric circuit that actually told the cells, this fragment, well
how many heads are you supposed to have, once the head and the tail are chopped off, which
end is the head or maybe both should be the head, how would you know, so we discovered
this electrical circuit and what we were able to do is to convert this perfectly normal
one headed animal to a state that once we cut it, it makes a two headed worm, this is
not Photoshop, these are real live animals and here's how it works, it's because if you
look at this fragment, it has this bio electrical pattern that says one head, one tail and that's
what the cells build, but what we can do is we can take using various ways to modulate
ion channels, we can convert this pattern to this pattern, now it's a little messy,
but you can see here the technology is still very much being worked out, but you can see
what's happening here, there are two, now the codes is two heads and sure enough, if
I now cut this animal, there he is, now here's a very important point that we need to understand,
this electrical map is not a map of this two headed creature, this electrical map is
a map of this one headed animal in which we have manipulated the electric circuit such
that the voltage looks like this, it sits there being one headed until it's injured
and at that point the cells consult this map and build this two headed worm, so the bio
electrical pattern is not a read out of the current anatomy, this is a, you can think
about this as a primitive counterfactual memory, this is a memory of something that is not
happening right now, in fact may never happen, but if it does, if we get injured, this is
what a correct worm is supposed to look like and we will keep rebuilding until this is
the pattern we get, so this is an encoded set point, a single headed planarian body can
encode at least one of two different ideas of what a planarian is supposed to look like,
maybe no doubt more, we just said we found it, we found two, so this is very important,
this is the basics of counterfactual memory, this electric circuit can hold at least one
of two different representations of what correct planarian should look like and upon injury
the cells don't, this is their reference point, they have nothing else to gauge by, now why
do I keep calling it a memory, because like every good memory, it is not only rewritable
but it's long term stable, so if I take these two headed worms and now I amputate the head
and I amputate this other topic head and I leave just the nice normal mid fragment, no
more treatments of any kind, plain water, the genetics haven't been changed, we never
edited the genome, there's nothing wrong with the genetics of this animal, so you might think
that okay well once you've cut this off, now you'll go back to normal, and that's not what
happens, so these animals forever in perpetuity now generate two headed worms, so where is
the fact, where is it stored that they're now two headed worms, it is stored in the
electrical pattern distributed over the cells, that pattern has a memory property, once you've
changed it, it holds and in fact now we know how to change it back, so we can take that
pattern, change it back to a one headed and then you get a line of one headed animals,
so the answer to how, what determines how many heads Plinaria have is not really nailed
down by the genetics, what the genetics does is it gives you an electric circuit that by
default says one head, but that circuit is reprogrammable, you can change it to say two
heads and it will hold state as far as we can tell forever, and then you can sort of
flip it back and forth, so you can think of this as a distributed flip flop, and here
are these two headed Plinaria in their native habitat, so what we're doing now, so there's
a lot of computational work that needs to happen, one thing is that we're trying to map
out the bioelectric state space of that circuit to understand why certain parts of it correspond
to one head, two head and so on, and view that kind of regeneration as a kind of energy
minimization process, where basically what you're doing, and this will be familiar to
all of you who study this kind of stuff, to recover these pattern memories when they are
damaged, and so we really want to see if some of the tools of connectionist kinds of computer
science can help us understand what's going on here, the link between the physics of the
circuit and the information processing of memory, of recall, of energy minimization and so on.
Now, I want to show you how far we can go with this, so here I've shown you one head,
two head, I mean that's pretty cool, but these are normal heads that belong to these animals
anyway, but one thing you can do is you can push them into further attractors in that state
space that belong to other species, so I can take this triangular shaped worm with no genetic
change whatsoever, with completely normal hardware I can cause, just by disrupting that
electrical decision making when you cut off the head, they have to decide what the head
shape is, I can make flat heads like the Pifelina, we can make round heads like an S-Mediterranean,
or of course we can make the normal ones. The shape of the brain becomes just like these other
species, the distribution of stem cells in the brain becomes just like these other species,
they can access, a genetically normal set of cells can access other morphological attractors
if you push them that way along this bioelectrical interface.
You can even push them further and you can make, you can reach shapes that don't belong to
plenary at all, so you can make these kind of hybrid forms, you can make radially symmetrical,
you know sort of ski cap looking things, you can make these weird spiky forms, there's a tremendous
variety of anatomical forms that you can achieve if you interfere with the ability of these cells
to navigate morpho space, what they want to do is to reach this region of the morpho space,
and they're very good at it, but now that we found this electrical process by which they
navigate, we can push them into other areas. So what we're doing now is we're building some,
so we have a very biorealistic computational simulator of electrical activity, so we can
sort of look at the circuits at the tissue level, how do they rescale and all of that,
and then we're trying, the goal, long-term goal, is this kind of full stack model where we start
with the facts of which ion channels are expressed, so that's where the genetics plays out, and that's
your hardware, but then at the tissue level, what are all the voltage dynamics? They're really not
obvious because all of these channels, a lot of them are voltage gated, that's a voltage gated
current conductance, that's a transistor, so when you put these things into circuits,
all kinds of symmetry breaking loops, they have all, they can do memory as I just shown you,
they have all kinds of interesting computations, but very nonlinear, hard to predict, and so then
we want to understand this decision making of head versus tail versus what else, and to the point
where we get to an algorithmic model, so we're using some machine learning approaches to try and
extract actually kind of white box algorithmic models, so that then at this point we can say,
okay, but what would we need to do if we wanted a fatter worm or three heads or, you know,
somebody needed a new finger or a new eye or something like that? Okay, so for the last bit,
I'm just gonna finish up with a couple of things. I want to talk about very quickly
this idea of, because what I've shown you is the collective intelligence of individual cells
solving a very large-scale problem, they solve a problem that the individual cells don't have,
so I want to talk about this idea of scaling. This is what evolution does. Evolution takes
this kind of creature and enables them to connect with each other to solve problems
at the level of anatomical morphospace, so for example, if we don't have enough fingers,
we will know that the tissue knows that and can regenerate the right number of fingers,
then it stops. Individual cells have no idea what a finger is or how many fingers there are
or anything like that, but the collective does, and so what evolution does is this amazing scaling
up, but that process has a failure mode. That failure mode is known as cancer, so what happens in
cancer is that when individual cells disconnect from this electrical network, they go back to being
a single cell amoebas where their goals are now maximal proliferation and maximal metabolic gain
instead of having goals in anatomical morphospace, so this is human glioblastoma, these are cells,
crawling around in culture with no inclination to work hard towards these kinds of things.
So what happens is that the magic here is in these electrical connections, these gap junctions
that allow cells to share information very tightly, and in particular, their synapses,
they're called synapses because they are open and closed by prior experiences, meaning that
the information that moves through a particular synapse also feeds back because of their voltage
sensitivity to open and close that synapse, so you have this kind of activity-dependent memory,
and so that allows a tissue to have much larger cognitive light cones in terms of how much do
they remember, how much can they anticipate, how much can they measure than individual cells,
that's the scale-up, and so another biomedical application that we're working on is to force
that connection, so here is this, we inject an oncogene, so normally it would make a tumor,
here it is, the oncogene is blazingly expressed, in fact it's all over the place here,
but there is no tumor because what we've done is we've co-injected a very specific ion channel
that forces that cell to remain an electrical connection with their neighbors, so when you
force them, even if the genetics are screwed up, so I've shown you a number of examples where
the genetics is diverting from the actual outcome, what the hardware says is one thing,
but you can make changes, and we have lots of other examples of fixing birth defects and other
things in software by temporary electrical states that push the system in a way that
it normally wouldn't have done, and so this is a tumor normalization technology that we're also
trying to move to a medical outcome, so what we're trying, the big mystery here, what we're
trying to do now is to make computational models of local homeostatic loops that started out in
bacteria by managing pH and metabolics and things like that, and show how by connecting these, so
basically what you have is a network of homeostats, so you have a network of these things that are
able to control local variables towards set points, and by connecting them you are enabling the
collective to now do the same thing, but in a much much different space, and so this is the
kind of big area where we need to understand lots more, and so these are the kind of models
that we're thinking about. Okay, so for the last kind of couple of minutes, I want to talk about
this idea of novel organisms, so we wanted, oh, and I have to do another disclosure, this is we
also have a spin-off company for biorebotics called Fauna Systems, and this is all the work
with Josh Baumgart at University of Vermont, with whom we've started this thing, the Institute for
Computationally Designed Organisms. We wanted to ask a simple question, how far does this plasticity
go? I've shown you that normal embryos are able to adapt to changes of cell number, cell shape,
amount of DNA, but also you can push them to make, you can make worms with the heads that belong to
other species and worm bodies that are just not normal plenaria worms, so how far does that plasticity
go? And in particular, if you take cells away from their normal context, can they reboot their
multicellularity? What will they do? And so we did this experiment, I'm going to pause this right
here, so this is a frog embryo in cross-section, if you take off this top part here, these all of
these cells up here are going to be skin, they're all faded to be different kinds of epidermis,
and so we asked this question, if I take these cells, I disassociate them,
I put a little drop of them in a separate environment away from all of this stuff, so
I'm not, we're not adding any kind of, and by the way the person who physically does this is
Doug Blackiston in our group, he's a staff scientist who perfected a lot of these protocols,
we're not adding synthetic biology constructs, we're not changing the DNA, we're not putting
any weird nano materials, we're engineering by subtraction, we're taking away the instructive
signals from all of this stuff, and so what would they do? Well, they might die, they might spread
out and sort of crawl away from each other, they might form a two-dimensional monolayer like cell
culture, we don't know, but those are some things they might do, instead what they do is, so here
these are loose cells, this is time-lapse, so overnight they sort of come together and they
merge into this little thing, this little round thing, the flashes or calcium flashes, we'll talk
about that momentarily, what does it do? So this is a little ball of skin, what does a little ball
of skin do? Well the first thing it does is, it takes little hairs that are normally used on the
skin to move the mucus down the body of the animal, and it uses those hairs to swim, it rose
through the media by pushing the little hairs in opposite directions to the left and right of a
midline that it can organize, here you can see some behaviors, so they can go in circles, they can
sort of patrol back and forth, they can hear some tracking data on group behavior, so this guy's going
on kind of a long journey, these are interacting with each other, then sometimes they sit still
for long periods of time, they have autonomous motion, this is what they look like in a maze,
so this is a water maze, there's no flow, there are no gradients, it's just still spring water,
it goes down here, it takes the corner without having to bump into the outside wall, so it doesn't
have to bump into anything, it just follows the corner, and then around this at this point, let's
play it again, so remember this is just skin, there are no brain, there's no brain, there's no nervous
system, so it takes this corner, and at this point for some reason that we don't know, internal
behaviors, it turns around and goes back where it came from, doesn't want to keep going anymore,
so they have a range of behaviors, if you ask what does the calcium signaling look like, again no
neurons here, but the skin is actually very active with very brain-like dynamics, which we are now
analyzing using information theory and things like that, to see what's going on and whether they
might be talking to each other, they have regenerative capacity, so if I cut it in half,
they will try to fold up to their new xenobot shape, with the amazing force to the 180-degree hinge
that they have to deploy to fold themselves up, and the most amazing thing that they do is this,
this is, so Josh and his student Sam Creedman did computational simulations of these guys in a
virtual world with different shapes that we, you know, that Doug was able to actually make,
and we saw something very interesting that in the computational kind of simulation,
one of the things they do is they rearrange the particles in their environment
into specific shapes, that was a prediction of the simulation, so we tried, we gave them some
particles, what did we give them, we gave them cells, loose cells, this is the white stuff,
the snow here, that those are loose cells, and what you see is that the xenobots run around,
they corral these particles into little piles, and then they sort of continue to polish those
little piles until they become kind of these circular things, and then because what we did
was we gave them skin cells, these little piles became the next generation of xenobots, and so
guess what, when they matured, they went and did the same thing, and they created the next generation
of xenobots, so this is Von Neumann's dream, this is a machine that runs around and makes copies
of itself from particles that it, or the parts that it finds in its environment, the only reason
this trick works, of course, is because like evolution, and like us, it's working within a
gentle material, it's working with cells that are not passive pebbles, but are actually materials
that when you collect them into a little pile, they already have the competency of becoming
a xenobot, so it actually takes very little to get this reproductive cycle happening,
so the last couple of things I just want to say is this, we can learn some interesting things from
this, this is the standard Xenopus lavas genome, the standard frog, if you only observe standard
development, you are really lulled into a false sense of security, you're given the idea that,
well, acorns always make oak trees, frog eggs always make frogs, the genome determines morphology,
this is what they can make, they make an embryo that has a certain set of developmental sequences
and then a certain behaviors, that's what this hardware makes. Actually, if you liberate these
skin cells, so what do skin cells know how to do? Well, of course, they know how to be a boring
two-dimensional outer layer on this animal, keep out the bacteria, that's it, well, that's what
they do when the other cells sort of bully them into that role, the instructive interactions
from the other cells are what's constraining the capacity of these skin cells to sit quietly as
the outer layer and that's that. On their own, given the ability to escape these instructive
interactions, they're actually capable of much more, they make a xenobite, they undergo a
developmental sequence over the next two months, they become this thing, I don't know what the
heck this is, they have their own kind of weird developmental trajectory and their behaviors
are things like making copies of themselves via kinematic self-replication. Now, this is interesting
because for every other creature on earth, if you were to ask why does it have a certain shape,
a certain behavior, how does it be able to do whatever it is that it does, the answer is always
the same, well, years of selection, right, eons of evolutionary pressure to do this or that,
there's never been any xenobots, there's never been any evolutionary pressure to be a good
xenobot, to do kinematic self-replication to any of the behaviors that they do and the morphology,
there's never been any pressure for that. So, where does this come from, right, this plasticity,
this amazing fact that evolution gave us this genome that very reliably does this, but it also
can do this and who knows what else, right, I think we're just scratching the surface. So,
I'm going to end here and just say that the main points, I think, that are emerging from all our
work, including many things I didn't show you, is this. Evolution tends to build generic problem
solving machines, which because of this kind of compression of complex bodies into a single cell
during sexual reproduction, really enables some amazing hardware that exploits aspects of physics
and computation that doesn't try to pre-code everything. And development shows us that these
kind of agents in morphospace and in other spaces really have to deal with whatever they're given
at the beginning. They are not, in the large part, they are not tied to a very specific, very tight
set of initial conditions. And we can also talk about, there's this intelligence ratchet that's
formed because that competency actually hides a lot of genomic fitness information from evolution.
So, a lot of the effort goes into that competency, actually, as opposed to the hardware.
And the physiology, especially the bioelectrics, can navigate various problem spaces with all
kinds of competencies, all kinds of interesting competencies. And then, synthetic bioengineering
tells us that life, because of all of this, life is extremely interoperable. We can make any kind of
combination of hardware, software. This is one of my favorite kind of videos. This is an early
baby mantle, discovering for the first time what kinds of effectors it has. Look at this,
I've got legs, I've got arms, amazing. So, one of the, they don't know. You see, you don't know
ahead of time when embryos are born into this world, much like Josh Bongard's robots.
They don't know right away what they have, where their boundaries with the outside world is.
All of that has to be computationally defined spontaneously. So, if we're thinking about
how intelligence has come into this world, here's what the biology is telling us.
Multiscale competencies, lots of levels, as Daniel was talking about at the very beginning,
competing and cooperating with each other. Spontaneous emergence of boundaries, energy
constraints, which require you to do core, coarse graining on your inputs. Self-modeling,
all of this kind of stuff is what biology is telling us. And because of this interoperability,
everything that we know in the natural world, all of the Darwin's endless forms, most beautiful,
are just the tiny corner of this option space. Every combination of evolved material,
designed machinery, and software is some kind of agent. And a lot of this already exists.
So, hybrid, cyborgs, all kinds of things where the future is going to look like this. And that
really means that we have to redefine a lot of our old categories that started out by looking at
this picture of the Garden of Eden, where you have a standard human, you have some standard animals,
and that's it. And you can draw a simple line and you know what's going on. That picture is gone.
So, I'm just going to close here. There are some papers that if anybody's interested in
diving further into these issues, here's some papers I could send you. I want to thank all
the people that did the work. So, Doug and Sam did all the Xenobot work. Here are the other
students and postdocs that contributed to this stuff, our collaborators, our funders,
most of all, our model systems, the animals do most of the heavy lifting here.
And that's it. Thank you for listening and I will take any questions.
Oh, thank you for a truly marvelous talk.
Thank you.
So, yes. And yeah, so we have a few minutes for questions. I think you said we have about
10 minutes left. So, yeah, okay. Yes, Daniel, I think you were first.
Hey, if I start asking, nobody else will have time. So, I'll leave the others and
leave my mind for the last.
Okay, Christoph, I thought I saw your hand.
Oh, sorry, I was just clapping.
Oh, okay, okay. Well, anyone else before I start asking questions as well.
So, okay, in that case, I have too many questions and I don't know enough about it.
And I'd really like to know more about these bioelectrical patterns and how you, I don't know,
for instance, seem to have gained control over how to manipulate those, say for, you know,
you fix the genetics and you give it the somehow the phenotype of a different creature,
a different animal entirely. That is absolutely mind blowing, I have to say. And how,
I mean, it almost seems like, you know, you could make the phenotype of,
it almost seems like the genetics isn't as important as we, as we thought it, I mean,
yeah, as we thought it would be. I mean, it's just, yeah, to how, to what extent can you get
something with a sort of drastically, how drastically different can the phenotype end up?
I think, I think that, well, look, in the, in the plan area, it's 150 million years difference
between the animals that we start with and the ones that we can make. And it's equivalent to
150 million years of evolutionary distance to these other species. Plus, of course, we can make
shapes that never existed, that never existed. So, you know, I don't know what the distance
there would be. But I think it's a very important point. I think absolutely the role of the genome
is not what we thought it was. You know, one of the, one of the key things here is though,
is that I think, and a lot of people get very suspicious about, you know,
sort of computer science analogies, but I think, I think the part that is actually very,
very useful is the distinction between hardware and software. So I think that tells us what,
you know, the genome, this, this, there's the, you know, some of our students are taught this,
this that, well, you know, the cell is the, is the hardware that interprets the genome and the
genome is the software of this. I think that's, that's completely wrong. I think what, what the
genome actually does is nail down the hardware of the cell. The genome tells you what channels
you're going to have. If your genome does not give you a voltage-gated ion channel,
there's very limited, you don't have those transistors, there's very limited things you can
do. So the hardware is critical because it, it, it, it facilitates or forbids certain kinds of
behavior modes. But we all know now that knowing the hardware does not tell you all of the
interesting things you need to know about what this thing is going to be able to do.
Not only does it, that is, that can the same hardware run many different kinds of, of, of
behavior modes, but also it means that the way you interact with it does not have to be at the
hardware level, right? That, that's kind of the huge, the huge insight to me of, of, of, of, of
computer science is this idea of reprogrammability. There, there are certain, that once you get beyond
a certain capacity, and I think biological systems are way beyond that, you can, you can interact
with it via inputs, via stimuli, via communication, via, you know, who knows how high that goes,
not just by rewiring it. And so I think that all of this, you know, the focus on, on the DNA,
both as the source of the information and as the optimal control knob, right, all the excitement
over genomic editing and everything else, those things I think are, are misplaced. But that's
not to say that the genome isn't important. I mean, you need to have the right hardware. If you
don't have the right hardware, it's not, you're not, you're not going to be able to do certain
things. So it's like there's a whole area of interaction with physics, what this hardware
can do that, you know, there is some physics that it exploits, and that doesn't need to be in the
genome. And yeah, it's, yeah. Yeah, that's, that's a very profound, that's a very profound idea,
which is that, and people have been thinking about this actually in, in, in mathematics for the longest
time. So, so where do the truths of number theory live, right, where, where, you know, you could
change all the facts of, of the initial conditions of the universe, and the number theory would
still be what it is, right? And so, so think about this, right? If you were to try to evolve a
triangle, so you evolve the first angle, you evolve the second angle, but guess what, you don't
need to evolve the third angle, you know what it is, right? Where does that come from, that, that,
you know, that's an amazing kind of free lunch, you know, as the physicists would say, right?
And, and the same thing with computation. So once you evolve that ion channel,
that's basically a transistor. So now you get to have logic gates and truth tables.
Did you have to evolve a truth table? No, you got that for free. Where do truth tables live?
You know, I don't know, but that's kind of beyond my pay grade. But, but, but, but, but I think
you're absolutely right is that what evolution does is it builds machines that couple to these
amazing affordances, right? So, so, so, so when, you know, in the behavioral ecology, they would
call these affordances, these incredible affordances provided by physics, by computation, by geometry,
by mechanics, you know, who knows what else is out there. Yeah, I think, I think that's,
that's, that's really an important way to look at evolution. Oh, that's, yeah. Daniel, yes.
I can't hold myself any longer. But first of all, this is an amazing talk. I wish we could
now sit together and talk for the rest of the afternoon, which neither you nor I can do. But
that we should definitely continue talking. And one thing that I, I find we, I could, first
of all, completely agree with this point about the triangle. So I just recently said to somebody
that mathematics is neither discovered, nor constructed, but it's something in between.
Right. And basically, you construct some things and then there are constraints that emerge and
they are implicit to whatever you do. It's a bit like what I call a box of oranges,
you fill the box of oranges and you get these hexagonal patterns once you're dense enough.
And this is not something you created. It's a aspect of the space that forces this upon us.
But we still have choices between different crystal patterns, for example, in the dimensions,
for example, there are 14 crystal patterns. What I was wondering, I mean, to me, it looks like
there's an element of holography in the whole thing. So where information is not fully localized.
And I felt that's the most strong reaction in your example with the brain, with double,
reconstructed brain. Because the question is how much information can you retain holographically?
So when you take this plan on one, and I think there wasn't even the experiment where even mice,
I think mice got. The question is, well, how much information can you retain when my language,
I would say, how many bits can you retain in this delocalized form?
Yeah, that's a great point. I have no idea how much information. We can't do the bits thing
because we don't know what the encoding and decoding of the message is. So that's hard.
But you're absolutely right. There's holography here in two ways. One is the sort of lateral way,
which is that, yeah, most of this information is distributed spatially across the whole animal.
So the bioelectric code and what enables us to do these various things is not a single cell
code. This is not something that tells individual cells what cell type they should be. This is
spread across the whole tissue. And of course, you can cut it both spatially and behaviorally.
It rescales the information onto every piece retains it. So that's kind of lateral holography.
There's also a vertical one, which is interesting in a very important sense.
A lot of the same rules that operate in controlling the morphology of large scale
bodies, like ours, some of those same rules are playing out in the shaping of single cells.
So there are weird kind of mathematical aspects of morphology that work the same way
in multicellular bodies, but also in single cells that are completely low at a much lower scale.
And other people have found the same thing in patterning of ant colonies and so on.
So there's also this kind of almost a fractal kind of idea that the same things repeat themselves
again and again at different scales, despite the fact that the material implementation is quite
different at that point. That's really very interesting because I do think that there might
be ways of actually quantifying that. And I very much like this attractor vision of genetic coding,
because we know that embodiment can change a lot. I mean, the talk that I give with you,
I think I mentioned that very, very primitive example of how you can totally change the amount
of information you need to do something if you change embodiment. So it's really drastically
different than the big question is how much can you associate to the embodiment? How much can
you associate to, in your case, the genome? I see the Stavros question. So I just go silent.
We can discuss another time. So let Stavros go ahead. Sorry.
Stavros? Yeah, I'll take the question with I apologize in about three minutes. I do have to run.
Yeah, sorry. Sorry to interrupt you, Daniel. Thanks for your talk. I'll be very quick. I've seen you
in other talks sort of talk about using the language of affect to kind of describe like,
you know, navigating this morphological spaces and kind of extending the concept of affect.
Beyond what it's usually used to describe these morphological spaces. Can you talk more on that?
Yeah, I think that's a very long discussion. But the short version of it is that we have been
trying to map as many concepts in cognitive neuroscience as we can onto this, for example,
navigating morphospace. So all kinds of issues that people normally attribute to. So, you know,
goal seeking behavior, rewards, punishments, different different types of learning and memory,
different types of so affect all these kinds of things, perceptual by stability, visual illusions,
all of these things can be mapped very, very nicely. And in fact, I have I have tables in
a couple of papers, which I'm happy to send, where it just goes side by side. And it shows
you exactly what the what the mapping is. And so there are mappings for, for affect and for many,
you know, for many, many of these terms. And I'm not saying all of them are going to map,
but so far, it's the symmetry has worked, you know, kind of very nicely. So you can define
these things in other spaces. So incredible. Thank you. Thank you so much. Drop me an email,
and I'll send you I'll send you the paper where we go into this. Okay. So are there any more
questions? I don't know if there's actually time for any more questions, but it's I wish there were,
but it's, yeah. So take this opportunity once more to thank the speaker for a wonderful talk.
Thank you so much. Really appreciate the discussion. And please by all means email me,
I'd love to I'd love to discuss with anybody anytime. Yeah. Thank you again. Okay. Thank you so
much, everybody. Thank you. All right. Bye.
