Thank you so much. That's very kind. And it's been a real honor and a privilege to get to
know Bill and work together on these projects. So thank you for inviting me here. This is
a new kind of audience for me. And I've put together a talk that I haven't given before.
So let's see how it goes. By the way, if anybody's interested afterwards in the details, all
of the sort of official peer-reviewed kind of stuff, the software, the papers, everything is
here. And then here are sort of a little bit more personal thoughts about what I think it all means
and things like that. So let's begin here. This is a well-known painting. It's called Adam Names
the Animals in the Garden of Eden. And there are two interesting things about this old story.
One of them, I think, is needs to really be redone and ditched. And the other one is very
profound. And I think it's going to be important for us going forward. The one that needs to be
dropped is this idea here that there are discrete natural kinds of beings. We know what they are.
Here are these large, mostly cute sorts of animals. There's Adam. We know what they are.
They're discrete. They're different from each other. Adam, of course, is different from all of
them. And that, as you're going to see in a minute, does not do justice to the incredible plasticity
of life. Our attempts to bin it into these categories is not going to fly. What is really
profound here, I think, is that in that original story, you may or may not know that neither God
nor the angels were able to name the animals. It was Adam that had to do it. The job was on him.
And there are a couple of reasons why that might be. One is because in these old traditions,
naming something or discovering the name of something means you've discovered something about
its true inner nature. And I think that's important because we, as humans, are going to have to
discover the inner nature of a very wide set of beings that Adam could not even have begun to dream
of. The other thing is, of course, Adam's the one that has to live with them. And so his understanding
of his world and the other beings around it is going to be critical for him to develop. So I
want to talk about a few things today. First is some thoughts on information, evolution, and
selves, this notion of collective intelligence and where it comes from. I want to talk about the
paradox of change and how biology handles it. Now, the paradox of change can be said as follows.
This is scaled to the level of evolution, but I think you will see the obvious implications for
personal and possibly company growth and things like that. The paradox is this, if you're a species
and you fail to change, you're going to go extinct. But if you do change, you likewise will, in an
important sense, cease to exist. So what does that mean? How do we, as beings, preserve ourselves in
some sense as we inevitably change? We change physically, we change mentally. If you don't
change mentally, you can't learn. So there's some sense in which profound educational process changes
you so that you're not the same, certainly growing up, but we'll do that and so on. So this is a
really interesting paradox and I'm going to show you how I think biology handles it. And we're
going to talk about a few other topics such as plasticity, diverse intelligence, and creative
interpretation, a.k.a. polycomputing that biology uses across scales. And we're going to look at it,
we're going to start our journey here through the eyes of a frog with an eye on its butt. Now,
if anybody asks you in the future, have you ever seen a frog with an eye on its butt, now you can
say yes. This is a frog we have made in our lab. This is not Photoshop. This is not AI. This is
a real eye on its butt. And the reason that these kinds of things are possible is because
biology commits to a certain kind of creative process to solve this problem. The way the way
that frog came to be is that we took a tadpole. So here's a tadpole, here's the brain, the nostrils,
the mouth, the gut, the tail. And what we did was we put some eyes, some eye cell precursor cells
on the back of this tadpole. The cells go ahead and they make an eye. I'll tell you another story
about ectopic eyes in a minute, but that's how we did this is by transplantation. You'll also
note that he doesn't have any primary eyes. So we prevented those from forming, but we put an eye on
his tail. And then we built this machine. This was an incredible ordeal. It took probably five
years, about a million bucks, which is huge for a lab, to build this kind of thing. And what the
machine does is test these tadpoles in visual assays. So basically, there's a little spot of
light and they have to either chase or stay away from the moving light in order to succeed in that
task. And we found out that they can see quite well. These eyes on their backs enable them to
see perfectly well. By the way, here's the optic nerve. You can trace it. It does not go to the
brain. It goes to the spinal cord and then it stops there. So notice what's happened here is that
this animal has a radically different sensory motor architecture. You've got now this weird itchy
patch of tissue on your back that's sending signals to your spinal cord. How does the brain know that
that's visual data and use it? And in particular, why doesn't that take extra evolutionary cycles?
You know, cycles of mutation, selection, it's just ready to roll. You've drastically changed
this architecture that's been the same for millions of years and suddenly it works. And it
works because evolution doesn't actually make specific solutions to specific problems. It makes
problem-solving agents. And embryos, as I'll point out in a few minutes, can't take much for
granted. They solve these things on the fly, which is why this works. Now, what this has to do with
collective intelligence is this. We all started life right here as a single cell. I once pointed
out to somebody, I was doing some expert witness work and they were trying to, one of the attorneys
was trying to say that our work in frog was not relevant to humans. And he said, don't frogs come
from an egg? I said, will you come from an egg? And this was like everybody thought I was insulting
him, you know, the judge bang the thing. But let's remember, we all come from an egg. We all come
from a single cell. And that's a little blob of chemistry and physics. And that slowly and gradually
gives rise to one of these remarkable morphologies. And there is no magic spot, no lightning flash
that says, okay, you wore physics, but now you're a real cognitive individual. Now, mind comes into
the picture. This is slow and gradual. So we, then as scientists and philosophers, do need to understand
how does that scaling work? How do you get from a system that's well-described by chemistry and
physics? And as I'll mention, actually, not with zero cognitive capacity, it's small, but it's not
zero. How do you get here? And let's remember that we humans with our magical, agential glow
are not discreetly different from all of these other things. We stand at the intersection of two
enormous continuums where you can both, both evolutionarily and developmentally. And then,
you know, through biological change and through technological change, there are all kinds of
interesting beings that we're going to need to get to know. So that's a little disturbing. And a lot
of people, a lot of people, they send me emails about how disturbed they are to find out that
they were basically a scale up from a single cell. But at least we're a true unified intelligence,
right? So like we're not like a collection of ants or termites or something that you can talk
about an ant colony as a collective intelligence, but we're an actual true unified intelligence,
right? Well, wrong. So this is Descartes, who really liked the pineal gland. And the reason
he liked the pineal gland is that there's only one of them in the brain. And he felt that our
unified human experience should be associated with a structure in the brain. That's unique, not
bifurcated, not to like the hemispheres or all these other structures. It should be the only one.
Well, if he had had access to good microscopy, he would have looked inside the pineal gland and
you would have seen that, wait a minute, there's not one of anything. It's made of a bunch of cells.
Each one of these cells has all this stuff in it. So look at this. These are all the things that are
inside of each cell. And there's plenty more. This is only what we know to stain at this point.
And so all intelligence is collective intelligence. We are all built of a kind of multi-scale
agential material. This is a single cell. This happens to be a free living organism known as
a lacrimaria. But look, this is what a single cell can do. There's no brain. There's no nervous
system. He's handling all of his local needs with, and this is real time. So incredible anatomical,
physiological, and metabolic control and so on. And so we're all made of collections of these.
And the thing about being a collective intelligence is that you need cognitive glue.
Now what I mean by that is, here's a rat that's been trained to press a lever, get a reward.
There is no single cell here that has had both experiences. So the cells at the bottom of the
feet interacted with the lever. The cells in the gut got the delicious sugar reward. But no single
cell had both of these experiences. So who owns the associative memory? Who is it that knows that
these two things are tied? It isn't any individual cell. It is the rat. So you've got this. You've
got what you need is a set of mechanisms that are able to provide the system with memories,
preferences, goals, and other cognitive properties that the individual parts don't have.
Now we're used to thinking about ones like this, and creatures like this are fairly,
the rat doesn't change too much, but there are many other creatures that show us something
really remarkable. So here are some flatworms, some plenarium. You can train them to understand
that these little bumpy circles that we've laser etched into the bottom of the dish are where they
get fed. So the liver shows up on these little circles. The other amazing thing about plenaria
is that they regenerate. So you can cut them into pieces. The record is something like 276 pieces,
and if you cut them in half here, this tail will sit there doing nothing for about eight days. It'll
grow a new head, and then behavior begins, and you find out that these animals remember the
original information. So the information is not exclusively in the brain because you can cut off
the entire head. It is somewhere else. However, it is imprinted onto the new brain as it develops.
And so you can do all kinds of interesting thought experiments, like the old malfunctioning
transporter, and ask, okay, if we cut them into pieces, who's the original plenaria, and so on.
So right away you get into these issues of personal identity. You get into where is behavioral
information? How does it move through the body? How does it imprint it onto new brains? How do
brains know how to interpret? Just like I showed you in the tadpole, the brain knows how to interpret
information coming off of its spinal cord. How does this brain know that whatever the tail is
telling it is actually behavioral information that the brain can use? But it goes even beyond that.
It's not just about maintaining the information. Here's one of my favorite examples. So here's
a caterpillar, two-dimensional. You can model it as a soft-bodied robot with a particular
controller, and that's suitable for moving soft bodies that have no hard elements, so you can't
push on anything. So these things crawl around and they eat leaves, and they have a brain that's
well suited for that. They have to turn into this. This is a butterfly that flies in three-dimensional
space, doesn't eat leaves, it drinks nectar. And in order to change the brain from this to that,
you basically undergo this remarkable transformation process that dissolves most of the brain.
Many of the cells die, most of the connections are broken, but what you find out is that if you
train the caterpillar to seek out leaves on a particular color disc, the butterfly will do
the same. Now there's a few amazing things here. You can ask questions like, what's it like to be
a creature in the process of changing so radically? Questions like that, and you can ask where is
the memory? If the brain is being refactored, where does it keep those memories? But there's a
deeper issue here, which is that butterflies don't eat the same stuff that caterpillars eat,
and they don't move the same way the caterpillars move. So having the exact memories of a caterpillar
is completely useless. What it has to do actually is interpret whatever the engrams, whatever the
memory traces that the caterpillar leaves, it has to reinterpret them for its new context. So in its
new higher dimensional life, it doesn't carry the exact memories of its previous life, but it
carries the deep lessons that it's learned. And the trick here is that it has to know how to
remap them onto its own architecture. So you can read a lot more about this in this preprint
that I just put up a few days ago. So the interesting thing is that these worms and
caterpillars and so on, we shouldn't just think about them as this sort of bizarre
aspect of biology that has nothing to do with us. Because if you think about the slices of
our own life at any given moment, you don't have access to the past. The only thing you have access
to are the engrams, the traces of past experience that your past self has laid down in your brain,
in your body, in notepads, in various outsourced kinds of things. You have to reinterpret those
memories at every point. You have to reconstruct actively the story of who you are, what you are,
what your various commitments and beliefs are from the molecules and the energy patterns that are
in your body. And you have to tell a story about what they add up to. This is what our brain does
all the time. One way to think about this is that memories are messages from your past self.
Just the way that you exchange messages laterally with other beings at your current
time point. These memories are messages from a past self. And like any act of communication,
you're not actually required to interpret these messages in the way that the sender intended.
You are free to reinterpret them, however it's best for you. And not only are you free to do that,
you actually have to do that because you will change. Your body will change, the environment
changes. Even for humans, there's turnover. There's molecular turnover and cellular turnover
all the time. So all of these messages have to be turned over. And the way that this works,
you can imagine that these engrams, these memory traces are like this middle node, this narrow
little middle node in what this is probably familiar to many of you, this kind of
this architecture that's used like an autoencoder kind of thing where it squeezes down
all of the information that's come before because you don't want it to remember the exact data.
You want it to remember patterns. And then you pass the bottleneck, you want this side to
reinflate those patterns into whatever makes sense on the other end. Biology has this everywhere in
gene regulatory networks and voltage at the center of bioelectrical circuits in biomechanical
networks. This architecture is absolutely everywhere because this is what enables information to
preserve salience, not accuracy, but salience and utility on the other end. Now this will only work
if the two ends of this thing are smart. They have to undertake some effort to interpret
and encode what's going on here. So our bodies are made of a multi-scale competency architecture.
Every level of this is in fact smart in the sense that it has a competency to solve various problems.
So whole bodies of course solve problems in three-dimensional space, various kinds of behaviors,
but your molecular networks, your subcellular organelles, your cellular components, your organs,
tissues, all of these things solve problems in other kinds of spaces. And in fact, one thing
that evolution has done is to pivot some of the same tools and tricks for navigating problem spaces
across these various spaces. So we started off metabolic space and then physiological space and
then genes came along and you could navigate gene expression space and then multicellularity came
along and you could navigate anatomical space, the space of possible large-scale shapes. And then,
of course, brains and muscles showed up and you could do behavioral space and then eventually
linguistic space. And it turns out from some recent work in our group that actually some of
the exact same ideas from navigating these other spaces you can use to help AIs navigate linguistic
space and keep track of a story longer and longer and so on. So Alan Turing, who obviously needs
no introduction, who was very interested in minds and intelligence and different embodiments of
intelligence and machines and so on, he was studying intelligence through reprogrammability,
right? He was interested in programmable hardware and plasticity. Interestingly,
he wrote this paper, The Chemical Basis of Morphogenesis. It's one of the earliest works on
the mathematics of how order might arise in chemical systems like that egg that I showed you.
So he was interested how do you, how does the egg self-assemble? How do the chemicals assume
some sort of order? Now, why would somebody who was interested in mathematics and computer science
and so on be interested in this question? And I think that he saw a very profound kind of
invariance that I think if he had lived longer, both biology and computer science would be much
further along because what he realized was that the story of the appearance of minds is fundamentally
the same story as the story of the self-assembly of the body, right? The factors that put together
your body should be really important for understanding where minds come from. So let's
ask where do anatomies come from? So you start life as a collection of embryonic blastomeres.
This is a cross-section through an adult human. Look at the amazing order. All of the organs,
they're the right size, the right shape. Everything is next to the correct thing.
Where does this amazing order come from? Where is this pattern written down? And so if you ask,
even nine-year-olds, I've given talks to middle schools and they will immediately say, well,
it's in the DNA. It's in the genome. But the thing is that we can read genomes now. And actually,
this was apparent long before, but now we know for sure because we can read genomes. None of this
is directly in the genome. What's in the genome are the specifications of the proteins, the tiniest
hardware, the molecular hardware that cells get to have. This pattern, any more than the actual
structure of the termite colony or the precise pattern of a spider web are not in their genome.
This is not directly in our genome either. Where this comes from is the working out of
the physiological software that this hardware enables. And so we have to ask a number of questions.
Given that DNA specifies the hardware, where does the anatomy come from? How do cells know
what to make and when to stop? If a piece is missing, people like us want to know how do you
repair it? How do you convince them to regrow what they need to regrow? And as engineers,
we also ask, well, what else are they willing to do if we knew how to communicate with them?
And I could do a whole thing here on the anatomical compiler and some of those ideas.
But if we knew how to communicate with these cells, what else would they be willing to build?
And I'm going to show you some of those towards the end of the talk.
Now, one cool thing about this process is that it's not hardwired. This is not simply the emergence
of complexity. This is actually the emergence of intelligence. What kind of intelligence? Well,
goal-directedness of a certain kind in anatomical space. So here, this is an amazing creature,
this axolotl. And they regenerate their limbs, their eyes, their jaws, portions of the brain
and heart and so on. And if they lose a limb, and they do this all the time, they bite each other's
legs off constantly, wherever they lose the limb, the cells will work very hard to build exactly
what's needed, and then they stop. And that's the most amazing thing about this process is they
know when to stop. How do they know when to stop? Well, they stop when the correct axolotl arm has
been completed. It's a process of anatomical homeostasis. If you deviate them from their goal,
they will get right back there and then they stop. By the way, this is not just for weird organisms.
Mammals are a little bit regenerative, so humans can regenerate their liver.
Kids up to a certain age can regenerate their fingertips. And deer can regenerate bone
and vasculature and innervation up to a centimeter and a half per day of new growth when they're
doing this. So we have some of these capacities, but not terribly much. And I want to show you
one of my favorite examples of this kind of intelligence and what it means to be a being
coming into this world. This is a cross-section through a kidney tubule in the in the in the
nude. So normally it's made of eight to ten cells or so. But one trick you can do is by
increasing the number of nuclei of actually genetic material in these cells, you can make
the cells much larger. So the cells will scale to the amount of genetic material,
but the nude stays the same size. And the only way you can do that is by using fewer cells to
build the same structure. And so the first amazing thing is that you could have extra copies of all
your genetic material. No problems. Everything still works. Second, you can have huge cells,
and you will scale the number appropriately. No problem. The most amazing thing happens when
you make truly enormous cells. And at that point, one cell will just bend around itself and give you
that same lumen. Now this is a completely different molecular mechanism than this. This is cell to
cell communication. This is cytoskeletal bending. So this is top-down causation. In the service of a
particular journey and anatomical space that that this system needs to make, it can use different
tools in its disposal. It can use different molecular tools to get the job done. And we can ask all
kinds of interesting questions about how did it know that that was the thing to do? But just think
about what it means to be a nude coming into this world. You can't depend on anything. Never mind the
environment. Never mind the injury that somebody else might come along and bite your leg off or
something. You can't even count on your own parts. You don't know how many copies of your chromosomes
you're going to have. You don't know what the size of your cells are going to be. You don't know how
many cells you're going to have. You have to come in and on the fly, you have to take this journey
in anatomical space, and you can't overtrain on your evolutionary priors. You cannot assume any of
the things that were true in evolution going back. Not just about the environment, but about
yourself. So a very long story, very short. We've been studying how all these things work, and what
we basically found out is that the capacities of brains and nervous systems for dealing with novelty,
for intelligence, for navigation, for keeping memories and pursuing goals and all of that,
those capacities are actually incredibly ancient. They're driven by a kind of
electrophysiological software that is produced in the brain by these little ion channels
that set voltages, and these voltages can propagate through the network, and you get
this electrical activity that you can imagine going on in the brain. But that mechanism is
extremely ancient. It's not really specific to brains at all. Evolution discovered it about
the time of bacterial biofilm, so very long ago. And all cells have these ion channels,
most cells have these electrical synapses. Your whole body is a giant electrical network
that has many of the capacities that your brain has, but it does them slower. So if you take almost
any neuroscience paper, and you just do a find, replace, and in fact, we made an AI system to
do just this for people, it basically flips some words around, you know, if instead of neuron,
you say cell, and instead of millisecond, you say hour, you basically get a pretty reasonable
developmental biology paper about how, whereas your brain thinks about moving you in three
dimensional and now linguistic space, the rest of your body has been thinking about how to move
you through anatomical space from being an egg to being, you know, whatever, whatever we become.
So I just want to show you a small piece of what happens when we understand something like this.
This is, this, these electrical networks are literally the cognitive medium of the
collective intelligence of your body cells, whereas you are the product of the collective
intelligence of your neurons, your body is the product of the collective intelligence of the
rest of your cells behaving in anatomical space. And when we learn this interface,
this bioelectrical interface, we get access to an API that's very, very powerful. Here's one
example. And by the way, just to say none of this has to do with applied electric fields,
there are no electrodes, no magnets, no waves or frequencies or anything like that. We're hacking
the natural interface that cells use to shape each other's behavior, which is the set of ion
channels and gap junctions on their surface. And so, so we can, we can, for example, insert
some, some potassium channel proteins here to create a particular voltage pattern. And that
voltage pattern is a signal to these cells. And what these cells will do is build an eye. This
is not like the eye I showed you before, that was a transplant. This is not like that. We have said
to these cells, which normally make a gut, we've said, here's a particular voltage pattern. It's,
it happens to be the same pattern that they normally use to make an eye. And the cells see it,
and they build an eye. Okay. And these eyes, if you section them, have the same lens, retina,
optic nerve, all this stuff. Now notice a couple of interesting things. First of all,
like any good subroutine call, we did not have to give it all the information on how to build an
eye. In fact, we don't have any idea of how to build an eye. We don't know how to talk to all the
stem cells, all the genes that are there that have to be turned on eyes very complex. And we don't
want to, we want a high level stimulus that prompts the cells to do what they already know
how to do. So that's the first thing. The second thing is, here, this is, this is a lens sitting
out in the flank of a tadpole somewhere. The blue cells are the ones that we actually injected
with our ion channel, but there's not enough of them to make an eye. And so what they've done is
they've recruited all these other normal cells to participate with them to be an eye. And in fact,
we've studied, there's a conversation that happens, these blue cells acquire a new belief. They believe
that they should be an eye and they tell all the other cells, hey, you should be working with us
to make an eye. These other cells, actually, what are they saying? They're saying, no, we should be
skin or gut or whatever. And so they have this back and forth conversation. And sometimes these guys
win and you get an eye. And sometimes the rest of the cells win and they ignore us and stay whatever
tissue they're supposed to be. There are other collective intelligences like ants that do this
when, you know, two ants or a couple of ants discover something that it's too big for them to
carry by themselves. They recruit their neighbors. So all these competencies, you know, this ability
to hold a goal in anatomical space to try to convince others of your goal to get buy into your
story about what should happen and sometimes you win and sometimes you lose that battle. All of these
are native competencies of the tissue. We didn't have to build in any of that. It's already there.
And in the plan area, I told you that they regenerate. And if you cut off the head and the tail,
this middle piece will reliably regenerate this normal worm with the right number of heads.
Here's the bioelectric pattern memory. This is now, we're literally seeing the memories.
Think of it as a brain scan, except not in the brain. We're literally seeing the
representations in this tissue of how many heads a normal planarian should have. So we can go ahead
and change them. We have the technology instead of one head, we can say, no, you should have two
heads. And here's a perfectly normal animal whose tissues, not the animal itself, not the brain,
but the tissues have been incepted with a new memory that says that if you should get cut in
the future, so this is a counterfactual. It's not true now, but if you get cut in the future,
a proper worm should have two heads. And so if you cut that worm, this is what you get. And
again, not Photoshop. These are real. So a single worm body, a perfectly normal and anatomically
normal worm body can store at least two different ideas of what it will do in the future if it
should happen to get injured. And the reason I call this a pattern memory, it's a memory of the
collective intelligence of the body. The reason I call it a memory is because if you then go ahead
and you cut these two headed worms in perpetuity, they maintain two headedness with no more change.
And so this has all the properties of memory. It's stable, but it's rewritable. By the way,
not genetic. We haven't touched the genetics. The genetics are completely untouched. So the
question of where is the anatomy of this, the answer, the genome is not really the right answer.
Yes, the genome encodes hardware that by default will say one head, but that hardware is reprogrammable
and here you can have these nice, you can push it into this other state. And by the way, you could
push it into a state belonging to other species. So this nice triangular headed planarian can make
flat heads like a Pifolina, round heads like an S Mediterranean. This hardware, again, with no genetic
change, this is just by altering the bioelectrical patterns that serve as the memory here. They
will visit these other attractors in the anatomical state space where these other creatures normally
live about 100 to 150 million years of evolutionary distance. But that's okay. This hardware can
visit there if pushed. And of course, not just the shape of the head, but actually the shape of
the brain, the distribution of stem cells are all the same like these other species. So what we're
seeing here is the, first of all, the hardware, software distinction in biology, the reprogrammability
of biology, the API, once you understand how the cognitive glue works that binds individual cells
into a more global vision of what they should be doing, now you can start communicating with it,
rewriting goals, and really collaborating with the material. This is, you know, I do a whole
other talk on engineering with agential materials. This is not metal and Legos. This is an
agential material. You're a collaborator with that material. You're not micromanaging it.
So let's think about where these cells come from. So here's a blaster term. Let's say it's,
you know, 10 or 50,000 cells in the beginning. We look at that and we say, oh, that's one embryo.
What are we counting when we say that's one embryo? What is there really one of?
But what we're really counting is stories. We're counting how many different stories there are
in this tissue that the cells are committed to as far as where they're going to go in anatomical
space. We're counting commitment and they're aligned. All of these, under normal circumstances,
all of these cells are aligned there. They've bought into one single story and this is what
they're going to build. That's what we mean when we say there's one embryo. You might ask a similar
question in the brain. If I showed you a human brain and you didn't know what a human was, you
could ask, so how many individual cells fit here? Like, what's the density of cells per, you know,
per unit volume of this medium? And computers, we kind of have some idea of how much information
fits into a certain number of transistors or whatnot. But here we actually don't know.
And the amazing thing is that if you take this early embryonic blaster and use a needle to scratch,
put some scratches into it, and I used to do this in duck embryos when I was a grad student,
what happens is that each of these little islands doesn't feel the presence of the others
for a while until it heals up. And so it goes and self-organizes an embryo. And then you get conjoined
twins like this. You can get triplets. You can get all sorts of things. And so a couple of interesting
things here. First of all, the number of individuals that come out of this excitable medium is not
known in advance. It's certainly not determined by the genetics. It could be zero, one, probably up to
half a dozen. So how many cells, how many individuals are really in there? Well, you don't know until
they self-organize. And that process of self-organization is critical. One of the things they
have to do is determine boundaries. Where do I end and the outside world begins? Or in this case,
some other embryo begins. Actually, some of the cells at this intersection are a little confused.
That's why in conjoined twins, one of the twins will often have a laterality defect.
We actually figured out why in the 96 for the first time. Why conjoined twins tend to have a
laterality of flipping in one of the twins? It's because these cells can't quite tell,
am I the right side of this guy or am I the left side of this guy? But overall,
they have to establish their boundaries. And the analogy to the brain is actually still apropos
because we have lots of examples of split brain patients, dissociative identity disorders,
all of these kinds of things where it's entirely not obvious that our brain is host to just one
coherent self. And so one way that I've been working on to start thinking about how to
understand beings, goal-directed beings in very different embodiments is to put aside the question
of what you're made of or whether you were engineered or evolved and really just to ask
about the size of your goals. What's the largest goal you're capable of pursuing? And so that gives
rise to this idea of a cognitive light cone. It's kind of like a Minkowski cone except a little
bit upside down. And so if you collapse a space onto this axis and time onto this axis, you can
see that different kinds of creatures can have different scopes to the goals that they can
conceive of. I mean, humans actually may be uniquely, their cognitive light cone is bigger
than their own lifespan. And that may provide some for some interesting psychological pressures.
If you're a goldfish, you may have some goals 20 minutes into the future,
but those goals are probably pretty achievable. It's very likely that you will live for the
next 20 minutes. So all your goals are achievable. For many humans, they know their goals are
guaranteed not achievable because they can see and commit to goals that are bigger than their
known lifespan. So for now anyway, this is something that makes humans kind of unique.
And then of course, we are all compound bodies of lots of little subunits that have their own
goals in various spaces that compete, cooperate, and interact with each other. Now, this kind of
this crazy way of thinking about things as this cognitive light cone has clinical implications.
And I like this not just because I want to make advances in biomedicine, but also because this
is how we know that some of this philosophizing is actually on the right track. So this
is the tiny cognitive light cone of a single cell. All it really cares about is the state's
locally here. But what evolution did is scale it up via mechanisms that I haven't really had time
to talk about, but bioelectricity is one of them. It's now the cognitive light cone is huge. It's
the size of this whole limb. All of these cells, they're not pursuing their own local agendas,
they're pursuing this triangle. But that has a failure mode. And that failure mode is cancer.
So once individual cells disconnect from the network, they roll back to their unicellular
cells. They can't conceive of these grandiose goals anymore. All they can remember is proliferate
as much as you can and eat as much as you can and go wherever life is good. And this is a human
glioblastoma. That's cancer. And so one of the things you might do then is on this weird way
of looking at things is instead of targeting the genes or being worried about genetic
defects or trying to kill these cells with toxic chemotherapy, you might say, well,
what if we just forcibly reconnect them to the rest of the organism? So here's a tadpole injected
with a human oncogene. And the bioelectric imaging already tells you, yeah, here's the first thing
that happens when these cells transform is they disconnect electrically from the rest of the
body. They acquire this aberrant voltage pattern. And if we co-inject an ion channel, it doesn't
kill the cells. In fact, you can see here, the red is the oncoprotein. It's very strong. In fact,
it's all over the place. This is the same animal. There's no tumor because even though the hardware
of these guys is a little screwy because they've got this oncoprotein, they're being forced
informationally to be part of this continuum. And that causes them to be part of a collective
intelligence that just builds nice organs. Now, again, we're able to do all this, make eyes and
normalize tumors and induce like regeneration in animals that don't regenerate and so on.
Not because we're so smart or we're doing some kind of crazy synthetic biology. All we're doing
is hacking the native competency of the tissue. And by the way, oh, and one other thing I wanted
to say is that these cancer cells are not more selfish than normal cells. There's a lot of game
theory that models cancer is being more selfish. I don't think they're more selfish. I think they
have smaller selves. So you can be as selfish as you want as long as your cognitive light cone
is large enough to encompass many possibly all beings and then it's fine.
And so there's this issue and this is something that Bill and our other collaborators are actually
working on this notion of increasing the cone of compassion outwards. So the interesting thing
about us engineering all this is that we are not the only bioengineers. This is another,
this is a non human bioengineer. And look, this is a this is an oak leaf. And you might think that
well, acorns always make oak trees and these leaves, we know what the oak genome does, right?
It makes these flat green things. But but here comes this bioengineer doesn't change the genome,
the hardware is perfectly capable. You don't need to rewire it. I don't have to explain to this crowd
why, you know, you don't use a soldering iron when you want to go from PowerPoint to Microsoft
Word on your laptop. This this this this animal takes advantage of exactly that,
which is that it lays down some signals that prompt the cells to build something completely
different. This is made of the of the plant cells, not the not the not the animal. Would we have any
idea that these cells are capable of building something like this or like this, right? If we
hadn't done this, we would not. And so for that reason, in our lab, we make a number of synthetic
creatures to really test the plasticity, the the the ability of these of the hardware to undergo
novel novel scenarios. And this is we call these xenobots, because what what happens here is that
some some skin cells are harvested from the top of a frog embryo. They self assemble into this
little thing, which I think is a biorebotics platform. And we are interested in knowing where
their goals come from. So here you can see they swim. They can go in circles, they can patrol back
and forth, they have collective behaviors. Here's one going through through a maze. So it comes down
this this arm of the maze over here, it's going to take a turn without bumping into the opposite
wall. So it takes a turn. And at this point, due to some internal mech, who knows why it turns around
and goes back where it came where it came from. Remember, this is just skin. Okay, there's no
there's no nervous system. There's nothing in there. One amazing thing they do is kinematic
replication. So if you provide them with loose skin cells, they will run around and combine them
into these little these little piles and work them and polish them. And because they're working
with an agential material, for the same reason we were able to do this, not because we know how to
how to change the way these cells behave, but we liberated them into a new context. And these
little piles mature into the next generation of xenobots. And guess what they do? They run around
and they make the next generation and the next. This is basically von Neumann's dream of a robot
that makes copies of itself from materials it finds in the environment. And so if you ask,
what does a frog genome know? Well, it certainly knows how to do this how to make this developmental
the hardware that goes through this developmental sequence, and, and then has these these kind
of behaviors, there's some tadpoles. But apparently, it also can do this. And the amazing thing is that
there's never been any xenobots, there's never been any evolutionary pressure to be a good xenobot,
where did all this come from? Why is there this weird developmental stage of this xenobot? This is
an 80 year old, 80 day old xenobot, it's changing into something, we have no idea what, they have
their own behaviors, they do this kinematic replication that no one else, as far as we know,
no other organism does. So, so this is really the thing when you make, or when you facilitate
novel collective intelligences that have never been here before. And that includes financial
structures, social structures, internet of things, who knows, we make these things all the time.
We really don't know where, where their goals come from, what their goals are going to be,
what their capacity for problem solving is going to be, we need to understand.
And lest you think that this is some special, I mean, these these cells come from an amphibian,
they come from an embryo, you might think amphibians are plastic, embryos are pretty
plastic, this is probably some some crazy embryonic cell thing. Well, here is this little creature,
if I asked you what you thought this was, you might think we got it off the bottom of a pond
somewhere. If you were to sequence its genome, you would see 100% Homo sapiens. This is, these
are human cells, they come from an adult human patient, no embryo stuff, adult human tracheal
epithelial cells, they make something we call anthrobots. We, this is a type of agential intervention,
because these anthrobots, remarkably, we found a novel capability. The capability is, and I'm
sure there are many others, is just the first thing we found, is that if you played a bunch of
human neurons and you scratch them, so you make a wound right here, these anthrobots will traverse
down the wound. And when they settle down, what they'll do is they start knitting the two sides
together, they heal this this this neural defect. And so who would have known that your tracheal
cells, which sit there quietly in your airway for decades, if you take them out and you let them
have a new life, reboot their multicellularity, have a new life in the new environment,
they become this little motile creature that can run around, by the way, can be injected back into
your body. There's no immune suppression needed because it's your own cells. It shares all the
priors with your own tissues about what health and disease are, what cancer is, what inflammation is.
And among other things, what they can do is they can actually repair neural defects.
And so, so that's just kind of the biomedical side of things, but, but more fundamentally,
and I'm just about done, I know I'm over time a couple minutes.
Just fundamentally, what we see is that what I think these are, and this is not a,
this is not the conventional, you know, view of my colleagues, I don't think, but, but what I think
we're looking at in all of these examples is vehicles for exploring a platonic space or a
latent space of possibilities. When we ask where do the shape and behavior of xenobots,
of anthrobots, of other chimeras, and of the weird things that we make, where do they come from?
Well, evolutionary selection is not where they come from. And I think that what normal embryos do
is exploit a little pinprick, a one single point of interface between this platonic space and the
physical world, and you get your standard reliable body. But, but what we can do is we can start to
enlarge these little holes by making anthrobots and xenobots and other things. We can start making
holes and, and looking around and starting to understand the structure of that space. What
else is out there? I, I really think that what we're studying here is, is the structure of this,
of this space that's around us and still very poorly understood. So just, just a couple things
to, to finish up here. First of all, here's what I think the biology teaches us. Everything is going
to change. Your body is going to change, your parts, the environment, everything is going to change.
It's futile to try to hold on to specific details. And in particular, biology uses an extremely
unreliable material. Everything is within, within a cell is going to go bad. There's, there's huge
amounts of noise. It's, it's exactly the opposite of what we do in computers, where we make very
reliable parts and we try to insulate each level from the level below. You don't, you know, you,
you just sort of assume the level below is going to work. And then, and then that's how we program.
That is the opposite of what biology does. Biology assumes the material is going to go
wrong in a million ways. Whether you're a genome, whether you're, you're a genome that has to be
reinterpreted by the species as it changes, you know, your parts are going to change. You're going
to be mutated and your environment will change. You have to reinterpret it. Brains do the same
as they change over time. They reinterpret their memories. Intelligence is everywhere.
That's because the only way to do this kind of, this kind of thing, this committing to salience
as opposed to accuracy means that intelligence has to be everywhere. Every part of the body has
to be able to reinterpret, confabulate, tell stories, new stories about what it saw and,
and what information it has to solve whatever the, the new problems are. This is polycomputing,
which, which Josh Barnagar and I work out, work on the idea that biology has is, is just a
huge collection of systems which interpret and reinterpret each other's computations in different
ways. The exact same computation means different things to different observers. So it's an observer
focused view. You can't say, what is it really computing? And from that perspective, each self
is a, is a dynamic construction. It's an ongoing process of sense making of your own memories and
the environment and it's self reinforcing. These are, these are, these are basically
points of view. These are self reinforcing, continuously modifying points of view that seek
to perpetuate themselves by making sense of whatever's going on now. And this is, this is a
very deep idea from William James where he said, thoughts are the thinkers. If we sort of dissolve
the idea of the distinction between data and machine, right? And we, and we think that the
pattern itself is actually helping construct its niche. So it's constructing the cognitive system
within which it will prosper. Then, then all of us are really very complex bundles of, of thoughts
that have sort of closed the loop and learn to contribute to their own persistence within various
physical cognitive systems. And because biology is so interoperable, because biology solves all
of this on the fly, it doesn't, doesn't assume anything. Pretty much any combination of evolved
material, designed or engineered material and software is some kind of viable agent. So we
already have some cyborgs and we're going to have lots more in there, hybrids and chimeres and
all kinds of just different bodies and minds where all of Darwin's endless forms, most beautiful
on earth are a tiny little dot in this enormous option space of new bodies and new minds. So,
so these, so the need now for a new ethical synthbiosis is clear. This, this old idea that we
can decide how we're going to relate to something based on what does it look like and how did it
get here? Did it come from a factory or was it naturally evolved by the random processes of
evolution? Those two criteria are going to be out the window. We're going to have to deal with
beings that are nowhere on the tree of life with us that don't offer us easy answers the way that
for example, current AIs do when, you know, you can, you can kind of distinguish them
strongly from, from biology, but, but boy, we're going to be surrounded by, by beings that are
composites and none of those answers will be so, so trivial. And this is Jeremy Gay. He's an amazing
graphic artist who drew this for me. This is kind of a new version of Adam and the, and the Garden
of Eden because we've got our job cut out for us, but it's, it's going to be an amazing journey
because we are finally going to, I hope, get better at detecting and, and relating to very
diverse minds all around us. So I'm going to stop here. If you're interested in any of this stuff,
it's discussed in various papers here. These are the people I want to thank, a number of postdocs
and PhD students that did the work that I showed you today. Lots of our collaborators. These are
the, the people who fund us on disclosures. So these are three spin-off companies for my group
that have funded our work and most thanks of all to the actual animals that we deal with.
So yeah, that's it. Thank you so much for listening.
