So thanks everybody for being here and letting me share some some ideas with you. If anybody's
interested in the details of it, you can track them down at this website. Here's all the papers,
the software, the data sets, everything. Here is where I put some more speculative kinds of things
where I talk about what I think the papers mean and so on. So you're welcome to welcome to check
them out. What I'm going to talk to you about today is kind of a weird topic. I'm going to talk about
a little bit about AI and the right way to understand AI through the lens of collective
intelligence. In other words, we're going to take a kind of a deep dive into where minds come from
so that we can actually talk about this notion of whether artificial minds have the same status as
biologically evolved ones and so on. And so we're going to look at those kind of questions.
So the main points of today, what I'd like to do is this. We're going to look under the hood
of biology a little bit to kind of clear out some viewpoints and some terminology that's
persisted with us for centuries, basically, but I think are going to have to change and this idea
of discrete natural kinds in biology. So we'll talk about that. We'll talk about diverse intelligence
in particular collective intelligence. So very kind of unconventional minds and unconventional
cognitive systems. And I'm going to argue that all the things that people argue about today in
terms of artificial intelligence are basically kind of an off ramp to a much deeper, more difficult
discussion about the really deep philosophical questions about what we are, what about freedom
of embodiment and things like that. It's actually much more, it's a much more complicated set of
questions than just to focus on kind of today's AIs. And so we'll talk a little bit at the end
about the ethics and the future of humanity and things like that. So let's start with this.
This is a well-known painting. It's called Adam Names the Animals in the Garden of Eden.
Here he is. So this is the old Judeo-Christian story where animals are showing up and Adam
gets to name them. Now, something important about that story is that actually it was on Adam
to name the animals. God couldn't do it. The angels couldn't do it. Adam was the one that
had to name them. I think that's a very interesting part of that story. And I think for us it has
two lessons. One that we're going to have to break, I think, as the future moves on. And the other
one that's actually very deep and that we're going to have to dive into. The part that has to be
given up is this notion that all of these species are discrete. They're natural kinds. Everybody
knows what each of these are. They're separate from the others. In fact, Adam is also a discrete
entity and completely different from all of the others. And this idea that you can sort of
number and categorize very, very specific types of beings. And that's what they're,
you can sort of count the animals in your environment. As you'll see in a minute,
I think that idea has to go. But what's deep is this notion that Adam, because he is the one
that has to live with him, he is the one that has to give them names. Now, in these old traditions,
giving something a name was very deep and spiritual. It meant that you've discovered
their true nature. Knowing the name of something means you know their true nature. And as I'm
going to show you at the end of this talk, because of synthetic biology and bioengineering and some
other disciplines, we are going to have to name or discover the true nature of all kinds of unusual
creatures that you guys will all be living with in your lifetime. So let's start there. Here's
the part that has to break. So here's a normal modern human. Lots of philosophy talks about the
human mind that does this and that and humans have responsibilities and rights and all the
interesting things. But we know that now, because of evolution and also because of developmental
biology, that this is not a sharp category. In other words, if you just track backwards in time,
these modern humans are at a particular point in the evolution of a lineage that goes all the
way back to single cell organisms. So if you have something to say about humans, you might ask yourself,
well, what about the humans of a couple of hundred thousand years ago? What about the hominids of a
couple million years ago? What about them? And just understand that all these changes are slow
and gradual. And the same thing about development. Whatever you think is true of humans with their
true hopes and dreams and cognitive responsibilities and so on. At one point, they were a single cell
and this process is again very slow and gradual. And so we know now that there's this continuum,
right? It's not just a discreet human, but actually a whole continuum of forms that you might have
to decide what is the status of these other forms. Not only that, but there's this other continuum
going horizontal here in my diagram, where we know that humans are going to be modified and
improved. So for various health applications, but also for augmentation technologies,
there's no particular reason why anybody is going to want to be stuck in the body that random vagaries
of evolution left them with. So, you know, I don't think anybody really thinks that a mature,
modern humanity, you know, a hundred years from now is going to be susceptible to the same dumb
diseases, lower back pain, astigmatism, viruses. You know, presumably all that is going to get
fixed. There's nothing magic about where evolution happened to have dropped us. And so there are
technological modifications. There are biological modifications that will be made. And that's because
at every level of organization in our bodies from subcellular materials all the way up,
you can introduce different kinds of novel engineered components. And so all of this is
now possible. And again, if you have thoughts about what a human is versus what a machine is,
you have to ask yourself, how are you going to distinguish this when you are confronted with
all sorts of beings along this continuum? You know, you're going to need to find ways to relate to
them. And so one of the things that I've been working on for some years now is a framework to
be able to recognize, to create, and to ethically relate to truly diverse intelligences that we
can have relationships with regardless of their composition, meaning what they're made of,
or their origin story, where they evolved, did they come out of a factory or some combination of
those. And that means that we need to think about all of these things. So familiar kinds of creatures
like primates and birds and maybe an octopus and so on. But also all kinds of weird organisms
like colonial organisms, swarms, synthetic engineered new life forms, artificial intelligence
is whether robotic, meaning embodied or pure software AI, and maybe even someday aliens,
right, there's probably some sort of exobiological life form out there somewhere with that at some
point we'll confront. Now, we need to be able to think about all of these in the same way,
regardless of where they came from or what they're made of. Now, I'm not the first person to try for
this. So here's Rosenbluth, Wiener and Bigelow in 1943, trying for this scale all the way from
passive matter. So, you know, rocks and sand and things like that, all the way up to different
kinds of active matter, and then various kinds of computational matter, and agential materials,
which is what I'm going to be talking about today, all the way up to some sort of human
metacognition, you know, complex, complex human kinds of minds and beyond. And the goal of this
kind of framework is not just it's not philosophy. The goal is to first of all, move experimental
work forward. So, part of my framework is a very strong insistence that when you look at something
and you say that's not real cognition or that, you know, that is real, you know, this thing really
does have intelligence. The goal of this is not just to have philosophical feelings about it,
it's to have a toolkit for interacting with these systems that is beneficial, that gives us new,
brings new discoveries, new capabilities, biomedicine, engineering, and so on. And also puts
ethics on a better footing, because these old categories that we've had for a really long time
for how we deal with other beings are really not going to be of use anymore, and the details are
all here if you want to follow that. So, a basic fact from developmental biology is that we all
make this amazing journey from what people call just physics. I really don't like that phrase,
but people use it. So, just physics to a complex mind. So, each of us started life here as a single
cell, a little blob of chemicals, and slowly and gradually it became something like this, or even
something like this. So, you know, a complex metacognitive being who's going to say things about
not being a machine and so on. This process is gradual. You need to understand developmental
biology gives us no magic bright line at which point, boom, you know, you were just chemistry
and physics, but bang, there, there, that this is where the mind appears. There isn't anything
like that. It's a very slow and gradual process. And so, what that means is that scientists and
philosophers need to develop a story of scaling. We need to understand how the properties of this
thing, which follows the laws of chemistry and physics, ends up being something that's also
describable by the laws of psychology and psychoanalysis and things like that.
The reason that this is possible is because we are all made of an agential material, unlike legos
and wood and metal and things like that, that basically just stay where you put them. We are
made of a material with agendas. And so, this is the kind of thing we're made of. This is a single
cell, okay? This happens to be a free-living organism called a lacrimaria. You can see that
it's extremely competent in its local unicellular goals. So, there's no brain, there's no nervous
system, there are no stem cells. But this thing is doing everything it needs to maintain its
physiological, its metabolic, and behavioral goals. So, the first kind of shocking thing to
some people that you need to realize is that we are all made of this interesting kind of
stuff that has its own agendas. I don't have time to tell you about it today, but the reality is
these things, ourselves, can learn. They can actually have pretty complex problem-solving
capacities in different kinds of environments. And so, we are a very interesting construction of a
very unusual type of material with which we are just now starting to learn how to engineer.
But at least, you might think, at least we are a true unified intelligence, right? So,
maybe you can call an ant colony some kind of collective intelligence, but we have a brain
where we feel like a single unified being. So, at least we are a true unified intelligence.
And in fact, René Descartes really liked the pineal gland because there's only one of them
in the brain. And he thought that that's where the human experience was centralized because
there's no multiple aspects of it, there's just one in the brain. But if he had had access to a
microscope, he would have discovered that inside this pineal gland is all this stuff, it's a bunch
of cells, and inside of each of those cells is all this stuff, okay? There isn't one of anything
in the brain, and all of us are collective intelligences. We are all made of parts that do
things. And the real trick here, again, is that scaling story is to tell a convincing,
to give a convincing account of how it is that all these parts give rise to something that is a
centralized, that has the feeling of being a centralized unified self. And so, this is what
my group works on. Now, it's interesting that Alan Turing, who is basically the father of
modern computer science, he was very interested in machine intelligence and in computation and
programmability and things like this. And so, everybody knows that part. But one weird thing
is that he also published this paper called The Chemical Basis of Morphogenesis, which was
basically an attempt to understand how the chemicals of an embryo organize into order
from their initial disorder. Now, you might wonder why would a guy who's interested in
computation and intelligence and machine minds and things like that, why would he be studying
the chemicals in an embryo? And I think that, although he didn't write about it,
I think that Turing saw a very profound truth, which is that the process by which bodies come
to be in this physical universe, by which your body was self-organized from a bunch of chemicals
in the other side, is very closely related in a profound way to the question of where minds come
from. So, the origin of the self-assembly of your mind and of your body are very related stories,
even though they're treated by completely different communities. So, neuroscience and the
behavioral sciences versus developmental biology, molecular biology, cell biology, typically those
folks do not think they're studying the same thing. And I think they're studying exactly the
same thing just in different components. So, to look a little further into where we come from.
So, this is an embryonic blastoderm. So, that's basically a flat sheet of cells. So, in the
beginning, what will happen is that the egg will get fertilized, it will divide, and then eventually
flatten out and give rise to, at least in amniotes like us, it will give rise to a
flat sheet of cells. So, you can think about like a little disk or something like that. That's just
a couple cell layers thick. And so, here's your disk. And so, let's just imagine there's about
50,000 cells at this point in this disk. And we look at it and we say, ah, there's an embryo,
maybe a human embryo or a mouse embryo or something. Actually, mice have a different
structure than this. They're kind of weird, but let's say rabbit. So, human or rabbit or some other
amniotes. You look at that and you say, there's one embryo, but there's 50,000 cells. What are you
actually counting when you say there's one embryo? Well, what you're counting is,
you're really counting alignment. You're counting the fact that all of those cells
are committed to the same story of what they're going to do in anatomical space. They're all
going to collaborate to build a very particular kind of embryo. They are all connected together
and they are all going to cooperate to do one specific thing, which is to build that.
That's what makes this an embryo. What makes this an embryo is that all of these cells are
committed to the same plan. That doesn't have to be the case. And so, this is some work that was
first done in the 40s. I did it again when I was a grad student in the 96 or so. When you take a
duck embryo and you use a little needle to scratch some scratches into it like that, what you'll see
is these little islands here for the next few hours before they rejoin again, each of these
islands doesn't realize the other one is there. So, what they do is they self-organize a new
embryo. Each one of them thinks they're the only one, so they make an embryo. And when they do
heal up, you end up with this kind of conjoined twin or triplet. You end up with a few individual
animals coming out of the same blastoderm. So, the question of how many beings, how many cells
are actually in an embryo is tricky. It's not fixed by the genetics. It's anywhere from zero to
probably half a dozen or more depending on what happens. The cells arise in this medium, this
cellular blastoderm in real time as a process of physiology. It's not hard-coded. And what that
means is that a self has to put itself together. It has to figure out a border between itself
and the outside world. So, here's three embryonic fields sitting there. Each of these cells has
to decide, am I part of this one, or am I part of that one, or who am I part of? And this kind of
thing, this medium that can fragment or come together to form some number of coherent individuals
is not just for development. This happens in the brain as well. So, we have split brain patients
that have a cut between their two hemispheres that actually end up having, you then find out that
they have actually, in an important sense, there are two individuals in there that have different
opinions and so on. You can have lots of dissociative identity disorders and various other phenomena
that make it clear that it's not so simple as the brain has one cognitive owner and the body
has one embryo. It's actually not that simple. And you learn about this when you think about
something like this. So, here's a rat. You train the rat to press the lever and get a delicious
reward. But the thing is that there are cells in this rat that interact with the lever. There are
cells in this gut that get the sugar, but there is no single cell that has both experiences. So,
who is it that owns this associative memory, the fact that the pellet is associated with pressing
the lever? Who owns that? Well, the owner of that memory is not any individual cell. It's the entire
rat. It has to be because no cell has that experience. And there's a kind of cognitive
glue that operates in this rat, which we know as the nervous system, which allows the rat to know
things the individual cells don't know, such as that these two facts are connected. So, that cognitive
glue is a very interesting thing. We're going to study that more of that momentarily. But I want
to be clear that these animals that you typically hear about are not the only game in town as far
as some very interesting aspects of what the biology is trying to tell you. I'm going to show
you a couple of these examples just to sort of expand our horizons about what we need to understand.
So, here's a caterpillar. This caterpillar lives in a two-dimensional world. It's a soft-bodied
creature. It has a controller, a specific brain that's very well suited for driving this kind of
soft body around. But it needs to turn into this. This is a flying kind of creature with hard elements
and the brain basically, during this metamorphosis process, when the caterpillar turns into the
butterfly, what happens is that the brain is pretty much dissolved. So, most of the connections are
broken. Most of the cells are killed off. Huge refactoring, remodeling, new cells, new brain
is built, quite different, and there's your butterfly. So, that already is kind of amazing.
And you can imagine the sort of philosophical question of what's it like? Never mind what's it
like to be a caterpillar. What's it like to be a caterpillar changing into a butterfly in real
time? Not just on an evolutionary timescale, but in your lifetime drastically. Never mind
puberty. This is a major change. So, that's the first thing. But the second thing is that
it turns out that memories persist through this process. So, a caterpillar that learns
something will still remember it as a butterfly. So, that's amazing. How do memories persist when
the brain is basically getting radically refactored? But it's even more than that because, let's say,
what they did was to train caterpillars to look for leaves at a particular color disc.
That kind of information is completely useless to the butterfly because, first of all, the
butterfly doesn't crawl. It flies. And also, it doesn't eat leaves. So, this process has to be
not just the storage of memory. It has to actively remap from what's important to the
caterpillar to what's important to the butterfly. It has to generalize from the concept of leaves
to the concept of food and from specific crawling motions that you might think is what this
simple animal is remembering to something much more complex, a navigational process that will
actually be implemented by flying here, by completely different muscles and a different
architecture. So, this radical process of change, and you might think about what happens to the
individual identity of this organism and what it would be like if the caterpillar knew what was
coming and said, well, you're going to change radically, but don't worry, you'll still have
some of your memories. It's just your priorities will be different. You love leaves now, but you're
not going to care about leaves at all later and you'll want this weird nectar. What is that like?
And we'll come back to this at the end of the talk. How would you convince a creature like this
that this is a perfectly fine thing for them to go through and are they still here? Is this organism
actually still here by the time you get to this stage? And the reason this is important for us
is because humanity is going to change in a way that's somewhat reminiscent of this.
So, that's one kind of example. Another example are these. These are amazing creatures called
planaria, they're flatworms, and when you train them to expect food on these little bumpy circles,
they will remember, and if you cut off their heads with their brain, the tail will sit there
doing nothing. Eventually, the tail will regrow a brand new head, so they regenerate, every piece
will regenerate, and eventually, when they regenerate, you find that they still remember
the original information. So, the memory, not only does this tell you that the memory can be
stored outside the brain, but also that it can be imprinted onto a new brain as the brain develops,
so the movement of memories through tissues. So, all of this is possible because we have this
amazing multi-scale competency architecture. At every scale in your body, from the molecular
networks to the organs and tissues and even groups, these different layers are not just
biological scales, but actually, they have the ability to solve problems. In other words,
they have competencies in different spaces. In the space of possible gene expressions and
physiological states and anatomical layouts, all of these things have the ability to solve problems.
I don't have time to show you a whole bunch of examples today, but there are some amazing
examples of these things solving various problems. Now, the thing to keep in mind is that we humans
are pretty terrible at detecting intelligence. I mean, we do okay with middle-sized objects
moving at medium speeds in three-dimensional space, crows and birds and maybe a dolphin
or something like that. We can kind of recognize those as intelligence, but there
are other spaces in which complex creatures navigate and spend effort and try to achieve
goals and so on. There are gene expression spaces and physiological spaces. I want to focus today
on what's known as anatomical morpho space. It's just basically a multi-dimensional space
of all the different shapes that any structure can have. So, in this particular case, here's a
planarian head and it can have different shapes, and these different shapes correspond to the
different settings of these two control knobs, and so you have this two-dimensional space that
shows you where all the different planarian shapes are. The actuality is for complex organisms,
very high-dimensional space. What I want to look at is, I've told you that we're all made of cells,
that these cells underlie the emergence or the self-assembly of a unified self, both of
them, cognitively and morphologically, and I want to look at how that works.
So, here we are. We start life as a collection of embryonic cells. This is a cross-section
through a human torso. So, just imagine where does this incredible order come from, the structure.
Everything is in the right place, the right shape, the right size, next to the right thing.
Where does this order come from? And at that point, even, I mean, I've given the version of this talk
to middle schoolers, and even nine-year-olds will immediately say, well, it's in the genome.
We know where it is. It's in the human genome. But, of course, we can read genomes now, and we know
that that isn't what the genome specifies at all. The genome talks about proteins. The genome
specifies the tiny molecular hardware that every cell gets to have. This isn't directly in the genome
anymore than the structure of a termite nest or the shape of a spider web is in the genome of
those species. All of this is the outcome of physiology and behavior. It's the outcome of
these cells doing their thing with the hardware that they've been given by their genetics.
So, if the DNA specifies the hardware, how do these cells actually know what to build?
How do they know when to stop? If we want to convince them to repair something that's been
damaged, how do we communicate that to them? And as engineers, we can ask, actually, what
else is possible? What else can we convince them to build? Same exact hardware, but what more could
they build? So, I want to give you a couple of examples of the amazing nature of this process,
because, see, when you look at this, you might think that, well, the biggest thing this thing
has going for it is reliability, that basically it happens the same every single time. And that's
true. Reliability is amazing here, but I want to show you that it's actually much more than that.
What you're looking at here is the cross-section of a little tubule leading to the kidneys of a
psalmander. And normally, there's about eight to 10 of these cells that work together, and they
form this little structure with a space in the middle. You can do this weird trick where you
cause multiple copies of the genetic material to build up in the very early embryo. And so,
when that happens, you still get a normal animal, and it's normal size, but the cells are bigger.
And when you take a cross-section, you find out that, well, the cells are bigger, and so now,
fewer of them created the same kind of lumen. So, let's see where we are so far.
Multiple copies of your chromosome, no problem. Weird cell size, no problem, because you'll scale
it to the number of cells. And most of all, if you make truly gigantic cells, and you do these,
these are, I think, 5N or 6N polyploid newts, when you do this, one single cell bends around itself
to give you the exact same kind of structure. Now, that's remarkable because this is a different
molecular mechanism. This is cell-to-cell communication. This is some sort of cytoskeletal
bending. And so, what this means is that in the service of a particular high-level anatomical
structure, these cells can call on different molecular mechanisms to solve their problem.
Okay? So, they're using different tools in their toolkit to get to where they're going.
That is a very good definition of intelligence, to reuse the affordances you have in the service
of a goal when things change. So, when you're a salamander coming into the world, you don't know
how many copies of your genetic material you're going to have. You don't know how many cells you're
going to have or what the size of the cells are going to be. You still need to be able to get the
job done. So, this is not a matter of just being reliable with fixed parts. This is the idea
that what evolution is making is problem-solving agents. It's making a system that is ready for
many, many unexpected things. And not just environment, not just when somebody bites your
leg off and the salamander regenerates it. No, this is unreliability of your own parts. This is not
even being sure of what you're made of. You really can't depend on much. And that's an amazing thing.
And it's quite different than what you normally get in a biology curriculum where they tell you
that your genome, the purpose of your genome is to carry information from a long time away with
maximal fidelity and to minimize errors. And every cell is going to do whatever the genome
says. And in the end, you get this emergent thing. Actually, that's not at all what's happening here.
Here's another example. We discovered this a few years ago. These tadpoles need to become frogs.
In order for this tadpole face to make a frog face, all the organs have to move. So, the eyes
have to move, the jaws have to move, and so on. And they normally do this quite reliably. But it
was thought to be a hardwired process. You know, people thought that, well, every organ just moves
in the right direction, this fixed amount, and that's it. What we did was we created these so
called Picasso frogs because we wanted to test how much intelligence is actually in that process,
how much, what kind of problems can it solve? So, we scrambled everything. You can see here,
the eyes on the top of the head, the mouth is off to the side, everything is just a complete mess.
And these guys still become normal frogs because all of these organs will move now in novel paths,
paths that these guys don't do, until they get to a correct frog face, and then they stop.
And so, what evolution actually has given you is not a hardwired set of instructions,
but a system for error minimization. Okay, for a way of wherever you happen to start out,
do whatever you have to do to end up in this particular location. This again,
this kind of goal-directedness is something else that you're not going to see in your
developmental biology textbook. This is not emergence, and this is not simply an increase
of complexity. This is problem-solving. And that raises an obvious question about how does it know
what the correct face looks like? Where is the memory for that set point of that homeostatic
process? I want to show you a couple of other things related to the plasticity of this. So,
just so you understand how much play there is between the fixed hardware of your genetics
and the actual outcomes. First of all, this here, you might think this is a photoshop or
something. I didn't believe it the first time I saw it, but this fly is running a stripped-down
ant morphogenetic program on its wings. It's running a virtual ant on its wings, and the idea
is that it wiggles its wings to simulate these ants scurrying about, and that keeps the predators
away because they don't want to deal with ants. And this is amazing, of course, and it's striking
that it has this pattern, but it's no more striking than the much more intricate pattern
of the actual fly. I mean, all of these are specific morphogenetic patterns, whether 2D
or 3D, carried out on this kind of hardware. And you might think that the outcomes are pretty
fixed. I mean, here's an acorn, and you know that all the time what these acorns give rise to is
these oak leaves. And you might think that you know what the oak genome actually does. It encodes
this particular shape, but along comes a bioengineer, and this is a non-human bioengineer. This is a
little wasp, and what these wasps do is they provide some signals that prompt the rest of the
tissue to build something like this. They're hacking the morphogenetic competencies of this leaf.
They're not changing the genome, and what they're doing is providing some instructions that cause
the leaf cells to adopt a different set point in anatomical space. Now, would you ever have any idea
looking at these flat green leaves, and how reliable they are? Would you have any idea that
they're capable of building something like this? I mean, we have no idea. So that just reminds us
that this whole notion of developmental constraint is really probably a constraint in our thinking.
It's not a constraint in the biology. The option space for morphogenesis is enormous,
and what we need to do is to discover the prompts, the language that we can use to get
them to build other things, and it clearly doesn't require modifying the hardware.
The genetics of this thing are still completely intact. So now comes kind of the meat of the
talk, which is that if morphogenesis is the behavior of a collective intelligence operating
in anatomical space, that's what I've been getting at for the last few slides, is the idea that
the act of creating complex anatomical shapes is really behavior. It's behavior in an anatomical
space of possibilities, and it's done by a collective intelligence, which just like us,
we're all collective intelligences, but that collective intelligence thinks about shape as
opposed to moving around in 3D space. So now we need to ask, how do we communicate with that
intelligence? I mean, the WASP did it through millions of years of evolution. We would like
to do it faster. And where does it store its memories? These are some things that we've been
looking at. Well, we know that one way to store memories and communicate with a collective
intelligence is through the nervous system. Now, the nervous system does it via computations
in an electrical network, and you can actually try to decode those. This is the work of people
doing a neural decoding to try to read the electrical activity of the brain and to know
what thoughts and preferences and memories and so on the system has. Well, it turns out that
this system, this ability to store memories in an electrical network, to use an electrical
network to integrate information across many, many, many cells, both in space and in time,
is something that evolution discovered a really long time ago. It is way older than nerve and
muscle. Bacterial biofilms were probably the first to do this, so long predating multicellularity.
And what we've done is to develop some of the first tools to read and write the mind of the
collective intelligence of your body. So by taking a lot of the concepts from neuroscientists and
really emphasizing this idea that neuroscience isn't about neurons at all. Neuroscience is really
about scaling of information from tiny competent subunits into much larger coherent cells that
have higher intelligence in other spaces. That's really what this is about. And that doesn't just
work in the brain, that works in your entire body. So the first thing I want to show you is
some of the techniques that can be used. One thing we have is this thing we develop called
voltage sensitive fluorescent dye imaging. And that means that without having to poke the cells
with electrodes, you can get in real time, this is a time lapse of a frog embryo, this is a frog
putting its face together, you can get a map of all the electrical states and thus you can try to
learn to decode what the system is trying to build. What are the computations that they're
doing? We call this the electric face. This is a bioelectric map of the face ectoderm long before
any of these organs actually appear. You can see that cells already know here's where we're
going to place the eye, the left eye actually comes in a little bit later, here's where the
mouth is going to go, here are the placodes. This is you are literally seeing the way you
would with a brain scan, you are literally seeing the content of the collective intelligence of
morphogenesis in the body of these animals. So these are normal patterns, in fact these are
required for normal development as I'll show you momentarily. But here's a pathological pattern,
and this is induced by injecting a human oncogene into these embryos which eventually
will make a tumor. But these tumors have an aberrant bioelectrical profile because what happens,
the first thing that happens with this oncogene is that it causes an electrical disconnection
from cells from their environment. And when cells disconnect, they immediately lose the ability
to remember these large grandiose goals that they were working on, so making complex organs and
fixing defects and so on, they're just amoebas now. That boundary between self and world has now
shrunk, that cognitive lycone where before the goal was the size of an organ or maybe the whole
organism, now it's down to the size of a single cell, and to them the rest of the body is just
an environment now. So this is where you get metastasis and progression because as far as
they're concerned, they're just amoebas living in an environment, and they go where they want and
they reproduce as much as they want. And so once you understand that, you can try for really
interesting cancer therapeutics, which is what we're doing in our lab. Don't try to kill the cells
with toxic chemotherapy. What if we reinflate their sense of self? What if we reconnect them,
forcibly reconnect them to the large electrical network that can remember what a proper organ is?
And so when you do that, so this is the same animal. Here's the oncoprotein has this red
fluorescence on it. You can see it's blazingly strongly expressed. In fact, it's all over the
place, but there's no tumor. And there's no tumor because we co-injected an ion channel
that modulates, it's an RNA that modulates the electrical property of the cell to force them
to remain in connection, despite what the oncogene is saying. And after that, it doesn't
matter that they have this genetic defect, they behave appropriately and they build nice organs
and so on. So that's a story at the level of single cells, how you scale individual cells
into a larger set of goals. But I want to show you something even larger scale than that,
which is we saw in that electric phase, there's a little eye spot which tells the animal that
that's where the eye is going to go. So we can ask a simple question, what happens if you
reproduce that bioelectric pattern somewhere else? Can you tell this group of cells to build
an eye somewhere else? And it turns out you can. Here it is, we injected some potassium
ion channel RNA into a location that normally would make a gut. So here's this is a tadpole,
here's the mouth, here's the eye, here's the gut. And if you tell these cells using an appropriate
voltage signal that, hey, you should be making an eye, boom, that's what they do. And these eyes
have normal lens, right, an optic nerve, all the same stuff. And you might see in your developmental
biology textbook that only cells in the anterior and erected are here are competent to make eye.
So that isn't true, that's only true if you try to prompt them with the so-called master eye gene.
So if you put in PAC-6 the master eye gene, yes, that's true, only these cells can do it.
But again, that limitation of competency isn't in the embryo, that's on us. That's because we
didn't know the community, didn't know the right way to talk to these cells. Once you understand
the bioelectric code, actually it turns out that almost any region in this embryo is competent to
make eye. And if you should happen to only inject a few cells, so here this is a lens sitting out
in the tail of a tadpole somewhere, if you only inject a few cells, these blue cells are the ones
we injected, then they know there's not enough of them to make a good eye, so what do they do? They
recruit a bunch of their neighbors to work with them to make an eye, just like ants and
termites will recruit their buddies to solve a problem. So now you can see that what we're
doing is providing signals. We didn't tell these cells how to build an eye, we didn't say anything
about the stem cells or the gene expression, we have no idea how to build an eye. What we did find
was a message that we can transmit through this bioelectrical interface that says build an eye
here. And once you get the cells by in so that they are convinced that that in fact is what they
should be building, after that you don't need to do anything, they will do what they do best,
they'll build to a morphogenetic spec. We know this, I want to show you, there's just a couple
of things left here, I want to show you another kind of pattern memory in these planaria, so here's
a normal flatworm. These guys, you can cut them into pieces and they will always regenerate correctly,
so every piece normally makes a nice one-headed worm 100% of the time. But there's a bioelectric
pattern there that we were able to read out and then we were able to modify it. And when you
modify that pattern, you make two-headed worms. And when you make these two-headed worms, what
happens is that you have rewritten the memory of what a correct worm is supposed to look like,
so that when these fragments, when these middle fragments go to regenerate, they consult the
pattern to see what what should a normal worm look like, they see that it says two heads,
and they go ahead and they build two heads. These two-headed worms now in plain water,
meaning no more manipulation of any kind, are now forever two-headed. If you keep cutting them,
they will just continue to regenerate as two-headed. We have permanently changed the target morphology,
the pattern to which they regenerate, but we never touch the DNA, there's nothing wrong with the
genetics here. If we were to throw these guys into the Charles River, 100 years later some
scientists would come along, they'd scoop up some single-headed worms and some double-headed
worms, they'd say, oh, cool, a speciation event, let's sequence the genome and see what made the
difference. There's nothing wrong with their genome, that's not where the information is.
And so that's really important to understand that much as we've been learning from computer science
for a really long time now, the hardware, if it's good hardware, does not fully constrain
what the software is able to do. And so this is a kind of pattern memory, it's long-term stable,
it's rewriteable because we can turn these guys back to one-headed, there you can see what these
two-headed guys are doing when they're hanging out. And so the question of how many heads should
a plenarian have is not written in the DNA, what is written in the DNA is the construction of
some biological material that by default will develop a pattern memory that says one head,
so that's what it does by default, very reliably, but you can change it, you can rewrite it.
And the fact that biological tissue is reprogrammable in this way is hugely important for biomedicine
and for other things. And so I hope you're starting to see that all the emphasis on
genetics and on the genome and all that, it's all very important because you have to understand
your hardware, but it's just the beginning. It's the same, the reason that on your laptop,
if you want to switch from Photoshop to Microsoft Word, you don't get out your soldering iron and
start rewiring because it's reprogrammable. Neither does biology. Biology is using an
incredibly reprogrammable medium that solves problems and can be communicated with using
various interfaces, for example, this bioelectrical interface. So we've talked about the reliability
of development and what things do by default. We've talked about various ways to hack, communicate
with and reprogram the collective intelligence of cells so they can build other variants on the
form. But where do these goals actually come from? So when we called up a second head here,
the second head looks just like the first head. Where are these patterns really? If it's not in
the DNA, what's the space of possible patterns? What else can we do? And by the way, I didn't
show you, but we can actually turn these worms into heads of other species, about 100 to 150
million years' distance. So triangular worms become round, become flat, but you can make the
hardware go to other regions of that space that normally belong to other species. But okay,
those are all evolutionarily defined forms. Is that it? Is that where the forms come from? They're
basically selected for and then there's a finite set of forms that can be implemented by the hardware.
Well, we decided to look at this in a synthetic kind of bioengineering way. And what we did was
we took some cells, some skin cells from frog embryos, and we let them kind of reboot their
multicellularity. We took them aside, we liberated them from their normal interactions with other
cells. And what they did, they could have done many things. They could have died, they could have
crawled away from each other, they could have made a flat monolayer like cell culture.
What they did instead is they merged into something we then named xenobots.
Xenobot because Xenopus lavus is the name of the frog, and we think this is a biorebotics platform.
So they start to swim. They have little silly, little hairs that are normally used to distribute
mucus down the side of the frog, but here they row. So these guys are rowing to the left, these
cells are rowing to the right, and as a result, this thing moves forward. They can go in circles
like this, they can kind of patrol back and forth like that. They have various collective behaviors.
These two are sort of dancing around. This one's going on some sort of long journey.
These ones are doing nothing. They have some very rich calcium signaling. You can see that here,
which is usually a sign of some information processing that's going on in these cells.
Here's one that is navigating this maze. So it's going to take this corner without bumping
into the opposite wall. So there it is. And then here spontaneously, for some reason that we don't
know, it turns around and goes back where it came from. It has spontaneous behavior. Again,
remember, this is just skin. These are just epithelial cells. And they have lots of interesting
behaviors that we can talk about. But one of the most amazing things they do is called kinematic
replication. So just imagine, we've made it completely impossible for these things to reproduce
the normal froggy fashion. They don't have any of the reproductive organs, they don't have any of
that. But in this novel configuration, they figured out a way to make copies of themselves. And
here's how they do it. If you provide them with loose skin cells, this loose material, what they
do is they run around and they sort of collect those loose skin cells into little balls like this.
And because what they're working with is an agential material, meaning these are not passive
pellets, these are cells, for the same reason that we were able to make xenobots, they make the
second generation of xenobots. And these little balls that they make mature, and guess what they
do? They run around and make the next generation of xenobots and so on. And this is kinematic
replication. It's kind of von Neumann's dream of a robot that went around and made copies of
itself from materials it finds in the environment. I mean, just think this, there's never been any
xenobots. There's never been any selection to be a good xenobot. This is not in the lineage of frogs.
Where does this come from? Their shape, their behaviors, the kinematic self-replication, all
the other things they can do. Where does that come from? It's very hard to say that this was the
subject of selection. So again, I come back to this theme that while the hardware was absolutely
selected for, I don't think it was selected to make frogs. I don't think that what evolution does is
create solutions for specific problems or things that are fit in a specific environment.
I think what evolution does is make creative problem-solving agents that they'll do the same
thing under default conditions, but once you start making changes and challenging them,
they often rise to the occasion and solve problems in very novel ways that reflect dynamics that
they've not seen before. And lest you think this is some trick of, you know, unique to frogs or
embryos, I mean, when we first published all this stuff, some people said, well, frogs, amphibians
are pretty plastic and embryos are especially plastic. So maybe this is some kind of a specific
thing in frog embryology. So the last thing I want to show you is this. So here's this little guy
running around and I will ask you what this is. And you might think that this is something I got
off the bottom of a pond somewhere, right, some sort of primitive organism. And then I can tell
you that, well, we've sequenced its genome and you'll say, oh, what's the genome? What does it
look like? And I'll say, well, this is 100% Homo sapiens. These are adult human cells. There's no
embryonics here. This is adult tracheal cells taken from human donors. Most of them elderly in
their 70s and 80s. And when given the chance, they reboot themselves and have a new life as these
things. We call them anthropots for obvious reasons. And they have all kinds of novel shapes
and behaviors. I call this kind of a technology for personalized agential interventions because
if you ask, what can these things do? Well, one thing they can do is this. If you take human neurons
and plate them on a dish and put a big scratch through them, these anthropots can settle down.
We call this a super bot because there's probably 10 of them here. They'll settle down and within a
few days you lift them up and you see that what they did was they took the two sides of the wound
and they knitted the nerves together. So they have the ability to repair these kind of neural
wounds. I mean, who would have thought that your tracheal cells, which normally sit quietly in your
airway for decades, that given the opportunity taken out of the body, they would actually
reassemble themselves into a new kind of creature with these new capacities. And so this is, I think,
hugely important for the future of medicine because just imagine, once we understand what
kind of healing effects these guys can have, they can be injected into your body. They do not
require immune suppression because they're made of your own cells. So personalized medicine in
that way. They share with your body all the priors about what health is, what diseases,
inflammation, cancer. You don't have to build all those detectors from scratch like you would with
some sort of engineered nanobot because these are your own cells. They already understand all those
things. And so again, you start to see this plasticity. Again, what you just saw is not
some embryonic developmental stage that they're recovering back in their history. There is no
such stage. This is completely novel set of behaviors. And so now I'm going to finish up here
with kind of some big picture thinking here. What I've been telling you about all of these stories
and all of their kind of biomedical implications for cancer and birth defects and regenerative medicine,
there's a bigger picture here, which is that what we're talking about is an example of how to
recognize and how to communicate with an unconventional intelligence. It is not just
philosophy that thinking about groups of cells as decision making, memory having goal directed
beings has led us to lots of discoveries that were not made by the standard paradigm, which sees them
as simple machines. So my point is that along this spectrum, I call this the spectrum of
persuadability because it's all about what kind of tools you're going to use to communicate
and control these various systems. So here it's hardware rewiring and maybe some control theory
and cybernetics with things like thermostats. And then here maybe behavioral science and training
and things like that. And then here you have some sort of rich relationship with cogent reasoning
and so on. The idea is that we can't just have philosophical feelings about where things fit
on this continuum. Most people assume that cells are somewhere down here, that they're basically
simple machines that need to be treated that way. And that leaves a lot on the table because we're
doing all kinds of interesting things with cell training and really taking advantage of the problem
solving competencies of these things. And so we have to do experiments. And so that brings us back
to the issue of AI because the question of AI isn't about today's language models. Today,
it's pretty easy to say, well, GPT-4 isn't really like a human mind and so on. No, it isn't. And it
doesn't matter for two reasons. First, because there are many interesting minds that are not human
minds and some of them are quite alien. And second, because the whole point is that you
can't just assume these things. You have to do experiments. You have to ask yourself,
do I know where intelligence comes from? Why do simple things? And we've studied some very
simple things that have amazing, unexpected, emergent, intelligent behaviors. Do we know
where that comes from and how to recognize them? And I'll tell you that at this moment we don't.
So this is the science of diverse intelligence. And we need to be extremely careful. And I think
this is where the ethics comes in. We need to be extremely careful about not denying moral
worth and various kinds of ethical protections to beings because they don't look like us.
Humans have a very long history of trying to make separations between in-group and out-group
based on really pretty ridiculous, very surfacing characteristics. And in your lifetime, you are
going to be confronted with all sorts of novel beings. So all of Darwin's endless forms, most
beautiful here on Earth, are like a tiny corner of this whole space. You know, hybrids and cyborgs
and all kinds of non-neurotypical humans with implants and different kinds of connections to
other creatures and to other technical systems. You know, pretty much any combination of evolved
material, engineered material and software is some kind of being. Okay, there are going to be
chimeras and cyborgs. And so it's not about the language models of today. It's about beings that
are nowhere with you on the tree of life. You cannot decide how you're going to relate to them
in the old ways, which was to, you know, sort of knock on it. And if you hear a metallic clanging
sound, you say, aha, so you were made in the factory and you're boring and I can take you
apart. And that's okay. Whereas if you heard like this soft, woolly thud, you would say,
ah, well, you're a real being like me and I have to treat you well, even though we're not even very
good at that as humans. But the point is that those kinds of categories are going to be worthless
because the space of possible bodies and minds is extending radically. And we're going to have to
develop much better ethical frameworks for kind of, you know, I'm sure you've heard of symbiosis,
I think what we're really talking about is a kind of synthbiosis, where we have to learn how to
relate to beings that are different than us. And that, you know, we're going to have to figure
out how you how you detect where things are on this continuum, so that we find appropriate balance
points between objectophilia. Objectophilia is the thing where people fall in love with bridges
and, you know, they think the Eiffel Tower is, you know, married to them and so on. Right. So,
things down here, you're not going to have that deep relationship with things up here,
but other people are really trapped in the other end of the continuum where they see things that
are not like today's standard humans. And they say, you know, those are not real minds worthy of
care and respect and so on. And that very quickly devolves to a kind of idea that's basically
love only your own kind. And I think that's that's that's probably lots much worse than this.
So, we really need to, and if anybody has questions we can talk about it, we really need to ask,
you know, given all of these facts, what are what is a human actually? And I have a kind of a weird
answer to that. And if you were going on on a long journey and you wanted a companion,
what is it that you actually care about? You know, when you say, you know, you don't want a
Roomba, that's that's not enough. But what do you actually care about? It's not the DNA. It's I
don't think anybody has any allegiance to our particular human DNA or the specific set of
organs. What is it that you do want, you know, in a rich human level relationship? That's that's
very worth thinking about. So, okay, so I'm going to I'm going to stop here. I'm anybody who's
interested in this stuff. Here's a bunch of papers that go into all of this in great detail.
Most importantly, I need to thank all the people who did the work that I showed you today. So,
here are all the all the postdocs and students and everybody else who who contributed. We
have lots of amazing collaborators. Our funding comes from all kinds of people have to do a
disclosure here because there are three companies that have spun out of our lab that are supporting
some of our work. So there's some business connections here. But most of all, I always
thank the model system because because the various animals and plants do all of the
heavy lifting in teaching us about biology and about ourselves. So thank you so much. I'll take
questions.
