Thank you so much, and it's a great pleasure to be there.
I love talking to students, and I hope to tell you some interesting stories today.
I'm going to talk about biorebotics, and in particular, engineering with agential materials.
Afterwards, if you want to follow up any of the details, all of the primary publications, the data, the software, all of that is at this site.
And if you want to look at some kind of more broader thoughts that I have about this work, you can find my blog here.
So here are some of the main points that I'm going to try to transmit today.
Most problems in biomedicine and many problems of bioengineering boil down to the control of morphogenesis.
The idea of controlling the collective decision making among cells is critical for advances in many areas that are important for us.
And I'm going to argue that this is not going to be solved by hardware-based approaches, such as genomics and so on.
In fact, biology uses a kind of multi-scale competency architecture of nested problem solvers in very different problem spaces.
We, in evolution, exploit this architecture, and in particular this bioelectrical interface that I'm going to tell you today that cells and tissues use to shape each other's behavior in the attempt to create and maintain complex functional structures.
We now have tools that allow us to read and write memories into this software layer, this physiological layer of control that sits between the genome and the anatomy, and this has many applications and birth defects, regeneration, cancer, and also synthetic bioengineering.
What I'm specifically going to emphasize today is engineering with agential materials, that is, materials with an agenda, where we can use tools from behavioral and cognitive sciences to exploit the intelligence and the competency of cells and groups of cells in these unusual problem spaces.
So let's think about the end game of our field. What we would like to do is something called an anatomical compiler.
So this is an idea that encapsulates where we want to go with this, which is the complete control over growth and form. So someday you will be able to sit in front of a computer system, you will be able to specify the plant or animal or organ or
biobot that you want, you could draw it at the level of anatomy, not at the level of molecular pathways. And if we knew how to do this, what the system would do is compile that description into a set of stimuli that would have to be given to cells to build exactly what you want to build.
Now, the practical applications of this are obvious. If we had something like this, then birth defects, traumatic injury, cancer, aging, degenerative disease, all of these things would be solved.
But there's a more fundamental problem here, which is that this is not meant to be a 3D printer. The point isn't to micromanage the position of cells or the expression of tens of thousands of genes.
This is basically a communications device. It's a translator between your goals as the engineer and the goals of the collective, which is going to build something. The question is how do we control what it is that they build.
Now, over the millennia, humans have been building with passive materials. And more recently, we've developed active matter and even computational materials.
But in biology, we use something that's even deeper and more interesting, which is something we call an agential material. Now, here's, this is the sort of thing we are all made of. This is a single cell.
This happens to be a free living organism named lacrimaria. And you can see the amazing control that this thing has over its body and the competency with which it solves its local needs, all of its physiological, metabolic, anatomical, and so on.
And there's no brain. There's no nervous system. The single cell does all of the things that it needs. And the interesting thing is that we all come from a single cell. We all begin life as a molecular network inside an unfertilized oocyte.
And eventually, we become something like this, or even maybe something like this. So we all used to be single cells at one point, and we need to understand this very continuous gradual process by which chemistry becomes mind.
And so in the scale up from a system that is well described by the laws of chemistry and physics to a system that is really also amenable to very high level descriptions of behavior science and psychoanalysis and these kinds of things.
Our job is to understand that scaling and to figure out what new competencies that gives us as engineers.
So because of this, biology can be looked at as a multi-scale competency kind of architecture, not just nested scales of size like nested dolls of structure, but also function.
So all of these layers themselves are competent at solving problems in different spaces.
So all the way from molecular networks to subcellular components to tissues and organs and whole organisms and even swarms are able to solve problems in anatomical spaces in gene expression spaces in behavioral spaces, of course, and so on.
And so that gives rise to a number of very interesting properties that our engineered constructs are still really very far behind.
And I want to describe some of the amazing things that biology does. Here's one example.
So this is a caterpillar and caterpillars live in a two dimensional world, they crawl around, they chew leaves, they have a little brain that's suitable for driving this in effect a soft-bodied robot without any hard elements.
This animal has to turn into this animal, which is going to live in a three dimensional world, a fly around using a hard-bodied design and drink nectar.
So it has a completely different brain. And along the way, what happens during metamorphosis is that the brain is largely dissolved, most of the cells are killed off, the connections are broken.
Except that we find, and this was this was work going back many decades, that if you train the caterpillar to let's say eat leaves on a particular color disk, that memory persists in the butterfly.
You might think that the amazing thing here is, is the question of where is the memory. I mean, where do you store memories when the whole brain is being taken apart and put back together.
But it's actually even much more interesting than that, because the raw memories of the caterpillar, right, what types of muscle motions to activate to retrieve a reward on a particular stimulus here are completely useless to this animal, because it doesn't eat the same thing, it doesn't move the same way the controller is completely different.
What actually happens to the information is not merely that it is stored, but is that is remapped. It is remapped to a new creature that lives in a higher dimensional world and has a completely new life.
So this this idea of information being context sensitive, and being interpreted by a new substrate is something that the material does on its own, we need to understand how this works.
In fact, in other models, such as for example these planarian flatworms, which I'll tell you more about in a few minutes, which which regenerate, we can we can train the animals to for example find food on these bumpy substrates.
So this is place conditioning they learn to look for food there you can cut off their head which contains a centralized brain.
The tail will sit there doing nothing for about eight days until it grows back a new brain and a new head. And at that point you can see that this animal once again remembers the original information.
It's interesting to think about how information moves through the body wherever else it's stored it has to be imprinted onto the new brain, as the brain develops.
And this, this is, this is this kind of plasticity is also seen in vertebrates so this is a tadpole of the frogs and up a slavis here's the mouth here the nostrils the brain, the gut.
And what you'll see is that there are two eyes that are missing here, but we placed an ectopic eye onto its tail.
These eyes make us make an optic nerve the optic nerve comes out it will synapse for example on the spinal cord here it does not go to the brain.
And yet these animals can see, we know they can see because we built a device here to automate the training and the testing of these little guys in a visual assay so so we train them to avoid or follow certain lights.
And they can do quite well. And so this is telling us that this this material does not need new cycles of evolutionary search it does not need more generations of, of generate and test of blind mutation and then selection in order to adapt to a new sensory motor architecture.
No eyes in the brain. Now you've got this eye on the tail connected to the spinal cord. No problem. The whole thing works the brain is able to use these signals, it works.
So, this kind of this kind of plasticity has many implications for for evolution but during today's talk, we're just going to talk about what it means for the engineer.
So, one of the key things that we have to do in order to start utilizing these amazing properties of the living material is to widen our ability to think about other problem spaces.
So, humans are pretty good at recognizing intelligence of medium sized objects moving at medium speeds and three dimensional space. So we see apes, we see some birds, maybe an octopus or a whale doing interesting things in three dimensional space and we can sort of understand this as intelligence.
But there are all these other spaces. So there's the space of gene expression, there's the space of physiological states, and what we're going to talk about most of all which is the space of anatomical states.
And in all of these spaces, you can think about different types of systems at different time scales at different in different embodiments, navigating those spaces, adaptively that is making decisions taking measurements, having memories and trying to reach specific regions of those spaces.
So let's talk about anatomical space, we'll have time today to mostly focus on that.
So, all of us begin life as a collection of blastomers but if you take a cross section through a human torso, you see something like this this incredible order, everything is the right shape the right size the right orientation next to the right thing, where does this incredible pattern come from.
I mean, arranging this pattern in the space of all possible configurations is a very specific journey. So how do the cells know where they're going.
Now, you might be tempted to say well it's in the genome of course it's in the DNA and that's what most people would say, but the problem with that is that we can read genomes now, we know what's in the DNA and it's nothing like this what's directly in the DNA our protein sequences.
There are specifications of the nano scale hardware that every cell gets to have. After that the cells have to engage in a process we call developmental physiology, which allows them to build something like this.
Now that means we need to understand how do cell groups know what to make and when to stop. How could we convince them to repair or rebuild if something is missing.
And as engineers we would also like to know how much plasticity is there could we get him to build something completely different with the exact same genome, right, how reprogrammable is this hardware what else is it willing to do.
And, you know, the, the information on the final outcome is no more in the genes than the exact structure of the termite mound, or the spider web is encoded in the genome of these animals, all of these things are outputs of behavior.
This anatomy is no less an output of behavior than is, than are these constructions.
So, where we are today in the biosciences is this we're getting very good at manipulating cells and molecules.
So, so what the genes interact with what are the genes and so on. We're really a long way away from large scale control of form and function if somebody needs their limb back after an injury.
We really don't know how to make them grow back or in fact, we really don't even know simple things like why, why do you have two bones in your forearm instead of one, despite all the molecular biology.
So, I think that what's happening here is that biomedicine has been stuck where computer science was in the 40s and 50s. So this is what it used to look like to program a computer.
You'd have to physically rewire it. And the reason that today you don't have to get out your soldering iron every time you switch from PowerPoint to Microsoft Word is that we've understood the power of reprogrammable hardware the power of using the information processing
and the competencies of your material to control it with stimuli at a higher level, not just to rewiring to rewire it and biomedicine is molecular medicine anyway is largely focused on the hardware today all the exciting advances are around genomic editing protein engineering pathway rewiring
it's all down at the level of the molecules. And I think the reason that we're still not close to being able to control what we actually want to control which is form and function is because we've barely started to take advantage of the higher level information processing or the intelligence and the decision making of the material.
When I say intelligence, what I mean is what William James defined it as which is the ability to reach the same goal by different means. This is a very cybernetic definition. It doesn't focus on how big your brain is or whether you were naturally evolved or engineered.
It basically talks about what level of competency do you have to call upon a various bag of tricks to get to the same goal when things change. And people have used this kind of this kind of ladder so here's a Rosenbluth wiener and bigelow with their ladder of three different kinds of systems going all the way from passive matter, all the
different levels of complexity of control and goal directedness to human level metacognition and so on. So intelligence doesn't mean that you know that you're intelligence and that you have this kind of self awareness it just means you have some level of degree of problem solving to get your goals met and what level what level of
degree is the operant question. So let's talk about what kind of intelligence does the living material possess specifically in this case an anatomical space I can tell you many stories about intelligence and problem solving and other spaces.
So one thing we know is that developmental self assembly is reliable you go from from a single cell to a normal human target morphology. Most of the time it works correctly. But that isn't what we mean by intelligence we don't mean the an increase in complexity it's not enough to say that something
becomes complex, because we all know there are fractals there are cellular automata. There are many systems that follow simple rules in a feed forward open loop kind of fashion, and something complex results that's just the beginning of the story.
What's more interesting is the fact that if you cut an early embryo into pieces, you don't get half bodies you get perfectly normal mono zygotic twins triplets and so on.
So actually you can reach the ensemble of gold states corresponding to a normal human from all kinds of starting positions and avoiding some local minimum. And so that gives you the ability to get to where you're going from different starting
positions and so that's that's one type of competency here. Another type is the idea that later on in in adulthood some animals maintain this this amazing capacity for regeneration.
This is an axolotl these these animals regenerate their limbs their eyes their jaws their spinal cord portions of the heart and brain. And you can see what happens here is that if you amputate anywhere along this limb.
They will regenerate, they will very quickly, the cells will grow they will undergo morphogenesis, and then they will regenerate the limb and then they stop. That's the most amazing thing about regeneration is that it knows when to stop.
How does it, how does it stop it stops when a complete salamander limb has been achieved. So, so it's a kind of you can think about this as a kind of kind of means and analysis or basically an error reduction scheme.
That's AKA homeostasis this is anatomical homeostasis. This is the goal state when you deviate the system from that goal state, it will work really hard until the errors within acceptable limits and then everything stops.
So that brings up an obvious question of how does it know what the correct pattern should be. I should point out this isn't some special thing about worms and frogs although I am going to spend most of my time talking about those models.
This is very widespread so human adult humans can regenerate their liver children, human children can regenerate their fingertips below a certain a certain age, and deer large adult mammals can regenerate huge amounts of bone vasculature
innervation skin every year as they regrow their antlers, they grow about a centimeter and a half of new bone per day. Just think about that a centimeter and a half per day to make the same pattern every year.
So one of the most important things to realize about this kind of anatomical homeostasis is that it isn't just about external injuries.
So far the stories that I told you are all about damage external kinds of damage, but there's something much more profound here and I want to illustrate this with one of my favorite examples which is the new kidney tubule.
So if you take a cross section of the new kidney tubule you see that about eight or 10 cells work together to create this this tubule and then there's a lumen inside.
One thing you can do with these animals is you can increase the number of the copy number of their genome so you can make polyploid newts that are not two and but three and four and five and so on.
If you do this the first amazing thing is that you still get a perfectly normal newt.
And the second thing you find is that when you increase the amount of DNA the cells actually get bigger. Okay, to maintain a proper ratio of cell size to to nuclear size.
And that means that in order to make the same size newt, which is what they do, you have to have fewer number of larger cells. So the cell number adjusts to the cell size.
The most amazing thing of all, is that if you make the cells truly gigantic and I believe this is like 5n or 6n newts, the cells get so big, what they have to do is bend around themselves to make the same structure.
Why this is important is that this is a different molecular mechanism this is not cell to cell communication as before this is now cytoskeletal bending.
This is an interesting kind of top down causation in the service of a particular anatomical goal. These, these, these cells are able to call up different molecular mechanisms to get their job done.
So, so a couple of things going on here one is that there's that definition of intelligence meaning they reach the same goal by different means when the circumstances change this is a novel scenario they've never seen this before.
And, and then just think about what this means as a as an agent coming into the world. You, as a as a newt coming into this world you cannot over train on your evolutionary priors you can't assume how many copies of your DNA you're going to have.
You can't assume the number or the size of your cells you have to get your job done, despite not only variations in the environment, not only potential injuries, but in fact variations of your own parts.
So when we build robotics and computerized systems, we spend a lot of effort making sure that the parts are exactly what we think they are the tolerance on the parts are extremely high. They never change and then we can engineer biology does the exact opposite.
It commits right from the beginning to the idea that both evolutionarily and ontogenically your parts are unreliable. They are, they're going to change there's going to be noise there's going to be death there's going to be air.
And despite all of that, it has to work it's a completely different way to engineer, and it uses this multi scale competency architecture, this this idea of, of goal directness and decision making at every level to make this whole thing work.
So the final example that I'm going to show you is something we discovered a few years ago here's a tappel with some eyes and some nostrils and mouth here.
And in order to turn into a frog what they have to do is rearrange their face. So all these organs have to move the eyes have to move forward and so on.
Now, it used to be thought that this was a hardwired process after all every tappel looks the same, every frog looks the same. So to go from a tappel to a frog you just know what direction and how much every part is going to move.
So we wanted to test this hypothesis and this is really important. The intelligence of any system cannot be examined cannot be determined I should say by a philosophical pre commitments you can just decide how intelligent things are, nor can you determine it from pure
observation you have to do experiments you have to do perturbative experiments to really know. So what we did was, we said okay what is the competency of this thing let's scramble all the organs.
Here's you can see an example we call these Picasso tappels. You've got an eye on the top of the head you've got the mouth is off to the side, everything's everything's scrambled it's a big mess.
And then what you find is that these things actually give pretty normal frogs because all of these organs will move in novel paths. Okay, novel paths to get to where they need to go and in fact sometimes they actually go too far, and have to have to come back a little bit.
But what you see here is that the genetics does not specify a hardwired set of movements, it actually gives you a system that is an error reduction scheme has a set point it has an error reduction capacity.
And this goes to my kind of major claim that what evolution produces is not solutions to specific environments it produces problem solving agents, that's what it produces.
So, you have here this kind of main loop that you seen in a developmental biology textbook that goes from the from from genes and gene interactions to various effector proteins and then this process of emergence.
And all of this is true I mean it does happen it is this complexity does emerge from from these local interactions.
But but there's something really important missing here which is this pattern homeostasis scheme. This idea that this is not purely a feed forward process. There's actually a set of a set of feedback loops that that if you get deviated from this goal.
So that's injury mutations to radigens and so on, depending on the time scale that you're talking about.
And these other mechanisms kick in try to reduce the error. So, this makes a very strong prediction what this suggests is that there should be a recorded explicitly recorded set point that is this, the cell should have access to some kind of
physical structure that actually actually contains that large scale set point.
And that if we were to change that set point, we could control what the system builds without having to change the hardware that this is this is important because under traditional approaches if you want to make that change up here you've got to figure out which genes
to edit. And there are a few low hanging fruit the you know single, single gene diseases and single gene traits and so on where it's pretty, pretty clear what to change.
But for the vast majority of things we're interested in. This is irreversible this process is not reversible we're not able to figure out what genes to edit.
And in that case, it would sure be convenient if we could find the set point and directly edit that information structure and let the cells do what they do.
So, we've been we've been doing this approach for some years now, and following the strong predictions of this model which is that it should be possible to find it, it should be possible to decode it and it should be possible to rewrite it.
If it's true that these pattern memories exist.
So, where where would we find this you know is it is it crazy to think that a collection of cells could store a memory of what to do. Well neuroscience for centuries has been studying exactly that a collection of cells that stores memories of what to do.
And so the way they do it is by this kind of interesting architecture where you have hardware that is consists of cells communicating with each other through electrical synapses by electrical signals that they established through the movement of ions in these little ion channel proteins.
And so that's that that's the hardware, the software, as you can see here by this this group made an amazing video of a brain of a living fish as the fish is thinking about whatever it is that fish think about.
And the idea then is that the process of neural decoding so this is the commitment of neuroscience is that the cognitive goals, preferences beliefs, behavioral repertoires, everything that exists in the mind of this animal can be decoded from the
physiology that goes on in the nervous system. Well it turns out the interesting thing is that this is an extremely ancient discovery by evolution. In fact it found the fact that electrical networks are good for scaling and processing
information back around the time of bacterial biofilms. So, this is very old, every cell in your body has ion channels, most cells have gap functional electrical synapses to each other and they build networks.
And so could it be possible that by in parallel, whereas neuroscientists try to decode the electrophysiology of neural cells to understand how they move your body through three dimensional space.
Could we do the same thing could we understand how information propagates through electrical networks to determine how they help you navigate anatomical space.
And we use a lot of the same tools as neuroscience is doing practical tools as well as concepts to try to understand this because the tools actually do not distinguish between these two cases.
Neuroscience is not just about neurons, all of the kinds of concepts that we learn in multi scale neuroscience, including things that have to do with very complex system level behaviors and perceptual illusions and all of that.
But it carries over and in fact we've made AI tools that help scientists to make that make that mapping and design new experiments.
So, in order to, to, to show that this actually works we had to develop some new tools so we had to develop tools to read and write the electrical information of these networks, so that we can then ask, what do they think about we know what what brain networks
what do these somatic networks think about so so first we developed a voltage sensitive fluorescent dyes that allow us this is a an early frog embryo in time lapse this is not a simulation this is a real real data.
We can try to understand how all of the cells are talking to each other in terms of the electrical patterns that are there. We do a lot of computer simulation to try to understand.
Where do these currents come from given the the ion channels and pumps that are that are expressed. I'm going to show you an example of a couple of these patterns so.
This is this is something we call the electric face this is one frame from a voltage die movie of an early embryo putting its face together.
The thing in this frame is that long before the anatomical structure start to be developed and the genes come on to to regionalize the face, already the cells are showing a pre pattern of what's to come.
So here's where the animals right eye is going to be here's the mouth here the placards, this is, this is a pre pattern memory of what's going to happen.
And it's in fact it's a crucial one because if you disturb this memory, then you change the anatomy of the face and I'll show you that momentarily.
There is also of course there are pathological patterns, which you can induce by by by introducing for example human oncogene so here's some cells injected with a human oncogene.
They make a tumor eventually the past the sizes but before that, you will already see very early on that the cells have electrically disconnected from their environment, and are basically rolling back to their ancient unicellular roots.
They're just going to be single cell amoebas treat the rest of the body as external environment, because they are no longer able to connect to that electrical network that remembers what to do at a large scale.
So tracking patterns is nice but what's what's really critical are functional tools.
So you need a way to manipulate the bio electrical information in the individual cells, or, and or to control which cells talk to each other cells through these gap junctions.
So for this, we do not use any kind of applied fields there are no applied electrodes there are no magnets no waves no electromagnetic radiation.
So what we do is the same thing that neuroscience is do which is to manipulate the interface that the cells use to talk to each other. That means we can open and close these gap junctions, and we can control the open and close state of these channels using drugs by using mutant channels
using optogenetics. This is all molecular physiology.
The idea is that can we develop a neuroscience beyond neurons to understand what the electrical patterns are and control them to read and write information into the collective intelligence of these cells.
So our goal is to treat morphogenesis as the behavior in anatomical space of a collective intelligence just like you and I are a collective intelligence of a bunch of neurons and some other cells.
The morphogenetically active body is also a collective intelligence trying to make its way through anatomical space, and it's held together by the same cognitive blue that holds us together by electrical communication between between cells.
So, so let me show you some some examples how why do we think that these electrical states actually store behavioral patterns in morphogenesis well first I showed you a little electrical eye spot the thing that causes eyes to form in the in the in the early
20s. So we asked if we could reproduce that pattern somewhere else and so one thing we did was to inject potassium channel RNA into a different region in this case a region that was going to give rise to the gut.
If you do that it makes it makes eyes and these eyes can be perfectly normal because I'm exhibiting all the lens right in the optic nerve all the same stuff. Now notice a few interesting things first of all.
This is a highly modular trigger that is we do not provide all the information needed to build an eye. You know we provide a simple pattern of voltage we don't tell the cells what stem cells to have or what the pattern of a particular eye needs to be.
In fact, we have no idea how to do that, but that's okay because this the tissue does what we're doing is using a high level sub routine call to tell the cells a that that and I belongs here.
We don't micromanage the molecular states we let the cells figure it out. So not only is the bioelectric signal functionally causal, it controls what organ you get at a particular location it's not just an epi phenomenon, but also it's a very modular high level sub routine
call that they can can pattern at the level of organs not at the level of gene expression, or at the level of a single cell fate this is not about telling stem cells what to do. This is about dialing in very large scale pattern so so big big movements and morphogenetic space
not tiny states. The other thing that's fascinating about this is that, look at this example here this is a lens of an eye sitting out in the tail of a tackle somewhere, and the blue cells.
This is the lineage label these are the ones that we actually injected with our potassium channel. There's not enough of them to make a proper eye. So what they do is they recruit all their friends they recruit these local cells to help them complete the journey.
And that is something that we didn't have to teach them they already do that this is secondary instruction, we tell these cells make an eye. They do the computations that lead them to believe that there's not enough of them and that they should recruit their neighbors.
So that is something that other collective intelligences do like answer termites when that when a few of them find something that's too big to move what do they do they recruit their neighbors to help. So this is something that that is apparently general to various collective intelligences.
The idea of using high level triggers is is a regenerative medicine roadmap. So in frogs, which normally do not regenerate their, their legs the way salamanders do their 45 days later after amputation there's nothing we designed a bio electrical cocktail where we can induce an electrical
state that immediately triggers pro regenerative genes such as MSX one here. And then by 45 days you already have some toes you've got a toenail, eventually a pretty respectable leg that's touch sensitive and motile, you can see that you can see the pattern.
And in our latest experiments, 24 hours of stimulation with a wearable bioreactor and this drug leads to 18 months of leg growth.
Right, we do not micromanage the states we don't tell it how to build a leg this is part of the competency of the material, our job is to trigger it.
So, at this point I have to do a disclosure because David Kaplan and I are co founders of this company called more fasauticals ink. And what we're trying to do is to develop this technology using his bioreactor and our, our bioelectric payload to try to trigger this in families.
I want to now switch to a different organism and tell you the, the next part of the story which has to do with actually observing and rewriting these patterned memories. So this is a planarian.
And these flatworms are incredible because, among other things you can cut them into many pieces each piece has the sort of holographic property it remembers exactly what are what a whole planarian is supposed to look like and then you get normal worms.
They're also immortal. And if anybody's interested in that that we can ask me after the talk we can talk about why these these asexual worms have no aging is no such thing as an old asexual planarian, which is kind of remarkable.
And it's because of their incredible morphogenetic control. So, the thing about these planaria are that extremely reliably if you cut off the head and the tail and you just have this middle fragment.
100% of the time, it gives you a one head at work. How does it know how many heads it's supposed to have how does this fragment know to make a head here, but not to make a head there.
And it's not just position because, because actually this fragment at the exact same position is going to go on and it is going to make a head here. So how does this middle fragment know what to do how do you know how many heads you're supposed to have.
So we discovered this interesting electrical circuit that actually determines this. And the way it works is this there's a voltage pattern that is a standing pattern of resting potentials that is present in this in this tissue that basically says and this is one of the first
ones we've decoded so that's why I'm showing into one head, no end one tail. And that pattern can be rewritten we now have a way using ion channel drugs to rewrite that pattern.
So we can say two heads and of course this is pretty pretty messy. The technology still, you know, being worked out but you can see two heads here. If you do that, in fact, you get a two headed animal this is not Photoshop these are these are real.
But now now notice something really important. This electrical map is not a map of this two headed animal. This electrical map is a map of this perfectly normal looking one headed animal. So look the anatomy is normal.
The molecular biology is normal it has head markers in the head, no head markers in the tail, but it has the incorrect memory of what to do if it gets injured in the future.
The set point for anatomical homeostasis has been rewritten. Now that doesn't matter until it gets injured which is why there's a mismatch between this pattern and the actual anatomy.
But if it gets injured, then this is what it's going to do. So a couple of interesting things here first of all this is a counterfactual memory.
It is like the kind of a mental time travel you see in neuroscience where brains are good at remembering things that are not happening now because they either happen before or they might happen in the future.
And that's what this is this is the beginnings of that kind of capacity this, this, this creature can literally store at least one of two and I'm sure there are more but we've nailed down to two different ideas of what a correct
planarian is going to look like if it gets injured, and those multiple different representations can live in the same kind of body this is something else that happens in brains you don't need to change your, your brain genetics in order to learn something
new it's a it's amenable to multiple different goal states. And so that's what you're seeing here so at the beginning when I told you that there was literally a recorded memory of what the shape is supposed to be so that all the cells can can agree and
cooperate to build it this is it you're looking at the morphogenetic memory of how many heads there should be in planarian. Now, I call it a memory for many reasons one of them is that it has all the properties of memory.
We take this two headed worm, and we cut off the primary head we cut off this ectopic secondary head in plain water, no more manipulations of any kind.
We let it regenerate and you might think that it should go back to normal because the genome is normal we haven't touched the genetics the hardware is completely wild type.
But in fact it makes another two headed worm. And if you recut again and again and again. It continues to make two headed once the memory of what to do, like any good memory is long term stable in fact we think it's permanent until we change it back and we
do know now how to change it back. And once you change it, it keeps. And so you have long term stability but it's rewriteable if you know how to rewrite it. And it's got latency which I just showed you.
And it has these two possible outcomes and you can see here these two headed plan area hanging out. This is what happens.
So, what we are doing now is making computational models of, first of all the electric circuit, and all of the different states that there are that lead to the different anatomies, and the properties of that circuit which such as pattern completion which you see in a lot
of different actionist models of neural networks and things like that, where if part of the information is erased, how does the network recreate the entire information. And we're trying to merge that with models of active inference and things like that to try
to figure out how the collective actually makes decisions on an energy landscape, which is an anatomical like energy landscape that is powered by bioelectric effectors that the system can trigger to get to where it's going.
Now interestingly it's not just about head number. For example, you might wonder what about the head shape.
And here this animal with a nice triangular head can actually be caused to make the heads of other species. So we can make flat heads like a Pifolina, we can make round heads like an S Mediterranean.
The distance by the way between these species and this guy is about between 100 and 150 million years, but this hardware has no trouble visiting the other attractors in anatomical state space that are normally occupied by these other species, but you can go there if the
bioelectric network guides you there. And not only would you have a normal head shape for these other species but you would also have their brain shape, which is quite different, and their distribution of stem cells again specific to these other, these
other species, again without any genetic change. So you're starting to see the the incredible reprogrammability of this hardware it's actually willing to do many interesting things. In fact, we can make.
We can make worms that are don't even look like flat worms at all they you know there's these crazy spiky forms you know kind of cylindrical things.
These these hybrid shapes, you can explore regions of the latent space of that circuit that evolution normally avoids I mean these are not particularly ecologically competitive, but but the cells don't mind making them you know the latent space of possibilities is quite huge.
So when you think about by engineering and people say there are developmental constraints, and there are things you will never be able to build. I'm not sure that's true at all.
You know under normal circumstances of course there are the mental developmental constraints, but I think that those are more constraints of our imagination and our knowledge then of the cells themselves I think we're sort of imposing that on the cells I think they can build almost anything.
In fact, this thing right here this is kind of an amazing example.
Look, there is, there is a plant genome that normally very reliably makes these flat leaves, and you would look at those leaves and you would think originally that well that's what the genome knows how to do it knows how to make this nice flat structure.
But there's another bio engineer around which is not us, which are these wasps.
And what the wasps do is they put down an embryo and some signals, and those signals hack the morphogenetic cues of the plant and just as we did with the frog and the worm.
They hack these cells to get them to build something completely different this crazy round spiky red thing. And if not for them prompting these leaves with new stimuli, we would have absolutely no idea that these cells are even capable of doing this you know who would have known
if we hadn't seen this would have known that that leaf cells can be prompted to do something like this again not by changing the genome, but by providing signals and stimuli, the way that we want to do with our anatomical compiler.
So biology is is eminently hackable I think living things hack each other all the time. And this is what we as engineers need to understand we need to understand the interface, and we need to understand the competency of our material, so that we can begin to collaborate with it on building
and try to micromanage it. So we build tools, all the way from these kind of molecular biology things where we understand which channels are expressed where, all the way through bioelectric simulators to then higher level kinds of models
of cellular error detection and minimization decision making, so that eventually you get this kind of algorithmic model of how these anatomical decisions get made, so that you can actually interact with it and and hopefully be able to control anatomy
in a much better way. So this is this is something that we're working on this kind of full stack of modeling, but just the way that neuroscience goes from the proteins that are inside of synapses to some sort of psychiatry and psychoanalysis
up here where you can make very large scale system level changes.
Now, I want to very briefly point out that one of the things that comes out of this way of thinking is that, during, during all these processes, not only to do the cells pursue goals, but the size of those goals changes.
So, originally, both in early development and in evolution, unicellular organisms have little tiny cognitive light cones, all of their goals are very small. So this cell really is just only interested in the states pretty much around itself, right, that's a small goal.
But during evolution, these bioelectric networks and of course other forms of communication, allow those goals to grow the the size of the goal becomes huge because these cells are committed to this enormous, enormous kind of thing this this the structure in anatomical
space. In fact, they're perfectly willing to die for it. Many of these cells will die they will app up toast during this journey, but that's okay the collective itself is working very hard to maintain this goal if you deviate it by cutting it
it'll get right back there and then it'll stop. So the size of the goals towards which they work will grows radically, but that process has a failure mode and that failure mode is cancer, because occasionally those cells get disconnected and what you're looking at here is human
glioblastoma. These cells are not any more selfish than these cells, it's just their selves are smaller. So what's happening during during cancer is a constriction of the cognitive light cone, where the size of the self the border between self and world goes from this very large
thing or even larger in the body to back to here back to their evolutionary ancient past as basically unicellular amoebas. And so that means that if we really think about the scale of this cognitive light cone like what's the size of
the kinds of goal states that cells and tissues can can entertain. We now have a new entry point to under to controlling these things in clinical settings. So this is our example where what we've done we inject a nasty human oncogene like a
KRAS mutation or something like that and of course they will make a tumor. But instead of trying to kill those cells what we do is we co inject the ion channel that will hyperpolarize them and keep them functionally connected
electrically connected to their network. And if you do that, even though the oncogene is blazingly strong up here I mean you can see it everywhere. This is the same animal.
There isn't any tumor, because it's not the genetics that drives it's not that it's not that the cells are not irrevocably broken by this by this mutation. They were simply disconnected and if you force them to be reconnected.
They're now instead of pursuing little amoeba scale goals of proliferation and migration to wherever life is good.
Attastasis. Instead of that, they're continuing to work in a group towards making nice skin nice spinal cord muscle and all of that. So of course we're moving trying to move that now to some human medicine.
Okay, so the last story I'm going to tell today has to do with a kind of synthetic bioengineering, because so far what I've told you is our various attempts to control normal structures that these that these cells and tissues build for let's say regenerative medicine approaches but
but now let's focus on which plasticity is there what else are they capable of forming and pursuing.
So this is a this is mostly the work that we do in our Institute for computationally designed organisms.
Doug Blackiston did all the biology that I'm going to show you but this is a close collaboration with Josh bond guard at the University of Vermont and same treatment was his student when we did some of this early work.
Let's just let's just ask this question.
I'm going to take an early frog embryo. We're going to collect some cells up here that are destined to become skin so these are these are ectodermal cells they're going to become skin we liberate them from the rest of the body we dissociate them we put them in a pediatric what's going to happen.
Well many things could happen they could they could die, they could crawl off away from each other they could form a nice two dimensional monolayer like cell culture.
Instead what they do is overnight they come together, and they coalesce into this into this interesting little thing we call a xenobot.
Why is it a xenobot. Well, Xenopus lavis is the name of the frog, and we call it a bio bot because it is potentially a platform in which we can learn to program their form and function we're going to try to understand how to control this.
Here's what it looks like it's swimming along. It has little silly a little hairs that propel it against the water. These cells are these silly are normally used by tadpoles to and by frogs to move the mucus down the side down the side of their body.
But here they're using it to row against the water. They can go in circles and they can patrol back and forth, and they can be made into other shapes and they have these.
These collective behaviors they can interact with each other they can go on these kind of longer journeys. Here's one running a maze.
So what you see here is that it goes down this path, it takes the corner without bumping into the opposite ball. So it takes this corner here for some reason that the known only to itself it decides to turn around and go back where it came from.
So they have spontaneous we were not we're not actuating them we're not pulsing them with electricity or anything like that they swim on their own.
They have all kinds of fascinating behaviors. They can self heal. So if you, if you cut them almost in half, they will get the look at the force.
That's that's that's necessary through this hinge to fold this thing back, but basically they will they will form form back into their into their son about shape.
One of the most amazing things they do is they fulfill von Neumann's dream which is to have a construct that builds copies of itself or material it finds in its environment.
And if you provide these zenebots with loose skin cells here what what you see them doing is corralling these cells into little into little balls polishing these little these little balls, and then because they're working with an
agential material these are not passive pellets these are cells. What happens is these little balls mature into the next generation of zenebot, and guess what they do they run around and collect, but then create little balls themselves, which makes the next
generation and the next generation. And so what happens is that they do this kind of kinematic self replication, and they continuously make make copies of themselves.
Now, this is interesting because you might think that what the frog genome learn how to do is this this developmental sequence and these tadpoles with specific behaviors.
But now we find out that by liberating these cells, we didn't add anything to them we didn't give them new genes. We didn't do any genomic editing there are no weird nano materials are no scaffolds.
It was engineered by subtraction we liberated them from the normal signals that are coming from these other cells. What what these signals are doing is hacking these cells to make to force them into a very boring two dimensional life as the outer skin layer
of an embryo sitting there quietly just you know, repelling the bacteria and things like that. But here you get to find out what these cells are actually capable of in the absence of these other cues, they do something completely different.
They make a Xenobot. The Xenobots have their own developmental sequence over time this is, I think, almost three months old, I have no idea what it's trying to become but but there it is it's got this weird weird structure and they have different behaviors that you're seeing here.
So, this branch has no straightforward evolutionary backstory there's never been any Xenobots there's never been selection to be a good Xenobot.
There's no other creature that we know of reproduces by kinematic cell for application. So, where did this all come from it wasn't selection.
But but this is an emergent feature of of these cells, acting in a new kind of a configuration where they're liberated from the normal forces that are hacking them into their conventional form that we see.
By the way, their behaviors are super interesting they can learn and some other stuff that's not published so stay tuned for that story but we're studying their ability to perceive signals and remember them and so on.
So the last the very last thing I'm going to show you is this, having seen those Xenobots one thing that you might decide is that well, amphibians are pretty plastic embryos are definitely very plastic.
We know that animal caps make the ciliated epithelium maybe this is just a frog specific thing.
So, I want you to take a look at this little creature and ask yourself what do you think this is, and you might guess that this is something I got out of a pond somewhere it's like a primitive organism that they came from a waterway somewhere.
I can tell you that if we were to sequence the genome, what we would get is homo sapiens. This is 100% human genome. These are bio bots, we call them anthra bots made of adult human.
Donate tracheal epithelial cells. So patients many of them in their 70s and 80s donate a tracheal epithelial cells during biopsies, and these cells can be a coax to be these kind of bots.
So, so these anthra bots. Here's one moving down a scratch that we made in a culture of IPS derived neurons. So there's like like a wound. And what you see is that if a bunch of them we call this a super bot because a bunch of them kind of call us together to
make this kind of structure, what they'll do over four days or so is they'll start to heal this wound. They'll start to they'll start to knit together the two sides of this of this this damage here.
So, now, who would have thought that these that these tracheal cells which sit there quietly in your airway for decades, if given the opportunity can reboot their multicellularity become a self multi a little creature that actually has this capacity.
This is the first thing we found I'm going to guess they have probably hundreds of different or thousands of different other behaviors that are interesting. This is the first thing we found.
So, this idea here is that all of these, all of these cells and tissues have numerous competencies both individually and in groups, and our job is to start to understand them and start to program them, because much like with any complex system, the goal isn't to control them
necessarily bottom up so you can see here these are the different engineering tools that we have for different levels of complexity. I call this the spectrum of persuadability because you use different tools to manipulate these different kinds of systems.
And symbio and morphogenic engineering is really hard if you insist on micromanaging at the lowest level.
But we're dealing with a material that has all of this stuff built in, it's already here for you, and sure we can add some of these things with with synthetic biology and so on, but enormous power arises from from controlling these kind of capacities
up here. For example, those anthrobots are patient derived, a gentle interventions that could be injected back into the body, you don't need immune system suppression because they're the same cells as the patient.
In fact, they have the same priors as we do about what health and diseases what inflammation is what cancer is, we don't have to teach them this we don't have to construct all the sensors that they need and all this all this other machinery it's already there.
And so the final thing I'm just going to say is this that because of this amazing ability of biology to assume from the start that the parts are unreliable that you cannot count on being a proper embryo you who knows what configuration you're going to come into the world as biology is incredibly interoperable.
Pretty much any combination of evolved material, designed or engineered material and software is some kind of agent. So cyborgs hybrids chimeras of different kinds.
All of these things, some of them are already being made, but but many of them are coming. And in the future, basically what we're going to see is that all of Darwin's what when he said endless forms most beautiful it's the whole variety of life on Earth.
It's a tiny corner of the possible state space actually that we're going to explore. And for the young people in the audience in your lifetime, you are going to be living in a world where you are not going to be able to judge other beings based on what they look like or how they got here,
meaning evolved versus engineered because we're going to be seeing every combination of biology and technology moved in every direction.
And all of these are viable bodies and minds and we're going to have to develop strategies for an ethical synthbiosis with with these beings and to really understand how can we relate to other beings when they are not on the tree of life with you and questions about their structure or provenance are not the key parameters that you need in order to
understand how to relate to them. So I'm just going to summarize here by talking about this idea that we have, we've learned many lessons from the cellular collective intelligence navigating in anatomical space.
Bio electricity is a really cool interface by which we can communicate with the primitive cognition or the problem solving of those those kinds of those kinds of agents, we can exert top down some degree now over rational control over where they go in space.
There's immense plasticity. And we are working on some AI interfaces to really help communicate with those tissues. And I think that we're going to really unlock the potential of CRISPR synthetic biology and by robotics by understanding the intelligent
agential nature of the material not just the technology to control specific molecules, but to really understand the world from the perspective of the material. What does it remember what does it measure what are its goals, what competencies does it have.
What is its stress level of various things and so on. So if anybody's interested in this stuff.
Here are some papers that go into all of this in great detail.
I want to thank the people so these are the postdocs and grad students who did most of the most of the work that I showed you today.
We have lots of amazing collaborators and our technical support.
Lots of funders to thank for supporting our work, including these companies. So we have commercial source funding from from these labs.
Yeah, and in particular, you know, the animals really are the most important component here. So I thank you for listening and I
