I'm going to talk about certain cabling and how living systems construct the objects that they found in the niche.
You know, this is an old idea, due initially to Gantt, and then developed first in the 20th century by Jakob von Weitzschul,
that living systems are active devices that create their universe.
And then I'm going to talk about this idea of what we have been doing lately to advance.
Then for the people who don't know, you know, I come from the lab of Madeleine and Varela that they created many years ago in the University of Chile,
that they created the idea of autopoyesis, and the idea of autopoyesis is that an autopoyetic network is a network that has two properties.
First, it has a circular organization in the sense that it's a network of processes that produce components,
and these components are essential to the existence of the processes that make them.
This is the idea of a circular organization, and the other idea is that this network, by its very functioning, produces self-encapsulation,
and that this is the secret, according to Maturana and Varela, that this autopoyetic organization is the real secret of biological systems.
And they created an idea around 1970, between 69 and 72, and this idea that self-agrication, because this is a notion of self-agrication,
is the core of biological phenomena, is not new at that time.
Before them, Robert Rosen, 10 years before at least, has published a theory called MR Systems,
that is also a theory of self-agrication that is very obscure at that time, and for many, many, many years.
It was a very obscure theory because Robert Rosen only wrote for himself.
Then it has very appealing ideas, but for many, many years nobody paid attention to the work of Rosen.
Then these two ideas, autopoyeses and MR Systems, are more or less interlinked.
And if you want to read about this two theory, I recommend two books.
Rosen wrote at the end of his life in 1981, a book called Life Itself, where he summarized his life work.
And the big summary is that Rosen thought that he found a demonstration,
a demonstration of how self-agrication can logically appear in a network of processes that are coupled through the fabrication of components.
He thought that he has a mathematical theorem, and from my viewpoint, this is a very appealing idea, but it's not correct.
But even if it is not correct, it's extremely interesting, and we should devote a lot of time to reinterpret Rosen.
What is nice of the work of Rosen is that he understood that self-agrication can lead to anticipatory behaviors in systems with self-agrication.
Then in summary, Rosen tried to demonstrate how self-agrication can appear in a network.
And Maturana Varela on the other side, they analyzed the consequence of self-agrication, the consequences for the immune system, for evolution.
They didn't try to demonstrate how self-agrication arises.
They put it like an axiom. The central fact of the immune system is self-agrication, and they put a lot of attention to the notion of autonomy.
They demonstrate that self-agricating systems will show autonomy.
And they wrote, it's initially in Spanish, but that book, Autopoyesis and Commission, was written, was published in 1980.
And from then on, it has been a very terrible explosion of different words exploring the notion of Autopoyesis with different degrees of quality.
And I'm going to use a lot of diagram in this presentation.
This is the symbol of an Autopoyetic system. It's the Ouroboros, the snake that eats itself.
And remember that the important thing is self-agrication and self-encapsulation.
Also, very few people know that Autopoyesis, that this theory about metabolism and about self-agrication, in fact, began as a theory about the organization of the immune system
by a paper that Maturana wrote in 1969 in the then very advanced laboratory in Illinois University called Biological Computer Laboratories.
And here's the fundamental idea. We are used to the computer metaphor where the brain captures external stimulus, analyzes the stimulus using logic that we think is a universal tool,
and then it produces a correct response. Then this is the metaphor of the brain as a computer.
On the other hand, Maturana in 1969 said, no, no, no, no, no, the brain doesn't analyze the external reality.
The brain, the only thing that he does continuously, he's in a loop, action perception, action perception, and is in this loop that the objects are created.
Then the nervous system does not analyze the reality, but it creates internal correlations between action and perception.
And because essentially a living system, also a very important point here, a living system is before anything else, an acting device, they need to act.
Perhaps they are the self-applicating device, but they exist in a universe that demand action.
And a living system always must answer the fundamental question, what to do next? And this is valid for a bacteria, or for us, or for everything.
And like in some sense, the fundamental question of a living system is to retreat or to advance. This is the ever-present question.
Then you cannot analyze a living system in the void. Here I show that a living system is always in a relation, you know, a living system is always in a relation with the medium through action and perception.
And here is a new concept in the theory, a living system is a relation between an organism and its medium.
I will put here perhaps a living system is a relation between an auto-polytic system and its medium. You know, they don't exist in a void.
Here I will show you the next slide, is the fundamental idea that I'm going to touch today. And this is the idea that Maturana thought was his great contribution, and also Varela thought that it was a great contribution.
Maturana called this idea structural coupling and Varela in action. And the idea is as follows.
Let me change my color a little. At the right, not the left, you have a living system, an auto-polytic system that is in a very elementary relation with its medium.
Then initially, because it's the first encounter between the auto-polytic system and the medium, the relation is undefined.
You know, it's not clear what is the loop action perception, but if the living system, the auto-polytic system continues to exist in that environment, in a recursive manner, little by little the relation begins to be more defined.
And the living system and the medium change in a complementary way. And here in T2, you have that the living system is complementary, totally complementary to an external object.
An external observer here will reach the incorrect opinion that the living system adapted to the external object without understanding that the living system in fact co-created the external object because of this recursive interaction with the medium.
And this process is called structural coupling and Varela called it in action.
Then this is why it's so important the relation between the living system and its medium.
And then I will repeat that initially the interaction between the organs and the meal is not established, but little by little, if the interaction is repetitive and recursive, the medium and the organ is changed in a congruent manner.
And I must insist also that a naive observer will think that the organ has adapted to the object while the real phenomenon is totally different because the organ has produced, has organized and the medium that didn't have, excuse me, didn't have a structure, has organized the medium, excuse me,
has organized the medium into an object.
And here it's a very important thing to this very theoretical idea can be put in the context of variation inference.
And here you have the basic idea of how it happened. You have the medium here that affects the sensory lamina of the living system and it produces a very complex set of internal signals.
And these internal signals are used by the organist to compute, in some sense, the future, the action that the organist must must produce.
Then the first step that the organist must take is to compute this probability is, which is the probability that I am facing object X, due to the fact that I am seeing the internal signal S i, S sub sub i.
Then the auto-projective organization inside the organist solves an inferential problem.
That is, what is the probability that I am facing object Y, given that the internal signal are S k.
Then this is the core of the mathematical problem.
Then you can make this idea a little more precise, imagine that you have a universe with three objects, three objects, alphabeta and gamma, and every of these objects produce an internal signal.
And these internal signals are not simple molecules, but are family of molecules, and they are very complex manifolds of molecules.
And then you have the internal signals that are produced and the object or actions.
And then in every single second, in every single encounter between the organist and the medium, this, you have like a conditional probability matrix that represents every entry of the matrix,
to present which probability that I am given an object alpha, given that I am seeing the signal three by example.
And what is interesting is that you can consider an updating equation in order to transform this very generic formulation into an updating mechanism
and transform it as a classifier, and in this way it is very similar to the fifth theory of Dr. Friston.
But in Chile we don't think about this problem in this manner, we add a little twist, because in this figure what you see is a universe where the objects, alphabeta and gamma, pre-exist.
Pre-exist to the organism, then this goes against the grain of our theory where the objects are produced by the encounter between the organist and the medium.
Then the idea that it's a classifier, we don't agree with that, we have another view that is as follows.
Initially, then this is why this is called a structural coupling by yesh and inference and object construction.
Initially, when you have an organism that is facing a medium, he's facing like, he doesn't have a precision about which are the perturbations,
you know the perturbation can be many, many, many different things, which is the set of internal signals that every one of these perturbations triggers,
and which are the actions that this organism takes, then initially nothing is defined, not the signal, the actions or the objects.
Then our idea, and this is what we're developing now, is that an object then is like a random walk in the space of action and signals,
because the organism initially, he doesn't understand what an object, the boundaries between the different perturbations cannot be asignated to a given object or to another one.
Then you have in the face space of action and signal, you have a random walk, and this particularly random walk that little by little gets refined, that is an object.
Then an object is this particularly trajectory, and then it's not a point, you know, it's not the final point in the trajectory, it's the trajectory itself,
and the trajectory itself changes because of random event, depending on what you're encountering, and by an updating mechanism that is more or less like a heavy and updating mechanism.
Then an important that the autonomy, the autonomy that you would discover in living system, means that the objects that the living system created are not necessarily equal to the object that the experimental observer detects in his own world.
Then currently we are developing this theory of like stochastic random walk, and in this sense is very different from FEB, because now we don't treat the organism as a classifier, but as a constructor of distinctions.
And after talking with Wesley last week and seeing his wonderful setup, you can imagine how this theory can be applied to the neural culture that he's planning to use with this amazing technology of 1000 and 1000 of electrodes,
where you obtain an electrical state of the network, and this electrical state of the network constitute the actions of the network upon the environment that is defined by electrical stimulation and chemical stimulation.
Then an object could be a sequence of electrical and chemical stimulation, you know, an object would be a very complex chain of events, and that initially you will not discover easily what these objects are,
but you can put the experiment of Wesley in the framework of structural coupling, and here I have developed two different ways, new methods to assess neural activity.
One is something that we call the coefficient of variation of the envelope that detects how much a neural signal is similar to Gaussian noise.
And the other is that we use the framework of filter Poisson process to interpret collective signals as not as being created by the addition of sine waves, but by the independent activation of pulses that generate the overall signal.
Then we can, in this way, we can, I think, measure, quantify the electrical state of a neural culture in the new dimensions.
Then this is what I wanted to tell you at the very beginning of the meeting, I am open to questions.
Thank you very much.
