Hello everyone, welcome to the Mindscape Podcast. I'm your host Sean Carroll.
I bet that most of us out here have had the experience of trying to put together a bookshelf
or something like that from IKEA or from wherever, some somewhat complicated piece of furniture
or something to have around the house for which you get blueprints, instructions, as well as pieces,
the raw materials, right? And so we have a certain paradigm in mind about how something
complicated like a bookshelf comes to be. There's a blueprint, a set of instructions,
there's stuff that we're going to put together, and there's some agent, us, that does that work.
It's very natural then, because we're familiar with that kind of process, to think that something
like that also happens when you put together a living organism, right? When you put together
a person or a whale or a tree, there is some blueprint set of instructions, which presumably
is in the DNA, right, in the genome of the organism. And then there is some agents putting
them together, presumably the proteins that get their information from the DNA via the RNA,
and they go off and they build things and voila, you get an organism. So it turns out it's almost
not at all like that pretty much, okay? That's some truth to the idea that there are instructions
or information contained in our DNA that will go into constructing an organism such as a person,
but the actual process by which it happens is much more nuanced, much richer, not quite that
simple paradigm we have in mind of an instruction kit and agent and some raw materials. And partly
that's because, you know, we are not intelligently designed, right? This whole system that we have
in us of DNA, genome, RNA, proteins, the organs that we have, the cells in our body, this all
evolved in a complicated process and whatever kinds of dynamics and process was important and useful
as far as evolution is concerned is what we ended up using, okay? It's not supposed to be
code in a computer where it's carefully commented or anything like that, it's just
what was thrown together and what eventually got used. And as a result of that, biologists keep
finding ways in which the morphology, the shape and the way things are put together in organisms
comes to be in fun and different ways than you might expect from the simple Ikea paradigm.
So our guest today, Michael Levin, is a biologist at Tufts University and it's actually a little
bit difficult to describe what he specializes in because it's kind of many different projects that
are all fascinating to me, but in the overall space of talking about how information and physical
dynamics come together to make organisms and all their different functions and things like that.
Not only does it help us understand the particular features of organisms that we know and love,
but to someone like me who cares about emergence and different levels of description of reality,
it's fascinating because we can start asking questions like, at what point is a decision
being made by an organism or by the processes that are going into making that organism? Is it
anything like a computer? Is there a separation between hardware and software? What is the role
of memory? What is the role of dynamical processes? All these fun questions. So we're going to be
talking about how cells, how information and how organisms all fit together. I'm not sure that I
am capable or qualified to draw a single unified theme from it, but I think you'll find that it's
a fascinating conversation that touches on many kinds of things we've been talking about on
Mindscape for quite a while now. So let's go.
Michael Levin, welcome to the Mindscape podcast. Well, thank you so much. Pleased to be here.
This is an interesting podcast for me to think about organizing and talking about because you
do so many different kinds of things and I finally hit on a starting point of asking you about
one of the experiments you described in your papers with the Xenopus tadpole. I think that's
how you pronounce it, the Xenopus. You basically, if I understand correctly, you in your lab or
your collaborators rearranged the face of a little baby frog tadpole and it somehow,
nevertheless, grew correctly into the right shape. Is that roughly speaking correct?
Yes, that's correct. And I do think it's a pretty important experiment and it's one that we can
definitely form this conversation around because it illustrates something very important. So it
used to be thought because all tadpoles look the same and all frogs look the same that basically
what the genome could do is somehow encode a hardwired set of movements that would transform
a standard tadpole into a standard frog. So the idea would be that the nostrils, the eyes,
the jaws, all these things have to rearrange themselves to become a frog. And so what we did
was a start out by making something we call Picasso tadpoles where everything is in the wrong
place. So the jaws might be off to one side, the eyes might be on the top of the head or
everything sort of mixed up and we can talk about how we make those. And then the remarkable thing
is that they largely become normal frogs. So all of these little pieces that make up the head and
the face will move in novel unnatural configurations until they land in the correct positions to make
a frog face. And so what this is telling us is that the genetics in fact gives us a system that's
very good at reducing error. That what it does is continuously work to sort of reduce the difference,
the delta between the configuration you have now and the configuration that it in some way
remembers as a correct frog face and that things stop moving and stop proliferating
when that error is sufficiently small. Yeah, which is a remarkable way of thinking about it,
because it's probably not what most people have in mind. Well, I say most people, I mean me,
you know, not being a biologist myself. I mean, I think that we think of what's packed into our
genome as roughly the equivalent of the instructions you get from Ikea or something like that, right?
Here are some building blocks. Here are the steps you have to take in order. And at the end, hopefully,
you get the finished product. But so you're saying it's not like that. No, it's absolutely not like
that. And on the one hand, we kind of already know it's not like that, because if you actually,
and look, the view that you've described is definitely the kind of the mainstream perception
that everybody has. And I've given talks to nine year olds in middle school and so on. And when I
ask them what determines what comes out of an egg, you know, it can be a bird, a dinosaur, a snake,
you know, what determines the shape of what comes out of an egg, everybody says the genome.
And in a certain sense, that's true. But if you actually look at now that we can read genomes,
if you actually look at what's in the genome, you're not going to find anything in there about
the size, the shape, the type of symmetry of the organism that's going to come out. And what's
important to realize is that we currently do not have the ability to look at a genome and guess
anything about what the shape of the organism is going to be. Now you can cheat and compare it to
the genome of another organism that you do know what it looks like. But this idea that you can
read the genome and sort of understand what the anatomy is going to be is not the case.
And that is because the genome does have a recipe, but it's not a recipe for shape,
it's a recipe for proteins. So what the genome does is prescribe what protein hardware every cell
in your body gets to have. So these are the smallest sorts of building blocks from which
cells build various structures. And so it's sort of like you're not getting the design of the IKEA
shelf, you're getting a description of the metal that goes into the screws and the wood or whatever
it is that goes into the other part. It's a description of a very low level aspect of the
system you're actually interested in. Yeah, and it's what do you say we can't look at the genome
and see what the shape is going to be? Is that our fault? I mean, is it implicit in there,
but there's just a lot of steps? Or is it really that even in principle you couldn't look at the
genome and figure out what the animal is going to be? Well, that's a great question. So let's
think about what we mean by in principle. So if you were to sort of allow Laplace kind of simulate
all of the micro interactions, then certainly you could. If you take into account the environment,
even things like let's say turtles, which use external temperature to determine the sex of the
offspring, you could figure out what was going to happen. So in a certain molecular sense,
if you were to simply absolutely model the lowest level of physics, yes, it's in there.
But we would like to do something better than that. We would like to understand the encoding.
And from that perspective, it's not our fault in the sense that that's not what's encoded there. So
what's encoded is not the actual anatomical features. What's encoded are the proteins and a
little bit about the order in which some of those proteins will appear as a function of time. So
from that perspective, even though developmental biologists are doing a very nice job trying to
understand how all of these organs come to be, we really need to understand a lot more. And you
can sort of, an example you might think about is the kind of bell curve that you get from
dropping marbles into a Galton board, right? Like where does the shape of that bell curve come from?
So in a certain sense, you know, at a micro level, you could probably calculate it out and predict
maybe if the arrows were small enough. But in a larger sense, that shape is not encoded anywhere
in the material of the marbles or the definition of the board or anything like that. It's because
what that device is doing is harnessing particular laws of physics. And what embryos do and all
living structures do is they harness the laws of physics and the laws of computation. So this is
very important. And so what you get in the genome is the description of a very important and very
interesting machine, which is able to generate and process information exploiting various laws of
physics and computation to make certain outcomes. And what's super cool about it is that these outcomes
are reliable most of the time. So most acorns give you oak trees and most, you know, fish eggs give
you a fish. But actually, it's way better than that because it is not only robust to all kinds of
perturbations, but it's actually reprogrammable, which I think is one of the most exciting aspects
of it. I guess it's very hard for us to escape the metaphors that we use to think about these
things, like as if there were blueprints or an instruction manual in the DNA. But the reality is
more, I guess, like you're saying, the DNA makes RNA, the RNA makes proteins, and the DNA is chosen
not because someone wanted to design something, but just because making these proteins in this
right environment gets us the morphology, the shape that is been selected for by natural selection.
Yeah, this is correct. So natural selection, of course, shapes the proteins that cells will use.
I think a really good analogy, and we can come back to sort of the status of metaphors in this
field because I think it's not quite what a lot of people think it is. But one useful metaphor
for this is the distinction between software and hardware. So you can imagine that if you had a bunch
of electric parts, you could connect them together. And if they were the right kind of parts, one of
the things you would get would be an electric circuit that might do something. And one of the
things that might do if your parts included transistors is that it might carry out logic
functions. And so it might be able to carry out certain certain operations that would be logic
that from which you could build up all kinds of complex computations. And so now you could ask
where the laws of computation live. That's an interesting question. Certainly, right? Certainly,
you know, the operations of AND gates and nor gates and things like this, we're not in the
electric parts that you got a specification to. But what evolution did was shape the parts.
And it shapes the parts in a way that when those parts interact together, they make a circuit.
And the part that we study in my lab is largely the electrical aspect of it, which is why I keep
coming back to these kind of electronics analogies. The amazing thing about these circuits is that they
take advantage of really interesting laws of physics having to do with electricity and how
that propagates and the laws of computation, which allows cells and tissues to make decisions
and to have memory and things like that. And that's where, you know, evolution really shines,
is to exploit these laws of physics. Right. But I guess that what I'm trying to
understand better is this idea that there's no top down directing of what's going on in the
individual cells. I mean, the cells that make up my liver and my brain have the same DNA in them,
and they're just doing their production of proteins, and it sort of all fits together
at the end of the day. And it's not that anyone wrote software to do that, right? It's just that
the DNA that makes that happen is the one that gets passed on.
Well, I'll say two things about that. Certainly, no one wrote the software in the sense of some
sort of designer. So that's for sure. But I will say that this issue of top down control is tricky.
And what I'm about to say is probably not the mainstream sort of story of developmental biology
that you'll get from a textbook. But this is how I see it. If you look at it, it's a multi scale
problem. So if you look at it from the scale of individual cells or molecules, then that's
basically correct. They are simply following sort of local rules about what they're going to do.
But I think the evidence is pretty good now that there is a larger level of organization that you
can look at. And this larger level of organizations at the tissue and organ level is performing some
interesting computations that deforms the possible action space for the subunits. So what that means
is that it basically alters the space of what's possible for the cells and the molecular
networks to do so that by simply following very mechanical rules, sort of minimization of
if free energy and things like this, they end up doing things that are in line with a global
body plan. So you can look at things that tissues and organ level structures are doing
that are very large scale computations and decision making about things like,
hey, is our face patterned correctly? Do we have the right number of fingers? Are the limbs long
enough? And the outcome of those computations are instructions to individual cells to either
proliferate or turn on certain genes or turn off certain genes. And at that point, the cells are
just doing what the chemistry sort of suggests in the sense that there isn't any magic there.
But if you look at the level above, what's happening is that all of those low level reactions
are being harnessed towards a higher level goal that none of the individual cells are
capable of perceiving. So at the single cell level, there's no such thing as an arm or an eye
or anything like that. No single cell can perceive that. But the group agent, and so I think
fundamentally this is a problem of swarm intelligence and group cognition, the group agent
has very sort of rough memories of what the correct pattern should be, and it has the
ability to make decisions about whether or not the current state is close enough to the target
state, and if not adjust behaviors. So I think from that perspective, there is a bit of top
down control, and we can talk about some of our worm experiments that tend to show this,
that is not in the sense of some sort of rational designer that writes software,
but in the cybernetic sense where there are systems that reduce error from a stored set point.
And so as long as they can remember what that set point is, they can then have this kind of homeostatic
cycle that harnesses the parts of the machine towards the goal, which is again, not something
magical, but is a representative target state towards which the whole system tries to get to.
There are times when we have a long stretch of time ahead of us where we're doing something,
but our attention is not completely absorbed. That's when Audible.com and their audiobook
selections can come to your rescue. I know that I've driven across the country several times,
and my favorite thing to do is to listen to ancient poems. I've listened to the Iliad,
the Odyssey, the Aeneid, Beowulf, helps make those long highways in Nebraska fly by. If you'd
like something a little bit more modern, my own books are on Audible.com. I was the one who read
Something Deeply Hidden and The Big Picture. The other ones read by others, so let that color
your choices. As an Audible member, you get one credit every month, good for any title in the
entire premium selection. And those titles are yours to keep forever in your Audible library.
Now is the best time to try Audible, because with their President's Day event, you're getting one
of their best offers of the year, only $9.95 a month for your first six months. Just head to
Audible.com slash Minescape or text Minescape to 500-500. That's Audible.com slash Minescape
or text Minescape to 500-500. So is there a sense then in which the frog genome literally has
the shape that it wants, that has encoded in it, the shape that it wants its body and its face to
have, and then the large-scale whatever shape it currently has reacts back against that genome
to sort of say, well, what do we do next to move us closer to that goal? Is that a right way of
thinking about it? That's close. I mean, I would say what the genome encodes is a bunch of parts
that when implemented in parallel, it makes a piece of hardware that has a very reliable
default behavior. That default behavior is a set of biochemical, biomechanical, and bioelectrical
circuits that if nothing weird happens to them by their normal behavior in their normal
environment, they will generate a set of patterns that give rise to a standard frog. And so the
real outcome, if you ask the question of where does a frog face come from, it's a sort of interplay
of the constraints imposed by the genetics which specifies the machine and the laws of physics
and computation which exist around it. Now, there's an additional factor as it turns out
that this machine has some really interesting properties. Evolution apparently doesn't just
favor machines that only have one outcome, but they favor, at least in many cases, it favors
machines with a particular capability which is a separation of hardware from software. What I mean
is it's able to represent different possible set points, and what the cells know how to do really
well is to build towards the set point. And if the set point changes, you don't have to rewire the
cells. I mean, that's really interesting. That reprogrammability is a really powerful
aspect of all this. I guess this is what I'm learning, not just from this conversation,
but from other podcast interviews I did with Carl Friston, for example, with his
free energy principle. I'll make a grandiose claim, and then you can fact check me here.
In many ways, the way that biological organisms work, either in sort of day-to-day dynamics or
evolution or development of the organism, is not this sort of Laplacian idea that you give me
exactly the state right now, and I will tell you what direction to move in. It's this almost
teleological way of thinking about things, just had David Hague on the podcast, and he wants to
let us talk in teleological terms. It's like, rather than saying, if this, then that, if this is
where we are now, here's where we should go, it's like, well, here is where we want to get to,
figure out a way to get there. Yes, I think that's absolutely correct. I think biology has been
trapped in this teleophobia, which is doing us a great disservice. I think it's completely,
not only fine, but absolutely necessary to talk about those kinds of things.
I think that's exactly what biological systems do, and we can talk about how I think this
aspect of goal-directedness, this multi-scale goal-directedness, is crucial for evolution.
I think it's what makes evolution work. It's what makes for much greater evolvability.
I'm a big fan of Friston's work. We've used it in our own research. I think it's absolutely
correct in that not only do living things have to predict their environment, but they actually
have to predict themselves. Living things are a patchwork at different scales of systems that
cooperate and compete with each other. Part of all of that is being able to guess what's going to
happen next, and having a preference about what you'd like to have happen next. Everything is
working towards minimizing that delta from what it expects and what's actually going to happen.
This is critical for evolvability. I think what's important about that
that teleology isn't simply that we allow it or disallow it, but I think we need to
move it from a philosophical problem, which a lot of people have argued in a vacuum about
whether it is or is not okay to talk this way, or whether all models in biology should be framed in
terms of biochemistry and molecules and not goals and things like this. I think it's an empirical.
It's a very practical problem. The question, it's a little like Dan Dennett's intentional stance,
it's very simple. You just say, what level of intentionality do I ascribe to my system
that best gets me to new prediction and control? Sometimes you'll err on the side of attributing
too much agency, and it's wasted, and you can do better with a simpler model. Sometimes you're
applying simple laws to systems that internally have a very rich protocognitive structure that
should be much better off taking advantage of. I've argued that for regenerative medicine,
and just in our lab and others, it's driven a ton of work to novel experiments that otherwise
would not have been done, to actually ask, what does the system know? What does it expect? What
are the preferences? What goals is it trying to achieve? This is on all scales of organization.
You and I are probably familiar with the distinction between, in physics, Newtonian
mechanics versus the principle of least action. I noticed that the principle of least action is
actually quoted on your webpage, and it's interesting because it's two different ways of
conceptualizing exactly the same problem and getting exactly the same answer, but from very
different languages. Maybe for the people out there who don't hang out on the wrong street
corners and hear about the principle of least action, why don't you tell us how physicists
think about that, because it's clearly related to what you're saying about biology.
Well, I'm probably going to make a massive fool of myself here because I'm not a physicist. You,
I'm sure, are a much better place to give a proper definition of it. But what I understand is that
there are lots of physical systems, and probably all of them, where one of the things you can do,
so let's say trying to understand how light is going to propagate through a bunch of lenses,
stacked one after the other, things like that. You could go after the micro details and try to
use Maxwell's equations and things like this to really model every piece of it, and eventually
you'll crank through and you'll get the answer. Apparently, it turns out that you could get the
exact same answer with a lot less effort if you simply make an assumption that what the light
wants to do is to minimize the effort, so to speak, or the action that it will take to get there.
I mean, that's a rough, that's how I understand these things. And I think that's an incredibly
powerful concept, because asking about how much effort does it take to compute something,
I think is really important, because when people, especially in the biosciences where things impact
medicine a lot, and people say, well, everything should be done at the lowest possible level,
and he said, well, you don't really mean the lowest, you don't want to talk about quantum
foam, what you really want to talk about is biochemistry, right? That's often when people
say to me, ah, you know, you've got to reduce this, and you don't really mean that. What you mean
is you've picked a level and that level is biochemistry. And my point is you can't, and this
is people like Dennis Noble have been saying this much better than I, that you can't simply pick a
level because you like it, you have to pick the best level, and how do you know what the best
level is? And the best level is how much effort do I need to put in to control the outcome? And in
the case of, you know, regenerative medicine, that outcome might be we're going to replace a complex
finger or a hand that's way too complicated for anybody to build by hand from stem cells or anything
like that. So the question is going to be, to what extent is your system persuadable? There's this,
you know, I visualize this axis, right? On the one hand, you have things like cuckoo clocks,
which are not persuadable. You are, you know, if you want to make a change in the way that system
works, you have to rewire, you have to physically change the hardware. There's no getting around it.
And then you have systems way on the sort of on the right side of that spectrum, which might be
humans, or they might be other kinds of advanced cognitive systems, where trying to intervene
in their activity on the molecular scale is maybe possible. But realistically, you know, the sun's
going to burn down before you figure out how to tweak all the cells in a person's brain to get
this or that to happen. So there you're probably better off with stimuli, with experiences, with
inputs that take advantage of the cognitive structure of the system to convince them or
motivate them or train them to do various things. And then in between are all kinds of agents,
many of which we know, so animals and simple AIs and basic life forms and cells. And then
all kinds of agents that don't exist yet. I mean, I think one of the fun things to talk about is the
space of possible agents, which I think is going to be actually enormous in our lifetime. And
somewhere on that scale is the correct way to interact with everything you come into contact
with. And you really have to ask what is the, what are, you know, are there goals that your system is
trying to achieve? And are you better off rewriting those goals or motivating the system
than micromanaging it? And I think it seems like physics is telling you at the lowest level that
this kind of stuff is already baked in. Yeah, I mean, I can't help but talk about the physics
and least action just a little bit more, because it's really fascinating to me. I mean, like we
said, there is this way, I even did a video on this in my summer quarantine project video series
called The Biggest Ideas in the Universe about how you can either be Newtonian and say, well,
I know where I am now. And all the laws of physics tell me is what to do next. Or you can be,
I don't know, Lagrangian or whatever it's called. You can, you can say, well, of all the histories
I could have in the future, I will take the one that minimizes the certain function, right? The
action. And that latter one just seems a little magical. I mean, you're saying like, well, how
did it know? But you show that in fact, secretly, they're mathematically exactly the same. It's
just a matter of convenience. But the convenience is extreme. When you become a modern particle
physicist, you're constantly writing down this action, this thing that is the thing you minimize
globally rather than locally. And it's just a much more convenient way of talking about it.
So I guess the question that is obvious to me now is, is there a reason why it doesn't have
something to do with the fact that biological organisms are these multi-level systems where
there's collective action from all of our tiny little cells coming together? Is that, does that
help explain why it is convenient to talk in these more global terms rather than just locally
following the action of every little atom or molecule or cell? Yeah, I think, well, I think
there are two aspects to this. The sort of more metaphysical aspect is in which I'm not sure how
much value this is, but I'll just say it because it's something I've been thinking about is that
if you ask yourself, let's say people who are into panpsychism or this idea that
some sort of intentionality is everywhere fundamentally, one of the problems that people
often have with this is that they scale down the physical system. They say, okay, now let's
consider a rock or something like that. And then they fail to scale down the intentionality that
I think I'm seeing is they say, well, it's ridiculous to say that a rock has hopes and dreams. And
of course it is. So what you need to do is you need to proportionally scale down the cognition.
So if you ask yourself, what would intentionality or freedom in the sense of indeterminacy look
like in the simplest possible case, I think what you get is exactly what particle physics is telling
us. So if you ask, what would freedom look like at the most minimal kind of instantiation,
I think you would predict something that looks like quantum indeterminacy. And if you ask,
what would goal-directedness look like at the simplest possible layer of reality,
I think you would get exactly what these action principles look like. So from that perspective,
I think it's a scale. And the way I think it scales is this. When we look at living things now,
all we're seeing are, it's a selection effect, all we're seeing are things that survived the
gauntlet of competition and selection. So we don't see any living forms that are not good at
pursuing goals. Those things disappeared very early on. Now, maybe we'll be able to create
some life that doesn't do that as people work on synthetic origins of life and synthetic life and
so on. But any sophisticated life that makes it past the first few steps of competition
is going to be great at pursuing goals in the very simple sense of homeostasis.
So one of the things that we're working on now is to try to understand the scaling of goals
from tiny homeostatic goals, like either chemical reactions that try to keep certain
entropic principles in particular ranges or single cells like bacteria that try to keep
metabolic states in particular ranges. How do you scale goals from these very
modest types of goals to something that's much larger, like the goal of having a properly shaped
hand or face with particular, and then how do you pivot the whole thing from early organisms that
and in fact still current organisms that execute goals in morpho space, meaning the space of
possible anatomical configurations. And you sort of pivot, you run the same algorithms, but now
your space is three-dimensional space outdoors. So now you can run around and have behavior and
have goals that are, hey, I'm going to run this maze because I remember the structure of the maze
and at the end there's some cheese and along with the way I'm going to do this and that. So
this idea, life has to start out with homeostatic loops. I don't think there's any way around it.
And those loops scale into progressively more impressive goals that what's one way to organize
all this is to ask yourself, what are the spatiotemporal boundaries of the goals that any given system
could potentially have? So it's sort of like think of a light cone, so to speak, that says,
okay, here in space and time, here is the boundary of things I can possibly have goals about. So
if you're a goldfish or a tick, those both in space and time, it's rather modest, you can only
conceive of things that are right in front of you and not too far in the past and you maybe have a
little bit of anticipatory ability. But by the time you get to great apes or humans, you could
have goals that are massive in scale and just a huge both in terms of time, in terms of memory
and anticipation that you could be working towards things that are going to happen long
after you die and things like that. So that's one way to organize all this is by the scale of
the goals that these systems are capable of maintaining. It can be hard sometimes to get
up the motivation to start exercising, but once you get going, it can be really thrilling. Peloton
is an easy way to overcome that barrier to getting started and staying motivated once you're there.
Peloton has inspiring instructors, amazing music, endless fitness variety, and an engaging community.
Whether you're looking for some extra encouragement, structured workouts, or just in the mood to laugh,
their instructors are there to bring out the best during each class. And with epic artist
collaborations, and there's specially curated music, whether you're in the mood for some hip hop,
pop, country, the Peloton bike has the right music to keep you entertained and motivated all year long.
With the All Access membership, you get more like a family plan for no additional cost.
You can bring home the Peloton experience for your whole family with access to their entire
class library. So get started on your Peloton journey. Go to onepeloton.com to learn more.
That's O-N-E-P-E-L-O-T-O-O-N dot com.
I thought of myself a lot about levels of description and reality. I mean, my book,
The Big Picture, just talked about levels a lot. And I'll be honest, I've always been very resistant
to the idea of causation acting between levels, downward or upward. It seems to me, and I think
this is just my fundamental physicist training kicking in, that levels should be autonomous
from each other. And I mean, you can derive one from another, maybe, but they act differently.
But maybe I should just start thinking differently when it comes to biology or human
scale things. I mean, certainly the words you're using seem to indicate to me that you find it
useful to speak as if what's happening on one level, like organism-wide or network-wide or
whatever, is important to take consideration of even when we're talking about what's happening on
lower levels. Yes, I think that's true. And I think that, actually, you may have seen this,
but there's some very interesting work on this coming out of Giulio Tononi's lab and Eric Hall
about quantifying some of these things. So there's now math that will help you understand for a given
system what is the causally most potent level at which to manipulate it. And it's not practical
to compute some of those things for a lot of real systems that we care about. But certainly,
there are techniques that we use all the time in the lab to ask what is the most appropriate level
at which to try to manipulate the system. And inevitably, it bleeds down into the lower levels
in the following sense. So in Plenaria, let's say, so we have these flatworms, and they have one head
and one tail, and you chop them into pieces. And each piece knows where the head and the tail are
supposed to go, and it reliably sort of regenerates whatever is missing. So what we've been able to
show is that this is partly the result of a circuit, which is partially electrical,
which stores the pattern of what a correct Plenarian is supposed to look like. And we can now see this
pattern, we can rewrite it, we can alter it so that now the pattern memory says two heads instead
of one. And then that's exactly what sells Bill, Bill, two headed flatworms. But I don't want to
go over this too quickly, because I know you do this all the time. But this is just amazing to
the rest of us, you can chop off the tail tail and head of this little worm and train it to grow
back two heads or two tails instead of one head and one tail. That's correct. Yeah, it's an amazing
thing. So there are many, you know, Plenaria, basically, I think every every important question
of life is found somewhere in Plenarian biology, I think you could say. They're an amazing creature.
First of all, they're flatworms, not roundworms. So they are bilaterians, meaning they are similar
to our ancestors, they have a true brain. Most of the same neurotransmitters that you and I have,
they're smart, they can learn. But they have this incredible property, you can chop them into pieces,
the record I think is something like 275. And every piece will regenerate exactly what's missing,
no more, no less, and make a perfect tiny little worm. Now, they are so regenerative that they're
immortal, they don't age, there's no such thing as an old Plenarian, which means, first of all,
that the worms that we have in our lab are in a direct physical continuity, which work with worms
that were here half a billion years ago. And that's mind boggling to think about. And also,
it's telling us that, in fact, it is possible to be a complex organism and with with a good brain
and so on, and never die. So these ideas of like thermodynamic limits on aging and so on,
I don't think are correct. But anyway, so that's what the animal does normally. Now,
of course, lots of interesting work has been done on how this works. They have a bunch of stem cells
that lots of work has been done on the molecular and genetic networks that specify different
cell types out of these stem cells. But what's really important to understand is,
the stem cells produce the building blocks, all the different things that you need to make a
Plenarian, but you still have to decide how to arrange all this stuff. And all of it can be
arranged in many different configurations. And one of the, now people learned long ago to manipulate
the lower levels of the system, meaning to get in there and take some of the genes that are required
for making heads and tails, regulate their expression and get one headed or two headed worms.
We found something that's, I think, it takes us to the next level, which is two things. First of
all, that you can actually, that there is a real time bio electrical circuit that stores an active
pattern, which you can see using using special dyes that reveal electrical states and microscopy,
you can actually see this this this anatomical pattern towards which the thing is going to build.
And so that's the first thing. The second thing is that you can, by turning on and off
these ion channels, which are these little little protein batteries that exist in cell
membranes, by turning these things on and off, you can manipulate that circuit and get the get
pieces to build, let's say a two headed or a no headed animal. And one of the one of the most
amazing things about it is that if you then, if you have a two headed animal, and you recut
that animal in plain water, so no more manipulation, no more doing anything to the ion channels,
you will once again get a two headed worm. Now this is the real, this is worth pausing here
because what has not been done in this case is to manipulate the genome. The genome is has
wild type sequence, you've not altered the genetics at all. It's the this is a great example and maybe
the best example of the separation of data from machine in this case, because the cells are standard
planarian cells, there's nothing wrong with them that you would identify on genomic sequencing.
And they are happy to build whatever it is that is specified in this large scale pattern memory
that is kept by the tissue electric circuit. And if the electric circuits has two heads,
that is in fact what they will build. And so this goes on in perpetuity, as far as we can tell,
you can keep doing this. We now know how to set it back from two headed to one headed again, there's
a change in the electrical state that you can make. And so this goes back to your question about
downer causation, because what what you can you can say is, well, it makes a second head.
What happened to the molecular pathways? Well, of course, the molecular pathways that are required
to build ahead are all activated on the posterior side of the of the animal. So you still need all
it's not like the bio electricity act by itself, it's still you still need all the the the the
building blocks, you know, the hardware still has to make all the cells that create the you know,
brain tissue and eyes and all of that. But the decision the early on decision of what the this
this tissue level agent is going to build is is made at this higher level, which then inevitably
filters down to the lower level. So you can track that lower level, you can look at the gene expression,
you will see nothing but chemistry, there's no magic, you will see every gene being triggered
by some other gene or something like that. But if you ask the practical question of what is the
simple what what is the best way to make a two headed worm, you've got a couple options, you
can try to manipulate these lower level, these lower level activities, and and and it's and it's
quite hard. Or you can go up to the to the master regulator level, and you can just interact. And
this happens roughly between three and six hours after cutting all the all the transcriptional
changes happen in the next 24 hours. The first thing after amputation that that circuit acts
between three and six hours, and it triggers both scaling so that so that the heads are
correctly scaled with respect to the rest of the worm, and the identity so so of the tissue,
so head versus tail, all of that stuff is downstream. So I you know, I do think from from
that perspective, I do think there's a kind of downward causation, regardless of some of the
philosophical aspect, in the sense that you simply ask, what's the best control knob. And in some
cases, it will not be bio electricity. And in many cases, we've seen that that's exactly where
the decisions are made. And I think that's not surprising. Look at the way the looking at the
way the brain works. Brains are basically an elaboration of the system that evolution found
probably around the time of bacterial biofilms, actually.
Oh, you'll have to say more about that. But in what sense did how are you relating bacterial
biofilms to brains? Sure. So so actually, there, there's a there's a lot of work on some of the
early work on ion channels actually was done in bacteria, it was known from from from, you know,
decades ago, that bacteria can be electrically active. And there was some, some recently some
really nice work from from UCLA, where there's a set of papers by Arthur Prindle, and colleagues
who have shown that bacterial biofilms drive a lot of very brain like electrical dynamics.
So individual individual bacteria coordinate with each other. And what you get are waves
potassium waves that in many ways are similar to what happens in brains. And I see, right. And
basically bacterial biofilms, you know, they're kind of proto body, right? They're, they're,
they're individual organisms learning to live with each other in a way to make a larger agent
that can do things that individual agents can't. Good. That is actually very helpful. And I'm sure
that's worth the whole podcast by itself. But I do want to get back to the planarian there,
because I am not personally an expert on the planarian reproductive strategy. So I don't even
know, do they lay eggs or give birth? But how exactly is the information about one headed
versus two headed planarian set down, traveling down to future generations, like where in the
organism is it? Yeah, yeah. So, so, so this is a great question. A couple of things. Let's,
let's start back with the question of how they normally reproduce. So which, which already tells
us that there's a lot we don't know. So, so planaria is some, at least the species that we work with,
they are capable of laying eggs and producing sperm and sexual reproduction, but mostly what
they do is fission. So when they feel happy or in fact, when they're stressed, either one leads
to the same outcome, oddly enough, they are fission organisms for human beings too. Yeah.
Right. Yeah. Lots of lots of, I mean, people use them actually for to study addiction to drug
addiction and they get addicted to all the same stuff that we do and so on. So when, you know,
when they want to fission, the back end grabs onto the dish, the front end keeps going and they tear
themselves in the middle and then they regenerate. Now you've got two worms. So that's their normal
reproductive cycle. Now, already before we even get to the two headed stuff, there's something
really interesting here, which is that you and I and most animals, when we reproduce,
our children do not inherit the mutations that happen to us during our lifetime. So if you get
a change of DNA in your arm, your kids don't get that. So that is, that's, that's really important.
And but, but the thing with planaria, because each piece rebuilds a new body out of the cells that
were in that piece, this means that unlike the rest of us, they practice somatic inheritance.
They do inherit every mutation that doesn't kill the the neoblast, the stem cell, they got it,
and those things proliferate. So for, let's say 400 million years, they've been accumulating
mutations and you can see this in their genomes are an incredible mess. We don't even have a proper
genomic assembly for the kinds of worms that that we work with. They are mix deployed,
meaning every cell might have a different number of chromosomes. So you don't even really know
what you're sequencing when you sequence these things. The genome is an incredible mess. And yet,
the regeneration, the anatomy is rock solid 100% of the time you cut that thing into pieces,
you get normal worms. So this is already telling us that there's some very interesting room between
the genetics and the anatomy that we don't understand, because the genetics could be very
messy. And the anatomy is rock solid. So now let's get to your next question, which is the two heads.
So if you have a two headed worm, they can reproduce by fissioning. When that happens,
generally speaking, one of the pieces will end up two headed and one of the pieces will end up
one headed. So you can imagine a scenario where we take some two headed worms and we throw them
in the Charles River here in Boston, and sort of at some point, some scientists in the future
come along and they scoop up some samples and they find some one headed forms and some two
headed forms and they say, ah, cool, a speciation event. Let's sequence the genomes and see where
that happened, right? And they're not going to find anything. And the reason is precisely your
question, where does the information live? So we have found so far, we've found two places
where that information lives. In the strict two headed, there's actually another part of this
that I hadn't mentioned yet, which is called cryptic worms, which I'll talk about in a minute.
In the two headed worms, one of the things that happens is the molecular structure of the cytoskeleton,
the thing that allows cells, especially neurons, but all kinds of cells to know a direction,
you know, from basal to apicalers and so on. The cytoskeleton is actually carrying a lot of the
information. And it goes back to a really interesting experiment, which is classical
epigenetics. So right now, if you say epigenetics, people normally think about chromatin modifications,
you know, all the things that can happen to the genome to mark it for future generations.
There's an older example, which is that if you take a single cell organism like a paramecium,
you know, they have these little hairs that point a particular way and they swim,
they wave the little cilia and they swim. So what somebody did was they took a glass needle,
this is an amazing experiment because these things are tiny. They took a glass needle and they cut
a little square in the surface of the animal. I don't actually think it was a paramecium,
but it was a related thing. And they rotated it 180 degrees and they put it back. This is doing
this to a single cell, mind you, okay, with my hand. Yeah, that is pretty impressive, right?
Under the microscope, okay? And so what they found is that these things give rise to a line
of animals that all have a little square looking the wrong way. And this was incredible. This was
the first real example of epigenetics because, of course, they had a wild type genome. And in fact,
there's a beautiful line in one of the papers that says these things are always on the verge of
starvation because they're trying to use the little cilia to waft food into their mouths.
And there's a little square that's, of course, kicking the food out the wrong way so they're
never quite good. And he says they're always on the verge of starvation and their normal genome
was powerless to help them. And this is a very powerful point because, yes, the genome has done
everything correctly. All the proteins have been made. They have all of the proteins that it takes
to make a normal structure. But the reason these guys aren't normal is because the information is
being templated off of the mother cell. So when the mother cell makes a daughter cell, it templates
that abnormal structure of the cytoskeleton, almost like a crystal templating, it templates it
and creates an offspring with the same structure. So there's something like that in Plenaria where
actually that subcellular polarity is being scaled up from individual cells to the whole organism.
And then, of course, there's the one that I think is also extremely interesting, which is the
bioelectric circuit. So one of the things that we can see is that the way that the ion channels
in Plenaria have been shaped by evolution is that they make a circuit that has memory.
And now engineers, of course, are pretty familiar with this. It's a really convenient way to make
memory circuits. As long as you keep powering them, you can have flip flops and things like this where
you make a transient electrical change and the circuit keeps that change until you come back
and reset it. So it's sort of like volatile RAM, so to speak. So this electrical circuit, there's
another type of worm that we can make, which is really interesting. We call them cryptic worms.
And the thing with cryptic worms is that they, every time you cut them, they toss a coin and
they make a more or less random, although it's a weighted, it's a biased coin, but it's more or
less a random decision as to whether they're going to make one heads or not. And if they don't,
what results is, again, a cryptic worm. And if they do, you get a two-headed worm that is
forever a two-headed worm. These cryptic worms, as far as we can tell, all the molecular aspects
are normal. But what's abnormal is the bioelectric pattern that is stored by their
real-time electric circuit. And it is this pattern that makes them have this destabilized anatomy
where they're not quite sure if they should be one-headed or two-headed. And you can manipulate
that electrical pattern and convert them back into one-headed worms or into two-headed worms or
whatever. One of the interesting, there's a paper from our lab that's about to come out in a few
weeks that looks at this as a as a as a bi-stable perception problem in the nervous system. So,
you know, when you look at these things that are like the rabbit duck illusion, right, or the
necker cube or these kinds of things, yeah. So, there's this ability of nervous systems to exist
in almost a superposition of states where you're, and this is very much top-down control, right,
because it's driven in both cases, the patterns, the pattern of photons hitting your retina is exactly
the same. The reason that you keep flipping from one to the other is because you have expectations
in the firstonian sense, right? You think it's got to be a cube and if it's so, it's got to be
facing in or out. So, that kind of top-down control in the nervous system is very similar to what
happens in these electrical circuits in non-neural cells where there can be this bi-stability where
there's kind of two ways to interpret this electrical information and that's what that's
what the cells do. So, I think and all of that is not to say that we've plumbed the depths of this.
There's absolutely more open questions than there are answers, so there may be other
pieces to this puzzle, but I feel very strongly that the question of where is this information
is in part, it's kept as electrical memory in the electrical circuit and partially it's in the
subcellular architecture of the cells that are copying previous architectures when they
when they form and we should you know you might also be interested in the the shifting of worm
heads to other species because you can do that too it's not you know making multiple you know
making multiple heads of the same species is one thing but you can actually again by by
interfering in the normal electrical electric in the normal electrical circuit you can get
these cells to build heads that belong to other species of planaria 150 million years distant
with no genetic change at all and to go back to put this in the context of the tadpoles whose
faces we rearranged and they figured out how to get them back the idea there's a goal in mind as
to what the ultimate face you want is combining that with what we've just been talking about with
the paramisi and the planaria that means that wherever this goal is that's not all by itself
encoded in the genome either right it's encoded a little bit more globally
exactly exactly yeah it is absolutely not directly in the genome I think I think again the way to
think about this is is good you know our concept of software running on electrical devices I think
is actually really good to to get us an intuitive understanding of this I think what the genome does
is encode a system that when you turn on the juice it encodes a set of electrical and of
course there's also biomechanics and biochemical signals that are important but when you turn on
the juice it reliably executes a pattern of activity there's symmetry breaking there's
amplification there's robustness meaning if you have some extra potassium in the in the pond that
you're growing in it's not going to destabilize the whole thing there are all these important
properties that allow you to spontaneously form a pattern of activity in this electric circuit
it's like you know you got a bag of parts that were specified for you you connect them all together
you turn on the juice and it does something and the parts were fine-tuned over eons to make sure
that what it does by default is is reliable and adaptive and useful but then you find an amazing
thing which is that there's actually uh that the thing's actually reprogrammable that while it does
have a default mode of behavior that that it will execute every single time there is in fact a set
of stimuli or experiences that you can give it without going in and having to rewire it that
will push it into a different mode in particular what it will do is what you can do is you can
rewrite the part of that electric circuit that serves as your homeostatic set point it's like
you know if you had a thermostat there has to be some physical structure that encodes the range
that this thing is trying to maintain and you can just go change that you don't need to
you know rebuild your thermostat you can you can change the set point so
it looks like in many cases living things have a set point now this is much more complex than
let's say pH or or some sort of metabolic level these are anatomical set points that are that are
rough not to the cell scale obviously but a rough description of what the thing should look like
and these these set points are in many ways we call them target morphologies it's the pattern to
which the cells are trying to build and it's the pattern that once they achieve it then they stop
these things are rewriteable and once you rewrite them the cells will build something
different and what we don't know of course is the limitations we don't know if cells are a universal
constructor in the sense that can you make absolutely anything or are there constraints you
know people talk about developmental constraints i'm not a hundred percent sure what that really is
or if there are any constraints in the sense that if we knew i i think we just don't know the code
enough if we if we understood how to reprogram correctly these these target patterns i think we
would be looking at something like an anatomical compiler you know this is like our our vision
when i talk about what's the end game for our group you know when when can you give up and go home
because everything's done i think what we're looking at is something like an anatomical compiler
that you sit down much like computer aided drawing you basically just draw a picture of a schematic
of the animal or plant that you want and if we knew what we were doing the system would decompose
that into a set of stimuli that you would give cells to get them to build that particular thing
not because you're going to micromanage you know the the you're not going to 3d print individual
stem cell derivatives but you're going to rewrite the goal state that these cells are accessing the
the cell collective i should be more precise the cell collective is accessing to know what to build
and when to stop the the idea that there's all these different levels that are interacting with
each other is a very powerful one and not just because there are levels with different sort of
levels of course screening if you want but that there are right levels in some sense right i mean
this is what you sort of got to earlier i mean there are there are ways of describing these
complex systems that just give you an enormously more powerful handle on what they're going to do
and one of the one of the issues that you've talked about you've even it's even come up a
little bit and what we've already said about the planaria and the biofilms with the bacteria which
is at what point do a bunch of either cells or molecules or whatever constitute an organism right
i mean at what point are they are they a self that you can pinpoint like that's a level of analysis
i can talk about the morphology and the hopes and dreams of that little bugger right there
yeah yeah yeah i think i think that's a great that's a great question and it um there's two
aspects to this i i think that we at least that we focused on um one of the aspects is uh how
cells come into being and this is the scale up of and i think i think this is both philosophically
and empirically this is you know one of the most fascinating problems in science it is is the fact
that look all cognitive agents are made of parts you know there's no such thing as a as a sort of
this this monadic you know kind of diamond like cognitive thing that's not divisible right we are
a bag of cells in between our ears and when people when people say oh you know what are you talking
about the this collection of cells has as memory and and goals so well you have memory and goals
right and they say yes i certainly do they say well very good because you're a collection of cells
and so um the question isn't whether cells can have you know goals and hopes and dreams that
question has been settled we we you know at least if for no one else but for yourself you know this
is other minds problem maybe but but but at least for yourself you know that's the case and so now
the only remaining question is the scale how do you scale up from a collection of competent agents
to some sort of unified uh single uh agent that has uh that has a coherent integrated cells that
is that is larger than these others right so so i actually have a model of this um of how this this
this works although although much work remains to be done but i have a beginning model of this
that has to do with these uh really important elements called gap junction so these are things
that these are proto synapses this is what synapses were before they became modern modern synapses
they're basically think about um two they're they're little proteins that hang out in the cell
surface that can dock with each other and you can think about like two submarine hatches underwater
sort of docking and opening up a path that you can go from cell to cell so the interesting thing
about that is that and and and this is these are these are critical for a multicellularity
they are an important part of electric circuits because they are themselves voltage gated so
not only does electrical potential propagate through these open gap junctions but it actually
controls whether they're open or closed so that means that this is a um a voltage gated current
conductance which a k a transistor and we know that once you have a transistor you can make a
almost anything you make logic gates and so on it gives them memory historicity and so on so so
what's what's really neat about these things if you imagine two individual cells coming together
and forming this kind of gap junction unlike every other kind of cell signaling so you know
cells produce all kinds of molecules in there in their environment you know they they secrete all
kinds of molecules and if you're a cell in the environment you can receive those molecules
and then you know perfectly well that they're not yours you know perfectly uh that they originate
from the outside you can choose to interpret them or you can think that they are uh false you know
that somebody's taking advantage of you or cooperating or or competing or whatever but but
something very different happens when you connect with these electrical synapses when you connect
with these gap junctions both cells get access to each other's internal milieu this means that
things that happen to one of the cells very rapidly propagate to the other cell and all the
metadata as far as who who you know what the what the originator of that information is is stripped
so if something happens to cell a and there's a calcium flux and that calcium flux propagates
to cell b it doesn't you know all cell b it sees is this flux it doesn't know whether what triggered
it happened to it or to its partner this this has a couple of really critical um implications the
first is that it makes lying or cheating almost impossible because anything you do right anything
you do to your neighbor is immediately going to come back to you so uh if you try to poison your
neighbor in some sort of um you know competition uh you you're going to get it too and what it
also means is that it becomes really difficult to maintain ownership of individual thought so so if
what you have are a bunch of information molecules that were a track record of things that happen to
you and and you know we don't have to think about complex thinking here we can just say
there are events that happen that trigger molecular reactions and these molecular reactions are um a
record that you use to adjust future behaviors you know all all cells do this so now you're
sharing those molecules and you can no longer tell which are true memories that you accumulated
and which are false memories that are incepted into your cognitive structure by the fact that
they floated in from your neighbor so now this erases it's like an amazing form of of telepathy
so to speak because it merges the minds of these two cells into a group agent where they literally
cannot tell what belongs to what and in that case that is the origin of of this i i i would claim
that is the origin of a simple compound self it's because you're erasing it's it's it's kind of it's
kind of cool i mean i think and again this is far outside my field but i think there's a lot of
important um quantum computation work as far as erasures right the fact that erasing information
is critical i think this is an example of that erasing this metadata that hey um here's here's
here's a memory that that you know belongs to this unit over here all of that is gone and that's
that helps create a kind of larger mind uh so to speak and then of course of course you know this
is a proto cognitive sort of thing which you can imagine the scaling larger and larger to allow
this agent now to have bigger horizons of those goals that um that i mentioned so that you can
now contemplate uh much much much bigger things in both space and you have the computational
machinery to remember further back in time and to anticipate further into the future now this
this kind of thing has a has a cool implication which is that you would think that okay if this is
the origin of the self then you have two questions number one is can it break down and what how would
it break down and what you can imagine is imagine that you're part of um part of this this
sensation you're you're connected to to a bunch of neighbors you're this multicellular kind of creature
and for whatever reason your gap junctions get closed you can no longer hear the electrical
signals from your neighbors you are um uh you are now sort of isolated from all this you no longer
get the the the the the the information input you no longer get the the consequences of things
you do directly fed back to you you could imagine that you would then in a in a game theory sense
instead of previously where you're you're sort of forced to cooperate and by the way this is very
interesting this is where we're doing now simulations of prisoners dilemma where the agents
instead of just um cooperating and defecting they actually have a new ability they can merge
and once you merge what you see is that right it's the for the as to my knowledge it's the first time
that the number of agents in a prisoner's dilemma is not constant usually you define the agents and
then you see what emerges and there's cooperation whatever but what happens is if you don't if you
don't fix the number to be a constant and you let agents merge you find out that well cooperation
doesn't just emerge it's it's it's inevitable because you can't cheat against yourself because
you're yourself is now bigger so what happens when this breaks down you can sort of imagine the
consequences and this is precisely what happens in cancer so in cancer what what they've they've
known since the late 70s that one of the first steps of carcinogenic transformation is a closure
of the gap junctions and then it wasn't quite clear why and i think this is exactly what happens
when you as a cell which your your identity was was smeared out all over this tissue you were part
of this larger group cognition as soon as you are now back sure your computational boundary that
that surface from which you're getting signals is now shrunk back down to the level of a signal
single cell you basically revert to your unicellular ancient past you and this has been born out by
by transcriptomics studies by paul davies group and others where you um you now basically treat the
rest of the body as just environment be you you you do what single cells always do they they go
where life is good they migrate they proliferate as much as they can and this is metastasis and so
one way to think about this as as cancer is a breakdown of multicellularity um and it and it
in fact can be caused it doesn't have to have a genetic component it can be caused by a purely
physiological uh cause we've shown that we can make metastatic melanoma in perfectly normal tadpoles
by preventing electrical communication briefly and these cells uh this is what happens the self
literally shrinks so going back to your question of you know how you get the when can you talk about
cells i think it has to do with the boundaries of these goals so that as soon as this cell uh no
longer has a goal of building a proper you know liver or kidney or whatever it was doing all of
its goals have now shrunk down to things that a single cell can understand which is very simple
i'm going to go down i'm going to go i'm going to follow some some gradients uh to where where
where food is more plentiful and i'm going to make as many copies of myself as i possibly can
and this is this is how cells shrink so you know and of course the the implications of that are
that you ought to be able to reverse it which suggests that cancer you doesn't just have to
be treated by trying to chase down all these irrevocably broken cells and killing them with
some sort of toxin you might be able to convince them to rejoin the collective and and we've done
this in the frog model we've shown that you can use either optogenetics or drugs or or iron
channel misexpression to take cells that are expressing really nasty human oncogenes like
k-r-s and things like that and basically just normalize them and force them artificially to
connect back into this into this group group agent and and normalize and and when go back to
normal morphogenesis you must know you're exactly describing the Borg collective from Star Trek right
i mean in in Star Trek yeah i know all these individuals it's it's treated as bad that all
these individuals melt into a single collective but when we when it's our cells melting their
individuality to make us we think it's good yeah yeah you're absolutely right and i'm not i'm not
big on on on collectivist kinds of things in general um i think that key is but i think this
is telling us something important i think what it's telling us is that we need to come up with
optimal strategies and these are the sorts of things i do a lot of work for example with
josh bongard at the university of vermont he's a roboticist computer scientist um we we want to work
on identifying optimal policies that uh try to get the best of both worlds because you see when
you do combine into this into this collective there are some good things about it which is which
are that you achieve higher computational capacity um cooperation is goes through the roof all of that
but of course the downside is that this collective agent the goals of the collective agent might
have absolutely nothing to do with the goals of the individual and so you know when when when you
lose some skin you don't worry about it and and so on and so right and so so this is this is a real
problem and so um what we need to do is to figure out now evolution has has optimized this in particular
ways that's not to say that that's necessarily what we want we need to come up with optimal
ways to to enhance the the the the benefits of this kind of cooperativity but still retain the
multi-scale nature of it you see that's the the key is you don't want to lose the the agency of the
of the pieces you want to retain it while reaping the benefits of some of the larger scale features
and it's it's hard to say at this point how well that's going to work but i think that's a really
important thing to work on in the future does this whole philosophy help us um either philosophically
or practically when it comes to our ambitions to go in there and change organisms not just solve
cure diseases but to make new organisms to do synthetic biology to create new things from scratch
and vice versa does it help us in what we would think of usually as robotics or technology can
we learn lessons from the biological side of things yeah yeah i think i think absolutely and
there's two ways to there's sort of a short term view and a longer term view of this the short
term view is that absolutely so so we work very closely with with roboticists um to uh take deep
concepts in both directions so on the one hand take the things that we've learned from the robustness
and intelligence uh i mean the intelligent problem solving of of these living forms is is incredibly
high and even organisms without brains you know this whole focus on on kind of like neuromorphic
architectures for ai i think is really a very limiting limiting way to look at it and so so
we try very hard to export some of these concepts into machine learning into robotics and and so on
multi-scale robotics you know i gave a talk called um why robots don't get cancer you know and this
is right this is this is exactly the problem is we make devices where the pieces don't have
sub-goals and that's the the good news is yes no no no you're not going to have a robot where part
of it decides to defect and do something different but on the other hand the robots aren't very good
they're not they're not you know very very flexible so um so part of this we're trying to export and
then going in the in the other direction and take uh interesting concepts from computer science from
cognitive science um into biology to help us understand how this works i i fundamentally
think that uh computer science and biology are not really different fields i think we are all
studying computation just in different media and uh and i do think there's a lot of opportunity for
for for back and forth but now the other thing that you mentioned is really important which is
the creation of novel um novel systems uh we we are doing some work on um on on synthetic um
synthetic living machines and and creating new new life forms by um basically taking
perfectly normal cells and uh uh giving them additional freedom and then and then some
stimulation to to become other types of organisms we i think in our in our lifetime i think uh we
are going to be surrounded by you know uh darwin had this this phrase endless forms most beautiful
we i mean i i think the reality is going to be a variety of living agents that he couldn't have
even conceived of in the sense that um the space and this is something i'm working on now is to map
out at least the axes of this uh option space of all possible agents because what the bioengineering
is enabling us to do is to create hybrid um to to create hybrid agents that are in part biological
in part electronic um right the parts are designed parts are evolved the parts that are evolved
might have been biologically evolved or they might have been evolved in a virtual environment using
genetic algorithms on the computer uh all of these combinations and and this we're going to see
everything from uh household appliances that are run in part by machine learning and part by
living um living brains that are that are you know sort of being controllers for various things
that we would like to optimize um to to to humans and animals that have various implants that make
allow them to control other devices and communicate with each other and these you know the the space
of possible agents and possible bodies is enormous um right uh i think that right the the plasticity
of cells and the ability look we we put um eyes eyes on the tails of tadpoles and those animals
can see perfectly well you know these uh the plasticity with which cells can organize into a
into a functional form even though it's completely different from their um genomic default is is
massive and there's a few things important about that one of the things that's important about that
is that um and and josh bongard and i are currently writing a paper on this it blows up a lot of the
vocabulary that we normally use you know people argue about whether there's a lot of papers arguing
that living things are not machines well they're certainly not 18th century machines but if you
write that's for sure right but but if you look at what machines are now you know all of the all
of the kinds of things that people say well machines are predictable and they're and they're made by a
human and they're none of those things are true of machines anymore and um things like what is a robot
what is a uh what what does it mean to be evolved what does it mean to be designed you know if you
dig into this question of what are we actually doing when we design something and how is that
different from testing variants over long times you know time span um all of these words like robot
program machine um all of these things i think are operating on categories that are no longer good
categories they served us well in the past when our engineering was was primitive and we couldn't
make these um we couldn't fill in the middle of these continuum between all of these kinds of things
but now we can and so all of these terms have to um all of these terms have to be redefined
to really pick out what's essential about these terms to really i think you know sort of carve
nature up better than uh than they used to and that will will have massive implications not only for
let's say uh regenerative biology and biomedicine and robotics and things like this but there's
there are ethics issues here too we have to think very hard about um what we owe to different kinds
of agents with different kinds of cognitive capacities and you know i've i've i've been
in a lot of debates with people talking about um brain organoids and human brain organoids and and
what uh you know what human brains are and so on because these things are now continua you know we
you could now make a system that's 80 percent human brain cells 20 percent drosophila cells
and 10 percent electronics with machine learning is that a human is it not you know what you owe
something like you know if your neighbor got the brain implant that allowed it to um that allowed him
to mentally run a vacuum cleaner no no big deal we have people with assistive devices now and and
wheelchairs and things right no problem and if your other neighbor had a vacuum cleaner that had
some uh human brain cells that were sort of a controller and enabled to get around also no
big deal still pretty much a vacuum cleaner so in those cases you have you know a 90 10 split
and a 10 90 split and that's easy but what about the 50 50 split then what and so we really have to
i think this idea where we clearly know what a machine is we clearly know what real preferences
are as opposed to just sort of as if um you know algorithm following by robots none of these distinctions
are as robust as a lot of people think they are and the implications for for ethics um are at least
as large as they are for biomedicine and robotics no i completely agree and i think that uh you know
for example there people have cared a lot about the possibility of uploading our brains onto
computers whereas i suspect that just like you say blending the boundary between humans and
computers is going to be a much nearer term thing that we're going to have to worry about in this
domain um but the stuff you just said brings up you know about 12 podcasts worth of of topics to
discuss so we're running out of time here let me just pick one that i really want to get to before
we go which is you mentioned that the idea that robots don't get cancer and that's very interesting
to me because the thing when i have artificial intelligence discussions the things that i always
want to bring up is that robots don't get bored you know there's no sort of motivation or or irritability
or desire to come back to some homeostasis built in automatically you can try to build it in but
it's not automatic in an artificial system and what you've said has given me the initial idea
or the uh additional idea that maybe the point is not just that robots don't get bored but that
robots are not or the way that we currently make robots they're not made of pieces that get bored
the get bored right i mean this is the extra little insight that real biological organisms
are made of these collections and the collections you know should be thought of in quasi-teleological
ways as well absolutely absolutely and there's this notion of info taxes where uh it was you know
where everything from molecular networks up are in a constant search for information
to update their ways of representing themselves and the world in the in a kind of uh firstonian
sense um yeah i i think i think that there is a really interesting question about motivations
and the fact that with any living system we can tell very quickly how to motivate it we know what
it cares about we know what it likes what it dislikes because we can we can train it we you
know with positive and negative reinforcement uh maybe these things will be a little harder in
the exobiological arena where we can run across new life forms but i bet even there in short order
you can figure out what you could use to to train this thing with you know what what what it's going
to enjoy and what it's going to be about punishment with uh there there have been study there have
been papers dealing with this issue of motivation and artificial agents you know you can have an
algorithm that causes this thing to do a or b but does it really care you know does alpha go really
care that it wins right or not and the so so the the problem with this question of does it really
care um like like a lot of problems you start to see the limitations of our categories when you
think about the chimeric case so um i can i can take um uh cells out of out of a brain an animal
brain or a human brain and we can connect them in in culture to some sort of device that has
machine learning or whatever and now if those cells had some sort of magic intrinsic caring
right that that enable human brains to care about things does that now carry over to the
machine because this this new sort of compound organism has some of that and what is it about
you know can you take out the human pleasure center and culture it alone in addition is you
know is is it just uh you know activate it all day long and if you've got like a little little
chunk of happiness there in addition of these these kinds of these kinds of things are really
important these chimeric constructions uh are really important to push to to to push us to
develop better concepts because we don't know really what it means uh to have intrinsic preferences
or how they might carry over to hybrid devices all of that needs needs a lot of overhaul well
i'm looking forward to our brave new cyborg future that you've outlined for us here it's a
certainly certainly things are changing really really rapidly and we're not able to uh really
predict where it's going to go even though apparently that's what we're supposed to be
doing having a goal and trying to get there so mike live in thanks so much for being on the
mindscape podcast thank you very much yeah it's been a lot of fun
