Hello Bayesian conspiracy listeners, this is Kyle, the sound editor and sound designer
of this podcast. We at the Bayesian conspiracy are looking for a new musical track to begin
and end our podcast, as the heavy metal track that you've been hearing thus far was just
meant to be a placeholder that we never got around to updating, that is, until now.
So we'd like to ask you, our listeners, some of whom surely have vastly superior musical
composition skills than we do, if you'd like to compose something for us. Your name will
be credited at the end of every show. Send us your submissions in MP3 format to Bayesian
conspiracypodcast at gmail.com and please keep the track no longer than a minute or
so in length. Thank you so much for being fans of the show, and we are very much looking
forward to hearing what you all come up with. And now, back to the show.
We're excited about today's guest, Brian Dunning. He runs the Skeptoid podcast that's
been doing a weekly episode for the past 10 or 11 or 12 years.
Stephen's been a fan for a long time now, like at least five years, right? That you've
been listening to this podcast?
Closer to 10.
Okay.
Yeah, so it's been fairly close to the beginning. Since I first heard about podcasts, I was
googling for something about evolution or something, and episode 10 was an evolution
primer for creationists, and that came up. So it wasn't new, but in the 40s, maybe when
I started.
And he was one of the early Skeptic podcasts, him Skeptic Sky to the Universe. There's a
few others, but he was in the initial movement.
Yeah, I think so. Anyway, he's awesome. And a couple of years ago, he did a film, or I guess
several years ago, he did a film that's available online on YouTube and on Skeptoid.com called
Here Be Dragons, which is like a 43 minute introduction to critical thinking that he
put together. And I think it's pretty well done, but it was basically just him on like
no budget. And what there was like, CGI or whatever you call it, green screens and this
and that, he put together a refined continuation of that called Principles of Curiosity last
year. And that's primarily what we'll be talking about this episode, as well as this
upcoming film coming out in 2018 called Science Friction, which is about the misrepresentation
of scientists when they're brought on as talking heads on TV. They're often misquoted and,
you know, they ask one question, and then they'll play a clip from another part. And
there's no like waiver, or excuse me, you sign a waiver saying, I get no green light
on what you guys put out there. You guys can use whatever you want. So
And for those of you who have not been with us for that long, I think he was one of our in our
first, within our first 20 episodes, right? Yeah, maybe first 10. Maybe first 10. Okay. Yeah. So
that one was good. Yeah, we'll link to that as well. But yeah, we are fans of Brian Dunning
here. For sure. And I never recommend that anyone start from the beginning from our show
because the first we were finding our sea legs in the first couple of episodes. Yeah, yeah. But
I, you know, grab grab the ones that look fun. Definitely don't listen to the first minute of
the first episode. Right. That was our first iTunes review, which reminds me. If you do guys
have time, I don't like the new podcast app on iOS, but it does make it super easy to rate and
comment on podcasts, you don't have to like go to the store and search for it. If you have 10
seconds, you know, out of stoplight, or, you know, at some other safer spot to run in and leave a
rating and a comment, we read them and I really appreciate them, even the negative feedback.
But yeah, by all means, it helps us be visible and helps people find it. So if you like it, it's
the easiest thing that you can do to contribute and share it. So yeah. All right, let's get into
the interview. Let's do it.
Hello, welcome to the Bayesian conspiracy. I'm Eni Ashbrotsky. I'm Stephen Zuber. And today we
have a guest back from Skeptoid, Brian Dunning, Brian's. Hello. Hello. Hey, how's it going?
Hey, it's going great. Thank you for, thank you guys for having me.
No, thanks for coming back on. I think today we were going to talk about a couple of things
primarily was going to be your film last year that Skeptoid media put out called The Principles of
Curiosity, and the one that's currently in funding science friction. And we can kind of take it in
whatever order you guys are inclined to.
Yeah, it's been, it's been an exciting year in making little movies. It's been a lot of fun.
With principles of curiosity, you know, we got to do some travel, we got to go to some really
neat locations, put together a product that we're super proud of. And science friction, the next
movie for 2018, this is going to be a little bit different. It's more of an interview show, but
we're going to be going to a lot of places again. So a lot of fun. And hopefully it's going to end
up with with a couple of really useful films that teachers are going to enjoy in the classroom
environment, but also the general public is going to enjoy. Science friction is actually aiming for
a limited theatrical release. So people in the world will be able to see it as well. So yeah,
there's a lot to talk about with these projects.
Excellent. So I have not seen The Principles of Curiosity, although I did hear your podcast about
it. Can you give us a quick summary for our listening audience?
Yes, Principles of Curiosity was the video that we made in 2017. And it was released about mid
year, I think about June. It's 40 minutes long. So it's not as long as a feature. The idea for
that is that teachers can use it in their classrooms. Now, I've been doing the Skeptoid
podcast and all kinds of related web series and other movies here and there for a long time. And
the piece of feedback that has stuck the most was that teachers were using these materials in
classes, either high school or college, they're using them in critical thinking classes, or just
almost any kind of class in a lot of cases, where they just wanted to introduce students to more of
these critical thinking type topics. How do we analyze the things that we hear in pop culture,
things that our friends tell us, miracle fad diets, miracle cures, this and that, whatever
it is, all kind of the usual skeptical topics. So Principles of Curiosity was intended to be,
and is, a dedicated unit on critical thinking, analyzing the things in pop culture.
And it presents a simple method that anyone can follow to do that. And to sort of wrap this up
into the length of a short film, we kind of took the whole scientific method and compressed it into
what I call the three C's, which is challenge, consider and conclude. You hear a funky idea,
the first step you do is challenge it to see if it's even true at face value.
If it passes that test, you go then go to the second C, which is consider,
you consider all of the alternate explanations. And we talk about lots of examples and how about
go about doing that. And then if you get past that, then the final step is conclude, you conclude
which of these explanations best fits the observation. So as an overall example that
we follow throughout the film, beginning to end, we took my favorite mystery of all time,
which is the rocks in Death Valley that mysteriously move across the desert floor all by themselves.
And so we got to go out there and film for about three days in Death Valley, which is not easy to
do. Getting a filming permit from the National Park Service was one of the most difficult,
definitely the most difficult filming permit I've ever gotten. But it was well worth it.
We had a great time there. So the whole crew got to hang out. We stayed at the Stove Pipe Wells,
my favorite hotel in the world, eating and drinking our meals at the Stove Pipe Saloon.
They don't just let you film at will on National Parks?
Well, no. I mean, anyone can go there with your own personal camera and take your own personal
stuff. But if it's going to be for any sort of a commercial purpose, or if you have anything like
professional film equipment, or if you have a film crew, anything like this, it's likely to cause
any sort of an impact to the environment. Then you have to have a permit. And whenever you have
a permit, you actually have a ranger physically with you the entire time. Ranger Alley, she was
very nice, but very firm. Do you have to pay for the ranger to be on site?
Oh, yes. Oh, yeah. It's not inexpensive. But, you know, we budgeted for this, and that film
was crowdfunded as well. We had the final amount that we could spend on the movie, and we budgeted
everything out accordingly. We cut one or two of the exotic locations that we were hoping to go to,
and we really just ended up having two away locations, which was the Death Valley one,
and then, of course, the US Space and Rocket Center in Huntsville, Alabama, where they have
Space Camp. We did a lot of stuff there. Everything else we just did locally in the LA area. We went
to some sound stages and filmed a lot of stuff on sound stages. And we also, one of the things we
wanted to do in Death Valley was a lot of aerial footage. We had a lot of calls for aerial footage,
but that's something that the Park Service won't grant under any circumstances, pretty much to
anyone. And the idea behind that is they figure that your drone is noisy and is going to disturb
other park visitors. You know, it's kind of silly on the one hand. We were tens of miles from another
human being from most of the places we were hoping to do the aerial footage. But on the other hand,
it's the California deserts. There's a lot of places you can go that are outside the National
Park. And so we were to get all the footage we needed just by doubling other locations for
the places in Death Valley. We were going to use it.
Yeah. And it's also kind of a tragedy of the commons problem, where if you have a drone out
there, that's no big deal. But if they just allow anyone to have their drones out there,
then suddenly you've got a sky full of drones.
I, you know, drones are not new. I mean, that we call them drones, but there's always been radio
controlled planes and radio controlled gliders. And I don't ever remember them being, you know,
a plague of a problem of swarms of these things flying around.
I think they used to be more expensive, though, like nowadays you can get a decent drone for
a hundred, 200 bucks.
Well, yeah, if you have one that is not going to go very far or do very much. But if you've got a
professional one that's lifting a 4k camera up there that's got, you know, good stabilization
and everything and is able to go pretty far and to fight the winds and just be a rock solid
camera platform, you know, you got to spend at least a grand and usually more and they do make
noise. I grant they are pretty noisy.
I did not realize. I guess there's a lot more to this movie making business.
That's why we do podcasts. We do it in the living room.
Right.
You have a microphone and a couch in your set.
Yeah. Well, you know, the next film, Science Friction, is going to be
more microfilm and a couch, a microphone and a couch in your set.
It's going to be just mostly interviews of scientists. In fact, I guess we might as well
segue and talk about the next film.
Well, we do that.
Yeah, I had questions about the first one first.
Yeah, let's stay on, let's stay on principles of curiosity, because there's a couple of
things I want to talk about, but fire away with your questions.
Oh, okay. So what were the three C's again? The
challenge,
challenge, consider and conclude.
Okay. I, when I was listening to your podcast, that kind of jumped out at me because I like
those and those are certainly much better than just the standard except what people say,
whatever you've read on the internet sort of thing. But on the other hand, I've also met
some conspiracy theorists who do exactly that. And the problem is that they, you know,
you can challenge and consider and find sources that are sound very convincing for the
conspiracy theory side. It's not like someone came up with the idea that the earth was flat.
Everyone knows it's round and it's taught that in school and it's only when you, you know,
get to be teens or early twenties or whatever, and you start challenging the idea of around
earth and considering these, these other things that are out there. And how do you,
I mean, like, is there tools given within this video for how to discern good sources versus
bad sources and how do you come to reasonable conclusions? Yeah, that's why I need to watch
the whole movie. Absolutely. Yes. I mean, the three steps by themselves are of no more value than
any one sentence description of any process. So that's what the whole 40 minutes is packed with.
How do we challenge? Why do we challenge? What tools do we use to challenge? And then when we get
to consider what's a good source? What's a bad source? How do we choose? And so yes, very much,
we go into great depth on each of those. And we have a couple of examples for within each one
of those three steps, as well as applying each of them to the overall example that we're talking
about. So I think it's not only very well explained, it's presented in a fun and entertaining and
really easy to follow and kind of self evident and self obvious method. The idea is every little
scene, the person watching the film is going to go, oh, okay, yeah, that totally makes sense.
And they should be able to predict what we're going to say next, because we are trying to present
a method that anyone can pick up and follow. So I think we do a pretty good job with it. But
you watch the movie and then you tell me. Okay, I maybe I should. I'm also curious,
since this is the Bayesian conspiracy podcast, if the conclusions that I, since this is a more
kids, I would assume it's more of a come down firm on one conclusion or another. But do you at all
introduce the idea of maybe having mixed probabilities in your head? Like, okay, based on all the
evidence, I will assign 98% likelihood that this was done by humans, and maybe 2% likelihood that
aliens were involved in some way. Or are you more like just discard the aliens idea, because that
sounds really just completely ridiculous. Well, yeah, I mean, we can't be all things to everyone.
So in this film, we, we basically try and encourage them to come up with the solution that fits best.
And we pretty much leave it at that level of complexity, we don't define what best means,
you know, and we do talk about Occam's razor, for example, that's one of the main tools that we use
when we're, when we're concluding, which, which explanation fits the best. Yeah, that's a good
one. And we've got a fun little animated sequence for Occam's razor and how that works.
Ooh, is it like a ninja slicing things apart?
That giant razor? Well, it features, it features our Sir William of Occam. Oh, okay. In a,
in a little animation where he kind of comes to life out of the stained glass window, but
it's cool. Yeah, it is cool. So did you want to run through, we could do the Death Valley example
or another one and just see how to approach it with the principles of curiosity? Or do you want
to save that for bringing listeners to the Skeptoid podcast or to the, to the movie itself?
I think, I think anyone could watch the film in less time that it would take me to
to try and, to try and regurgitate it for memory. But it's easy to watch because it's free and it's
online. That's one of, you know, one of the things that we do as a nonprofit is we're providing free
tools. So everything from Skeptoid media is available for free. It's at principlesofcuriosity.com
and that's basically just a screen that has the YouTube page on it. You can find it on YouTube
as well. So principlesofcuriosity.com, it's only 40 minutes. It's something you can watch
while you're eating your dinner tonight. All right, sounds good. Yeah. And hopefully,
hopefully it'll get people to, I don't know, to, to care more about knowing the truth as opposed to
simply being right. It's a thing that I always have trouble with where a lot of people seem to
just want to be right about things and get so married to their opinion that they aren't willing to
examine it and, and care more about correcting themselves to the truth rather than to,
to correct other people to see things their way. And that's a difficult problem to overcome because
everyone believes that what they know is right. Yeah. I mean, that's what, that's what the word
belief means. I wouldn't be believing it if I didn't believe it to be true. So as far as I know,
everything I believe is true. And it's really hard to convince people of that. And when you,
when you move into the scientific method, the first thing you've got to be able to do is discard
all of your preconceived notions, discard all of your beliefs, and then just go with what seems
to be supported best by the evidence. Yeah. And then as we all have so much experience,
when you're dealing with someone who tends to come down more often on the paranormal side,
for example, they just have a whole skewed set of criteria that they use for, you know, what's,
what is evidence, what, what is reliable evidence? They tend to look more toward
anecdotes and, and, and they consider, they'll, they'll consider like things like, well,
Uncle Bob was a very reliable old guy. He would never tell a lie. There's no reason
he would make up a story like this. So that's good enough for them. That's why it's not an
anecdote because it's evidenced by Uncle Bob's personality. Right. And, and, and a line of
reasoning like that can easily sound persuasive to most people who have not been exposed to better
tools. Yeah. And to the, to sit down, we'd come up with the, we get the better, better evidence
and you compare them, you say, Oh, well, this makes a lot more sense than the Uncle Bob story.
Yeah. And the fact might be that Uncle Bob may just be mistaken, you know, he's not a liar. He
just happened to be wrong about something for whatever reason. Yeah. I always point to there,
there was a, there was a pro paranormal TV show called Fact or Faked. And I always point to that
title as that is the perfect example. That's a false dichotomy. Because if we're looking at a
ghost story, Fact or Faked are the two least likely explanations. Yeah. Yeah. It's almost
certainly the case that someone was honestly mistaken. Yeah. And whenever someone does something
like that, I always consider it, I assume that it's a, a rhetorical trick to try to get you to,
to believe them. Like the Lord, liar or lunatic dichotomy, trichotomy, I guess. It's like, well,
if he's not a liar or lunatic, obviously he must be Lord. I'm like, it's not just those three things.
There's a lot of other options in there. Yeah. I, I, I grew up my entire life when I was a
little kid until the age of probably 20, fully brainwashed by the argument that the Bigfoot
proponents made, which is either there is the biggest hoax in history has been successfully
carried out by tens of thousands of people over thousands of years or hundreds of years,
without anyone ever getting it wrong, this incredibly well orchestrated hoax, or there's
an unknown species of great ape out there in the woods. And that was totally persuasive to me.
Wait, what was totally persuasive? What was the hoax supposed to be that there's not a great ape?
Well, no, no, the hoax would have been all the sightings and all the footprints and everything
that all of these witnesses were deliberately conspiring to put this hoax together. I see. Okay.
That it couldn't just be individual actions and things being aggregated. That it had to be a
conspiracy. And that suggestion also completely ignores the probability that almost all Bigfoot
witnesses are probably honestly mistaken. Yeah. I feel like honestly mistaken should
just be like an automatically inserted third alternative to any proposed dichotomy or trichotomy.
Yeah, I should. I think that's overwhelmingly the correct answer. Even if you're...
I'm trying to think of another, like a ghost example. You hear something in the middle of the
night and or painting falls off the wall or something. Well, nothing's ever fallen off of
here before. But my aunt, she doesn't lie. Yeah, exactly. Maybe she's mistaken. Maybe things do
fall off. Maybe the cat knocked it down. So I don't have much to add. I guess I'm just thinking
that there's just... That should be just the core lesson of, I guess, communicating the idea that
it's okay to admit that you're wrong, right? Was that our perceptions are fallible. Yeah.
And frequently so. And you can say something that someone said isn't true without attacking them
as a liar, right? Yeah. In fact, this whole thing is going to be the third film. I hope if scheduling
works out, it'll be the 2019 film. But that's too far out in the future to talk about. I've got
that one all planned out as well. I'm having fun with these little movie things. Yeah.
You know, I find a similar kind of thing happens with proposing actions, as opposed to this
just honestly mistaken thing. Sometimes you'll propose an action and people will shoot it down
or do whatever. And they act like just going with the status quo is kind of the default. And you
have to point out to them choosing to do nothing is also a choice, is doing nothing better than
this alternative that I am proposing. And sometimes it is, but other times choosing to do nothing is
even a worse idea. Yeah. I think there's a whole lot to just dive into with like false dichotomies
and that sort of presentation. But speaking of diving into things, do you want to go into more
principles of curiosity or do you want to move on to the science fiction? I will point out that
sort of the main benefit of principles of curiosity is the accompanying educational materials.
So on the website at principlesofcuriosity.com, anyone can come and download the educational
materials. And what are those? Is it like worksheets? It's basically this big book. It's a PDF.
It's free. So we don't actually send books to people. It's a PDF. And it's a 40-something
pages, I think. And it has just a whole bunch of classroom exercises, lessons, worksheets,
things for, again, broken out into various different programs for teachers to use. So
it can be a complete unit right here. A teacher can show the video in class and then keep the
students busy for a week. And actually, there's stuff for them to do before watching the movie
as well. So we have kind of some before and after, before we learn this thought process and after.
How do we treat mysteries and things that we hear in pop culture? It's a very valuable set
of materials and it's free and it's awesome. So if you're a teacher, come and grab it.
You know, we know a few people that are thinking about having children. We should maybe point them
at this and ask them if they find it useful for the upbringing of the little ones.
I imagine it's not geared towards that zero to eight demographic, but...
Well, never too young to start.
My aunt's a high school teacher, high school science, psychology and chemistry. I'll make
sure that she gets this. I'm sure she could use a day off to show the kids a video.
And it was a video that's not Shrek or the Breakfast Club. I'm sure that, you know,
then everybody wins. Hey man, the Breakfast Club is awesome.
It was the first like two times I saw it in school. Through primary school, I must have seen
Shrek six times. Okay. So educational documentaries, probably better used to everyone's time.
And it's also in all the indexes for teacher resources like the National Science Teachers
Association. They've got it listed and all of these fun things.
How did you get that listed in there?
Well, that's what part of the film's budget went for, was for marketing it to educational resources.
Is that like just writing or did you have to fly out and meet with someone for this?
No, but we had to have a number of Skype conversations and phone conversations and
everything and fill out forms and approvals and all this kind of stuff. It was exceedingly
bureaucratic, but I think well worth it in the end.
Yeah, that's really cool. Congratulations.
Yeah, thanks.
All right, let's move on to the science fiction or did you have something else you wanted to add
on this one?
No, that's it.
Okay, cool. So the science fiction thing I'm really excited about because I hate the news media and
the way they represent science, but I should let you talk.
Science fiction is quite simply, it's a documentary about scientists who've been
misrepresented in the media.
So all of them.
Anytime a scientist comes on as one of these talking head experts in some documentary,
you practically always get edited out of context or otherwise misrepresented to make it seem like
you said the opposite of what you were saying. This happens to everyone who's been on these
shows. It's happened to me a number of times. It's happened to a lot of other people in much
more severe cases. And this is just the tip of the iceberg because if you go out from,
okay, scientists who've been misrepresented, now how far do we want to expand that?
Scientists who have been so attacked and falsely accused of things and had their careers brought
to an end. We can't even cover all of that stuff. So we're going to focus on at least
getting people to consider that when they watch ancient aliens and hear some physicist coming
on and saying, yeah, so I think ancient aliens probably did build the pyramid.
This is how you can analyze and see, okay, this guy was probably edited out of context
when he said that. They're very good at asking the right questions and getting you to say the
right things so that they can then edit them back to front and string together this quote from
people. And it happens more often than any of us would suspect and it happens quite blatantly.
So in science fiction, we're going to go and talk to a bunch of the scientists that this has
happened to. We're going to see the clip of how they got misrepresented. We're going to have them
explain what happened in their own words. We're going to let them clear up the record. And we're
going to maybe take a look at their actual research they're doing, show us what the facts really are.
And one thing that I would like to do as the end credits are rolling, I want to get a clip of each
of these people saying, I've reviewed how I was appeared in this film and I certify that I was
not misrepresented in this. Oh my god, they should do that with every movie. I know. Well, here's
the best one. Now, we've talked to a lot of people. We've already done dozen or so interviews.
We have a lot more planned. And the best one was Richard Wiseman is an experimental psychologist
in the UK. Fun, funny guy. He's awesome. Everyone loves him. And I the only conversation I had with
him was just I met him at a conference and I said, Hey, do you want to be in this film? Is
anything like this ever happened to you? And he kind of like turned angry and grabbed me and shoved
me into a corner and got right in my face and said, I will never appear at movies again. Because
all of this because of exactly the things that we're talking about because they always try to
misrepresent what he says. And he says now at his university, when someone sends an immediate
request for someone to be interviewed or anything, they send back this ginormous set of contracts
that the film company has to agree to. Nice. And it basically gives the it gives the university
final cut approval, gives them all kinds of insight into the script, they have to approve the script,
they have to approve the questions, they have to approve the editing, they have to physically be
present when those scenes are edited. And all of this stuff that film companies are going to go,
Oh, forget it. There's no way we're going to do all of that. Yeah. And Richard said to me, and I'm
going to I will have the same deal with you too. When we make your film, I said, Well, that's fine.
We'd we'd of course welcome that. But what I said to him was, you know, I don't need any examples
from you of when you've been misrepresented. I just want you to repeat what you just told me.
And I want to get that on film. Yeah. Because it's so it's so elegantly showed the scope of this
problem, and the links that you have to go to, to avoid being victimized by this as a science
expert. It was dramatic. It was it was, it was great video, even though I didn't have a camera with
me. Yeah. And it's, it's, it's disgusting how well it works. I was raised a Jehovah's Witness,
and they had a book about evolution supposedly disproving it. And after I left, I found that
there were parts where scientists were literally quoted to be saying the exact opposite of what
they, they were saying, you know, you just read one line further on in the quote, and you can see
that he's like, is the exact opposite of what I would say, because that's a load of crap, you know?
Oh, yeah, the famous example from the origin of species where he says that something along the
lines of, I admit that the idea that the eye could be produced through incremental improvement
sounds on its face absurd, or something. And then the next sentence goes on to begin the
chapter about how the eye actually evolved. Yeah. And that's, so it's easy enough to quote mine,
like, printed quotes, even if you're not, and that's not even, you know, open the door, it's
like just straight up lying and saying that somebody said something. And it's really awesome how you
can, I've seen at least one documentary on this, about how to watch for cut edits to, like, if you
don't literally see someone saying the words into the camera, they, who knows what was actually
happening at that time. Right. If they cut away to some b-roll of something, guarantee you they
edited the dialogue. Yeah, exactly. Or if they cut to the other person doing like a reaction shot,
that's another, you know, red flag. That's something happened. They had to cut out a line to fit their
narrative. So science fiction's goals are to give the, some of the people that you're talking to a
chance to say, this is what I was actually saying, and to, I guess, educate the average viewer how
to be aware of that, or rather, not only to be aware that this is happening, but maybe also show
us some tips and tricks on how to, I guess, watch for specific instances or. Yeah, if we, I mean,
it depends on what we come up with. You know, we're going to be asking, asking all of these people,
many of whom have quite a lot of media experience, we're going to ask them for their thoughts and,
you know, can you suggest any tips and tricks and that kind of thing. So who knows what, what,
what kind of stuff we're going to come up with. I've, I've heard from, like, when you were talking
to, who do you say that guy was that shoved you up against the wall?
Richard Wiseman.
Okay. When you were talking to Wiseman, I've, I've heard other people say as well that they
simply don't talk to the media anymore because there's no way not to get distorted. They,
yep. Yeah. I remember when the, the quantum teleportation article came out and they managed to
sort of, you know, teleport an electron into lower ortho orbit, kind of, but all the headlines were
scientists beam object into space, teleportation now true. Like that is, that is no, that is not
even close to what happened, but they, they want the headlines and then they never.
That is such a, in fact, we talk about that in principles of curiosity, this,
this fact that when you see these crazy headlines, these unbelievable headlines,
we talk a little bit about how that comes to be. And the unfortunate fact or fortunate or
unfortunate is that universities have PR departments and those PR departments are always
looking for something to promote their university as being on the cutting edge.
And so they have non experts go and talk to their professors and the professor probably
tells them the truth and this person probably misunderstands it or comes up with some wild
and crazy version of it. And the university itself actually makes this problem worse by
promoting these horrible headlines. Oh God. See, I thought it was just the media for getting rid of
all the, the educated scientists on their science reporting beat. Like, it would be like sending
someone out on the sports beat who's never seen a football game or know what it entails, you know?
Like, so when you kick the field goal units, how did you feel? And, but, oh my God, the, the
university is into it too. You know, not, not intentionally. It's, it's through a lack of expertise.
And, you know, everyone has, everyone has their motivation. And the university PR department
is not there to educate people about science. It's there to attract funding to their institution.
There's another kind of variety of that of like popular, I guess, you could say, I guess outlets
for, you know, new developments or whatever. I'm thinking specifically of things like, like,
I fucking love science, which I was a fan of for like the first couple of years. And I haven't
looked at since, except for one, occasionally see it reposted in pictures elsewhere. And that's
just become, you know, this BuzzFeedy clickbait. It's, it's probably the kind of place that,
you know, linked to science can now teleport you to space, Star Trek's confirmed or whatever, right?
So that's, that sucks because their heart seemed to at least started, have started in the right
place. It might still be in the right place, but it looks like they're kind of just, you know,
like you said, or with a, you know, media or the university PR departments, more interested in
getting clicks than presenting actual stuff. Yeah, I hate them in part because they disenchant
people from science. It's, they published these, you know, the initial trials that haven't been,
you know, rigorously controlled or randomized. It's just like, Hey, look, this is something
neat. We should look into this some more. And they take it and report it as a confirmed fact.
And then a few months later, when the repetition is done, and it turns out, no, that was an
artifact of the data. Everyone is like, what do these scientists know? They're constantly going
back and forth on things. And they're like, no, this was, this was just something we were looking
into. It wasn't like confirmed theory or something. That's assuming anyone even follows it up. If
they're just following the headlines, they're going to just see every six months that Alzheimer's
has been cured and that you can regrow limbs and stuff, which works great if you're a small
sample of rats. But if you're, if you're not, and then it feeds into the conspiracy theories
again, it's like, look, scientists are able to teleport people to Mars and back. They're hiding
all sorts of things from us. I hope that that's not a huge demographic of people that are
following it too far. But yeah, I'm sure it's out there. I mean, it's the kind of people,
I have a, this reminded me the, because I was thinking of in the trailer for science fiction
available at sciencefriction.com or.org. Dot TV dot TV. That's what it was. Sciencefriction.tv has
a little, I don't know, a minute and a half trailer for the documentary. And there's a brief snippet
with Richard Dawkins. I remember that he appeared in, what's that, Ben? No. Oh, expelled. Yeah,
expelled. What was that guy's name? Ben Stein. Ben Stein. That's what it was. I want to say Ben
Stiller. And it's the kind of thing where you can, you can phrase the question and then, or I
guess, you know, like we talked about, you ask a leading question, they give an answer like, oh,
yeah, sure. I admit that it's certainly possible this didn't happen, but, and they cut off the
butt and then they give that, that sound bite somewhere else. But I was, I was just thinking
of, this isn't really relevant, but it came to mind that when I was in college, there was this,
my first in real life that I knew of, like full young earth creationists, and he's giving a
presentation because they were assigned to the class on different subjects. His was on evolution,
and he gave like the full Ben Stein version. And then we were like debating it on like the
class forums on the school website. And he was like, scientists don't know anything. It's,
you know, everything's always, you know, hypothesis that that's why it's always up in the
air. We used to think the earth was flat, et cetera, et cetera. And I was like, you realize
we're having this conversation from, you know, at the speed of light on our computers, right,
in different parts of the world. And we could be having this conversation from two different
airplanes. Like clearly science knows some stuff. How do you come down on this? If we didn't know
anything, why planes wouldn't fly? Come on. Yeah. So how long is science friction going to be?
Is this another 40 minutes? Science friction is actually going to be full feature length.
And it's going to, it's going to have a theatrical release. That's, that's the plan is being directed
by Emery Emery, who is a director and editor. He's, he's a good friends with Penn and Teller
and Paul Provenza, that whole crew. Oh yeah. He was part of the movie, the aristocrats,
and he's done a number of other films with them. And he is easily able to get a movie and do a
minimum of limited theatrical release. And then you see how it does in the festivals and hope
for a wider, a wider distribution. So this film is absolutely intended to be on that track.
That's fantastic. And who do you have lined up so far for, for interviews?
You know, I, I, you can see a lot of them in the trailer. We don't have anyone under
contract. So I kind of hesitate to say. Okay. But, you know, interestingly, if you, if you
look at the trailer, I mean, you mentioned Dawkins is in the trailer, James Randy is in the trailer,
Michael Schirmer, a number, Michael Mann, a number of big name scientists, but many of the cases
where this has happened the worst, the most blatant are scientists you've never heard of.
Because the shows have no reservations about taking these nobodies out of context and twisting
their words. Yeah, they don't have a platform to correct it from. Yeah, I can tell you right now,
the most dramatic stories you're going to hear in the film are from scientists who you may have
seen on a TV show, but you didn't, wouldn't have known their name. And some of the cases are just
absolutely shocking and infuriating. Is it, can you give us an example or is that too much of a
spoiler? Again, I'm, I, we've talked about this a bit and we've decided since nothing's under
contract yet and we're, we're, we're keeping, keeping the specific examples under wraps. Okay.
What about a personal example from your history? Or is that, is that also reserved for film?
I have a number of them and they're, they're, they're, they're super mild by comparison.
And one, for example, was I was on a couple of episodes of Weird or What with William Shatner
and we were debunking a seance and we had a, seance was being performed that we had set up
and the seance performers were using all of these old tricks and we were, the, the, the subject of
this episode was this one famous series of seances held a long time ago by a UK group called the
Society for Psychical Research and they basically hired some seance performers to perform some
seances for them, a series of them, where they used these exact same tricks and the Society
for Psychical Research people came out and said, there's no way we could have been tricked. Some
of us are physicists and scientists and experts and this or that and we could not have been fooled
and so we declare that these seances proved the afterlife is real and so we quite trivially
replicated all of these standard tricks because the things they did in their seances were all
the standard tricks. I mean, they were so inexperienced, these Society for Psychical Research people,
they were so inexperienced in seances that they weren't aware what's, what the usual
stage tricks are that seance performers do. So anyway, we, we, we replicated these tricks and then
I gave, you know, I gave my little spiel talking about some stuff and then Shatner comes on with
his narration, he wasn't there, but he comes on with these narrations says, Dunning believes
that this proves that the, the skull experiments were faked. Oh, it'd have been nice like if he'd
just, you know, if he could pass that back to you and be like, that's not what I said.
I didn't say it. Now that's a, that's a very minor example and it's not that bad because
of course the skull experiments were faked. I have no doubt of that. No reasonable person has any,
any serious doubt of that, but we don't have any proof. Right. You came out with a softer, like,
you know, more approachable, less dogmatic sounding position, which is we have very, we have no reason
to believe that they were real. Right. Which is like, you know, to people who aren't looking to
deliberately misinterpret you sound about the same as we think it's fake, or we're pretty sure
it's fake or even we know it's fake. But to somebody who is already inclined to believe this
stuff, they're gonna be like, Oh, how does, how could he possibly know it's faked? He's obviously
full of shit. Right. So. Exactly. Yeah. Yeah. So, you know, that's, that's, like I say, that's
the mildest example you're here. And we may even include that on the show just as a lead in for
you know, here's how I got interested in investigating this topic, something like that.
Cool. So when, when does this start production on this?
On science? So we've done a few interviews. We need a lot more. It's being crowdfunded right now
at sciencefriction.tv. We're almost at the 20% funded mark. So we've got a ways to go.
We are really looking for ways to promote this crowdfunding campaign more.
Um, and as we'd have on the FAQ of the page, if anyone's interested, if we don't make our,
our goal, we are still going to produce the film, even if we never get another penny. And
we're still going to produce the film with what we've got. Nice. It's just not going to be nearly
as good or nearly as effective. No one's money is going to go to waste, though. Cool. That's,
that's fantastic. At least you're getting. I'm super stoked about it. Yeah. Yeah. Do you know
when it might be available? Cause the film festival season is what, in the autumn?
They, they, the film festivals that I've found, I'm not an expert in them, but I find them
having their little deadlines for entry year, year round. I don't have no idea when the season is.
We should be able to get it completely wrapped within the, before the fourth quarter of 2018.
And hopefully then release sometime in 2019. That's, that's the general schedule. And I think
that's, until we have a better idea of how the crowdfunding is going to, is going to finish up,
I think that's about as specific as we can guess right now. Awesome. Sounds exciting.
It is. And you know, the great thing about this is everyone you tell this concept to,
they just have a fit. They say, Oh my God, that sounds like the best thing ever.
So I mean, that's, that's one of the reasons I'm so enthusiastic about it is because there's
just so much interest in it. Yeah. So you almost teased us with a third movie in 2019.
Yeah. That's going to be another smaller one, like principles of curiosity. That's going to
be more for the education market. That's going to be just through produced through Skeptoid media.
And you know, I, let me focus on one movie. Okay. Okay. Cool.
I don't want to, I don't want to devote any, steer any resources away from science friction,
because that's what the focus has to be on right now. Yeah. And are you still like,
well, working on your podcast at the same time as the movies are being done?
Oh yeah. The, the, the Skeptoid podcast, which comes out every week for 11 years now, that's,
that's still the non-profits bread and butter. So that, that can't, that can't go on hold.
That's going to continue. I had a lot of fun this, this past week
with a great old mystery that had, that had kind of freaked me out for a long time. That didn't
freak me out, but I couldn't find the solution to it for a long time. And that comes out on
Tuesday. So the Skeptoid podcast is always fun. Was the answer that it had been a conspiracy
worldwide? 30,000 people involved? No, it was, I won't, am I telling you? It was about the,
the provenance of a particular old photograph. Oh, okay. Neat. Well, the episode I was talking
about, which came out several weeks ago, was about the Civil War pterosaur. Pterosaur? Yes,
there's a, there's a famous picture that you can find all over the internet showing a group of
Civil War soldiers standing around this pterosaur of some, of some, you can't really tell what
living one, one that was, appears to have just been shot. Okay. It's like just lying there dead,
and they're all posing triumphantly around it. Like maybe they just shot it out of the sky.
We don't know. But there's, there's actually two versions of this photograph, different soldiers,
a different animal laying there on the ground. But the photos are aged in like exactly the same
way with the same kind of ragged rips in them and shredded edges around the photo. And the,
the second photo, everyone says, oh yeah, that was made for a TV show called Freaky Links.
And we think that they just couldn't get the rights to this famous one. So they made their own,
they just hoaxed up their own photograph. So of course, the famous one is being promoted by the
Young Earth Creationist crowd, because they're always trying to prove the dinosaurs still live,
because that would make it more likely that dinosaurs died and Noah's flood. And that's the
explanation for the dinosaur bones that we find. They're, they're trying to say dinosaurs still live
to this day. Like not as descended as chickens, but like real dinosaur, raw or tiny hands T-Rex
dinosaurs. Absolutely. If you dive into cryptozoology at all, there is a branch of cryptozoology
that believes, hey, there is said to be this, you know, this river serpent in Africa or something,
the, you know, the, the roping is one of these flying pterosaur type, type dinosaurs. And all
around the world, there are various animals that sound like a dinosaur still living in this jungle
somewhere. You will find almost universally that these are promoted by Young Earth Creationists,
because they fully believe that Noah's flood was what killed the dinosaurs. And therefore,
it's reasonable that some dinosaurs might still be living today. They're trying to prove that
the earth is young. And so that's where that whole branch of cryptozoology gets its, gets its
horsepower. And you learn something new every day. And for the uninitiated cryptozoology is the study
of fake animals, or maybe more charitably the study of hidden animals. Hidden animals. Yeah.
Hidden animals. Yeah, crypto. I like saying fake animals. Yeah. It's more accurate.
Cryptozoology is fun because it's, you know, it's a lot of it sounds and a lot of it is quite
reasonable. We do discover new species all the time, sometimes even megafauna, you know, a new
species of gazelle or something. It's not, it's not all little insects and microbes and things.
We do still find full size animals running around that are previously unknown to science.
That the interesting thing is we, they're always discovered by zoologists, not by crypto zoologists.
You know, Bigfoot, Loch Ness Monster, these are all cryptozoology topics. Yeah. And I think
that that's, you know, one of the more, I don't know, tame pseudoscience branches in that, you know,
nothing, for the most part, your personal health or, you know, that you're the well-being of your
family isn't going to hinge on whether or not you believe in Bigfoot, right? Right. It's not like
if you are going to try and cure your children's illness with homeopathic remedies or something,
right? Yeah. At least Bigfoot is more like a harmless hobby. Yeah. And it's also like, like you
just said, is one of the more like plausible kind of things. Like there's animals out there, like
we know that there are ape shaped animals. So it's not like you have to violate the laws of physics
for these things to exist. It's just an indicator of a bad way of thinking. Yeah. Yeah. And that's,
that's actually the key is because, well, what's the harm in believing that there's an animal in
the Amazon that's a leftover giant sloth, which is one of the one of the cryptids that they talk
about? What's the harm in believing that? Well, the narrative that supports the existence of that
animal is built on the string of all of these anecdotal thinking. And you have to train yourself
to recognize anecdotal thinking because the more you put your faith in anecdotes, the more likely
you are to go get a alternative treatment when you have cancer or something. So it's not like
these beliefs are totally harmless. By themselves, they are harmless, but a belief doesn't really
exist by itself. Beliefs affect your other beliefs and they're intertwined with them. So
it's important to weed these out wherever we find them. Right. Yeah. Beliefs like that can only
exist in a web of, or on an edifice that allows for other weird stuff or other bullshit. Very well
said. Yes. So if you, yeah, the same thought processes that lead you to disbelieve in the
giant sloth still existing, the same ones that you can use to attack fake medicine or conspiracy
theories or something. I think that the general misstep that a lot of these are making, whether
it's conspiratorily suppressed medical curers, you had that good episode a few months ago about
just the big pharma conspiracy in general, or the moon landing hoax or the giant sloth.
Everywhere, I think one of the common threads that allows for any of these is somewhere in your
chain of reasoning, the believer allows a small probability to be a large probability in their
thinking. So yes, you could say that there's a 0.0001% chance of the giant sloth actually
being out there. We just haven't found it yet. But somewhere in their day-to-day chain of thinking,
they've multiplied a small possibility into a large probability. Do you think any of it is
like optimism and hopefulness? Like the world would be objectively cooler if these sorts of
things were true, right? And maybe they just, they want the world to be that way. Totally.
You know, we all have our preferred beliefs. We all have our preferred way of looking at the world,
the way we wish things were. And if there's a 1% chance that this unlikely thing is true,
we grab onto that 1% and it holds much more weight than the other 99%.
That's the hardwired way that our brains work. That's confirmation bias. We're looking for the
things that we already agree with and we assign them more weight. I think this is where the role of
like legends and cultural narratives and stories comes in that we need to make it, or I would like
to see more stories that don't romanticize that sort of wishful thinking and optimism and more
things that really romanticize this burning passion for knowing what is actually true and having
a correct model of the world and having those be the heroes, you know? I would love to instill
the sort of desire for truth even at the cost of your own personal feelings of security and
happiness because you're just that principled of a truth seeker, you know?
Well, part of it means facing up to an undesirable reality too. Like I was talking to somebody just
like a month ago who was not really like a supporter, but they were kind of tacitly behind
the idea that it would be great. I think they were, you know, the level where I'd say that they
might have believed this. They were saying that, you know, I think they probably believed in the
Asian aliens kind of thing, but they were saying that, you know, they're still out there and they're
keeping an eye on stuff. And that was like the way they slept at night, wearing, you know,
if nukes were launched, these aliens would catch them or something, right? And I imagine that's
kind of like a religious fervor that, you know, oh yeah, God wouldn't let anything bad,
any bad thing happen. So they've, they've shed that, but they're, they grabbed something else.
You know, a simulation, someone who steadfastly believes that they live in a simulation might say,
oh yeah, nothing's, you know, this will be fine because the simulation, they don't want the simulation
to crash or something or, you know, so there's, I think there's a level of just hoping for some
safety net for at least some of these things, right? It should be great if my green tea that I
just finished could cure my cancer. But that doesn't make it so, right? Yeah. I mean, there's,
because there's, there's so many stories, especially in anime where the hero wins at the
end after like being completely beaten down and everything, just by getting right back up and
sheer force of will and passion, like I have to win because it is so important for my family.
And I mean, that's, that's great and all, but I would like to see that sort of thing like,
I have to know the truth because it is important for humanity. That'd be fun.
Yeah. But it's less, I think, you know,
cinematically interesting than watching somebody get up after getting their ass kicked, right?
You could do it if you're good.
Yeah, for me, that, that came about just when I, when I first started doing this kind of thing
and finding the solutions to mysteries that had always intrigued me as a kid for literally
decades, wondering what the truth was behind this old story. And then when you actually find out,
to me, that's, that's as exciting as it would be to some people to have their green tea cure
their cancer. So, you know, I, for me, I found a passion of an enjoyment in discovery that happens
to be discovering what's true. Do you remember what one of those early stories were that you
were driven to, to find the truth about? The one that I always bring up as an example
was one that I finally solved in the first year of doing the Skeptoid podcast. So this was
2000, this was probably early 2007 when I came up with this particular episode.
And the mystery was a house that had been billed as the most haunted house in the world. It was
Borley Rectory in England. And, you know, once you do the stuff for a living, you learn that
every house has been promoted by somebody as being the most haunted house in, you know, the
state, the country, what, what, so have you. And this one was promoted by a showman who moved
into the house. He lived with the family for a while. He wrote three books about it, presented
himself as a, you know, a scientist, a researcher. But in effect, this guy was just a PT Barnum.
He was involved with the Piltdown Man, Skull Hoax, and some other, some other famous archaeological
hoaxes. This guy was just, he was a PT Barnum of the day. But, you know, I didn't know that. I
read his books growing up thinking, wow, this must have been the most haunted house in the world.
But other people were involved in this haunted house as well. And there seemed to be a pretty
steady, pretty solid body of evidence for some of these things that had happened. And the one
that always freaked me out was what was described as automatic writing, writing that appeared on
the walls while people watched. And there was photographs of these words. The words said,
Marianne, get help. And a few phrases like that in kind of this weak, spidery handwriting.
And the fact that these were photographed after people watched these words appearing by
themselves on the wall, that just blew my mind. You know, I could be skeptical. I could say, oh,
you know, you see a shadow, it might have been something else. It doesn't have to be a ghost.
But what else could possibly cause this to happen? And it was just through a case of, and I think
this was original research. I don't think anyone ever had ever come up with this. I found some of
the diaries of one group of mediums that came into the house that were invited to come into the house
and do a seance and try and contact these ghosts that people believed lived there. And they were
doing it basically by a Ouija board. So they had a planchette that they would place their hands on.
But rather than the board sliding over, the planchette sliding over a board with letters on it,
they had a pen or a pencil inserted into the planchette. And when they put their hands on it,
it moved around and it wrote things. And here's the kicker. They were doing this on a large table
and they needed large rolls of paper to do this on. Well, the largest rolls of paper that were
available were some rolls of wallpaper. And if you looked at their original writings in their
diary, it said the writing appeared on the wallpaper while everyone was watching. And that
got misinterpreted, honestly misinterpreted and misreported by people saying, oh, writing
appears on the wallpaper. You assume that means the wall. That's where wallpaper usually lives.
That's what the story now says. It says this writing appeared on the walls of the house.
Interesting. That's really cool. It was really cool. And that was that was something that really
made a connection, a personal connection to this whole process of solving mysteries for me that
really kind of cemented my my passion for how much fun it is. Then there's this, I think,
trend with solving things like this, too, that if you if you buy the ghost explanation or, you know,
if you, you know, other explanations for other hokey sounding things, then you kind of just
you're left and like, oh, that is cool. But you're kind of just left kind of like, you know,
enjoying the mystery. And you have like this enshrined mystery in your head. When in reality,
the real explanation is actually really fun and interesting in its own way. And it has the bonus
benefit of being true. But it's not like it's just this wet blanket that you're throwing on every
cool mystery. You're you're instead of bringing up this hollow box, you know, in your head for this
mysterious thing that you're enjoying, you get this actually cool explanation. Like that's a fun
story, right? Yeah, it's the pot of gold at the end of the rainbow. You can sit back and look at
the rainbow and say, oh, that's that's a magical thing. I'm just going to enjoy it from here and
assume that it's made by a ghost or, you know, you can go and I guess that's not a good example.
I was going to say, you can go and actually get the pot of gold. Of course, there isn't one. But
I think you see what I was going. Yeah, you can go get actual gold somewhere and gold's real.
So and it's oftentimes the real explanation is just so much more fantastical. Like,
who could have imagined that there's these tiny, reproducing, evolving things that grow inside
us and make us sick? Like that is that is kind of mind blowing in itself. And it's better than,
you know, demons don't like you and want you to be miserable for a week or two. Yeah. That's a great
example. Yeah. It's an amazing, amazing thing to think to think about that, to think about what's
happening. Yeah, and that our immune systems have evolved over all these eons to, you know, fight in
the sort of a red queen race against against the two systems. The desire to stop at a halfway
explanation is never one that I've been able to understand. We talked earlier in this conversation,
we mentioned the irreducible complexity of the eyeball. Yeah. Let me say, oh, you chop an eyeball
in half, it's not going to work anymore. And and if you put no more thought into it than that,
you haven't really learned anything interesting or cool. But if you then go and learn about the
evolution of the eyeball and and what totally unexpected and surprising functions, these pieces
of an eyeball did in fact perform, it's that's where the that's where the fascinating stuff is.
I think I found that's where the excitement it is. And you know, that's that's a I think a theme
we've touched on before, not just on this episode, but on other ones. I think I first found your show,
I think in high school, I was looking on, you know, I just found iTunes and podcasts and was
looking for some stuff on evolution. And you had an episode might have an episode in the first 10,
I found your show, I think in the first year that it was being made, but it was like an evolution
primer for creationists or something. Yeah. And you had this line in there that's always
stuck with me that evolution in reverse is not accurately simulated by taking an existing
organ and chopping it in half. That's right. I was curious, you said, I remember that it was
a good one. You said he dropped the Bigfoot thing later on, like in your 20s, or in your early 20s,
what was how did that actually turn out? What finally turned that over for you?
Deciding that Bigfoot wasn't in fact real. I would just think that
general appreciation and understanding of science got me to be enthusiastic to learn
what were the science explanations for why people are saying Bigfoot isn't real.
And, you know, I was very much conditioned to want to learn those and want to find out what
that was all about. And when you learn it, it's like, oh, well, that makes sense. I never heard
that from the from the pro Bigfoot guys before. Gotcha. I think you mentioned once on another
show that either you made fake Bigfoot prints or fake crop circles or something.
The crop circles, I was blown away by the crop circles when I saw how they actually made them,
because like on documentaries, they like had a helicopter come down like, look,
it's impossible to make these with any sort of modern technology. And then it's just two dudes
with a piece of board and a string. It's like, really? Oh my God, I've been sold this bill of
goods that you can do with a board and a string. The thing that gets me about that is when you
look at the depths that the that the believers go to where they're picking the the bent stocks
and they're analyzing them with the microscope and they're looking at the cell damage and they're
deciding this cell damage couldn't have been done by any earthly cause. Like a human foot.
This is obviously the product of antimatter rays.
It's kind of it's kind of sad but kind of funny. Well, we are coming up on an hour. Is there anything
that either of you wanted to say or finish with? I just hope people go and look at the
sciencefriction.tv website. If you don't want to donate to it, at least watch the trailer
because it's enjoyable. You will have fun with that. And there's some social media sharing tools
on there. Some of your friends on Facebook and Twitter will really enjoy watching that trailer
as well. So that's something that everyone can do that doesn't cost you penny is at least go watch
it enjoy it and share it. And it would help us out a lot and it would help out everyone getting
this movie made sooner and better is going to be a good thing I think for everyone in the world.
And we'll put up links both in the show description and on our website.
Well, thank you very much. Yeah, of course. There's also principles of curiosity.com
and sceptoid.com or sceptoid.org. Do you have both?
So sceptoid.org is the sort of the corporate website for the non-profit sceptoid.com is the
podcast. So yeah, everyone should check those out too. I talk about the show once in a while.
So yeah, everyone's almost there once a religiously for like a decade now. I mean,
every week. Yeah, about as often as people go to church. That's really religious about it.
All right, well, thank you for coming on. This was wonderful. Yeah, thank you guys so much. It's
always so it's always fun to be here. Thanks, Brian. I really appreciate it. And we wish you the best
of luck. Thank you.
And now on to listener feedback. We recorded this episode just a few days after our marriage episode.
So we do not have any new feedback to go into yet. However, we will still thank our awesome supporters.
This week, it's Mirzan Irkugolov is my my best guess. I'm gonna give them to you. Yeah,
doing my bad Russian impersonation. And it's probably not Russian, but it looks Eastern European.
All Eastern European languages look Russian to Americans. So that's sorry about that. And
in my defense, I'm Eastern European. I was born in Poland and my parents taught me how to read
Polish and they still look Russian. So you know, you see the OVs or and the yeah. Anyways,
going way off on a tangent. Thank you for your support. It's it's awesome. And it really makes
us feel happy to know that people like us enough to throw us a buck. You know, thanks Mirzan.
It means something. And the since we don't have listener feedback, I do have a thing that
harking back a few episodes where we were talking about science and spirituality.
And someone I don't even remember who anymore mentioned that like Richard Feynman was the
stereotypical example of a like cold spoky scientist. I think Jesse brought him up as that.
And I thought that was the worst example to bring up. Yes. Because Feynman was kind of the
opposite of that. Yeah. He wasn't like the, I'm trying to think as many does fit that description.
I don't think there's anyone that actually fits that description. Is there any, I mean,
there's got to be a lot of fiction, you know. There's got to be one that fit it better than
Feynman. But yeah, in any case, by all means continue. I just, yeah, big fan of Feynman.
Yeah, I so I found this quote from Feynman that I mean, I already talked about this once in a
previous host feedback episode session. But I just have this quote from him that I wanted to read.
Feynman said, I have a friend who's an artist, and he's sometimes taken a view which I don't
agree with very well. He'll hold up a flower and say, look how beautiful it is. And I'll agree,
I think. And he says, you see, I as an artist can see how beautiful this is. But you as a
scientist, oh, take this all apart and it becomes a dull thing. And I think that he's kind of nutty.
First of all, the beauty that he sees is available to other people and to me too. I believe,
although I might not be quite as refined aesthetically as he is, but I can appreciate
the beauty of the flower. At the same time, I see much more about the flower than he sees.
I can imagine the cells in there, the complicated actions inside which also have a beauty. I mean,
it's not just beauty at this dimension of one centimeter. There's also beauty at a smaller
dimension, the inner structure. Also the processes, the fact that the colors in the flower evolved in
order to attract insects to pollinate it is interesting. It means that insects can see the
color. It adds a question, does this aesthetic sense also exist in the lower forms? Why is it
aesthetic? All kinds of interesting questions which shows that scientific knowledge only adds
the excitement and mystery and the awe of a flower. It only adds. I don't understand how it
subtracts and I totally agree. And I think he was even a bit too nice to his artist friend there
because his artist friend was being a douchebag and knowing more about things really does make them
deeper and more beautiful and more interesting. It's like people. The more you know about them,
the cooler they are. I'll plug again. Richard Dawkins' kind of book-length version of this
paragraph was Unweaving the Rainbow and that's a response to that Keats poem that Newton
destroyed the beauty of the rainbow by reducing it to prismatic colors and basically by understanding
it. And Dawkins is popular now for kind of being, you know, curmudgeoning about religion and stuff,
but that's, you know, Dawkins complaining about stuff he doesn't like. When you've got him excited
about something that he loves, it's really a beautiful read and it was one of the most
just impassioned and... I can't think of another word for it, but it really ignited for me a love
of science in a way. Like that love was there, but it really poured gasoline on that fire. It was
awesome. It's a strong recommend. Cool. I remembered at our last listener feedback. We had Naveen here
and we read a listener feedback about someone who said, I don't really care about the economics of
the situation. I just want my internet to work for me, which right away Naveen was like, oh, come
on, what the fuck? This is important. And I also expressed disbelief and we went on that for a while,
but afterwards I felt bad about how we said that and how we were uncharitable to him about this.
So I want to address that in a slightly more serious note. Yes, the economics of things are
always very important. It's how we got to where we are now. It's why our society works,
but on the other hand, I can also really, really empathize with sometimes not caring about the
economics. Like if my dad has cancer and he's going to die in a few months and the cancer
drug would save his life and it only cost the company a few dollars to make the cancer drug,
but they're charging 10, 20 thousand dollars for a course and I can't afford it. I don't give a shit
about the economics of the situation or that this is how we fund research into medicine and this
is the reason we have good drugs and this is the reason people's lifespans are as long as they are
because that after a drug is found for the next 10 years, you can't get the drug unless you're
super rich, right? In that situation, I just want my dad to be alive and fuck the system.
Yeah, all you see in the system is somebody standing between you and a curator.
Exactly. For pure base profit for something that only cost him a few dollars,
my dad's going to die and that really hurts and so I can absolutely empathize with the
not caring about the economics of a situation and that's also the reason we have that system
because sometimes for the good of the system in general, some people get hurt and that sucks,
but if that wasn't the case, we wouldn't have had those drugs at all and 10 years from now,
there wouldn't be people getting this drug cheaply because the drug would have never been developed
in the first place. So yeah, I don't know what to say about that. Sometimes stuff is just shitty
because we don't have a postcare city economy yet. Was that your feedback you said you wanted
to touch on your update on that neutrality? Was that it? That was basically it. Yeah,
that I understand that sometimes you don't care and there's a very good reason for not caring.
All right, well then that's all we got this week. It'll be a slightly shorter episode than usual,
but that's okay. Give Kyle a little break. Oh my god, we almost forgot to thank Kyle
and massive thanks to Kyle who puts in untold hours working on this shit every week and we
thank him for it. I think we forgot to thank him explicitly last week, so double thanks, Kyle.
You know that the show wouldn't have it without you and nobody would listen to it without you
either. So yeah, everyone say a silent thank you to Kyle Moore for making this presentable.
Cool. Leave an empty space for him at your what is that dinner where they leave an empty space?
I have no idea. Oh, there's a Jewish tradition. Shabbat. Oh, hold on. Shiva? No, that's where
you sit with the body. Maybe we shouldn't speculate on religions that we don't know much about.
Yeah, so just, you know. Just hold Kyle in your thoughts.
He is the Holy Ghost of the Trinity. He doesn't really get much airtime,
but you need him in there. That's right. Before we get even more insane, let's go ahead and find
All right, please, guys. Thank you.
