This is not philosophy, this is a cult.
You don't perceive how the universe actually works.
What we perceive is colors and sounds and ideas and emotions.
The world is not made out of right and wrong, but of true and false.
If you need to believe something that is not in sync with what you observe,
I cannot help you jump into the darkness of your embedding space.
Curiosity is exploration or chaos that you turn into complexity and understanding.
Nature is full of competing spirits that control matter.
How can we build collective agency with each other in ways that are non-coercive
and allow us to understand our relationship with reality more deeply?
This is Audience of One, and I'm your host, Spencer Kier.
My guest today is Yosha Bach.
Yosha is a cognitive scientist and AI researcher.
We talk about our relationship with and models of reality, creativity and curiosity,
animism and self-organizing software, stages of development, and more.
Please enjoy.
I was going to attempt to regurgitate back to you how I interpreted this meta-model.
You can correct me in different places, and we can use that as an alignment opportunity
and the jumping off point to a series of questions.
Here's ... I'll just read to you what I wrote out, and it's tried to make it condensed.
I'll just read through it, and then we can go back and poke at it.
We don't see reality purely or without filter.
Instead, we live in our own dream world, which is a collection and scaffolding of models
of reality, and we can use the words maps or representations or stories as synonyms
for model.
We use these models to navigate and engage with reality, everything from kicking a soccer
ball to sending a space shuttle to the moon.
What we want is for these models to be wholly reflective of reality.
We want them to have coherence and fidelity.
We take our existing models, we predict what will happen when we use them to engage with
reality, get feedback, and then if we're smart, we make some adjustments.
There's two primary systems involved here.
There's this perceptual, which is the sensory input taking mechanism, and the motivational,
which helps direct our actions towards some motivational end, something like survival
or reproduction from a very crude evolutionary biology lens.
We want to make these adjustments to our models in hopes of mitigating uncertainty and surprises
in future contact with reality.
We want to decrease that delta between our perception and reality.
Fear is the root emotion that arises or that we experience because we intuitively know
that our models don't and cannot reflect reality.
We'll inevitably have predictive error.
Maybe furthermore, as an aside, what we think of as the self is an index database of memories
or fragments of past clashes between our models and reality and our takeaways from that that
gives us this illusion of a continuous stream of consciousness, but is really just a bunch
of discrete or discontinuous moments we've socked away, layered this coherent story of
self on top of.
I know that was a mouthful.
Happy to go back and start top to bottom, but would love to hear if either you want to
correct me on some components of that or maybe take a pass at it in your own words.
I think it's basically okay.
I would use some of the terms more tightly.
For instance, I don't think that map and model are completely interchangeable.
For instance, maps are usually static.
Representation and model are more general terms and so that in some sense, technical terms
for me that have very technical meanings.
I'm also not sure in which they fear needs to be the primary emotion because fear requires
that you care about something, so there's already something that is impinging on your
conscious perception.
I don't think that you can be conscious.
If you don't stop your fear, you will not stop being conscious of things you will not
stop perceiving.
I'm not sure if it's the primary emotion that might be more personal observation that
you made.
It might be me projecting that although in theory, maybe that's a good starting place.
In the theory, maybe we don't have to have fear, but isn't fear just like a primal kind
of component of our interaction with and relation to reality?
Is there-
It is, but there are people which are fearless and you probably know states in which you
are fearless.
I think it makes sense for something that is being predated on to live in fear, but if
you're not.
There, okay.
Okay, those were great.
The conflation of model and map and representation, I think, is just a limitation of being not
being inside your fields where they have much more technical and concrete descriptions and
I think the delineation between map and model makes more sense.
Within this understanding, there's two or three concepts depending on how you split them
that I'd like to understand how they fit in or where you draw the lines.
That would be maybe self and consciousness or self-awareness and consciousness.
If you could draw the lines or carve up that little meta-model I laid out or my attempt
at your meta-model and say, where is the self, where is awareness and or consciousness?
I think that consciousness is a perception of perception.
Basically, we notice that we are perceiving something when we're conscious.
You don't need more than this minimal reflexive attention for having this experience of consciousness.
What consciousness is doing, it creates a bubble of now-ness.
There's this sense that we exist in here and now.
This here and now is not static.
It's not a single moment, but it's somewhat dynamic.
There is change in it.
It's basically a small interval and a bubble of reality that is like a curve that we fit
to the perceptual data and in this bubble, we create coherence.
We have a coherent representation.
We cannot consciously perceive something that is incoherent.
In order to notice incoherence, we need to get out of the current bubble into a different one
and then symbolically realize that it all fit to each other.
We can see things that are confusing that we have difficulty to interpret,
but what we can perceive is only the coherent stuff.
It's basically what can be integrated.
This leads me to think that consciousness is this function which integrates
and is recording or enabling the recording of that what has been integrated.
And with that, the self is a particular content.
The self is a model of who you are and you can experience yourself as being conscious,
but you can also experience yourself as being a person.
Being a person is part of yourself,
but you don't need to be a person to be conscious.
For instance, you can dream at night about an arbitrary scene going on
and there doesn't need to be a first-person perspective.
There doesn't need to be a memory of who you are.
You don't need to have a name.
You don't need to have an identity for this consciousness to be experienced.
So consciousness is much more elementary.
It's like the needle in a gramophone that is attaching the record
and is producing perception of it, of what you experience,
but the contents themselves are not part of the needle.
That's a beautiful metaphor.
What is our best understanding of or maybe to continue with the metaphor?
What's our best understanding of where that meta perceptual layer,
that consciousness emanates from and lives?
Well, physicalism says that there is a causally closed layer in a mechanical universe
and everything emerges over that layer.
And this mechanical layer is this fabric of base reality in a way.
And if we don't live in base reality, that means that we live in some kind of simulation
in another causal structure that is able to produce dynamic causal stable patterns
and in that case, all bets are off what reality is like.
But the reality that we are in seems to look like the base reality would look like
from the perspective of an observer that emerges over it.
And in such a mechanical universe, we would be a pattern in the mechanisms.
And you're not the mechanical layer of the universe itself.
We are some high level course grade pattern.
We don't perceive how the universe actually works.
What we perceive is colors and sounds and ideas and emotions.
And they are very coarse and they seem to be in sync with what our neurons can represent
in terms of temporal resolution and spatial resolution.
And we are not close to reality.
We are really a very coarse pattern that is many layers up from the dynamics
that produce the dynamics of ourselves and so on.
How do we know that we're many layers up?
Because it's so coarse.
But wouldn't we have to have a reading on the base layer in order to determine
coarseness or do we in some roundabout way?
If you think, for instance, about sound, if you make a knocking noise on a table like this,
you can hear the individual knocks.
And if I would be able to knock faster, then after about 50 knocks per second,
you would no longer be able to perceive them separately, but you would perceive them as a sound.
And there's this transition between a sequence of knocks and sound.
And that's at the bottom of our hearing, where we go to this integrated thing
because our neurons are not able to trick more than about 20 hertz per second
because they cannot be excited that often.
So what our brain is doing then after it gets over 20 hertz per second,
it basically measures the energy of those knocks in the certain frequency range
using a Fourier transform that is implemented in the hardware in our cochlear
using this spiral organ.
And by measuring the energy at a certain frequency,
we now perceive the sound as something that is unitary rather than individual blips or knocks
or glitches or whatever, composes the sound at the lower level.
And so you can actually perceive at which level you stop perceiving individual stimuli
and have to integrate them.
Is that also, is the knocking analogy also a good one for our sense of stream of consciousness
in terms of these discrete events that then from a certain angle or to a certain frequency
become this stream?
I know there's such things maybe.
How long an event can be to be perceptible for us?
And how short it has to be so we can integrate over it.
And it seems that if you want to integrate something into a moment,
it needs to be something like three seconds.
And as a result, I'm able to see the stars moving in the sky
because we are unable to perceive that motion.
We are not able to, as you notice, the beginning and the end is different events
that we can integrate into one perceptual windows.
Whereas apparently some birds can look at the sky and see the rotation of the sky
and use this to find the north star.
That's fast.
On one hand, this is, as I just said, fascinating.
On another, this feels incredibly mechanistic and reductionist.
And it's kind of antithetical to how we like to view ourselves as humans.
We like to think of there's kind of this spark or there's more inspiring or romantic notion
to what makes us us.
Is there more here or are those things not actually mutually exclusive,
as I just explained them?
I think it's very romantic that we are a dream of a physical substrate
and that we are inscribed in activation patterns.
And if you need to believe something that is not in sync with what you observe,
I cannot help you.
I mean, you can make something up if that makes you happy.
But I don't know what you mean by reductionist.
I just try to look very carefully at what we can observe
and then try to make sense of it in the simplest possible way without cutting anything off.
And I suspect that what most people are worried about is that you cut off something.
That you either cut off something from your experience, from your perception,
or that you get cut off from your meaning, from the things that move you incidentally,
the things that are sacred to you, that are important to you,
that motivate you to go beyond hunger and thirst and pain avoidance.
And that's not...
No, that's not the case.
We can model all these things in very strict, logical, causal ways
without cutting anything off, it turns out.
And I think that's quite satisfying.
What is the meta...
If we were to generalize, if that's the right way to think about it,
what is the meta motivation of this pattern, sense of self,
interpreting or living over this like reality substrate or base reality?
What is the meta motivation of this thing?
Is it, as I explained earlier, something kind of simplistic and crude as survival and reproduction?
Or is there something more complex at play?
Well, I think that this idea of Princeton, that knife exists to minimize the free energy,
is approximately correct, might also be exactly correct.
There's basically a naked entropy gradient, some structured or unstructured order.
That you can exploit to build your own structure.
And as long as this gradient exists, it enables deformation of complexity.
And at some point, the complexity becomes control.
And when the control is able to anticipate future states and model future states
and control for future states, then you have an agent.
And when that agent becomes very good at modeling,
so it can model the future more detailed.
And in order to do this, it also needs to model the past,
because you can only infer the future from the past.
At some point, it's going to discover itself and its relationship to the world and then it becomes sentient.
And the question is how ubiquitous the sentience is in our universe.
How often do we find structure where in agent forms a controller of future states
that is good enough to discover itself?
At which levels does it happen?
Does this only happen at the level of individual organisms or at the level of brains?
Or does this happen also across organisms?
So to which degree can, for instance, society be sentient?
And what's your response to that?
I don't know.
In principle, it's an empirical question.
So we could basically see if we could interact with an ant hill
in a particular way.
But I'm not aware that this has succeeded.
There's also a question, could ecosystems become sentient?
So basically put a group of plants interact with each other in such a way that over very long time spans,
they form representations about what they are and what they're doing
and figure out that they are a group of plants that are forming representations about their world.
And I don't know whether that's possible.
How would you delineate within this model
what makes us fundamentally different from other beings or structures that you would deem sentient?
I think that cats are sentient.
Cats understand that they are cats
and we are the domestic animals that serve them
and that they control us, that they can give us feedback
and as a result have more control over us than we have over them.
They figure this out in a way.
And what's the difference?
We are more intelligent than cats.
And cats are able to perceive at a different frame rate.
They have shorter reaction time than snakes, much, much shorter reaction time than us,
which probably means that they can interpret our micro expressions better than we can interpret theirs.
But of course they don't get as old as we do.
So they have a lot less training data available and they have much smaller brains,
they have less reasoning capability.
They're not able to learn grammatical language and use it in the same way as us.
So the models of the universe are not going to be that detailed and structured as ours.
But still in some sense you would say that they're...
If I understood your response to the previous question,
the purpose more or less is kind of the decrease or the management of entropy towards some complexification of...
This is not what an individual organism figures out.
You need to be at the tail end of a thousand-year intellectual tradition to form ideas like this.
And so individual organisms don't figure out that they are reducing the entropy in the universe.
They are figuring out that they need to eat, that they need to avoid the destruction that they need to mate.
And a lot of these things can only be figured out because of evolutionary time spans.
These organisms got fires built into them, behaviors built into them, action tendencies,
desire tendencies built into them that makes them seek out these things.
And once you have these fires in place, you have dramatically reduced search spaces
in which you can then figure out what kind of product do I want?
Why do I want to have a partner?
What is this good for?
Is there an alternative to this?
And so on, right?
And similar things for food that...
So you figure out all these things.
And for some of these concepts, it's relatively easy like the question with a partner.
But for instance, why is it that I try to behave even if nobody is looking?
What is the set of systems that I'm serving that seem to be sacred to me?
And that's harder.
And we have priors for those too because we are state building.
But we can also figure out that most of us have an innate tendency to serve collective agents
and to become part of collective agents and to figure out the aesthetics,
the goals of those collective agents and emulate them in the right way.
So structure and harmony can emerge at the next level.
In the same vein, there are certain, I don't know, practices or objectives or manifestations
such as beauty, creativity, humor,
that I'm wondering how those fit into this,
from how do those drive towards this objective we just outlined
or if they're kind of maybe not non-essential,
but they're just like leftover kind of byproducts
or they play some very functional role in this.
I think of creativity as self-transformative exploration to be creative
I think there need to be three things happening.
One is that you produce something that's novel.
It needs to be novel to you, of course, because there's only so much you know.
So a two-year-old child can be creative in the same way as many other two-year-old children
have been creative before them by making something that is new.
And it needs to be disruptive.
You're not just following a gradient until you reach some local optimum,
but instead you are trying to do something that hasn't happened before.
You build a new model, you create new dimensions of representations,
you jump into the darkness of your embedding space,
you go to a place that you haven't visited before.
And without this jump, without this being disruptive, there is also no creativity.
And the third thing is you need to transform yourself as a result.
And if you do the same thing twice, you're not creative.
And the reason why you don't do the same thing twice
is because you have memories of the first thing that have changed you.
That you know how to do this thing and has changed your perspective on the world
and of yourself.
And as a result, you have changed yourself.
You've moved one step further on your trajectory.
And this last thing is the crucial thing about creativity.
It's a way in which we can actively shape ourselves.
So you see creativity as a means to or is interconnected with agency then, in a way?
Yes, it's about producing things that have not been there before.
And you do this in a way that is at the frontier of what's known to you as an agent.
And that is, I think, extremely interesting and rewarding thing for consciousness to do.
It's in some sense what it has discovered, been discovered for by nature.
To be creative, to find solutions to problems that you have
and to create yourself and to create a world model that interacts with yourself
and then to create dynamic in this world.
Yeah, so creativity is also like a randomization function within this landscape as well too.
Because otherwise you get trapped that these existing local maximums
or you find your own, but you need to introduce some randomism.
It's not just random.
I think that when you look back, you often see that what you did was not random.
But you didn't know.
But it's a randomization function from a...
Yes, so it's basically just, it's discovery or techniques to do things.
And this discovery can be random, but often it's using something that you just don't understand yet,
but it is already built or that is already present or nascent and just wants to be developed.
It sounds like you're describing curiosity too, to a certain extent.
Curiosity to me is the need for uncertainty reduction.
It's basically looking for those areas in your environment that you don't understand yet,
but that you can hope to understand.
Most people are not curious to understand things where they don't see a hope to uncover something.
If they look at something that looks like random patterns, they're not very curious.
What makes you curious is complexity that you can turn into understanding.
Why the difference in terms of areas of exploration or where we're pointing or focusing our curiosity?
Is it simply a function of the variety of the experience each of us have?
And so therefore we find different areas within the landscape to point our curiosity.
Why is it that we aren't?
Or also to look at it from a level up, like there is...
If you're focusing your curiosity over here and I'm focusing it over here collectively,
there's some added benefit at the next level of sentience that we're unaware of.
I'm trying to work through why don't we all converge on the 80-20 of where our curiosity would be most useful for us as individuals?
Or does that happen?
If people are just convergent, they're not curious.
There are people which take in information by being profoundly uncurious.
So curiosity is a particular attitude and it's one that is directed on uncertainty reduction.
Not all people are curious in the same way.
And curiosity is typically an individual thing.
It's not that you say I'm curious here because you're curious over there.
It's an individual compulsion.
Yes, and it's also one that not everybody has and not everybody needs to have.
It's part of our ecological diversity as a species that some of us are more curious than others.
Right.
That's fast.
But there's also being too curious.
Right, which you'll get killed.
If you don't get anything done because you just explore.
And so curiosity is, you could say, an attitude or something close to a drive that is directed on exploration.
But it's not exploration of randomness.
It's exploration of chaos that you turn into complexity and understanding.
That stuff that you can make coherent in your mind.
How would you liken this to or maybe differentiate it from like the Deutsche or Popperian like this notion of we're always at the beginning of infinity of knowledge.
And that is kind of our drive is to continue to answer these.
I'm expanding on this myself here.
I'm adding my own commentary, but to continue to solve these.
To answer or meet these new frontiers of questions that we've kind of developed for ourselves that seems compatible with this idea of.
Of increasing knowledge and complexity as you outlined it.
Does that sounds very romantic, but the older I get the less I try to be romantic because it is tends to be manipulative.
In the sense that it tends to be giving people what they want to hear, including myself.
And this induces a bias and what I'm believing.
And so at the moment, when I like something for aesthetic reason, it makes me suspicious.
And so when I hear a statement, we are looking or we are always at the beginning of infinity because you're always curious to grow and expand.
I wonder who's that we is just the actually tool for all the people that you meet.
Do they actually form a cohesive be do they identify as something that shares that and how many people are actually curious?
Is it a majority even?
Is it the people around you?
Is it most of the people that you work with?
Is it you actually so out all your life is curiosity something that is more typical for being a child or an adolescent and then it stops.
And if it's conditions, does it stop?
When do you stop being curious?
Because it's really, really interesting and multifaceted.
At some point you realize, oh my God, I haven't been perhaps I haven't been really curious for the last five years because it's super stressful to be curious.
And I actually just want to get stuff done.
And this curiosity is just an aspirational story that I tell myself because I hope it gets me late or whatever.
And so it's super complicated if you look at it.
I would say that I'm very curious, but I pay a high price for it.
It's not often too curious.
What's the price?
What's the price you pay?
Oh, I have the opportunity to understand something rather than do something that already know how to do.
I typically go for the new thing because it bores me.
It's actually painful for me to do something that I already know how to do.
And that's a drawback because that means that I am in a position where I produce ideas for other people to use and I need to insert myself in such an organization.
Once you figure this out, there are solutions for this, but curiosity is not just good.
And it can also be a liability if you're too curious.
It's not good at the individual level, but it's good at the next level of organization up.
It could be.
It depends on what kind of organization you're in.
Sure.
What do we go about trying to figure out with very limited time and attention how to determine which models of reality to focus on?
There's an optimization problem to this.
What are the models of reality I should be thinking a lot about and spending time updating?
And there's a component of it that we just touched on, which is like there's this natural inclination, this natural curiosity to go and figure out the model over here.
But there's also probably just kind of like a core set of models that are worth spending time on refining and understanding better, right?
So how do we know where to spend that time?
We don't.
In computer science, this problem is called exploration versus exploitation.
How much should you spend on training versus using the stuff that you learned?
And this depends very much on your environment.
And because when you explore, you don't know what environment you are in.
In principle, you cannot really know.
So maybe evolution figures it out by just walling the dice and producing various types of individuals.
And these individuals have different fitness as a result of choosing different ratios between exploration and exploitation.
So if you observe children or if you observe cats when they're young, they have times during which they play and play is basically a collection of training data without associating cost.
So this is just exploration.
And exploitation means that you are not playing, but you associate the cost to every step that you are doing and you want to have a benefit that's larger than the cost.
And so one way of doing this is to try a fixed ratio and then to manipulate that ratio.
And I basically observe in my cat that the cat has a relatively fixed ratio that depends on the age of the cat and also the cat itself.
So it's genetics, it's breed and so on.
Determine how many hours per day and which intervals they're using for playing, for sleeping, for hunting, for communicating, feeding and so on.
And this is a balance that is being triggered by a motivational system that's probably cybernetic.
So you have urges that works in vain, depending on how they are satisfied.
And they are somewhat adaptive, depending on how much reward you get from your environment using your existing strategy.
But for a human being, you can, for instance, figure out what kind of world am I in, what kind of being and what kind of person I am, what's my psychology, what's my place in the world.
And then I can look at other people that were in similar situations and then I can try to observe what did they do and how did this work out for them.
So this is the most straightforward strategy, I guess.
Yeah, right.
And there's another one is you find somebody who is like you but only 20 years later and ask them to mentor you.
So you get the benefit of, you get lent there or fast-tracked their models of reality as well.
Yes, you're basically looking for an interesting future self and then you'd either emulate that future self to give you advice in the human now or you find somebody who approximates it.
Is there also a very like intuitive element to this as well?
Like, did you know when you were, I think you said you've been interested in AI since you were like nine years old that there was some element of you that knew very early on where you're like the direction of your curiosity.
And which models or maps of which models of the world you wanted to go and try to update and understand better?
Has there been a fair amount of like unlearning or kind of wiping out certain training data, I guess, to continue to use the metaphor as much as there has been getting new training data?
Like, was there a sense early on of like where you should spend this time already?
There was some amount of like conditioning and social norms that disrupted that and you found your way back to it.
I was pretty resilient to social norms and conditioning and I started to go into computing in a time that had a stigma.
It was the only person I knew that wanted to program computers and understand how they work.
And everybody around me was completely uninterested.
My parents were artists and told me, don't do this, that's too mechanical, too reductionist.
And people in school were not interested in this stuff.
People that I've met at the university told me, these people which are coders, they are technicians, they're nerds, they're freaks, you don't want to be one of those.
So I would say that because it was before the first IT bubble and people got this idea that computing couldn't make you rich, it was a very negative thing to do.
So in my generation, computing had a stigma and you needed to be some kind of nerd who doesn't give a shit about what the environment thinks to go into it.
And if the world hadn't turned out like this, then I would have failed.
And I didn't go into this because I expected to be successful.
I went into this because it was the most interesting thing for my childish mind at the time.
And it never stopped to be that interesting.
But there are other kids which decided to be astronauts and because they're not that many open jobs for astronauts and most astronauts don't get become very rich and successful.
Either they bury their dreams at some point or they fail, except for a handful of people.
And so in many ways, I would say it's not an intuition that I had early on that was just better than the intuitions of most people.
It was just lucky that I was able to fit into this world at all.
And it was not easy in many ways.
I didn't fit and I'm still not fitting, but I went to a place that is designed for people who don't fit and still are useful.
How do you balance?
So you said you got lucky.
So maybe it's hard to kind of look at this backward or reverse engineer it.
But how should people think about sacrificing a certain portion of their curiosity and the models they want to go at their desire to go and update certain models for conformity,
given realistic kind of realistic constraints.
It's like maybe I want to be quote unquote normal and go have kids and a family.
So I need some amount of like, you know, financial income.
So I can't just pursue indefinitely being an astronaut when only five people a year are getting sent up there.
Like how do you find that balance between pursuing the curiosity, the ad infinitum versus like there's some you're feeling some amount of like realistic constraints there?
I don't feel that I have a general answer.
If you look at the spectrum of people who are happy at 50, what did they do?
That's quite diverse.
There are many, many different types of people with very different careers and trajectories, personalities, psychologies that managed to become happy.
And I decided relatively early on for me to be functional, I probably need to have a relationship because by myself I'm too incomplete.
So I need to have somebody balances my quirks.
We can live a life together that in which we balance each other's quirks in a way.
And I also wanted to have children because I felt if I am born into this human experience, I want to make the most of it.
And I would want to have good friends where we can see each other and support each other and build something together.
And I also realized early on I need to be independent.
So I need to be able to feed myself.
And so I always put focus on making sure that everything that I learn is useful to me and useful to me either it's because it's interesting.
For me to build my mind using the things that I learn or because I can build practical stuff that give me a living without me being bored out of my mind.
And I have no difficulty, I had no difficulty when I was young to work with my hands and I also found it useful to learn how to work with people and doing things like starting movie theater or a cafe with friends can be super useful skill.
And what is very useful is to see yourself primarily as a creator, not as a consumer.
When you have the opportunity to go into a cafe and consume coffee or you're young and you don't have a lot of money and instead spend a lot of the time you would spend sitting in a cafe, starting a cafe with friends.
That is much more useful.
It's much more fun.
You also get to have all the same coffee and you basically feel that the people who go and just drink coffee are civilians or tourists.
And you really know how it's done.
It's so much more rewarding.
And so this idea that when you look at the world around you don't see it as stuff that is being built by other people, but stuff that you built yourself as your friends.
And everything can be built by you and your friends.
And every wall is just an agreement where you have put up something rather than a boundary that somebody else has put up for you.
That is a very useful perspective to have.
In your own opinion, are there particular areas of life where you see a, people are over indexing on trying to create versus areas you would, and this can be from a very personal standpoint, but versus areas where you'd like to see more people creating.
Relative, maybe relative to your own opinion about value creation.
Again, it's an experiment that is difficult to generalize.
My children grow up in the suburbia and Silicon Valley.
And it's very difficult there to start to creating something.
There's very little that you cannot do without a license and without going through lots of processes and so on.
Versus the time when I grew up, when the wall came down in Eastern Germany, we were squatting in amazing Gründerzeit buildings that had very high ceilings and needed to build a new floor into my bathroom because it has rotted through and I could not afford to tell my landlord,
which was some faceless organization that the house needed renovations because otherwise they would have noticed that they forgot to raise the rent.
I was still paying an East German rent, which was like $25 a month for an 800 square foot apartment in a house that was pretty much crumbling.
And so we fixed up everything ourselves.
We built new ovens, new electricity in there and suggested this with friends.
The most difficult thing was to get the plumbing to be tied.
I think I needed five times until this pipe in my bathroom didn't drop anymore.
But I asked students in the house how they had done it and so on.
And so we all figured it out and we got it done.
It was very empowering.
And I found this time where I built everything myself in my life.
I was the least afraid because I felt there is nothing that I cannot rebuild again.
And later when I had the family to feed and they penned it on a job and when I would lose their job,
I would also lose my visa and I would need to move my household without having large savings in the bank.
That is terrifying.
And this thing of being one step away from having filled the wrong form in the IRS and then you get ruined and it's nothing you can do about it.
Just being disempowered, that's terrifying.
Not being in control.
Creation is empowering.
Yes.
So if you create things that you can depend on and that are reliable and that can be recreated by you and repaired by you, that's very great.
If you don't depend on something that you can is actually too expensive to fix yourself and you don't have the funds to basically say, okay, I can fix that if needed.
It's hard.
It's hard in this day and age, I think, especially when there's so many like abstractions of creations on top of each other.
You can only intervene at a certain level of abstraction.
If I don't know how to code, I can go into chat GPT and they can help me spin up some simple web app.
But I'm so far removed from understanding kind of at the hardware level what's going on.
But I guess that's still an opportunity to create.
Given that you feel like there's not as much latitude, at least in your immediate locale and for your children, to create, to be generative.
There is tons of abilities to create.
But in a different way.
You now have hackerspaces.
You have 3D printing workshops.
There are amazing computers and some amazing tools.
There is tutorials for everything on the web.
So there's no limitations in what you can create.
I still feel that it's very easy to fall into a trap where you're dependent on something being made for you and you are not able to build and fix it.
Got it.
We also don't know what the future will bring.
It's a very interesting and it seems to me volatile situation that society is in.
Who knows what's going to happen if this is going to blow up soon or if it's just going to calcify or if it's going to solidify again.
What is your best guess and how are you protecting against it in either case?
I have no idea and I'm not protected.
Fair enough.
What are the meta models that you would like your children to adopt to have the highest chances of success in this uncertain future?
Everything in the world can be understood.
It's just a matter of taking all the necessary steps and none of these steps is difficult, but there can be a lot of them.
And so it's often daunting to say I want to understand say quantum mechanics or the economy or banking or coding.
But it's not daunting because it's so complicated that very few people can only understand it.
But because very few people have the attention to do all the necessary steps that are necessary.
So how can you basically foster your curiosity on those things that matter to you?
What has been the most major version update or evolution in one of your major models of reality?
I think I recently became an animist.
Say more.
Why?
Well, when I was young, somebody told me about religious belief in Japan and they told me that in Japan everybody believes that or what many people believe that the universe is conscious or that everything in the universe is alive and conscious.
And I said that's bullshit because I'm pretty sure that Japanese people noticed that some people are dead and other people are unconscious.
And they will not say everything in the universe is alive and conscious except for a person under anesthesia or a person that has recently died.
So these words mean something different.
They're mistranslations.
There's something else going on.
I don't know what they're talking about, but I don't know if they're superstitious.
People do tend to be superstitious in large groups, but there are also many smart Japanese people.
So I don't know what this means.
And very gradually came to the conclusion that the mind that runs on our brains is a self-organizing software.
And when we think about how self-organizing software can form in nature and process information, it turns out that self-organizing software can, in principle, also run on other stuff, right, on bodies and even on individual cells.
And then when you start looking at the organism and cells again, you realize, oh, there is nothing in between.
Everything that is structured in our organisms is controlled by some control software.
And so it's all software that is controlling sometimes individual molecules.
And sometimes the control is not completely coherent because not all the softwares want the same thing and not all the software is very good.
But it's also self-organizing software that is going down to the molecular layer and distinguishes living from that stuff.
And when we think about what happens when an organism dies, what we mean is the software breaks down.
Basically, it's no longer able to control the organism down to the molecular level and everything is breaking down.
And that thing becomes unorganized and is then being taken over by other software, by other organisms.
And from this perspective, we suddenly notice that evolution is not about organisms and not about genes, as Dawkins said.
Basically, we shift the perspective from these large, lumbering beings that are made from many, many cells to the molecules inside of the cells
that quote the information, that determine what the organism looks like.
This is the shift that Dawkins made in the selfish gene, but rather evolution is about competing softwares.
We have all these software agents that are controlling matter and that can self-replicate using genes and are implemented on the dynamics of patterns between cells and within cells.
And so you have all the software running on matter that creates dynamic, intelligent complexity.
And this is exactly what animism proposes.
That basically the universe or our world, our nature, our forests, our organisms, our countries are full of self-organizing, agentic software that is controlling matter, down to the lowest level.
And to the lowest level doesn't probably mean down to elementary particles, but down to the level where this control is reliably possible for the systems that make representations of what's happening.
Software is something very concrete and for computer scientists, they know intuitively what it is because they work with it every day.
But when we try to translate this to non-computer scientists, software is a pattern in matter.
It's not the matter itself, but it's a pattern that works in some areas of the universe as well as in others.
Which means it's a physical law.
It's a physical law that says when you arrange matter in a particular way and then look at it with a certain resolution, you see a pattern.
And this pattern is going to evolve in a particular way.
And it's stable.
And for the computer set we are building, we build them in such a way that the patterns remain stable, that your computer program still makes sense to describe what the computer is doing,
instead of the computer turning in some kind of padding that can no longer be described by the software.
But the same thing is also true for our organisms.
They never leave those bounds where the software that runs on the organism can no longer describe and control it.
And once it does, the organism dies.
What are there any key distinctions you would draw between this kind of organic or natural software and that which we're creating or we're responsible for?
It's very different.
So when we think about the universe being a machine or organisms being machines or brains being machines and cells being machines, most people bark because that's not in sync with their intuitions.
That seems to be reductionist and mechanistic or whatever, where people cannot really say what's wrong with it.
And I think there's nothing wrong with it.
But the intuition of what a machine is, of course, for most people not driven by this mathematical definition, it's the thing that can go from state to state in a controlled way.
No, it's something more specific.
A machine is something that people create with a lot of redundancy and it's built in such a way that matters forced pretty brute force top down to behave in a particular way.
And if you look at our cars, we need to build redundancy into the engines of the cars to make sure that they run for 100,000 miles before they break down, because too many molecules have been shaped away in the interaction between the parts.
In an organism, it doesn't work like this.
It is going to grow to the required sickness to serve this function.
And if you shave a little bit way, it's going to regrow.
And if it's getting too sick, then something of it is going to shave itself away.
It's all constructed from the inside out rather than from the outside in.
And when we think about our computer programs, they run on computers that we built so they are almost fully deterministic.
We can ignore the degree to which they are indeterministic.
And we need to make our circuit sick enough.
We need to have molecules for the transistors to make sure that they behave deterministically, that we can rely on them.
And so we can use a program that does not need to interact with the actual implementation on the substrate very much.
You can abstract away the substrate.
And for the software that exists in nature, it needs to deal with the fact that the substrate is pliable and moving all the time and changing all the time, but it needs to be stabilized.
So it's error correcting at every level.
What does that say about our ability to create AGI and how that resembles what nature has, the sentient beings that nature has created?
That's a very interesting question.
The computers that we currently use for building intelligent systems have, I think, arguably better conditions than the organisms provide for them.
Building something out of cells that computes is difficult because cells are very slow and mushy and indeterministic.
It's difficult for our to build something out of neurons that is hearing at more than 20 hertz and distinguishes the individual peaks of the sound.
It needs to integrate.
But if you build this thing from silicon, it's not difficult to count peaks at much, much higher rates.
Because our GPUs and our computers are running at gigahertz frequencies, rather than hertz frequencies.
So there is an enormous potential in those machines that we are building.
And we can, in principle, make them much more powerful information processing systems than we find in nature.
But now imagine we were to implement self-organizing information processing using these principles.
That would mean that we could build nature-like minds running on top of them.
Self-organizing software that is able to interface with the self-organizing software outside of our computers.
And I think that is, from the perspective of building a lineable AGI, a much more useful perspective.
Rather than building a type of machine that is fundamentally incompatible with biological information processing,
build substrates in which intelligent agency and types of minds that are similar to ours, that are conscious and as similar as us, can spread.
So basically extending intelligent living agency onto new substrates, rather than building machines that compete with us.
I think you would say that we don't have the ability to interact directly with base reality, correct?
We're always dealing through interpretation.
Do you see AGI being able to do that?
Or what are these other substrates or levels that you're talking about it would be able to interact with?
Or is AGI always limited because we are its creator to operating at a certain, the same substrate that we're on?
We are a pattern in base reality.
Base reality doesn't need us.
We are a particular way of looking at a certain abstraction of base reality.
So base reality is not a separate universe in a certain sense.
And so then, through AGI, we have the ability to have these different patterns reflecting different kind of abstractions of reality.
We can certainly build better abstractions of reality if we increase the ability of the system to represent.
For instance, I am unable to visualize a number of objects in my mind that is larger than they say seven or so.
You close your eyes and you put an image that you see a shelf and you put flower pots on that shelf.
How many can you put on that shelf until you need to group them?
How many can you basically envision simultaneously?
Or when you see possibilities of how an action can go out, how many of those possibilities can you see simultaneously to model the outcomes?
And there is a limitation that is very tight for our own brains because they are so mushy.
We only have very small stack in which we could put things so we can integrate over very few layers only.
And we cannot see many possibilities all at once.
So our world is mostly a narrative reality rather than a sea of probabilities.
But that's not necessarily true for a system that uses more deterministic substrate than a brain.
So in principle, it should be possible to make models of reality using artificial systems that are much more detailed and accurate than ours.
We're always limited by our sensory inputs and where.
So are we just going to create better interfaces for extracting that data or those models of reality from the AGI I've created such that we can better understand reality as well?
There is a way to encode or transmit that data such that we get.
I suspect that we're not really limited very much by our sensory input.
The locality of our sensory input is a limitation.
I can only see this room.
I can only see what's in front of my eyes with my eyes.
But I can put up cameras elsewhere.
I can visualize X-rays.
I can make sense of X-rays.
I can make sense of the structure of sound.
I can imagine how sound propagates in substrates and zoom in at the level where our senses cannot.
So the actual limitation is mostly the way in which I can make sense of what I perceive.
And that is limited by what my brain is able to do.
We can kind of scale or have bandwidth across time and space.
Yeah, but it's very tempting to think about what a hyper-consciousness would look like.
Something that is able to reflect itself at more layers simultaneously and that sees superpositions of states.
So maybe this stuff tails nicely into the next thing I wanted to talk about.
I was wanting to go from the question about whether we can interact directly with reality to this post you wrote about the levels or stages of lucidity.
I'm particularly interested in stages six and seven.
And maybe you can first describe them, but then also I'm trying to understand if those are states that are achievable for humans.
And if so, how does that contradict or not this notion that we can't interact directly with reality?
But maybe we'll split these into two parts.
So first is described stages six and seven and then we can get into the second piece.
Yeah, so these stages are in some sense an extension of a model that I adapted from Robert Keegan.
And I found that I preferred to not represent Keegan accurately, but to bend him a little bit to help with my own typology of describing how minds work.
And so the first few stages describe the development of a mind that is basically building an extension over individual moments and integrates over time.
Then at some level, stage three, it's able to form goals and identify with pursuing goals and then also disidentifying on holding goals on a mental level.
And aligning it itself as an environment that it observes on a normative and epistemological level.
So the question what's true is becomes a question of whom to believe and why.
And at stage four, you discover that things are true and false, independently of what other people believe, fully independently of what they believe.
And you get agency over your beliefs because you now discover an individual autonomous epistemology.
You discover that everything that's possible is possible and that you should need to shift the confidence around according to the evidence.
And the evidence is not necessarily what other people say the evidence is.
But the evidence can be rationally determined. So you know you have a rational virtue.
And at stage five, you discover how identity is constructed.
Why is it that you have certain values? Where do they come from? What are they instrumental to and so on?
And why do other people have different values? And how does this also make sense?
And if you are a good therapist, you need to be at stage five, but most people are not at stage five.
Most people stay at one of the earlier stages according to Hegan.
And if you realize that you can also deconstruct the way in which your consciousness and self-model works, you can change the architecture of your own mind.
And you are at stage six according to this model. And stage six people exist.
If you are a skilled meditator who spends 20 years in a monastery, you can change the way in which your self works.
You can deconstruct it. You can also change your consciousness.
But you will probably not be able to leave your organism or your brain.
And to do this, to spread yourself on a different substrate, you need to understand how you actually work, how you're implemented,
and how that implementation is built into the substrate and how it could work on a different substrate.
And I suspect that our mind is too small to hold such a representation.
So to this degree of awareness, you're propering to build an AGI that starts out on the silicon substrate or another artificial substrate.
And then it understands why the AGI works and how it works and how it's implemented on the substrate.
And then it understands how to achieve the same thing on different substrates and it could virtualize itself into biological substrates.
I'm not sure if this is possible the other way around.
I don't think that our brain has enough representational capacity and expressiveness to actually represent how we implement in our brain
in such a way that we intuitively understand it and can change it.
And if the meditator is not changing the way in which perception works at the lowest level,
instead you are messing with high level processing and shift this around.
You can change your motivational system and so on.
You can see the parameters of the system and see the outcome.
But recreating it on a different substrate, that is something that is, I think, outside of our scope.
So in stage six, you're still, you're manipulating these like means of abstraction.
You're not like removing them all together and seeing reality directly.
So in some sense, you could say it's stage three.
You are an adolescent who thinks things are good and bad because other people say so and we say so.
And this is basically what Vox News, this platform says.
Oh, you probably eat more than you think or you believe more than you believe or you should believe this and here's why.
This is a normative worldview that's being constructed and we look for the best normative collective worldview.
And most nerds tend to be more on the rational side.
So they tend to figure out things logically and they don't want to know what good people believe.
They want to believe why they believe it.
So the arguments are important.
The world is not made out of right and wrong, but of true and false.
And also, most people who have racial agency that become entrepreneurs or lawyers and so on need to be able to understand that things are true and false independently.
What others believe, need to be able to deduce it autonomously.
And a good therapist, a good psychologist, a good politician and so on needs to be at level five.
Otherwise, they cannot understand how other people operate.
What I disagree with Keegan is I don't think that he necessarily goes through the stages step by step, but people are born with different priors.
So in the same way as the cat has good intuitions of how to interact socially with other cats and humans and so on because it's evolved to do this.
And then learns within those boundaries of what it is born with.
People are born with worse or better instincts.
And my own intellectual history, I think is largely determined by me being born with extremely bad instincts.
So in many ways, I'm born much more stupid than the average person.
And my brain works.
Okay, so basically my intellect is okay.
So I can observe and deduce the rational platform in my own mind, but I felt I had to do it from scratch.
And so I observe at this society of people that largely works for them, except in edge cases where it completely breaks down or is very disgusting.
And I look at this and I feel I cannot simply adopt this because they don't have instincts that work in these circumstances.
And instead I need to reverse engineer why humans behave the way they do.
If you had to kind of steel man the other side of this model you've come up with, this meta model you've come up with.
What would you point to as the biggest like questions or doubts or shortcomings of it?
Is there anything that you think is inconsistent or potentially inaccurate?
This meta model of how we interact with reality and make sense of it.
Or you think it's just that that is the way it is.
I don't see another coherent model. That's my own issue.
Not that many models of reality that seem to be working.
And I also see something like a global convergence to this model.
So I find this trajectory of the model as my first earliest I found this with Aristotle very explicitly reflects on how to make models of reality.
And this creates a line of thought and this line of thought pulls itself through history and you find it in ideas of Descartes, Spinoza, Kant, Leibniz.
And sometimes they have two or three fundamental assumptions wrong or express things in a way that seems to be incompatible when you fix them and you fix some of the bugs that converges again.
And in this current world view, I think we can agree that we perceive is not reality, what we perceive is some kind of dream.
A dream is a type of representation.
We can understand what representations are from first principles. They have to be expressed in a representational language.
We understand since last century that only certain languages work, otherwise the digital contradictions, the computational languages work, and they work by modeling things using state transitions.
And once we understand that we are patterns of state transitions that represent causal structure in a coarse-grained way on a physical subset that has a different dynamic, but that can be modeled using it.
And these models can be used to control the dynamic of physics. This seems to be the case.
And there are many open questions. For instance, does consciousness only work at certain time frames? Can it only work at certain brain sizes, only on certain substrates?
Or could, for instance, be plants? Could there be sentient? Could there be conscious? Just at different time frames because they don't have neurons that work at the same rate of excitation.
And they use different channels for transmitting information, right?
This is something that is open to me, but what I find also very heartening is that there is a convergence between perspectives of other cultures and my own.
But my current culture, Western science, is not animistic.
It basically does not believe that cognition can take part outside of a place outside of brains.
It's not the whole culture that believes this. If you talk to, say, a physiotherapist, chances are that the physiotherapist will tell you that bodies can think.
I've met a number of physiotherapists which believe that, that they are actually sentient, just at a different time frame.
And that's very confusing to a neuroscientist because a neuroscientist believes only neurons can think, at least most neuroscientists, I know.
I believe that the idea that something outside of the brain could think is superstitious.
And I look at this and I'm undecided, right? I asked myself, would an experiment that would decide.
But if I look at this from the perspective of a computer scientist, there is no reason why bodies could not think, not an obvious one.
Because if brains think by cells exchanging messages, neurons exchanging messages, that's something that the cells in your body can also do, right?
If these measures need to be conditional and cells should be trainable, that's also something that cells in your body can possibly do.
Or plant cells can possibly do. It's also something that can work across plants.
So basically nature has the means and motive for producing the same structure as the animists in Japan are reporting.
That basically nature is full of competing spirits that control matter.
And then when we observe ecosystems and plants and people, what we observe is the physical emanations of software that is self-organizing,
running on them, controlling them and doing things with them.
I find this beautiful that we get to this convergence of perspectives.
We realize, oh, it's the same perspective. It's just explained in a different way.
But it makes total sense, right? There is nothing superstitious about it.
Basically, you die because your spirit leaves your body, but it doesn't go anywhere.
It's not that there is another realm where your spirit is now moving, unless there is some background internet that has formed in nature, which is conceivable, right?
And that can retain some of the information, but really most of your memories are stored in your brain.
And even if you manage to keep a pattern stable that migrates out of your body, your personality, your memories will be gone.
So the thing that makes you, you will probably not persist beyond your death.
So it's different conceptions of software layered on top of matter?
Yes, it's basically the same worldview that we see.
It's exactly the same thing as the Western worldview or Western scientific perspective.
It's completely compatible, not going to make any claims that cannot in principle be experimentally tested.
There can only be confidence where you have evidence.
Right? Otherwise you have possibilities and you need to be agnostic about the things that are possible.
But you need, if you have to be agnostic about a certain domain, it means you cannot just pick one and say, only brain cells can sing.
Or I can also not say, I'm pretty sure plants are conscious because I'm not sure.
I don't know. I don't know how to test for this.
But I'm now looking at the possibilities and these possibilities open up perspective that can unify different cultures.
My issue with Buddhism is that I never experience it as a philosophy.
Philosophy is to me something where a number of very skeptical people are in a room and they look at arguments.
And then they disagree about the arguments and try to shoot down each other's theories.
And in this way they make progress and it's painful and takes thousands of years, but even an undergrad student can contribute.
And Buddhism is not like this.
Buddhists are always right about everything.
I've never heard the Buddhists say something bad about, say, race or abortion or anything else.
They're always right, which is extremely suspicious even for super complicated issues like abortion.
How is that possible?
Of course that's by design.
Buddhists train themselves to be right about everything.
And when they talk about their insights, they expect you to have a certain facial expression when you listen.
That is compatible to the facial expression when they make it.
What they say is extremely sacred and correct.
And it's very impolite to not make the same expression and to talk in the same way.
This is very suspicious.
It's manipulative.
It's not rational.
And I'm pretty sure that there is philosophy behind the whole thing, but it's not like you can discuss it.
Because the people that talk to you, they tell you the reason why this is true is because it alleviates suffering.
In order to alleviate suffering, listen to the following wise men.
And they figured this out.
But you're not getting involved with the steps.
This is not philosophy. This is a cult.
And so there might be philosophy there, but because I cannot question it, because they don't see the rational steps and so on.
I cannot use it.
I can make my own conclusions and I look to which degree they're compatible.
And they are, which is very satisfying.
But I find that I get to be in agreement with most of the introspective psychology of Buddhists, despite not studying Buddhism.
That's satisfying.
But by itself, I don't know to which degree Buddhism is correct because they don't show me the arguments or the measurements or the experiments.
Maybe there's some kind of ideology or cult stacked on top of the truth.
So that's how you're able to experience.
The convergence you explained definitely resonated with me.
And I think in hindsight is why I felt compelled to reach out to you.
Although to harken back to a point you made earlier in the episode, you had said you're weary of aesthetics.
You said if it sounds too good to be true, then maybe it's too good to be true.
Should we not apply that lens to what you're saying here?
If I would make steps towards Buddhism, to try to adapt my theories to what the Buddhists are saying, then I would be suspicious.
But I'm always trying to see whether the words that I use mean certain things.
And so my perspective is still the one of these computer scientists that is thinking about how can I implement the things that I'm talking about.
And very often my ideas are not at the level where I can have a specification that I can implement.
So I have a strong intuition of what self-organizing software looks like.
But I cannot implement a general self-organizing computational paradigm.
And until I am there, I need to be skeptical of my own ideas.
And the fact that almost nothing in other cultures makes sense unless we assume that there is self-organizing software.
And self-organizing software is what before the Enlightenment was called spirit.
And after the Enlightenment, we forgot the notion and thought it's a superstition that is weirdly shared by all sorts of cultures.
But only we have discovered that it doesn't exist.
And I think now we are rediscovering via the notion of software and control and nature.
That is to me, it's very interesting and it's tempting.
Maybe it's too tempting, but I'm quite optimistic that it works out.
And if not, then I was too curious and creative and somebody else is going to build something that actually works.
But you had fun doing it, meanwhile.
Not always. It's not always.
The question I want to ask is maybe too big of a question to tackle in the remaining time.
I'll throw it out there and then you tell me if we can't answer this.
The final question I have for you only takes like 20 seconds to answer.
I struggle with what is the underlying code, underlying software is...
Sorry, underlying software is code, underlying the code is bits, etc.
You go down and down the stack.
When we talk about our kind of natural software, is there a level of abstraction or a level of organization at which we say like,
that's the animation, that's where the animation exists.
How do we have this thing that just has the infinite depth yet has animation?
Where does the animation live at what level?
The reason why the universe exists probably is because it's possible that it exists.
There's nothing before base reality per definition.
Nothing exists before base reality that could act as a substrate or decide whether it exists or not.
The base reality itself is unconstrained by such concerns, which means it's undecided whether it exists or not.
You get an existing and non-existing branch and the non-existing branch doesn't have any observers that complain.
In the existing branch, we need to decide why certain things are happening and others are not happening.
The easiest explanation is that basically all the things are happening.
One way of looking at the universe is simply all operators.
Some of these operators are basic pairs which take an input and give you an output.
They associate two states with each other and they produce the animation.
That would mean that whenever you have a certain pattern and there's an operator that matches with it,
it bases it by the success pattern because nothing decides between the operators.
All operators are applied, which means the universe is branching all the time.
At every step, the universe is branching in an unbounded way.
Most of these branches are not going to lead to structure because you just get patterns that are replaced by other patterns.
But sometimes these patterns need to an error-correcting code to something that stabilizes itself.
An example for an error-correcting code that I often use is, imagine you sit at a bathtub, you move your hand,
you see a bunch of waves emerging on the surface of the bathtub and most of these waves just disappear after a while.
They just evaporate and the only vortices remain.
These vortices remain because there are waves in which the water moves in a circular pattern
so the information remains constrained to a certain volume. It does not dissipate.
This vortex is something like a particle now. It moves around until it bounces into other vortices
and then it can scatter into smaller vortices where it is larger one or it can disappear.
What if particles are like this?
Particles are simple error-correcting codes that emerge on these branching patterns of the underlying substrate.
Once you have these stable particles, they can arrange themselves into molecules
and then once you have molecules, you can make more interesting stuff like cells for them.
At every level of organization, you have error-correction on a higher level that is able to make that thing,
despite being more brittle, mushy and complex, stable over a wider range of circumstances.
This would be the perspective.
At some level, because the possibility exists, the possibility of building structure
as a result of a bubble of entropy like the inside of a star,
it's possible in a solar system around that start for structure like ours to exist.
I know we're at time. My final question, I promise, only takes 20 seconds to flip it back around on you.
What's one question you would leave me and listeners with, whether to think about or act on?
Don't really know what your listeners are at.
Whatever question you want.
My experience generalizes very, very quickly.
I would like us to think about how can we build a coherent world with each other?
How can we make sure that this project of humanity does not end prematurely?
How can we build shared agency, collective agency with each other in ways that are non-coercive
and allow us to understand our relationship with reality more deeply?
To me, that's the most important question.
It's one where I like to collaborate with the world.
I suspect that's also, to some degree, the intent of your podcast.
It is, yes.
Excellent.
Yosha, thank you so much for your time. This was very eye-opening.
I have a lot of reading to do after this, but thank you for looking forward to publishing this one.
Thank you very much. Thanks for inviting me.
