At the moment, all we can say is, that the fine confirms that early human evolution wasn't
very simple and linear, it was much more complicated, more bush-like, than a straight
line.
Berkeley paleoanthropologist Tim White, who is probably the leading expert on human evolution
at the moment, theorizes that Tomai was some form of ancestor, of Ardipithecus ramidus,
a hominid which he found in Ethiopia, dating to about four million years ago, until now
the earliest known hominid.
But, really, one must be honest and say that he is probably guessing.
Why?
Because we do not have enough fossils to be definitive.
White himself will be the first to admit that he may change his mind as more fossils
fill to come to fill what is a huge black hole in human evolution, those two million
years between seven and five million years, and just after that, when we know almost nothing.
And this, of course, was the critical period when there was this division developing between
the chimpanzee line and the human line.
The next known fossil, which dates to between four and four and a half million years ago,
was a small creature called, as I've said, Ardipithecus ramidus.
Ardipithecus stood upright.
It had thin enameled teeth, and a skull which looks much more like that of an ape than a
human.
In a way, it's a mix, like tomayas.
Ardipithecus ramidus was named by Tim White, who found it in the arid Awash region of
Ethiopia.
It's been potassium-argundated to about four and a half million years ago, maybe a little
later.
It's only, at this point, fragments, so we really don't know very much about it.
There's another early hominid, too.
This hominid is called Australipithecus anamensis, named after the local Turkana tribe's name
for a lake, Anam.
This primate flourished at the south end of Lake Turkana in Kenya.
It is, in some ways, somewhat similar to Ardipithecus, in the sense that it's a mosaic
of ape-like and human-like anatomy.
The human-like limbs, but much less mobile hands than later hominids.
It dates to about four to 4.2 million years ago, and weighed between 104 and 120 pounds.
Again, a mosaic of ape and human, but the less mobile hands are very significant because
mobile hands are very important for tool-making.
So we have this period between about seven and four million years ago, which is complete
confusion scientifically.
Three fossils, all of them mosaics of humans and non-human features, all of them somehow
connected with human evolution in its very early stages.
It's very tempting to put them in a line and say, to my Ardipithecus anamensis and so on.
But in fact, at this time in Africa, we must realize that there was an astounding diversity
of primates, some of them closer to apes, other closest to the human line.
We only have the tiniest fraction of these populations, three fossils, maybe six, fragments
at the most a dozen individuals, we don't really know.
So really, it's a very early stage, but if you reflect the 20 years ago, the earliest
fossil known was something like two and a half million years ago, this is all extremely
exciting.
