Lecture 4 The First Human Diaspora
In this lecture, number 4, we again move forward in time.
The span of prehistory covered in this course is enormous, and the segment we have today is large.
It goes from about two million years ago up to about half a million years ago or somewhat later.
We can't give you a precise date for the end of this particular time bracket.
Again, a high percentage of prehistory, but as you will find as we go through the course,
the chronological span gets smaller and smaller until it comes down sometimes to mere thousands of years or centuries even.
In this lecture, we're going to describe the first appearance of Homo erectus, the descendant of Homo in Africa,
and then we're going to talk about the spread of these archaic humans out of tropical Africa and the first settlement of Asia.
We're going to talk about Europe in lecture 5.
We begin by introducing a very fundamental background here, that of the Ice Age,
and make the point that climatic changes have been constant since 780,000 years ago,
and that these changes played a major role in human biological and cultural evolution.
After that, I'm going to describe the first Homo erectus fossils from Africa,
which incidentally are sometimes called Homo Agasta to add to the confusion of fossil names on the table,
before describing the spread of erectus across the Sahara out of its original homeland
as part of a series of waves of mammalian migration, which culminated about 700,000 years ago.
And then finally, I'll summarize what little is known about the first human inhabitants of Asia and their life way.
Their culture changed little until the appearance of fully modern humans, Homo sapiens sapiens in the region,
perhaps as early as 75,000 years ago. The date is unknown.
I want to make a point now that throughout this course, our perspective is not just going to be confined to Europe
or North America or some other small area, it's always going to be ardently international,
because prehistory is a global subject, not a provincial one.
And this course, the Prehistory of Humankind, is about world prehistory,
human history on the broadest possible canvas.
Two million years ago, humans were still confined to tropical Africa south of the Sahara,
only a few thousand of them, living mainly in the more open savanna and woodland areas of eastern and southern Africa.
It was in this crucible, and it is a crucible, of human evolution,
that at about two million years ago, new, more advanced humans appeared.
They are known generically as Homo erectus, the human who stands upright.
In time, Homo erectus spread widely over the old world, into Asia and Europe,
but not into the Americas, which is an important point which will resume in lecture 11.
Many forms of this archaic human evolved in different environments.
And one of the big differences now, after two million years ago,
is the increasing environmental diversity of the world and the increasing frequency of major climate change.
This climate change is encapsulated in the last great geological era, the Pleistocene,
which is commonly called the Great Ice Age.
This last great geological era began somewhere around 1.8 million years ago,
just as Homo erectus appeared in Africa.
Is there any connection? We don't know.
During the Ice Age, northern latitudes became colder,
but climatic fluctuations between warmer and cooler conditions were relatively minor
until about three quarters of a million years ago.
