But their skills paled in comparison with those of the stone workers who developed over a hundred thousand years ago new ways of shaping stone cobbles or cores.
They would shape these cobbles, these cores, very carefully before striking any flakes off them, so that you would get a standard size and shape of flake from which you could duplicate numerous tools, spearheads in particular.
Spearheads with triangular shape and lethally sharp edges and points, and they would take a whole series of flakes off these cobbles before discarding them.
Once they had got all these flakes, they would turn them not only into spear points, but into a wide variety of other tools.
In short, there was much greater standardization of stone technology, but on the other hand, there was also a much greater variety of different tools.
Projectile points, scrapers for working wood and scraping hides, knives for butchering.
Neanderthals were also experts at sharpening the edges of stone tools with careful trimming.
They made some beautiful circular-edged or curved-edged scrapers, which must have been very durable because they trimmed the edge rather steeply to make a very tough, long-lasting working edge when scraping.
They did another thing, too. They were the first people to make what archaeologists call composite tools. That's tools with several parts.
They were the first people to mount stone spear points on wooden shafts. These made these weapons more lethal, not only because they were sharper, more effective weapons at wounding,
but also because, very often, when the point went into a animal's body, the shaft would break off and the wound would therefore be more serious and more potentially fatal.
But despite their stoneworking skill, it seems that the Neanderthals made a relatively limited range of artifacts,
which vary considerably from one site to the next.
Now, there's great controversy over the meaning of these different toolkits. Some have small handaxes, which obviously are descended from much earlier versions of these artifacts.
Others have little sawblades. Others have innumerable scrapers.
And archaeologists have argued ad nauseam as to why these toolkits vary. And they vary greatly, not only within the same area, but at the same location from one layer to another.
Now, in earlier times, you found the James General toolkits over enormous areas. Very different, much simpler, much less sort of mental and technological versatility.
Here, we see variability within an area on a site. What does it mean?
Some people believe that different groups using different toolkits visited the same location at different times, maybe within a period of months, maybe at different seasons of the year.
Other people believe that these changes the result of cultural change, gradual cultural change, over many thousands of years.
And even smaller group of experts believe that these tools were the result of different activities by the same group.
They might come to the site once and be processing hides. They would use scrapers. They might come at another time to woodwork.
And they would use serrated flakes to cut bark and wood. The fact of the matter is, we will never know unless we start doing systematic edgeware analysis and are able to show what tools were used to cut hides, what for wood, and so on.
This controversy is unresolved, despite lengthy and elaborate classifications of these artifacts by French archaeologists.
In practice, all we can say is that Neanderthals made a highly varied and simple toolkit for different activities, and they had the mental versatility to create slightly specialized toolkits for different tasks.
And if they needed to scrape hides, they made lots of scrapers. They might even modify the scrapers for different types of skins, we don't know.
Certainly, their toolkit was far more versatile and more efficient than that of earlier people.
