The multi-regional hypothesis is based almost entirely on fragmentary human
remains, on this incomplete jigsaw we were talking about. The fossil evidence,
actually incomplete as it is, does not tend to support the multi-regional
hypothesis. Furthermore, as I just said, and this is a very fundamental point, DNA
extracted from a Neanderthal limb bone in Germany, shows that there was complete
incompatibility in terms of DNA from those archaic homo sapiens, Neanderthals,
with modern humans, to the point that they couldn't interbreed. And if this
applies to the Neanderthals, it probably applies to other areas as well. And it
seems increasingly likely that modern humans evolved in one area, and that area
is Africa. I say this with some confidence, because there is a new tool that
has been applied to the origins of humans which has given us a startling new
perspective on this whole problem. And that is molecular biology. This new
approach has played a decisive role in the debate to the point that most
scholars now believe that modern humans did indeed evolve in Africa. The basis
for this is mitochondrial DNA. Now this particular form of DNA is
inhibited only through the maternal line. It is female DNA. It does not mix with
or become diluted by paternal DNA. This means that you've got a sort of chain
of a potentially reliable link between modern and ancestral populations. This
approach, which was refined in the 1980s, has involved mitochondrial DNA
analysis of women from all continents, not just Africans, Europeans, Asians,
Pacific Islanders. And it shows that the differences between all these women are
very small, which suggests, and this is the fundamental point, that they split off
from one another relatively recently. However, and this is where the fun
really starts, the Africans in this sample displayed enough differences from
the others to suggest that they were much earlier. It suggests that the
Africans developed from diverse forms of mitochondrial DNA, more diverse forms
than other present-day populations elsewhere in the world. How did this
happen? Because they had more time to develop such mutations. When they
discovered this, the scientists were excited, carried out further research
and developed an even larger database of nuclear DNA and of blood groups and
enzymes. And together, these databases display a primary split between Africans
and non-Africans. Then later, a split between Eurasians and South West
Asians. This data implies an early split in Africa, a dispersal of population
from Africa, and then another split or bifurcation in Asia. This is a very
complex debate. The chronology of it is subject to considerable argument. The
methods are being continually refined, but enough research has been done to
strongly hint that modern humans evolved in Africa and that the ancestral
Homo sapiens populations may have lived in Africa between 200 and 100,000 years
ago. When this discovery was first announced, there was a great deal of
excitement and loose discussion about an African Eve. From a garden of Eden in
Africa, a female, a primordial female, who was the first modern human. This, of
course, is nonsense because geneticists look at populations, not individuals.
