But probably the most important innovation in Bone and Antler was a small, inconspicuous
artifact whose existence we've already talked about a little bit, and that is the eyed needle.
Small, made of bone ivory, little hole bored on the top with a fine flint ore.
And that hole you thread, and then having done that, you can fashion multi-layered, tailored,
cold weather clothing.
It's funny, for years, people didn't really think about layered clothing.
And then about the 1960s and 70s, particularly with the release of polo fleece, people began
to think about wearing layered clothing, climbing mountains, hiking, sailing, whatever you want.
The chromagnons were well aware of layered clothing, as indeed were the Inuit and Eskimo
in more modern times, because they worked in extreme subzero temperature outside, there
were sharp temperature changes, and this sort of clothing is ideal for this.
Furthermore, by selling you could combine different hides and different skins, for example
the fur of an arctic fox, into such items as boots, and the heads, the hoods of anowax,
because these different furs have different qualities, some are waterproof, some insulate
well against cold, and so on.
The important thing about tailored clothing was that it enabled people to live out in
the open year-round, on the arctic semi-perigracial plains, north of the more sheltered areas
of southern Europe, the vast steppe tundra, which covered Europe and Eurasia, they could
settle there, living in houses, which we'll describe in a subsequent lecture, but venturing
out in the coldest weather and still being warm and relatively comfortable.
They were not just wearing skins, like the Crumag, like the Neanderthals did, this was
a major inconspicuous revolution in human technology.
When then did the first modern humans alive in Eastern Europe?
The answer is we're not absolutely sure, but we suspect it was around 45,000 years ago.
These were round-headed, completely modern people, known to anthropologists as Cromagnons.
After the Cromagnon walk shelter, which was found in 1868 during the construction of a
railroad station near the small village of Lays Aisie in southwestern France, which is
a major center of Cromagnon research.
We know when all these dates come from radiocarbon dating, a method which is widely used for
later prehistory and described in your guide, the Cromagnons we know from these carbon dates
had settled in Western Europe somewhere around 38,000 years ago.
In other words, the spread into Europe by prehistoric standards was probably fairly
rapid again.
It was this natural process of expansion.
Over some five to ten thousand years, they seemed to be living alongside a slowly shrinking
Neanderthal population.
As we've said several times, these people didn't interbreed with Neanderthals.
If any modern analogies are correct, they probably pushed the Neanderthals out into
more marginal areas and they eventually became extinct.
By between 30 and 31,000 years ago, the Cromagnons had Europe to themselves.
What was this Europe like?
It was very different from today.
Huge ice sheets mantled Scandinavia and the Alps spreading out onto the plains surrounding.
Huge ice sheets may have also formed in the Pyrenees between France and Spain.
A broad zone of treeless rolling plains extended from the Atlantic coast deep into Eastern
Europe and Eurasia and all the way out into Siberia.
