The point about the chromagnons is that they exploited all these food resources with great
efficiency to the point that many bands lived almost permanently in one place, moving out
when there were migrations, but always coming back to the same bases, many of them large
caves and rock shelters, using open camps in the summer, a far greater versatility
of human settlement, and of course they were perfectly capable of living out in open camps
year round. Most rock shelters in sheltered valleys were close to large streams or fords
where reindeer, cross rivers, or salmon ran. As much as possible they settled in south-facing
caves. Why? So they could get the full warmth of the winter sun.
This was a much more complicated existence. The seasons passed, and there were events
each season. The highlight of the chromagnon year was the summer, probably when neighboring
groups came together to specific locations where game like reindeer or salmon were abundant
for a few weeks at a time. This was when the harvest took place. This was the time when
marriages were arranged, initiation ceremonies were performed, and other highly intense rituals
unfolded. Where group shamans, and we'll talk about shamans next time, told tales and wove
spells when the ancestors and the forces of the spiritual world were invoked to ensure
the continuity of life. For the first time we see the spiritual and symbolic realm impinging
on human existence, threatening, offering precedent, bringing people together, giving
them a worldview and an identity, something mentally that humans apparently have not
had before. These seasonal gatherings were ortho times when people traded, men and women
traded artifacts, raw materials, ornaments from afar. Chromagnon sites in southwestern
France contain such exotic sea shells from the northwest Atlantic coast and the Mediterranean,
even shiny amber from northern Europe which had modern magic qualities when rubbed. Many
of these objects may have fostered gestures of social obligation between individuals and
groups. Many Chromagnon groups seem to have lived closer to their neighbors than ever
before. This was a society where social elaboration, where relationships between people, where
symbolic acts were of immense importance, both with kin and with more distant neighbors.
Shamans, people who understood and interpreted the spiritual world, were much more important
than ever before. The climax of the Chromagnons came with the Magdalenian culture of southwestern
France which flourished about 15,000 years ago. The bracket may be 18 to 12, we're not
quite sure. It's named after a rock shelter called La Madeleine in France's Vesère Valley.
And in this you see the full effluorescence of the magnificent engraving and painting
achieved by the Magdalenians, a society adapted to extreme cold which was about to be exposed
to a far warmer and climatically rapidly changing world. The Magdalenian 15,000 years ago was
the climax of tens of thousands of years of brilliant adaptation by modern humans to
an extremely demanding and ever-changing arctic environment. These people were the epitome
of Ice Age humans. In this lecture we've described the spread of modern humans into
Europe and then the distinctive and increasingly elaborate life way developed by the Chromagnons.
We've described how new antler and bone technology allowed the development of highly specialized
toolkits, also of tailored clothing. We've also talked a little bit about the dynamics
of Chromagnon society which was far more elaborate than that of the Neanderthals. From here we
need to explore the society in a little more depth. We need to look at this interface between
the living and spiritual worlds at the ceremonies and what we know about them and about the
first art known in the world which illuminates this world like a searchlight. And then in
the second half of the next lecture we'll go east into Eurasia and deep into Siberia.
