What was surprising about Chauvet was that it was so early.
AMS radiocarbon dating, once again described in the dating section in the guide, allows
us to date little flecks of paint from individual paintings, so we can actually date the moment
when the painting was painted, and the paintings in Chauvet date to between 31,000 and 24,000
years ago, far earlier than Lascaux and El Camero, paintings with a sophistication which
really surprised the experts.
But what does all this art mean?
Intense debates around the subject.
As I said earlier, many theories thought of the art originally as art for art's sake,
a creative moment, as you might say.
But then, interpretations evolved.
People began to think of the art as sympathetic hunting magic.
In other words, they painted the animals, they were hunting as a way of ensuring that
there was plenty of game.
But now, today, after years of speculation and extremely very complicated argument,
most authorities now believe that the art was painted by shamans, much of it as a result
of solitary vision quests deep in dark caves.
The scenario goes like this.
A shaman, the word comes from the Siberian word Saman, which means a person of power.
Was someone who, through solitary vision quests, assumed unusual spiritual powers, powers which
enabled them to pass in trance, may be induced by hallucinogens from the living to the spiritual
world?
In other words, these people were intermediaries between living people and the forces of nature
and animal spirits.
They were people who alone could fly free in the spiritual world and see the forces and
all these images and mythic beasts, and then they would come from their range, and while
it was fresh in their mind, in their altered state of consciousness, they would paint the
animals.
Now, these modern theories, which engulf shamanism, involve using modern-day research on san-hunter-gatherer
art, that's the Bushman Common they call, in Southern Africa.
This art, which is magnificent and quite different, it's mainly human figures, signs, animals,
painted on walls, with a definite background code, which we don't really understand, has
been understood because a linguist, a German linguist called Wilhelm Blick, actually talked
to Sam in the late 19th century and recorded the meanings of some of the art.
These people told him that the art was very often depicting scenes where hunters would
acquire power.
From the animals, the animals they killed, dancing around them as they died, and that
other scenes were painted by shamans.
And it's been argued that this model could also be applied to the chromagnons.
Of course, we're speculating here, but it's very interesting, because there was clear
evidence that groups of people went into many of these caves.
They came in groups far from daylight, congregated sometimes in small caverns, very often in
larger ones, where clearly some form of ceremony took place.
Maybe an initiation ceremony where knowledge is passed from one generation to the next.
That seems to be one of the economical explanations.
But there were lots of paintings, which are found in obscure chambers, lots of cabalistic
signs, there are imprints of human hands on the wall, where someone has placed their hand
on the wall and then blown powder against it to leave the impression on the wall.
And this is where the shaman comes in.
They believe that in dark caves, the shaman would communicate and go into his vision quest
far from daylight, in complete darkness, and then he would come out, or maybe when
he was in the same place, he would light a light and paint what he had seen, and that
many of these paintings are in fact images of visions, images of the spiritual world.
