Archaeologists call these societies the East Gravettian, named after a cave in France or
rock shelter called la Gravette.
These cultures, which are obviously much more complex in detail than we actually know at
the moment, flourished on the plains and varied terrain of central and eastern Europe between
about 28 and 10,000 years ago.
In other words, they straddle the very end of the Ice Age and survive there in one form
or the other after global warming began about 15,000 years ago.
These people, in popular stereotype, are commonly thought of as mammoth hunters, because they
have assumed to have preyed on the herds of Arctic elephant on the plains, remarkable
animals with thick, thick, felt, and long hair which were brilliantly adapted to very
cold climate.
In fact, much of their diet came from smaller animals like rabbits.
But mammoth were very important because the big limb bones and ribs of these animals,
many of them may be culled from animals that have died of natural causes, because of places
literally which become mammoth cemeteries, as we know from Siberia, were ideal for building
the roof beams for dome-like structures which were covered with sod or other materials like
skins to create semi-subterranean houses partially built into the subsoil so that they were protected
from the cold and the wind.
The Dhoni-Vetsanici and Pravalov sites in the Czech Republic, for example, overlooked
a river about 24,000 years ago.
The people lived in oval and timber houses dug partially into the ground.
In the Don and Dnieper rivers, valleys of the Ukraine, the most intense Gravetian occupation
was between about 18,000 and 14,000 years ago.
Here the people often built intricate houses with a framework of mammoth bones and lived
overlooking the Dnieper Valley, or the Don, where they pursued animals.
The Mesalic site, overlooking the Nipah, occupied 15,000 years ago, was a full settlement of
five houses dug into the ground covered with roof turfs or hide.
This was a place which was used on and off quite some time.
To the east of the Don and Dnieper valleys stretches central Asia, a vast area of step
and varied topography that extended as far as Siberia's Lake Baikal and beyond.
A vast, huge area of the world, the archaeology of which is almost unknown.
We know that during the late Ice Age a sparse population of highly mobile hunter-gatherers
lived in this savage environment.
They lived in river valleys and near lake basins where they came in contact with other
hunters from areas to the south, from the desert regions of China and so on.
Central Asia was subject to cultural influences both from the late Ice Age cultures of the
West and from the little-known contemporary societies of China and areas to the south.
And this area was the crucible for the first settlement of America.
In this lecture we've looked at the earliest artistic tradition in the world and the explosion
of human culture after 50,000 years ago.
We've analyzed some of the motives behind the art, and from there we've moved east
and northeast until now we're ready and poised in the next lecture to look at the first
settlement of the Americas, a virgin continent.
