Although archaeologists divide Great Basin and Southwestern and interior California desert
cultures into various subdivisions, the basic tenor of arid land life remain much the same
over many millennia.
As I said, anchored to water supplies, with expeditions to outlying locations, for nut
harvests, for pineal nuts, for hunting big horn sheep, and other seasonal needs.
The population was never large, very, very small in many places, and it changed but little
over thousands of years.
When you come to the Pacific coast, you're dealing with a very different world, a much
more temperate climate.
Water is still short supply, the hinterland is still arid, but there is the richness
of the maritime environment, particularly in areas like the Santa Barbara Channel of
Southern California, or the Pacific Northwest, where such phenomena as salmon runs, or natural
upwelling of colder water from the ocean floor, provided an abundance of fish, where sea mammals
could be found, and shellfish could be taken.
Now the sea mammals and the shellfish have particular advantages.
They are reliable, predictable foods.
Contrary to popular belief, shellfish weren't a supplementary food, they were a major part
of the diet, especially in the winter, because they could be taken by the hundred, by rocky
outcrops, by the shore.
And sea mammals come ashore to breed, and the young and the mothers can be clubbed in
their rookies with fair ease, and each one yielded not only a great deal of meat, but
valuable byproducts like seal skin.
Much of this exploitation of the maritime environment was done close inshore.
With inevitably, by at least 9,000 years ago, and probably much earlier, some canoes
made of dugouts maybe, maybe some of them grass canoes, some of them even planked, ventured
offshore to the Channel Islands of California, where mollusks, sea mammals, and even dolphins
could be taken in abundance.
In later times, coastal hunter-gatherer gilchers assumed considerable political and social
elaboration, especially in food-rich areas, like the Santa Barbara Channel with its rich
fisheries, in the San Francisco Bay, where fish and fish are bounded, especially in the
last 2,000 years, and of course in the Pacific Northwest.
Between 11,000 and 3,000 years ago, the hunter-gatherer peoples of North America, the ancient
North Americans, developed increasingly sophisticated adaptations to all manner of challenging
environments.
This increase in sophistication was due in part to population increases, more sedentary
living, and to more circumscribed hunting territories, and in earlier times, where populations rose
and people had a greater sense of territory, there was increased interaction, but at the
same time, the ancient Native Americans developed increasingly complex ritual beliefs and ever-richer
spiritual beliefs and seasonal rituals, and began to build shrines, earthworks, and to
paint representations of shamanistic visions on the walls of caves and natural outcrops.
Here, as everywhere else, in the ancient world, the living and spiritual worlds passed imperceptibly
the one into the other, bridged by priests and shamans who were able to pass effortlessly
into the supernatural realm.
A profound spirituality and a complex ritual life marked every Native American society from
very early times, a spiritual complexity that seems perhaps to have intensified dramatically
in later times and become an integral part of the elaborate chieftains and farming societies
which flourished in late prehistoric times.
