But, even these archaeologists can work magic with.
There is an example of a site in northern Belgium, which comprises a scatter of stones
around a half in one place and a few feet away, a boulder with a scatter of stones around
it, and the Belgian archaeologists who studied it, was able to show that at some point during
this brief stay, a person had gone over, sat on the boulder, made some stone tools, subsequently
a second person joined him and made more tools, and then they made some bone tools from using
the stone tools.
One of those two stone workers was left-handed, and they showed this simply from the stone
by looking at the direction of the flakes and reconstructing the flakes back onto the
floor onto the core, which is the most hideously complicated and dull archaeology you can imagine.
Forget golden pharaohs, this is the real world of archaeology, mind-blowingly simple monotonous
routine.
But at this time we know the toolkits became lighter and more portable, and it seems there
were none in this forest area of the elaborate bone and antler tools found in chromagnon sites
and used by chromagnons.
One reason was a major invention which probably had developed during the late Ice Age, the
bow and arrow.
You would think this was a very revolutionary invention, it actually wasn't, because really
it's an extension of the spear power, and everything we see say in North America suggests
the bow and arrow was very useful, but it didn't really have a revolutionary effect.
The big innovation was that it enabled people to shoot animals from a larger distance, not
that bigger, but enough, where the stalking was a little easier, but it also enabled people
to take waterfowl and birds on the wing.
This to you and I may seem like a very difficult skill, but actually with practice you can
do it, and this allowed people to eat a much wider range of meat.
Bone tools became smaller as a result.
Many of them small microliths, the word microce, is small in Greece, again my classical education,
but these served as barbs for spears and arrows.
If you put a barb on a spear or arrow, when it penetrates the victim, it does more damage,
obviously, than a simple spear point.
So that was the forest field, very simple, light population, very mobile.
Along the lakes and the Baltic Sea in the north, Mesolithic societies were more sophisticated.
They became very expert fowlers, taking birds and fisherfolk, camping for long periods of
time near swamps and along shallow river coasts where fish and birds are bounded.
We're very lucky in Scandinavia because there were so many swamps and bog and so many low
lying terrain areas that we know a great deal about these societies because organic materials
like wood are well preserved.
They found fishing nets, they found barbed fishing spears, they even as you know in
later periods found entire corpses in bogs.
And we know that these people depended very heavily on wood and fiber for fish nets, baskets
and traps.
They were trapping fish like pike and spearing them in shallow lakes.
And they were living in one place for much of the time.
This was a very successful adaptation.
By 7000 BC, some of these populations, they're known to Danish archaeologists as the Malimos
people after a site of that name.
Because some of these Malimos sites had risen considerably in the most favorable locations
near estuaries and lakes.
The result was something that happened again and again in later prehistory.
Territorial boundaries became more circumscribed.
There was conflict between groups.
We know this because finds of war casualties in cemeteries.
Probably they were fighting over domestic matters and food supplies.
But the interesting thing about these people is their society got more complex, they adjusted
a bit to greater crowding.
And what's fascinating about this is the oil farming was introduced a few thousand years
later before 3000 BC.
Many of the hunting and fishing practices of these people survived in common use into
modern times.
Despite the introduction of farming within a thousand years later, two or three thousand
years later, the important thing about this is that by studying modern folk culture, by
modern I mean early 20th century and 19th century, you can get some fascinating insights
into much earlier prehistoric populations.
An archaeologist at Cambridge University called Graham Clark pioneered this approach back
in the 1930s.
