So there were some consequences. So we'll look briefly at some other areas. The Nile
Valley, the cradle of ancient Egypt, which we'll talk about a lot later in the course.
Along the Nile Valley, rising sea levels after the Ice Age created a lush enviroment for
hunter-gatherers along the Nile flood plain, because when you lift the river, the river
which had a steep gradient obviously has to adjust, the result is flooding and the creation
of a flood plain. These hunter-gatherers exploited both plants and fish very extensively, a few
sites have been found. But unfortunately, the thousands of years of Nile floods have
buried most of these settlements under fine river silt. As you know, each year the Nile
flooded and the rivers rose and the waters spread over the flood plain, depositing fine
silt and re-fertilizing the land. At the same time, the silt accumulates, burying ancient
sites way under the alluvium. Generations of scholars have argued that agriculture was
introduced to the Nile from southwest Asia, somewhere around 8,000 BC. But by the same
token it is entirely possible that it began independently there. We don't know.
One thing we do know is that drought was intensifying in the Sahara during this time. And during
the younger dryers, when the Sahara got drier, they may have responded to a shortage of food
by domesticating plants and animals on the edges of the Nile Valley as a safety net which
protected them against an unpredictable environment. The truth is, we do not know when agriculture
began in Egypt, but as we will see, village agriculture was the foundation of ancient
Egypt. The earliest farming villages actually known from the Nile date to about 4,300 BC,
by which time villages of a considerable size were flourishing along the river and in the
Nile Delta. These were the communities that were the ultimate foundation of ancient Egypt,
which became a unified state in 3,100 BC. Farming also began early in what is now Turkey,
with agriculture, domesticated animals, and an obsidian trade well established by 9,500
BC at sites like Halan Semi-Tipisi, in eastern Turkey. By 7,000 BC, and the record is much
better here than the Nile, well established large farming villages existed in central
Turkey, on what is known as the Anatolian Plateau. The Hasilar village was one settlement
first occupied in about 8,000 BC, a community of small roundhouses each with their own ovens.
But the most complex settlement of these was a village sometimes called a town called Katalhuyuk,
also on the Anatolian Plain. At its height, this large village which is being excavated
by an international team covered 32 acres. It was a tightly packed community of flat
topped sun-dried brick houses with the outer walls of the houses serving as a defense wall.
The village was rebuilt at least 12 times after 7,000 BC, and is remarkable that some
of the rooms of these houses served as shrines with sculpted ox heads, wall paintings which
depict vultures and the dead and ancestors, and relief models of bulls and rams, a rich
community. Why was it rich? It came from its control of the local obsidian trade mined
from quarries in the nearby mountains. Obsidian interconnectedness, much more complex agricultural
economies which were beginning to flash over so much of southwest Asia by 6,000 BC.
In this lecture we've looked at some of the theories surrounding the origins of agriculture
and we've examined something of the consequences of agriculture to which we will return again
and again. There was no one cause of the changeover. There were many different consequences, many
of them which appeared long after agriculture came. Higher populations, denser settlements,
more permanent settlements, new technologies and major changes in social and ritual life.
And from there we established that agriculture was well established in Nile by 4,000 BC and
Turkey by 6,000 and we're now ready in the next lecture to explore agriculture in Europe.
Thank you.
