However, as we also said in Lecture 13, much of Europe was covered with dense, mixed oak
forests, the primordial European forests of which very little survives today.
The problem was the lack of open country.
This forest coverage tended to keep population densities among methodolithic communities
more and contributed to a much later settlement of Europe by farmers than might otherwise
have been the case if the country had been more open.
Why?
They lacked the technology to clear large, dense forests.
It's quite difficult.
As with every other major archaeological topic, controversy surrounds early agriculture in
Europe, but there are some points that people agree on.
The first of these is that agriculture did not arise indigenously in Europe.
It was not a center of early agricultural innovation.
Everybody agrees that both the cultivation of cereal crops and domesticated animals
spread into Southeast Europe, that is the Balkans, from Turkey and the west of the southwest
Asia across the Dardanelles.
The development of food production in Europe unfolded in three stages.
Firstly, global warming brought steadily warming climatic conditions.
In the early Holocene, this favored more plant growth.
These plants included both wild einkorn and barley, which grew in dense stands.
Enough grain could be harvested in a few days in Southeast Europe to support a family for
a year, but most other groups still relied on game and other plant foods.
As the climate warmed still further, forests, mixed oak forests, colonized hitherto more
open areas.
Harvests of wild cereal grains diminished.
What did the local inhabitants do?
They now started, and this is speculation, ring-barking trees.
They would strip off bark so the tree died, or burn down forests to clear space for more
wild grasses to grow, and also to attract grazing game animals.
In other words, they were managing the environment.
But everybody in these regions still lived in small temporary camps.
A settlement pattern common to all of Southern Europe's mesolithic societies.
Then, at about 7000 BC, or thereabouts the second stage of all this, domesticated grasses
were in full use on the fertile soils of southeastern Europe.
Farmers cultivating emmer wheat, barley, with herds of cattle, sheep, and goats had settled
in northern Greece by that time.
Within a few centuries, agricultural settlements were well established further north, in what
is now Bulgaria.
Now when you move north from Greece into Bulgaria, you move into a more temperate area, with
much heavier soils, heavy vegetational growth, and year-round rainfall.
This required very different farming methods, to say nothing of housing, from the methods
used for a long time in western Asia.
Here you had to use timber and thatch instead of mudbrick architecture.
You needed very effective groundstone axes and adzes with tough blades to clear even
modest forest growth.
Many of these methods, adapted for colder and wetter environments, were developed probably
in southeast Europe, not in southwestern Asia.
It was an indigenous adaptation to the environment.
And then the third stage.
In about 6200 BC, four centuries of much cooler, drier conditions may have caused widespread
drought across southeastern Europe.
