Now, the Lapita people developed these skills.
They were skills based on a society which lived close to the ocean, who knew the sea
intimately, but they also knew the passages of the heavenly bodies.
They knew, for example, what time of the year certain planets and stars would rise.
They knew how to set a course using the sun.
They knew that if you were close to land, the waves would bounce off the land, and you've
got a different feeling.
They felt the ocean with their bodies, and using these skills passed orally from one
generation to the next.
They learned how to make long offshore voyages, how to make successful landfalls, and how
most important of all, even if they didn't find land, to return to their starting point.
This was a catalyst, the development of the canoe, the use of easily stored foods, and
the navigational methods to voyage out of sight of land.
The colonization of Micronesia and Eastern Polynesia began about 2,000 years ago.
But this was after the first settlement of Western Polynesia, the places close to the
Bismarck, again involving long passages, which had taken place some 1300 to 1600 years earlier.
And this was the period when you find the beginnings of Polynesian culture.
The Polynesians themselves may have originated in the Fiji Islands, then by navigation and
by voyaging some of it caused by strife at home, others voyages by simple curiosity.
They then settled more remote islands, and they did it deliberately, not by accident
as many early researchers believed.
They were on the Macazos by AD 500, they were on the Society Islands and Tahiti by AD 800.
The first canoes arrived in Hawaii by about AD 600, and they were on East of Ireland,
for a modest land mass of all, a century later.
The human settlement of Polynesia took about 2,500 years, ending with the colonization
of New Zealand from Raiatea in the Society Islands, perhaps as late as 1200 AD or maybe
a little earlier.
This colonization of these remote land masses with their low density of biological species
with their poorly fertile soils was a remarkable achievement.
It was an achievement achieved at rapid speed by people who were expert navigators as safe
on the ocean as they were on land.
And part of the cause may simply have been the fact that these islands were incapable
of supporting very large populations, and many cases strife or overpopulation prompted
young men to travel with navigators to more off-lying islands in search of new lands.
With the colonization of Polynesia, the great diaspora of modern humans, Homo sapiens sapiens
ended.
It ended at the threshold of historic times in many parts of the world, at a time when
medieval crafts people in Europe were building the great Gothic cathedrals.
It was the end of a chapter which had began more than 100,000 years ago.
In this lecture we've described the beginnings of agriculture in East Asia, especially in
China, and the first human settlement of Polynesia.
We began with the origins of rice, which was cultivated in southern China by at least 7,000
BC.
Millet was cultivated in the north at least a thousand years ago, later in the far drier
Huanghou River Valley.
By 5,000 BC, farming societies were well established throughout China.
And with the domestication of root crops, development of out-vega canoes, and long distance navigation,
as at last settled the offshore Pacific Islands.
