In the south, between 7,200 and 5,500 B.C., during a period of warming climate, some wild
rice collectors in the Anxi Valley seemed to have turned to deliberate cultivation of
wild rice, presumably to increase food supplies.
How do we know this? From a small scatter of archaeological sites. The Pengdushan site
in the Middle Yangtze River Valley was a community of rice farmers between about 6,500 and 5,800
B.C. This was a substantial settlement. It had large houses and was settled at a time
when rice agriculture was well established and was sweating rapidly through southern China.
The only scenario we can really think of for the beginnings of rice cultivation is simply
that people living in these wetland areas did the same as they did in southwest Asia.
They extended the stands of wild rice by cultivating deliberately additional wild and planting
it and very rapidly changed over from collecting rice to actually farming it for themselves.
It seems that this innovation, as in Asia and Europe, spread rapidly because by 5,000 B.C.,
rice agriculture supported hundreds of thousands of southern Chinese. We know this because
we can track the spread of the crop by the widespread distribution of large farming villages
throughout southern China, where potters made a very distinctive sort of clay vessel
which was decorated with a twisted cord. It's widely distributed, even found in Taiwan.
Within 2,000 years, jumping ahead in time now, by 3,000 B.C., much more sophisticated agricultural
societies flourished throughout southern China. They were practicing a very intensive form
of agriculture, cultivating rice with large irrigation schemes. Now, these irrigation
schemes, which of course involve the movement and control of water, require cooperative leadership.
And we find that by 3,000 B.C., these societies were led by wealthy individuals, perhaps kin
leaders, but certainly people whose primary function was controlling trade and the organization
of irrigation agriculture. Rice, as I said, remains one of the great
mysteries of early agriculture, but what is very compelling about southern China is that
it spreads so rapidly, populations grow, rose rapidly as a result, and it seems to
have taken hold with great speed. This leads me to suspect that in fact, rice cultivation
on a small scale began in the Yangtze Valley very much earlier than 7,000 B.C., and I certainly
would be prepared to bet quite a lot on the farm that, one day, we'll find it back perhaps
as early as 10,000 B.C. But I'm only speculating, rice has been one of the great success stories
of humanity. We know, for example, nothing about when it originated in India and very
little indeed about when it originated in Southeast Asia, but certainly China was a
major center of rice cultivation from very, very early on after the Ice Age.
The second great center of Chinese agriculture lies 400 miles north, in the Huanghou River
Valley of the north. At the end of the Ice Age, wild plant foods,
including wild millet, assumed great importance in this region where the climate was warmer
and moister than today. Now there's a difference between the Yangtze and the Huanghou environments.
In the south, they practiced agriculture extensively. They used irrigation schemes to intensify
the farming, probably from quite early on. Here the farming was dry. It was dependent
on seasonal rainfall.
