So, we're looking at a very early date, by the time civilization was established in
Mesopotamia, at a very relatively sophisticated culture, which had a well-established farming
tradition which went back thousands of years in the north, an equivalent in the south,
about which we know very little, many regional farming cultures developing throughout China,
at least a thousand years before civilization was established in Mesopotamia, after 4000
B.C., as the Yang Shao was flourishing in the north, many so-called Lung Shenoid cultures
of northern China flourished alongside the Yang Shao, with equivalents in the south.
The Lung Shenoid culture is named after Lung Shen's site, also in northern China.
Now by this time, between 4000 and 3000 B.C., Yang Shao, as I've said, was not alone, and
some other things were happening.
There were contemporary, regional, and quite complex farming societies in the Yangtze
Valley in the south at the same time, and we find now in the north that some of these
Lung Shenoid societies were relying in part on two innovations from the south.
One was rice cultivation, and the other was irrigation.
So you're seeing here, by 4000 to 3000 B.C., and after that, one or two very important
things happening.
The first is much more elaborate and wealthier farming cultures, which are the foundations
of Chinese civilization.
The second is the emergence of powerful people who were organizing this agriculture, the
first signs of leadership, and thirdly, tremendous regional diversity between the north and the
south, which, as we will see in lecture 28, were the foundations of Chinese civilization.
So the roots of this were settled and in place before 3000 B.C.
What then about mainland and island southeast Asia to the south?
We don't know when rice agriculture began there, but it must have been pretty early,
and certainly as early as 3000 B.C., when Yang Shao was flourishing in northern China.
It seems that a broadly homogeneous rice growing culture developed over a wide area,
with extensive trading networks linking the islands and the mainland.
Now you'll recall that as early as 40,000 years ago, people were living in New Guinea,
and by 30,000 years ago they'd settled on the Solomon Islands, all islands within line
of sight of other land masses.
Now we also know that by 7,000 B.C., New Guinea Islanders were probably cultivating root crops,
taro, and yams, staples in the air today, on a small scale.
How do we know that?
Because people have found drainage channels up in the islands.
And then between 5000 and 2000 B.C., taro and yam agriculture had become really well
established, to the point that they've actually detected signs of forest clearance, major
changes in the natural vegetation, and the creation of an artificial garden environment.
Now this was an enormously important development for the settlement of the Pacific.
The last major theme in this lecture.
The development of root agriculture in New Guinea, taro and yams, and its spread to the
islands of the Bismarck Archipelago, which lie off the eastern shore of New Guinea, close
offshore, had momentous consequences in the long term.
Why?
Because until now, nobody had colonized the offshore islands of Melanesia and Polynesia.
Why not?
These remote Pacific islands were biologically impoverished, and could only be settled by
people bringing agriculture with them.
Why?
Because firstly they would have to grow crops when they got there to feed themselves.
And secondly, they had to bring with them easily stored foods, for which taro and yams
are ideal.
This is quite a part from the problem of getting there.
