There was another change too.
The administration of government for the state had, for many centuries, rather resembled
a family business, run by high nobles, all of whom were related to each other, and to
the royal family.
Now things changed.
The business of running the state passed to trusted commoners, officials of vast administrative
experience.
More and more of the king's time was spent presiding over his ambitious political provincial
governors and maintaining overseas trade beyond Egypt's frontiers.
Egypt, for example, had almost no timber.
It relied heavily on timber which Biblos, a city on the eastern Mediterranean coast,
the famous cedars of Lebanon of the Old Testament, and it's no coincidence that this trade was
a royal monopoly.
From ports like Biblos too, the pharaoh's agents acquired goods from Mesopotamian city
states.
Successive old kingdom pharaohs sent expeditions to the south into what is known as Nubia,
to acquire slaves, ivory, and other tropical goods.
The Egyptians called Nubia the land of the bowmen, because the Nubians were skilled archers
who often served in Egyptian armies.
The land upstream of the first cataract was Nubia, an unknown land from which tropical
parks and eventually gold helped nurture the kingdom.
The last old kingdom pharaoh was Pepe the First, Pepe the Second, I beg your pardon,
who came to the throne in about 2278 B.C.
He reigned for over sixty years.
Some people believe he reigned as long as ninety-four, but that's stretching credibility.
Pepe's reign began well, but he was soon beset with misfortune.
After about twenty years of his reign in 2258, King Sargon of Babylon, whom we met in the
previous lecture, sacked Biblos and destroyed a major source of the royal wealth, the monopoly
in the timber trade.
At the same time, a drastically weakened and poorer pharaoh had to deal with increasing
rebellious provincial governors.
He paid them off with lavish gifts, but this didn't work.
The only thing that kept him going was his long experience, his long reign, and his prestige.
He died.
And at about that time, a series of poor floods, starting in about 2180 B.C., brought chaos.
Throughout most of the old kingdom, the fuds had been good, the pharaoh's kingdom had been
prosperous, harvests had been good.
But now the poor floods brought famine.
It is said that people could walk across the Nile and up to Egypt, dry shod.
People starved.
The central government, headed by a series of weak pharaohs, collapsed soon after Pepe's
death.
What happened?
The central authority evaporated, the pharaoh was unable to feed the people, and the kingdom
dissolved into a series of competing kingdoms, headed by warlords.
Now the pharaohs for century had preached that they were infallible.
But here was a flood.
Here was no flood.
The pharaohs obviously had no control over the kingdom, and their prestige evaporated,
because they did not control the flood, and could not stave off famine.
They were proven fallible.
The local provincial governors behaved now like kings, and boasted in their funerary
descriptions of how they saved their people from starvation.
And the future of ancient Egypt was seriously in doubt, because the kingdom had come apart.
In this lecture we've looked at the origins of ancient Egyptian civilization, among a
patchwork of small kingdoms along the Nile, which grew up after 4000 BC.
We described the process of diplomatic and military monopoly, which made Neckhen and
then Thists come to dominance, and how unification took place in about 3100 BC, an event surrounded
by intense symbolism.
Then we described Old Kingdom Egypt, the pyramid building, and the building of these
pyramids which served both religious and secular processes, and then finally we described how
this remarkable kingdom came apart.
