Writing probably first developed in Mesopotamia.
Why do we say this? Simply because Oroch was earlier than Egyptian towns.
But the writing that developed also developed in Egypt independently.
Egyptian priests who were probably the first scribes developed their own script,
which was much easier to write with a pen on paparous reed paper.
They didn't use clay where you stamp the script into wet clay.
Here they used paparous. Why? Because paparous was abundant.
A classical case of a solution coming from abundant raw material.
So you had these various kingdoms competing with one another the length of the Nile.
And then in about 3100 BC the exact date is still a little vague.
These competing kingdoms became a single unified state.
It is very important to understand that this process of unification, the notion of unification,
the notion of what the Egyptians called two lands, was of critical importance
to the entire ideology of ancient Egyptian civilization.
Unification meant two lands came together.
Unification meant order, the opposite of chaos.
It was not a process that happened overnight.
It was a process that was the combination of centuries of constant diplomacy, local wars, and conquests.
It was the culmination of local political and social developments which resulted from centuries of change.
Rapid and then gradual change.
A constant trajectory towards larger political units.
In the centuries before 3000 BC for example, the larger villages and towns became the focal points of different territories
that were eventually to become the gnomes or provinces of the Egyptian state.
Throughout Egyptian history there was a bit of a tension between the provincial rulers and the provinces and the centralized government.
And when, as did happen a couple of times, ancient Egyptian civilization fractured,
it was these provincial governors competing with one another that were the real political power.
Lower and upper Egypt were eventually unified by a series of shadowy rulers from the town and kingdom of Thys near Abdos.
We don't know much about them except for some cemetery excavations which have yielded a few tantalizing clues as to who these people were.
Their names were such as Scorpion and Nama.
They reigned around 3100 BC.
Egyptologists call this Dynasty Zero, the first of all ancient Egyptian dynasties.
We don't know much about these people except that they were skilled traders and warriors.
They certainly traded as far as the delta, if not further afield.
There was for example an active trade in wine between the delta and upper Egypt.
And they also conquered Meccan and became increasingly dominant.
Now we will never know the details of unification beyond the fact that it was a long process of negotiation and warfare.
The Egyptians themselves cloaked unification in mythic terms.
Each pharaoh ruled as Horus, the Falcon God, a manifestation of the God of heavenly power and the skies.
The Falcon-headed God symbolized good order.
His antagonist was a snout creature, a snouted creature, Seth, the epitome of chaos and disorder.
And the conflict between these two gods, Horus and Seth, symbolized the struggle between the forces of order and the forces of anarchy.
According to Egyptian myth, perpetuated for many centuries, the two gods fought over the right to inherit the kingdom.
But Geb, the deity of earth and lord of the gods, reconciled him in an act that symbolized the triumph of order over chaos.
And from unification onwards, from 3100 BC, Egyptian belief and ideology was based on the notion of stable and wise government by pious kings who presided over harmonious, unified world, the two lands.
