Lecture 23, The Minoan Civilization of Crete
In the last two lectures, we've surveyed the long 3,000-year history of ancient Egyptian
civilization.
Now we're going to take a wider look at the other end of the eastern Mediterranean
world and look at a civilization which traded regularly with Middle and New Kingdom Egypt,
the civilization of the Minoans of Crete.
First, I want to describe the beginnings of maritime and village farming in the Aegean
Ocean area and the first agricultural settlements at a place called Knossos on Crete.
Then I'm going to explore the palace of Minos at Knossos, Minos being the legendary king
of the Minoan civilization, and trace the development of this society.
I'm going to describe the far-flung international trade which was the lifeblood of Minoan society.
And then we'll analyze the distinctive Minoan religious beliefs which were very different
from those say of Egypt or Mesopotamia.
And finally, we'll describe one of the great natural disasters of ancient times, the Santorini
explosion of the 17th century BC which blew an entire island into space.
And we'll look at the end of the Minoan civilization two centuries later as Crete became part
of the Greek world.
When Ramazes II ruled Egypt in the 13th century BC, he presided over one of the great imperial
powers of the eastern Mediterranean world.
As we said before, it was a world built on trade by land and sea, whose tentacles extended
from Mesopotamia to the eastern Mediterranean coast, the Levant, into Turkey and to the
Nile Valley, and as far west as Greece and the Aegean Sea, and ultimately even further
to Italy, North Africa, and beyond.
The roots of this trade go back far into ancient times.
We know that seafaring vessels plied the waters of the Aegean Sea as early as 4000 BC.
There were long-distance trade networks which linked the islands and the Greek mainland.
These expanded rapidly to even more distant lands.
This was a world where most communication had to be from the ocean, where small vessels
powered with oars and sails coasted from bay to bay, and from village and town to village
and town, from island to mainland, and further afield.
This was a hazardous pastime.
Most ships carried many stone anchors and regularly were erect to the advantage of the
archaeologists who learned a great deal from the contents of the shipwrecks' cargoes.
At 2500 BC, many villages and small towns were founded on the Cyclades Islands of the
Aegean, also throughout the large island of Crete, and on the Ionian islands of western
Greece.
These islands were ideal for farming two important crops, olives and vines, to say nothing of
cereal crops.
Olive oil, in particular, and wine, developed rapidly as a trade commodities, and a trade
in olive oil and wine soon connected the islands with a much wider world.
How do we know about this trade?
By tracing the distributions of the distinctively painted pots in which the wine and oil travelled.
At the same time, the Aegean also became an important center of metalworking, much
of the ore coming from some distance away, from Coppovic Cyprus, from Anatolia, modern
day Turkey, where also tin deposits were to be found.
This trade centered on small towns on the islands, and the fountains of these small
towns fostered considerable cultural diversity throughout the Aegean.
