The difference is here that what you've got is what I called in a previous lecture a web
of interconnectedness, probably of common religious beliefs, certain loose structures
of government, hierarchies of settlement, extending over this huge half-million square
mile area, but the actual tight core was much smaller, and it was in these areas, the core
area, that like Samarians, the Harappans adopted the city as a way of operating and controlling
their society.
The archaeology of the Harappan has been studied sporadically over the last three quarters
of a century.
We know now that there are at least five major Harappan cities, of which two, Harappa and
Mohenjadaro, by far the best known.
Both were excavated in the 20s, again in the 40s and 50s by the great British archaeologist
Mortimer Wheeler, and there has been sporadic work, and some is continuing at this time,
which improves constantly our knowledge of two of the most remarkable cities of antiquity.
Each of them, built on artificial mounds, erected at enormous cost above the river flood
level.
This was not an easy place to build and maintain a city.
The largest Harappan city is Mohenjadaro, six times the size of a wrapper, and rebuilt
at least nine times, each time building on the earlier levels.
It's thought that about 40 to 50,000 people may have lived at Harappa, about 23,500 at,
I beg your pardon, 40 to 50,000 may have lived at Mohenjadaro, about 23,500 at Harappa.
A large citadel rises at the west end of each city, dominating a grid of narrow city streets
lined with standardized brick houses.
Mohenjadaro's citadel rises 40 feet above the plain and is protected by massive flood
embankments and a perimeter wall, which must have been built at enormous cost.
The public buildings on its summit include a pillared temple, perhaps where the ruler
gave audience to petitioners and visiting officials.
There were no very elaborate temples or palaces, merely a ceremonial bath lined with bitumen
and surrounded by a colonnade.
It appears that ceremonial bathing was an important part of late South Indian rituals.
The citadels looked down on a complex of at least partially planned streets.
The more spacious dwellings, perhaps those of nobility, merchants and high officials,
were built around courtyards, some even with two or three stories, rows of one-story tenements,
housed thousands of commoners close to the bazaar and the artisan's workshops.
Like Egypt, like Mesopotamia again, society seems to have been a social pyramid.
But we still know very little about the Harappans.
We do not know the names of the rulers who presided over their cities, nor do we understand
the intricate links between the cities and lesser settlements.
Of the five major Harappan cities, only three of them, including Harappo and Mahanjidaro,
were the size of Sumerian Iraq in Mesopotamia.
While the Sumerians were predominantly urban dwellers, crowded into densely inhabited cities,
most Harappans lived in villages, they were village farmers dwelling in settlements that
interacted constantly with their neighbors.
They had been points to some form of stratified society and centralized government.
But unlike the Mesopotamians or the Egyptians, the Harappan rulers never boasted grand delicately
of their conquests and deeds on palace and temple walls.
They seemed to have lived unauthenticious lives marked by a complete lack of lavish public
display, a remarkable contrast with other civilizations of the day.
One is reminded a little bit of the Minoans, who also seem to have been relatively self-effacing.
One reason we know so little about the Harappans is that their script has never been deciphered,
despite intensive efforts and the use of computers.
There are at least 400 pictographic symbols in Harappan's script, but we do not know what
language they depict, but we do know from these computer analyses that the script was
a mixture of sounds and concepts, just like Egyptian hieroglyphs.
