Lecture 28 The Origins of Chinese Civilization
In the last few lectures, we've described what I've called, again and again, a web
of interconnection, an increasingly interconnected world that linked the Eastern Mediterranean
realm with Africa, the Eastern Mediterranean realm with the Indian Ocean world with the
Persian Gulf, and India, or what is now India and Pakistan, South Asia, with Southeast Asia.
Now in this lecture, we're going to skip a bit and add another link to this chain, but
go up to the Eastern North before we go into Southeast Asia, where states started fairly
late and look at the origins of civilization in northern China, a development that unfolded
in about 2000 BC, at about the time the Harappan civilization was flourishing in India.
First, I'm going to describe the increasingly complex Lungshanoid cultures, which we mentioned
in the earlier lecture on early agriculture in China, which developed over a wide area
of northern China after 3000 BC.
Then I'm going to describe the three legendary dynasties of early Chinese history, the Xi'a,
the Shang, and the Xu, represented by Shang culture in what we call the Archaeological
Record.
After that, I'm going to explore Shang civilization, the urban clusters, and the culture of the
elite, which was separated from commoners by a vast social chasm.
And then finally, I'm going to evaluate the role of these rulers, these Shang rulers,
as ritual specialists, talk about their divination practices, and the precise nature of the realms
over which they presided.
I'm going to also show you that Shang State was one of many such organizations forming
at the same time in northern China.
It's important to stress at this point that archaeology in China is still in comparative
infancy, and many new discoveries are likely to change radically the picture we paint in
this course.
And I also want to stress that this is a very generalized picture of early Chinese civilization.
It was infinitely more complex in practice, during Shang times, than will be apparent
from this lecture.
This is partly a product of lack of knowledge, and a product also of time.
You will recall that in lecture 17, we described the increasingly sophisticated farming societies
which came into being in China after 3000 BC.
These we called Longshanite cultures, after the Longxiang site in northern China.
These were regional societies, and you're seeing something happen here which obviously
happened in the Indus Valley, obviously happened in Egypt, and happened in Mesopotamia.
More and more contact with increasingly complex societies which were beginning to interact
with each other on a much more regular basis than they had in the times of small farming
villages.
It's quite clear from graves and excavations in settlements that these Longshanite societies
were dominated by small, rapidly emerging elites.
Kin group leaders, probably many of them, noble families with ties with sacred ancestors
who competed vigorously with one another for economic and political power, and also that
elixir of elixirs for civilizations, and for all human societies, personal prestige.
Although, of course, the culture milieu was very different, it's the same process in many
ways, to that that we witnessed along the Nile, before the unification of Egypt.
And there was this long drawn out, very complex game of what the Egyptologist Barry Kemp called
political monopoly, of political and economic monopoly, played out between neighbouring
chiefdoms.
One chief would marry the daughter of another, or they would quarrel, alliances would fall
apart, or become strengthened, three cities might join together, and then fall apart, this
constant atmosphere of change, interaction, and competition.
