It was one result of all this, and that was that Longxanoid culture became more and more
homogeneous over a large area of northern China, rather like the homogeneity which was
applied to the British Empire by the British colonial authority.
You get many common artifacts, many common fighting weapons in particular, commonalities
and architecture, commonalities in settlement layout.
This was a volatile time politically.
It was also a time of fighting and violence.
How do we know this?
Because for the first time, earthen fortifications appear.
They surround large Longxanoid settlements.
These were formidable defenses.
The people built walls, constructed of rammed earth, rammed tight down, laid between parallel
lines of timber shuttling.
Some of these defenses were up to 35 feet thick.
The layers of earth were compacted by workers with long poles, until the accumulating earth
reached the desired height.
Here we see another characteristic of Chinese civilization, the expenditure of enormous quantities
of labor on works which are to the royal good, or to the good of the elite, or for some purpose
like defense.
The area enclosed in these Longxanoid settlements by these rammed earth fortifications ranged
from as little to two to no less than forty-two acres, a vast undertaking by these standards,
to build these huge walls around them.
We know these were warlike times from another clue as well.
In dry wells, we find the skeletons of decapitated sacrificial victims, and also under the earthen
platforms which were the foundations for the houses of chiefs and other members of the
small elite.
We find dozens of human sacrifices.
There was already emerging a caption, a vast chasm, between a teeny elite and the common
farmer, the artisan, and the people.
They were the laborer who labored for the few.
The elite of these Longxanoid societies displayed their power and wealth in other ways that
were to become characteristic also of later Chinese civilization.
Longxanoid potters made a highly distinctive form of glossy black pottery, constructed with
a potter's wheel, so it could be produced in large quantities.
Not only were these beautifully made and very standardized, but these vessels were fired
in kilns that could achieve temperatures of up to about twelve hundred degrees centigrade,
a temperature hot enough to smelt and cast copper.
And it's no coincidence and very interesting that copper and bronze vessels soon became
an all-important mark of elite status in Longxanoid society.
Just like the Sumerians of Mesopotamia, just like the Egyptians or the Aztecs of Mexico,
as we will see, rank was validated with ornaments and possessions and clothing, and
the possession, for example, of ceremonial bronze vessels were an important mark of prestige,
rank, power, and wealth, and all four went together.
Now the lords of these Longxanoid communities also adopted a widespread practice, which
is highly distinctive of early civilization in China, and that is the practice of Scapulomancy.
This is divination, undertaken by applying heated implements to the shoulder blades of
oxen and other animals, and also to tortoise shells.
The notion was that the ruler would ask a question, and a priest would apply a heated
rod or something to the shoulder blade, which would crack, and then he would read the quack
and give an answer.
