Not only that, but within a couple of centuries, Chinese Smiths had found ways of regulating
the amount of carbon taken up by the iron, and this resulted in the creation of a mild
steel.
And believe it or not, this was far superior to anything in the West until the late Middle
Ages, a tremendous technological advance way ahead of anything in the West.
The Smiths were extremely adept.
The level of production was very high.
With organized furnaces, iron was cheaper to produce than bronze, and was soon used
to produce enormous numbers, not only of weapons, but agricultural implements.
We said in earlier lectures that iron is very much a utilitarian method.
Copper is more ornamental.
But when you start producing utilitarian tools in large numbers, there is one immediate advantage.
They are accessible to a very broad range of the population.
This enabled the Eastern Shoe rulers to expand agricultural production in a time of rapidly
rising population.
They did this by increasing the production of agricultural implements, simply by building
huge iron refineries close to major forests so that they could acquire the timber and
charcoal necessary for large-scale iron smelting.
Very clever, and that sort of organization takes very centralized and very ruthless government,
and it worked.
The Eastern Shoe leaders were consummate traders.
So much so that early in the 7th century BC, coinage appeared.
And this coinage of a relatively standardized form stimulated trade throughout China.
But it had another advantage too, if you're talking about control, you're talking about
taxation and tribute.
Now if you have coinage, you have standard units for taxation or whatever you want.
It made it much easier for rulers to collect revenues from their domains.
Now at this time, there was no centralized state in China.
There was a hodgepodge on larger and smaller and medium-sized states.
Most of them autonomous.
Believe it or not, there were about 130 separate states in Eastern Shoe times.
You can imagine the complex political and diplomatic atmosphere in which life unfolded,
particularly when you are dealing with states which were headed by very controlling rulers
who clearly had ambition and many of them considerable ability.
And inevitably, wars broke out.
The objective being to try and acquire more territory to take over your neighbors.
And between 770 and 458, numerable, small-scale wars broke out, concerned as much with the
prestige associated with deploying chariots in display on the battlefield as with territorial
expansion.
I remember that the chariot came in fairly late in Shang times.
Now this curious mixture of prestige and internecine warfare to acquire territory in subduing
your neighbors is known as the period of warring states.
And by the 5th century BC, there were now 22 states as opposed to 130.
And that's still a lot of states.
Now the effects of population growth and mass-produced iron weaponry changed the dynamics of warfare
considerably.
