In the southern deserts, around Tucson, the Ho-Ho-Kam flourished. Desert farmers who
were first identifiable in archaeological sites, around AD 300, and their culture endured
and flourished until 1500. For many centuries, their ceremonial life and trading activity
centered around places like Snaketown, a major Ho-Ho-Kam settlement near the Gila River
in southern Arizona. The Ho-Ho-Kam traded with other parts of the southwest. Again, you've
got interconnectedness. They even obtained seashells from the distant Pacific coast.
And they acquired tropical bird feathers and other luxuries from Mexico. There again, there
was a widespread trading pattern, which endured and changed over many centuries. Again, Ho-Ho-Kam
did not vanish completely. The cultural errors of Ho-Ho-Kam are the older home people of today.
Southwestern Pueblo societies developed into theocracies, a form of government that regulated
religious and secular affairs through both individuals like chiefs and kin groups or through
associations or secret societies centered on keyvers which cut across kin lines. These
mechanisms, which clearly were in place in Chaco Canyon, at Mesa Verde in Ho-Ho-Kam, fostered
a sense of community and allowed for communal works such as irrigation. Southwestern Pueblo
culture was unique and a magnificent and brilliant adaptation to an extremely demanding and unpredictable
drought-ridden environment. It is astounding what was achieved, but it was only achieved
by having a system of government which was extremely flexible, which correlated very carefully
ritual and secular concerns. And always here, very important, were the ties of kin, the relationships
between individuals, the obligations of reciprocity between family and relatives, which helped
enormously in times of scarcity, especially in an environment with very localized rainfall.
What about the history of maize and bean agriculture elsewhere in North America? We know that maize
and bean agriculture spread across the southern plains into the eastern woodlands of North
America during the first millennium AD. This was somewhat later than the Southwest, but
we also know that long before this, local river valley populations in some areas, in areas with
exceptionally abundant and diverse food supplies, the populations had increased to the point that
the mobility of many hunter-gatherer groups was restricted. And as we said way back, some of these
groups began to cultivate native plants like goosefoot. At the same time too, we find the first
signs of social ranking and an increasing preoccupation with ancestors, burial, and life after death.
I am eerily reminded of the great emphasis on ancestor worship in ancient Europe, where
communal burials are thought to have marked the borders of territories and to have been a symbolic
link between the living and the ancestors who were the guardians of the land. And it's very interesting
to note that between about 500 BC and AD 400, elaborate mortuary cults flourished over a
wide area of the eastern woodlands. They were marked by a frenzy of earthwork and burial mound
construction. And it is these earthworks which caused a major controversy in the 19th century
when the first European settlers came over and the Appalachians and the Alleghenes and started
cultivating and clearing forest in the Ohio Valley, they came across all these earthworks and the few
Indians who still survived there had no idea who'd built them. And they came into being this myth of
the mound builders of an ancient European civilization that had built these earthworks and created
and now vanished highly civilized culture in the Midwest, only to be wiped out by incoming Indians.
