This required organization and leadership. Major political and social changes soon followed,
as the Mississippian tradition appeared over much of the south and southeast, named after
the river. Regional Mississippian societies developed in river valleys and interacted constantly
with one another. Their major centers lay in fertile river-bottom lands with lakes and
rivers. Some people lived in dispersed homesteads, others in compact villages, others in centers
so large, they could be called small towns. Thousands of farmers lived near major centers
like Cahokia, on the Mississippi of a near-modern East St. Louis. Cahokia flourished in a rich
flood plain known today as the American Bottom. The great mounds and plaza of its ceremonial
precincts dominated the landscape for miles around. Monks mound, so called, at the center
of the town, and the eastern end of the plaza, rises 102 feet above the flood plain and covers
16 acres. A thatched temple once stood on the summit. The entire Cahokia complex of mounds
and plazas and temples and warehouses and homes of the elite covered more than 200 acres.
The St. Drupal precincts depicted the ancient cosmos of the ancient woodlands, divided into
four segments and oriented towards the points of the compass. Cahokia lay near a strategic
point near the Missouri and Mississippi confluence in a region where northern and southern trade
routes met. The ruling families were adept traders who achieved enormous political and
spiritual power in a few generations, probably as a result of their abilities at mediating
between the spiritual and living worlds. The chiefs presided over a teeny territory
by the standards of Maya or Sumerian standard civilization, politically volatile based on
religious beliefs, rooted in ancestor worship and the agricultural site. Cahokia's power
and prosperity, like that of the commercial states, depended entirely on the authority
and charisma of a handful of rulers. Inevitably it collapsed in about 1250 when other chiefdoms
rose to prominence in the south and east. Another major center developed to the south
at Moundville, Alabama. But Mississippian society was never an integrated
whole, it wasn't covered for whole of the southeast. It was a mosaic of chiefdoms, large
and small, ruled by leaders who lived somewhat la luffe from their subjects. The Mississippian
chiefdoms were past the height of their power when the first Spanish conquistadors reached
the great river in the 16th century. Just like Southeast Asia, these were concertinas,
chiefdoms that expanded and contracted according to the ability of their rulers and of course,
according to the ability of their rulers to communicate with other states on the outskirts
in a country where the main communication was either by inter-village trail or by the
river. Numerous chiefdoms still flourished in the south and southeast at European contact,
but the Mississippian was past its greatness. But would these numerous kingdoms have ever
achieved the elaboration of Mesoamerican or Andean civilization? Probably not. Most experts
believe that the growing season for maize and beans in North America was too short to
support the kind of intensive agriculture or high population densities of pre-industrial
civilizations like those of Highland and Lowland Mesoamerica described in the next two lectures.
In this lecture, though, we have taken a look at the major chiefdoms of the southwest and
the eastern woodlands of North America. We described the indigenous roots of Pueblo
Society in the southwest, visited Chaco Canyon and Mesa Verde, the two major ancestral Pueblo
centers, and described the Lowland-Hohokam tradition. We concluded that these societies
were theocracies. And from the southwest, we traveled to the eastern woodlands, briefly
described the mountain builder cultures at Dano and Hopo, and then described the rise
of the Mississippian tradition with its great centers and elaborate chiefdoms, which were
the apache of North American chiefdoms. In the next lecture, we'll travel south to Central
America and look at the culture of the Maya.
