By 300 B.C., many centuries of experimentation in this very unpredictable agricultural environment
had resulted in much more productive crops of maize and beans, and as a result a greater
dependency on farming throughout the Southwest.
The cultural changes of these years included more permanent settlement, but it was not
until about AD 600 to 800 that permanent villages appeared in any numbers.
These were the centuries when the three great cultural traditions of the ancient Southwest
came into being.
The ancestral Pueblo, formerly known as the Anasazi, Hoho-Kam, and Mogoyon, the latter
a mountain tradition which became part of ancestral Pueblo tradition after 1150.
Now as we've seen again and again in this course, almost no human society is completely
self-sufficient, and in an environment like the Southwest, where fertile soils are distributed
widely over the landscaping patches, and where food resources of every kind occur in bunches
over large distances, no Southwestern community, however humble, was completely self-sufficient.
They relied on one another for such utilitarian commodities as pots, and for luxuries like
toquas, which came from the Santa Fe area, and copper bells, passed from hand to hand
over large distances.
As far as we can tell, this intercommunity trade was highly organized.
Until about AD 700, people in the Northwest lived in oval or round pit houses, dug partially
into the ground, and then roofed with mud-covered timber frameworks.
But over the next three centuries, there was a change.
People began to move out of pit houses into settlements of multi-room dwellings and storerooms
above the ground.
Eventually, the rooms abutted one on three each other to form Pueblos.
Why?
Because this is a relatively, a thermally efficient way of living above ground in a
landscape with very hot summers and cold widows.
Between about AD 750 and 900, and many of these dates now are fairly accurate thanks
to the use of tree-wing chronology, which counts the concentric rings on fell trees
and compares a master curve of thick and thin wings to the rings found on beams in
Pueblos preserved in the dry climate, we know that village settlement expanded greatly
throughout the northern, southwest, and especially on the Colorado plateau.
The ancestral Pueblo societies that resulted often congregated in Pueblos of considerable
size.
And what's interesting is that these were often shaped in small arcs to make the rooms
equidistant from the subterranean keyvers, the sacred rooms, in the middle of the settlement.
So you've got developing in an environment where the carrying capacity of their land
is generally very low, a remarkably dense settlement, heavily populated, lots of people
crowded into relatively compact settlements.
The largest and most spectacular of these Pueblos developed in more densely populated
areas like Chaco Canyon, New Mexico, and Mesa Verde area and the Moctezuma Valley in Colorado.
By far the most spectacular of these is Chaco Canyon, with its dramatic cliffs and its
great houses.
It was a center of dramatic flowering of ancestral Pueblo culture between about AD 900 and 1100.
