The canyon is famous for its great houses like Pueblo Bonito, which were important
ritual and trading centers, multi-room centers and multi-stories in arcs around
large keyvers. But these great houses are a bit of a mystery. You see, Chaco
Canyon soils, we know from pretty sophisticated agricultural studies,
couldn't support more than about 2,500 people. So it's been argued with some
convincingness that Pueblo Bonito might have been a place where food was
stored in large quantities and used when large numbers of people from the
isolated communities around congregated in the canyon for major seasonal
ceremonies, also for trading purposes. What's interesting is, and Chaco is, a
canyon in the semi-arid landscape, is that the influence of this place extended
over an enormous area. How do we know this from tracking its distinctive pottery
and from its extensive road and water control systems? The influence of Chaco
extends over about 25,000 square miles of the San Juan Basin. There were
outlying water control systems controlled and connected to the canyon by
ceremonial roadways. This was a landscape, but the purposes of these roadways and
what made this huge system sometimes called the Chaco phenomenon work is a
mystery. Was Chaco Canyon a major ritual and market center or was it an
unusual concentration of settlements headed by Parthal chieftains? We don't
know, but it was a remarkable unique flowering of Anasazi architecture and
culture which flourished until about 1130 AD. One of the great advantages of
having tree rings and they have hundreds of samples of tree ring sequences now
from the Southwest is that they can not only date places like Chaco very
carefully and very precisely, but they can also track droughts because droughts
in tree rings are reflected by thin growth rings and so precise now of a
tree ring data from the Southwest that they literally can track the progress of
a drought from Northwest to Southeast across the Southwest. And the droughts
around AD 1130 were very serious and Chaco collapsed. The canyon was largely
abandoned. The focus of ancestral Pueblo settlement moved north and new major
population centers developed in the Moctezuma Valley in Colorado and in the
Mesa Verde region. And between AD 1200 and 1300 people moved from dozens of
dispersed hamlets into crowded Pueblos, the most famous of which is the famous
Cliff Palace at Mesa Verde which has 220 rooms and 23 kivas. Rooms, sharing
walls, storehouses, kivas all jammed, many of them in rather remote and inaccessible
places. And then after 1300 the entire San Juan drainage was abandoned, almost
certainly as a result of drought. And the so-called ancestral Pueblo collapse,
and that's a gross overstatement, has long been touted as a mystery. But if you
look closely at ancestral Pueblo and modern Pueblo cultural traditions, you
see that there is a deep hell tradition of movement, movement in the face of
drought, and unpredictable rainfall. And it seems that as a result of this
prolonged great drought, that the people of these crowded Pueblos simply
dispersed elsewhere, where there was more water, where they had relatives with
whom they could live. And many of the ancestral Pueblos from Mesa Verde and
Moctezuma Valley appear to have dispersed south and southeastward into
the lands of the Hopi and the Zuni, where that descendants live to this day.
So here you have these dense ancestral Pueblos, ancestral Pueblo settlements at
the end of the first millennium and the beginning of the second, and then
suddenly they disperse, and after that other Pueblos arise in other places,
right into historic times.
