Lecture 33, Highland Mesoamerican Civilization
Now we move to the Mesoamerican Highlands.
In the last lecture we surveyed Olmec states and then Maya civilization, which collapsed
in the southern lowlands of the Yucatan, around AD 900.
Now we'll go up on the plateau and look at the civilizations which developed there, in
the first millennium BC.
We begin in the valley of Oaxaca, and we trace the development of the state of Monte
Alban, from growing village settlements in the early Christian era.
Next we'll describe the great city of Teotihuacan, which dominated the valley of Mexico from
AD 200 to 650.
We'll describe how its markets attracted merchants from highlands and lowlands, and
we'll discuss the importance of the city as a place of pilgrimage.
Then we'll examine the political vacuum after Teotihuacan's fall and the brief rule of the
Toltext.
Finally, we'll tell the story of the Aztecs, who rose from complete obscurity to become
the masters of Mesoamerica in two dizzying centuries, only to fall before Spanish conquistadors
who ended ancient Mesoamerican civilization in 1521 AD.
Again the theme here is interconnectedness, and then there's a second theme again, that
of volatility, rise, fall, a rapid collapse of states which even only a century before
had been flourishing at the height of their powers, this feature of volatility of Mesoamerican
civilization.
In the previous lecture we stressed how Mesoamerican societies were interdependent, flourishing
as they did in a wide diversity of environments.
The appearance of larger settlements at higher elevations, like the valley of Oaxaca and
the basin of Mexico, was closely connected to the development of long-distance trade
with the lowlands.
In volcanic glass obsidian used for mirrors, tropical bird feathers, and the sharp spines
from stingrays from the Gulf of Mexico used for ceremonial bloodletting, an essential
part of Mesoamerican ritual.
The warm semi-arid valley of Oaxaca is the home of the modern-day Zapotec people.
It's a place where in the past water could be found close to the surface.
The valley prospered.
By 2000 B.C., the valley supported numerous small farming villages.
And as local populations rose, larger communities appeared, and trading with the lowlands expanded
rapidly, especially with the Olmec.
Olmec pottery and other ritual objects appear between 1150 and 650 B.C.
This was part of this process whereby many parts of the highlands and lowlands of Mesoamerica
were now linked by common religious beliefs, even if local deities and cults varied considerably.
As I said in the previous lecture, the influence of Olmec was enormous.
In 400 B.C., just as Maya civilization was beginning to emerge in the same way from
small chieftains, at least seven small chieftains flourished in the valley of Oaxaca.
One of these, Monte Alban, soon achieved dominance.
By this time, the elite of Oaxaca may have aspired to the status of chiefs, like those
on the lowlands.
They adopted this iconography of the Jaguar, and the iconography of a feathered serpent,
with eagles, claws, and feathers.
A deity and a cult which now linked people in the highlands and lowlands alike.
The feathered serpent, Cuetalcoatl.
Larger centers also appeared elsewhere in the highlands at about this time.
Cuetalcoatl, in the valley of Mexico, began life as a large village in 1300 B.C.
