Elminios were first identified by scientists in the 19th century.
They were identified as a result of startling fluctuations in the amount of guano produced
by seabirds off the Peruvian coast.
Now it may be news to you to learn that Peruvian bird fertilizer is the finest nitrogen-rich
natural fertilizer in the world, and during the 19th century the Peruvian government exported
millions of dollars worth of this lightweight, very good fertilizer, very smelly fertilizer,
to North America and especially to Europe.
But there were years when the seabirds vanished, and there was no guano production, and for
years the scientists wondered why.
And then in the 1890s they finally got round to asking the local fisherman, and the local
fisherman looked at us with their crazy and said, ah, it's Elminio, the Christmas child,
and they pointed out that somewhere around every seven years, and the interval as you
know is variable, a cross-accountercurrent, a warm one from the tropics, came down bringing
alien fish, stopped the upwelling so there were no anchovies, and the seabirds followed
the anchovies further south in Ticcele, and then, after a year or so, the pattern reversed
back to normal.
The result was a decimation, temporally, of the coastal fisheries, and people argued
that Mosley's hypothesis was wrong because of these fluctuations.
But in the long term, I think you can counter by saying that the fishery produced such enormous
surpluses that probably some of the impact of Elminios was mitigated.
Also that isn't to say there were no fish in the ocean, and they certainly caught other
species.
So I believe that Mosley's hypothesis has met it, especially since farming communities
in the Highlands needed not only fish meal, but also seaweed and salt to complement their
carbohydrate diet, to combat such conditions as Goitre, and the result was there was this
interdependence between coastal and Highland communities.
And for example, you couldn't grow a root crop like the potato, which is the Andean
crop in the Highlands, in the Lowlands, so there was this constant interaction right
through history between Highlands and Lowlands.
Now this focus on marine resources, goes the Foundation's argument, led to the formation
of large, densely concentrated populations in major river valleys.
The leaders of these communities and these populations were able, because of the food
surpluses, to organize large labor forces to build elaborate ceremonial centers using
adobe brick.
And as crops began to be cultivated on the coast, the same labor forces were also used
to create the irrigation works needed to allow intensive cultivation of the fertile river
valley soils.
And so, Moseley argued, the combination of a maritime diet, maize agriculture, remember
that maize was introduced here about 1800 BC or so, and trade provided impetus for major
changes in coastal society.
And this was the moment all these factors came together, so that after 1800 BC, a series
of competing kingdoms developed along the north and central coast of Peru, concentrated
on those river valleys where irrigation was possible.
In these valleys, sedentary, permanent villages, housed several hundred people each, and were
home to skilled weavers.
People who were weaving cotton grown in these low-lying, warm valleys, the start of a long
and flamboyant Andean cultural tradition, and in fact, the designs on textiles provided
a really major way of communicating basic iconographies of civilization.
