Interestingly enough, the thing we know most about the Moche is from their pots.
Their pots, they were magnificent potters.
They produced superb portrait pots of Moche lords looking serenely into the distance.
But they produced them of fishermen.
They produced them of shamans, of people engaged in day-to-day activities.
And they also painted freezes on some of these pots in black.
And using an ingenious photographic technique which basically unrolls the pot by photographing
it revolving on a platform, they can produce a flat version of the freeze painted around
the pot.
And Chris Donan at UCLA has examined hundreds of these freezes.
And among them are scenes of warfare, of people fighting and capturing prisoners.
And there were scenes also of these prisoners of war being pervaded in front of what appear
to be lords dressed in regalia remarkably like that found in the tombs of the Lords
of Sipa.
Then you see the prisoners being executed.
And you see the leader and others drinking the blood of the victim while the corpse
was dismembered.
And Chris Donan believes that these men were warrior priests.
They were the lords of the Moche.
Men of enormous wealth who controlled through food surpluses the work of very, very skilled
artisans, gold, silver, copper, pottery, textiles, these people were not only had metallurgy,
the earliest in the new world, but they also were magnificent craftsmen and many other
gestures.
But most of the population of course dealt entirely with day-to-day life.
They were just farmers.
Again, it was a pinnacle.
And these people lived in isolation on the top of adobe pyramids, some of which were
residences, other of them had temples.
But like Aztec and Maya rulers, the Moche warrior priests were well aware of the impact
of theatrical ceremony and public appearance where they would glitter in the sun like gods.
But these society was very, very vulnerable.
The wealth of Moche society was concentrated in very, very few families, a nobility who
ruled from ceremonial centers at strategic locations in the valleys.
But they were vulnerable.
Why?
Two words.
El Ni単o.
We know that El Ni単o's descend on this coast, bringing with them hundred-year veins.
And in addition, sometime between 650 and 700, a great earthquake hit the coast.
The Moche capital was at Cerro Blanco near the modern city of Trujillo, to a hood, huge
adobe platforms for palaces and temples, surrounded by irrigation works and extensive
urban precincts.
This great earthquake struck the Andes, blocked irrigation canals, and choked the river with
landslides.
The silt washed into the Pacific and washed ashore, only to be blown inland to form huge
sand dunes, burying agricultural land.
They probably lost thousands of acres just at a moment when a powerful El Ni単o devastated
the coastal fisheries in about AD 600, bringing hundred-year veins which swept away generations
of irrigation and much of the capital.
The capital was partly flooded, repaired, and then overwhelmed by sand dunes.
So the great lords had to abandon their capital and move northwards close to where the rivers
debouched from the foothills, where water could be maximized.
But only a half-century later, another El Ni単o descended on the Moche state, and a combination
of this and probably competition from the Highlands caused civilization to settle, to
collapse.
As Moche civilization ended, a separate tradition of small kingdoms had already developed at
the southern pole of Andean civilization, like near Lake Titicaca, and as Moche collapsed,
so these civilizations began to come into prominence.
This has told the story of this lecture of the beginnings of Andean civilization from
its two poles at the opposite end of the Andean world.
We've described the Maritime Foundation's hypothesis, which holds that the rich Pacific
fisheries were a major catalyst for Andean civilization.
We talked about the changes in spiritual belief at Chavin de Juanta, and then we've
accounted the rise and fall of Moche civilization in the north coast.
The major themes here are interactivity and vulnerability in a desert environment where
you could only live by the coast or in the river valleys.
And we'll talk about the latest stages of Andean civilization after AD 700 in the next
lecture.
