From the beginnings of our existence, humans have existed against a backdrop of constant
climatic and environmental change.
Some of these shifts endured for millennia, glacials and interglacials.
Others, like the younger dryers, for a mere thousand years, still more, for a century
like a drought cycle, and many others, like El Ninos, even for a few months or even weeks.
There's a lesson in this, because the chronicle of prehistory shows us just how vulnerable
we are to the sudden twists and turns of global climate, to drought and flood, to natural
disasters like earthquake and fire.
And there is one thing that's very clear, that many of societies earlier, less complex
cultures, were far less vulnerable to natural disaster than we are, simply because they
could move.
Prehistory is a lesson in increasingly environmental diversi- a vulnerability through time, a vulnerability
to the forces of nature even more acute today.
When we have anthropogenic global warming, chronic overbuilding of coastal plains, and
many more people on Earth than ever before, two and a half million years of human prehistory
provide us with a fascinating perspective on the potential dangers of anthropogenic
global warming, and of our ability to modify our own environment often disastrously.
The earliest historical records on Earth go back about five thousand years, in Egypt and
Mesopotamia, but as I told you earlier in the course, it was many centuries before these
records became true human chronicles.
In many parts of the world, written records did not exist until the arrival of European
explorers and colonists.
In parts of Africa, for example, archaeology and oral histories passed from one generation
to the next by word of mouth, which only have a limited chronological depth, are the only
records of the recent and more remote pasts.
Why is human prehistory important?
Not only because it tells us about diversity, but because it gives us the unwritten history
of numerous societies throughout the non-Western world.
It's an extension of history, much further back into the past in areas like Europe even
with longer historical records.
As such, the finite records of the past, artifacts, archaeological sites being devastated by industrial
expansion and by looting, and all manner of destruction like deep plowing, are a priceless
record of human achievement which is vanishing before our eyes.
We learn some important lessons about humanity from prehistory, which come from thousands
of archaeological sites, from artifacts, food remains, and all the panoply of modern archaeological
research.
We learn, for example, that we're all descended from African roots and share a common humanity
which unites us more than it divides us.
As the late Harvard biologist Stephen J. Gould said, we are all products of a common African
twig, the twig of this tree of human evolution.
We learn another lesson, too.
There are numerous solutions to living successfully in the world.
Not all human societies became farmers or herders.
By no means all farming chiefdoms, for example, developed greater and greater elaboration
and became fully-fledged urban civilizations.
Civilization we learn was not necessarily a panacea to the evils of an increasingly
crowded world, a solution to food shortages or protection against predatory neighbors.
All too often, the pre-industrial civilizations functioned for the benefit of a few.
