Or another occasion, in Britain, when I was walking on the earthworks of the Maiden Castle
Arnage Hill Fort in southern Britain, which was attacked by the Romans in AD 43, and overthrown.
And I walked on the ramparts, and it was a cloudy day with rain, and the rain and the
cloud was hovering just above the earthworks.
And I sat down and looked over the landscape, and shut my eyes.
I was tired.
I had jet lag.
And then suddenly, in my ears, I could hear war cries, and the clash of shields and swords,
and the cries of the injured, and a battle underway.
All the time, when in Africa, I got up at dawn, and I was walking over by my excavation
of a remote farming village, and just for a moment I could hear the sounds of the waking
village where my workmen lived half a mile away, the barking of dogs, the smell of wood
smoke, a few voices in the quiet of dawn.
And suddenly my village, which was a silent mound, was peopled with thatched houses, of
people wrapped in skins against the morning cold, of women stirring a fire.
And then the sun came up a little more, and the vision faded.
The past is all around us, haunting us, offering precedent, offering fear, offering encouragement,
and being evocative.
I beg of you all, whatever sights you visit, not just to look at a chilly pyramid of stone
covered with visitors, or to go to Angkor Wat in Cambodia, and just think, gee, this
is big.
I want you to walk there and sense the smell of the incense, the orange priests clad in
their orange garments, the great king and his golden comparison, look closely at the sensuous
dancing girls on the freezes, and remember that once this place was alive, it was vibrant,
it was a place of ceremony, it was a place of excitement, and it was a place of reverence,
which people served with their hands, their wealth, and their lives.
Prehistory is a subject about people, not about how different they are, but how similar
they are, and very often when wandering through Angkor Wat, I thought to myself, these are
magnificent freezes, but ultimately, these people are behaving as human beings like we
do ourselves.
It is the commonalities of humankind, which to me are the most striking things about the
prehistory of humankind.
I began this lecture by describing the closing centuries of prehistoric times during the
European Age of Discovery, and made the point that prehistory only ended in the 20th century.
It's all around us, even today.
Then we summarized the four major chapters of prehistory, which delineated this course,
the archaic world, the origins and spread of modern humans, early food production, and
the development of states.
I stressed that we human beings are definitely products of our long prehistory, and there
then I discussed some of the reasons why prehistory is important to understand, both to comprehend
our own diversity and to recover our own unwritten history.
I also stressed that prehistory is not about sights and artifacts, it's about people making
decisions, and it is something around us which can evoke and offer precedent and is exciting
for us all because the monuments are there.
The great 19th century German statesman Otto von Bismarck once remarked that humanity was
a float on a stream of time, and that our skill in navigating this stream was the critical
factor in shaping history.
This same stream of time went strongly through prehistoric times, and we are, because what
we are, because our ancestors navigated these turbulent waters with aplomb and skill, farewell.
We hope you've enjoyed these lectures from our great courses series.
Our courses are now available to order online.
Visit our website at www.teach12.com or call our customer service representatives at 1-800-TEACH-12.
That's 1-800-TEACH-12.
Thank you very much.
