But the greatest lesson we learn from prehistory is not a matter of artifacts and changing
technologies of villages and cities or gold trades and mother goddesses.
It is a story of human origins, of human people, human beings, of individuals, of small groups,
of families, communities, and special interests, going about their daily business, being born,
growing up, being educated, falling in love, becoming sick, making money, being happy, being
unhappy, and eventually dying, living out their expectations and living out their ambitions
in a world on the expectation that they would survive.
We've learned from this course that this humanity, this decision-making, is an essential
fabric of our past, and why it's so important for us to understand the lessons, not only
of the recent but of the more remote past chronicled in these lectures.
Archaeology has a reputation as a romantic subject, a subject of golden pharaohs and
great pyramids, of vast cities and buried treasure.
This is, to a considerable degree, a false image, because a great deal of archaeological
research is extraordinarily dull, very slow-moving, and devastatingly unspectacular.
Archaeology began in the 19th century as the province of travelers and adventurers.
Today, it is team research carried out by international teams often, working with very
disciplinary skills with one common goal, the understanding of humanity.
You see this, for example, in the study of new fossil remains from Ethiopia, where teams
of up to fifty people are working on a single find.
You find it in long-term excavations of farming villages in Turkey, or of cities in Maya Lowlands.
It is a huge jigsaw puzzle which dozens of people are putting together, very, very slowly.
The spectacular finds still come, the lords of Sipan, Maya burials, and others, but in
the long run, it is the unspectacular, much as the spectacular, which put this complicated
jigsaw together.
One of the problems with this very specialized world is that world prehistory is inaccessible
to many of us.
At the specialized level, its language is specialized, jargon-ridden, and often very
obscure.
But from this come the answers to the big questions of the past, the biggest use, why did humanity
evolve in Africa, what was the cause of Inca civilization, and so forth, and so forth.
But fortunately also, the past is accessible to all of us.
It's accessible to us in the great monuments of the world.
Some of my most special moments of an archaeologist have been when visiting an excavation, or
treading on the earthworks of a hill-fort in England, or visiting a Maya city.
I remember vividly once going to an amphitheater, a Greek amphitheater, at Epidaurus in an evening,
when the sun was setting, and there was a wonderful scent, it was the spring of olive
and pine trees in the air, which was still, and a beautiful, rosy light was suffusing
the landscape.
And I sat in the virtually deserted amphitheater at the top, and a German classics professor
with a small number of students came into the amphitheater, and he sat them down on
the lower seats, stood in the middle of the stage, and recited Euripides, and the stanzas
rippled in Greek up the sered seats, and it was, as if one was there, a crowded audience
straining to hear the speaker, whose voice echoed through his beautifully acoustically
perfect setting, and just for a moment, the past lived.
