what day is it it's June 4th all right and last week Austin got all the top
plate glued down and bolted on looks really good we're gonna work on getting
the trusses set today we got a few of them up there we're getting ready to
start marking them out this interest here the anchor bolts are touching it so
we're gonna have to notch it out where all the anchor bolts are about one inch
or so on the bottom plate so we just got that marked we're gonna pull it back
down and get those notched out and we're gonna start laying it out
did you fart? did you fart when you lifted that?
did you squeeze one out of me again? all right I'll push it your way. yeah come on
all right so we got the end one on one two three four five so six trusses all
together and we got six to fill in this gap right here
sorry I fell on the ditch
all right
all right well we got one two three four six seven eight nine ten eleven twelve
Is that right? 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, yeah we got 12 of them in so far.
Just go on in there. I'm trying. Sometimes I feel like you're trying to push me.
Oh man.
Okay.
Let's just set it down in the ground and we'll get these two set and then come back up here.
Lay it over.
Yeah, we got all the long trusses in here.
Yeah, it's just a matter of getting them all screwed down and lined up like they're supposed to be.
Get started on that.
Come on down. Yeah, remember we pulled all of our 16s starting here and going that way so when we do our decking and everything we do is going to be from this side that way.
Yeah.
That's what I found. That's what I found.
You want it? Yeah. It's yours. Keep it.
You find a rock Samuel? Yeah. I found a marble.
Whoa.
Dude, I found that rock.
What is it? A rock? Yeah, I'm good.
I found that rock.
I'm hot out here.
You look like you're holding a cigarette.
Be careful. Don't let that get sucked in your lungs, okay?
Or in your throat.
Well, you got that right there.
Okay, say you're like tripping and you fall, okay?
Then what happens with the nail goes right down your gullet, okay?
Sweet, you're so concerned.
Okay.
Man, what a day.
We've been out here for 10 hours. You got here 7am, it's 5am right now.
We went ahead and cleaned up.
Didn't really go home and shower and eat and all that good stuff.
We got all the long trusses in today.
They are all in, lined up.
He's got the rim board run around.
I don't know if it's a rim board, but it's got that 2x4 run around.
Line them all up.
I put stiffeners down through the center in between these two big spans.
I'll be doing more over here after we get these center trusses in.
We got the bedroom or the man cave root walls all built.
We got the divider wall.
This is actually the other side of this.
This is going to be the staircase.
Tomorrow we'll build the rest of these walls.
They'll be the wall.
This will be the bathroom in here.
You'll come in that door and there'll be a pantry and a washer, dryer, hot water heater in here.
We got to get these walls built.
We got to get an LVL beam for right here to hang these trusses from.
That whole big opening is going to be the staircase with a place for the fireplace.
Looks pretty good.
Let's go look up top.
These basement walls aren't square, so I had to line it up with this back wall as the straightest wall.
We got one spot right there where the 2x4 isn't sucked up about 10 foot down.
We're going to unscrew that, take it back out, and get it cinched up tighter than that.
That's perfectly straight.
Amazing what a couple of guys can do in 10 hours by themselves.
I think it looks good.
This is the north side.
What do you think?
We'll be back tomorrow, huh?
Today we're going to be finishing up, hopefully get it all finished.
I've got 1, 2, 3, 4 more walls to build here.
Then I can get them all straightened and lined up and put these short trusses in through here.
We're going to have to get all the trusses straightened and lined up.
We're going to have to get all the trusses straightened and lined up.
We're going to have to get all the trusses straightened and lined up.
We're going to have to get all the trusses straightened and lined up.
We're going to have to get all the trusses straightened and lined up.
We're going to have to get all the trusses straightened and lined up.
We're going to have to get all the trusses straightened and lined up.
We're going to have to get all the trusses straightened and lined up.
We're going to have to get all the trusses straightened and lined up.
We're going to have to get all the trusses straightened and lined up.
We're going to have to get all the trusses straightened and lined up.
We're going to have to get all the trusses straightened and lined up.
We're going to have to get all the trusses straightened and lined up.
All right.
Is it June 5th today?
Right.
We got all the trusses except for five in, and we need to get a LVL beam to go across this opening right here before we can put those in.
We've got all the walls laid out and partially built.
This will be studs through here for the staircase that's going to go up.
This will be a door and you get two by 12 for the headers.
This is a load bearing wall.
It'll be a two foot eight door.
It should be big enough for washers and dryers to get through.
Here's the bathroom walls.
Two foot eight door.
Going to open to the right.
It'll be a tub right there, a toilet, and a sink.
Looking pretty good.
Got all the runners in it.
There's stiff backs.
Austin's just going around and putting, I don't know, a couple hundred and eight thousand screws in.
How many screws are you putting in each of those?
Six.
Six times what, 30 trusses?
Yeah.
Times two because you got to do it on both ends.
So technically eight to count the...
You put two out on the nose of it too.
So eight times three is what, that's 240 screws per size.
480 screws just on the ends of the trusses.
I'm not counting all the stiff backs and stuff too that we already put in.
Time to go home, take a little break, get ready for work this week.
We'll get back out here next weekend, finish it up.
Hopefully we start laying decking next weekend.
