Welcome to the Basin Conspiracy. I am Niyash Brotsky.
I am Steven Zuber.
I am Jay Sticky.
Good morning and hello, everybody.
Yeah, welcome to the new year.
Oh, yes.
Or continuation of the old year, maybe.
It's going along.
Yes.
On the plus side.
All right. You know what?
Because it has been a weird week.
We re-scheduled what we're going to talk about.
I figured because it's been a rough week,
we should start with happy news.
Happy news.
The blue, which is kind of cool.
Oh, yeah.
I took two weeks off for the holiday.
Helped to do some mock interviews for recent grads of skill distillery.
One of the people who I did mock interviews with,
the one who listens to this podcast,
is going to land a high-paying job,
I think probably before this episode airs.
Oh, wait, this comes out in a couple of days.
I'm going to say before the end of the month,
I'll bet $720.
Does that person listen to this podcast?
Yep.
Oh, cool. Congratulations to this person.
Yeah, go that person.
No, it's great.
Oh, I did not actually know it was great.
I wasn't sure.
I mean, I was pretty sure.
Yeah, I mean, it was like, it was hilarious because I was,
I think he was my middle interview.
And, you know, like the other ones were,
we talked about what I'd expect from bootcamp grads, you know,
vaguely able to talk about what they learned,
able to do, which is expected.
It goes way too fast for them to have, you know,
an operative understanding of everything,
like crib notes that's basically just say,
all right, look, have your resume that you sent to them
and then have your longer version that you look at
when you're interviewing on the phone that has definitions
of all the things in your resume.
And then listening to Gray,
he's explaining it to me like my, you know,
my mid to my mid tier slash,
like upper mid tier colleagues would explain their stuff.
I'm like, okay, yeah, you're fine.
I've got nothing to teach you.
As soon as you get through and talk to anybody,
like that's not a recruiter
and on like the engineering side,
you're going to get offers like it's just going to be a matter
of applying to enough stuff
to where somebody will respond to your, you know,
or give you a call.
I think he applied for a few things
and then like was depressed like a few days later
that he hadn't heard back.
And I was just like, you know, it takes like,
like job search, I think I heard somewhere.
It's like an average of what two, three months.
I think that's probably faster
in the software industry, maybe, but.
It's about the same, probably for your first job.
Yeah.
Well, and for them too,
they graduated like the third week of December.
So like, you know,
no one's going to be calling them back, you know, in 2020.
So I don't know if,
how true this is about everywhere,
but generally people don't like doing work
and interviewing new recruits is work.
So often it gets pushed off for, you know, several weeks.
At least this, this has been the case in my job that like,
unless we are desperate for someone
that we really need to get an ASAP,
it's like, okay, how I'll interview these people
next week and stuff.
So it gets pushed off.
Yeah.
And there's like onboarding and.
Well, he's had interviews and stuff.
So that's all coming together faster than average.
So.
Cool.
Anyway, props to you, dude.
What else, what else is going on?
So this was, this might be a good,
I'll let you guys get out any happy news
before I talk about my Wednesday
and then the country's Wednesday.
Also, we're doing the less wrong posts first still.
Yes, I forgot.
Yeah.
So we've got to do the, the posts, but well,
I still have my segue.
So I'll, I'll lead it in.
But anyway, what do you, what's your guys having this?
It's been a while since we sat down to talk
since the, what, second week of December.
Yeah.
It's been a while.
It has been.
What have you guys been up to?
Let's see.
Jase, you want to start?
I'm, you know, doing my programming boot camp,
so practicum and not a lot else.
I've been playing D&D, which has been pretty awesome.
I have been getting back into writing slowly.
I finally completed a draft of a new short story
and now I'm waffling as to whether I should do
one more short story or start in on my second novel.
Got, you know, I find myself playing a lot of video games
and I realized just how much time they take up.
Like during my, uh, mid late thirties when I was super
productive and writing and doing the HP more podcast
and everything, like one of the keys to my success
is I basically didn't play video games anymore.
Sometimes in the evenings for an hour or two,
but like most of my day was spent doing other stuff.
And now that I'm playing video games again,
I'm like, holy shit.
No wonder I don't have time for things.
This, this takes up a lot of my time.
It depends on what you're doing.
But no, no, the video game fun is very temporary.
It, it, you know, lasts for the evening and then it goes away.
Whereas making the HP more podcast fun is something that lasts like,
I mean, people still write to me and like this thing is amazing.
You have helped make my life for the better.
I'm like, ah, that was a thing I did years ago
and yet it's still paying dividends.
It keeps giving.
Yeah.
I'm supposed to like that boss that I killed three years ago.
I don't remember that.
No one else remembers that.
Who cares?
It was a thrilling fight.
I suppose.
Hey, I'm just justifying my video game playing habits.
I go month, I go like on months where I don't play and then months where I play a lot.
Yeah.
There are some Christmas deals.
Yeah.
What other game do you need?
Well, I'm re-playing a video game that's 15 years old.
So.
What are you playing?
World Warcraft.
Yeah.
Well, that's, I mean, you're socializing with people, right?
That's the hard part.
Like if I were to quit playing this game, I would stop hanging out with those people.
And like that part, just thinking about it makes me kind of sad and anxious.
Cause I really like those people.
Yeah.
I don't want to quit hanging out with them.
It's a social experience.
I think you're getting more out of it than you're giving yourself credit for.
What I really should have done is like rounded up all my meat space friends here and especially
the like the Denver Rationalist community and sucked all them into World of Warcraft.
Absolutely.
I think you exited the offer back when the game was being announced and I told you that
I didn't think I could handle that and a job at the same time.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I mean, basically no one wanted to play a 15 year old game.
Yeah.
No, it's just that I like, so when I graduated high school, I think I got like an eight day
demo of World of Warcraft and I was like, okay, I know myself.
Do I want to go to college or play World of Warcraft?
Cause I can't do both.
I'll be the one who stays up till three in the morning.
I mean, like, okay, yep, if I play, if I finish this, I can stop at three, get four hours
of sleep, play another hour and then go to class.
Like I'm like, nah, that's not sustainable.
I'll die.
So.
Tim, can I give you like a amazing thing I have discovered over the past year of playing?
Yes.
You know how like drugs nowadays are much more potent?
Like the weed that you can get in a Colorado dispensary is like 12 times the potency and
purity of the shit that people were smoking in the 60s.
That's right here.
Yeah.
And like nobody knows this unless every now and then and the old person used to smoke
in the 60s, try some and it gets knocked flat on their ass and they're like, holy fuck,
what's going on?
The same thing happened to video games.
Like that shit was extremely addictive at the time it came out because it was the only
thing going that was the best thing.
And yeah, people did lose their lives over it.
I knew a guy who dropped out of college due to Evercrack.
But like now that you play it and you compare it to modern video games, you're like, this,
you know, this is all right.
It's a fun enough game, but it is, it is not nearly as addictive as the modern stuff is.
And like we've just kind of developed antibodies and resistances to it where like it's still
addictive the same way 60s weed is still addictive, but it's not nearly as bad.
I hear what you're saying.
Yeah.
I think that they've mastered the surface to me less more on like newer video games.
But I just remembered like I played, I think in a year or less, I put like 450 hours into
Elder Scrolls Oblivion, which has none of the online component like competitiveness that
World of Warcraft has.
And so then again, that was Steven, you know, 12 years ago, maybe now I do a little better.
So.
Yeah.
Now that means just the old World of Warcraft game, the game part of itself is just objectively
less good than the current games that are out in current retail Warcraft is much better
in terms of like minute by minute play.
It's just not a great game, all things considered, but it is, it's more than the game, like the
both the social aspects and the overarching like logistics of trying to get a raid completed
is that that feels like the real game.
And that's not like pushing buttons and knowing what spells to use when that's like, like
actual human stuff.
Yeah.
That's the fun part.
And I was addicted to MMOs for six years.
I was in college at the time and I think I mostly just sacrificed sleep.
Yeah.
I did that too.
But like until sunrise and then like had to go to school.
I mean, I almost died a couple of times in car accidents due to my sleep sacrificing.
So that was a bad idea.
Yeah.
You guys are more partial than me.
If you guys almost died, I definitely will die.
So yep.
I actually woke up on the oncoming traffic side of the road.
Yeah.
But I mean, there was no oncoming traffic.
So it was fine-ish, but still really scared to wake up like that.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Waking up in motion is probably not something that fails to, you know, send an important
message to you.
Yeah.
Well, cool.
I'm glad you're writing again too.
If you ever need a dummy reader who doesn't, you know, who's not an articulate reviewer
to read your stuff, send me anything you got.
Sure.
Yeah.
Jace is crushing it.
Programming boot camp.
Everyone's winning at stuff.
Yeah.
So it sounds like you're getting up for it.
But it almost did.
But if we're going to do the wrong post, I can wait.
But speaking of winning, we're going to talk about Wednesday.
After we talk about what is evidence filtered evidence.
Yes.
In a sentence, I'm going to just summarize that this is like, if you're going to do really
formal Bayesianism, this is kind of like, to me, I don't need to articulate the points
in my head.
Or at least it's my understanding of it.
I don't need to articulate the points made in this post, like formally to intuitively
understand and implement them already.
But if you're looking for formalisms, this is a good, or I guess semi formalisms, there's
not that much math in this.
So I think this, this post, like it's, I think it's pretty intuitive, but it's also extremely
applicable, like much more nowadays than it was before, because basically all the news
we get everywhere is extremely filtered.
And that is, that has many applications the modern day.
Let, I don't know, let me, let me touch on this real quick, the what evidence filtered
evidence post, he hearkens back again to his dilemma about the clever arguer that he set
out in an earlier post where someone is hired to sell you a box that may or may not contain
a diamond.
And the clever arguer points out, for example, the blocks box has a blue stamp.
And it is a well known fact that diamond containing boxes are more likely to have a blue stamp.
And at that point, like, what do you do from a Bayesian perspective?
Because that is true evidence.
Like stamp containing boxes are much more likely to have diamonds.
And as a Bayesian, you should update your probabilities on true, true facts like that.
But on the other hand, you know, this is a clever arguer who will only tell you things
that are in support of the box having the diamond, and will not tell you about any other
evidence.
So are you supposed to not update on actual true evidence that exists?
Like what the hell do you do here?
Yeah, basically, this is the dilemma of what do you do when you're when you know you're
interacting with a biased source.
And so, like, I, and correct me if I'm wrong, but the conclusion is basically, you don't
really, you're not obligated to do anything as a proper Bayesian until you've checked
that against other sources, or like, you know, you know, you know, the rest of the relevant
data.
So here's the example of like, all right, I've got a biased coin, Ian Yash and Jace.
It's either two thirds biased heads or two thirds biased tails.
And I flip it 10 times.
I tell you that on the fourth flip, the sixth flip and the ninth flip, they came up heads.
What is your posterior probability that the coin is heads based?
Well, the answer is, fuck you, right?
Yeah, I mean, if you had made a pre commitment to always report the fourth, sixth and ninth
flips, regardless, then this is a good evidence that it is in fact, heads based.
But if your commitment is to only report the flip that come up heads, then this is actually
evidence that it's tails based, because that would mean that all the other flips were tails.
And if you don't know which way I've pre committed to, it means that you can't make an informed
update.
Yeah.
So, sorry, go ahead.
Okay.
Well, I was going to say that it's really cool.
At this point, he brings up the Monty Hall problem again, which for people who don't know,
there was an old game show where there's three doors, the contestant picks a door and behind
one of the doors is $10,000 and the other two are empty.
And then the host goes and opens one of the other two doors and the door that the host
opens will always be one of the empty ones.
And the question is then, should the guests switch doors or should the guests stay on
the door that they already picked before?
And the intuitive answer is it doesn't matter because they got a 50-50 shot.
The actual correct answer is they should always switch doors because then they will get it
two thirds of the time.
The reason for that is exactly because of this, because the host is a biased source.
And like the biased source that will only report on heads, you know that the other seven flips
are tails, so it's actually biased tails.
This is the same kind of thing where you defect, the host opened that door, changes the probabilities
and you should switch doors.
Right.
And like, it's sometimes, at least for me at the beginning when I first heard this like
a decade ago, it wasn't intuitive.
Oh, not at all.
There are so many arguments about this thing.
Well, I think for me, what really settled it is like, all right, picture a thousand doors.
And you know, behind one of them contains $10,000, the rest contain nothing.
So I pick, you know, door 100, the host opens all the other doors except one, and they're
all empty.
I'm like, okay, well, what are the odds that the one I picked had the $10,000?
It was one in a thousand.
But now that I know all the other doors are empty, I mean, it seems to indicate that the
one in a row, yeah, so it's a, it's a much better chance that it's the new door.
So yeah, or the remaining door, rather, there's an admonition here, right.
There's a, there's an admonition here not to use the evidence filtering as a fully
general counterargument, like we've talked about before.
That's just like the, the, the tool you can whip out with the inappropriate tool you
can whip out and say, ah, I noticed your bias.
I get to disregard what you're saying.
Like, that's not how this works.
That's not really any, and so this isn't the only fully general counterargument, but
those sorts of things are things you have to be careful of, lest you find just enough
tools to never change your mind.
I like what he says here.
Do you mind if I quote it exactly?
Yes.
You do?
I'm kidding.
Go.
Yeah, I know.
I'm good.
Come on.
Okay.
I don't know.
Maybe you're like, oh man, I was trying to get through this now.
You know, I should slow this down again.
You're good.
Let's hope he, okay.
So, yeah, he's saying, people will say that argument was filtered.
Therefore, I can ignore it.
What he says is, if you're ticked off by contrary argument, then you are familiar with the
case and care enough to take sides.
You probably already know your own side's strongest arguments.
You have no reason to infer from a contrary argument the existence of new favorable
signs and portents, which you have not yet seen.
So you're left with the uncomfortable facts themselves.
So, you know, yeah, the other side's argument is filtered, but you already have
all the filtered pro arguments.
So don't just discount the other side.
Right.
And, you know, man, this sounds kind of appropriate for right now, doesn't it?
Yes.
But yeah.
I mean, it's just the idea that, like, I think everyone knows this on some level.
You know, you go to a used car lot, you know, the car salesman is trying to sell
you a car and they're not going to talk down the car that they're selling you.
They're going to talk it up if they think you might buy it.
They're not going to tell you all the reasons you shouldn't buy it.
So that's why you listen to their spiel and then you go to your phone and Google
the make and model and see if there's any, you know, common problems with this vehicle.
I think people know that just because they've been told it so many times, though,
like people still trust a lot of their own media sources, even though that is the
worst person to trust as they have the most filters.
Oh, that's what I'm saying is that people, people know about this, this, uh, this
problem in certain areas, the technique is applying it.
Broad.
Oh, okay.
Yeah.
Otherwise, uh, yeah, you're just leaving yourself open to be manipulated by used
car salespeople.
Chase, you're seeing?
Oh, I thought you had something.
No, I was just making it.
Okay, okay.
It's all right about it.
I do love the dig he gets in on creationism at the very end because lest we forget,
this was written back in the mid 2000s when, uh, creationism and the religion
debates were still sort of a thing.
Uh, it was like during the, what was it?
The heyday of like new atheism.
Yeah.
Or at least on the tail end of the new atheism thing.
It was still strong.
Maybe it was still the heyday.
Don't recall now.
It was the tail end, but I think, but because this was like what?
2010 ish, uh, we can actually look at the date.
I thought it was 2007.
Okay.
Oh yeah.
Right in the middle then.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Then everyone moved on to more important things to talk about.
Yeah.
But yeah, he says, if it's the first time you're ever hearing something, you
should be aware and no one can really trust the theory of natural selection.
If they, if they're just hearing it for the first time until they've listened
to creationist for five minutes, then you know it's solid, which was great.
It's fun.
Yeah.
And then the next post was, uh, rationalization, which, uh, to me, I just
always liked this cause it has the very memorable, uh, it makes the very memorable
point that like rationalization is like calling lying truth, this is Asian.
Like it seems so weird that like, cause it's the, it is basically, uh, top bottom
line thinking, right?
And so you're reasoning backwards so that you can find out what it is to support
your position and that's what they call rationalization.
And that's not like close to what rationality is the root of rationalization.
Um, or the root word of, and so it's, it bears as much resemblance as lying
does to telling the truth.
Yeah.
Yeah.
That the curious incurer writes down all the signs and portents on the box and
that's rationality, whereas the clever arguer first writes down box B contains
the diamond, then goes looking for evidence and that's known as rationalization.
And basically the entire post is saying, this is a stupid word.
I hate this word.
Why did they make such a stupid word that sounds just like rationality when
it's the exact opposite?
Yeah.
Uh, can I pull a quote?
Yes.
To improve our beliefs, we must necessarily change our
beliefs, rationality is the operation we use to obtain more accuracy for our
beliefs by changing them.
Rationalization operates to fix beliefs in place.
It would better be named anti-rationality with pragmatic results and for its reversed
algorithm.
Yeah.
Yeah.
On that refers to algorithm thing, that's a thing he touched on a couple of
times in that post.
So figure we should probably mention it.
Maybe it'll come back in the future.
He says a few times that rationality is the forward flow that gathers evidence,
waste it, and then outputs a conclusion, whereas rationalization is a backwards
flow from conclusion to selecting evidence.
So yeah.
Yeah.
I mean, like, and it's easy enough to rationalize, uh, you know, I almost had an
example of this last week and then, uh, there's a couple, I mean, that's what I
like about this is you don't have to be a, you know, perfect Bayesian in a box.
Like you can, you can put your, uh, your confusion out to trusted sources and
then like heavily update on that and just throw out what you were trying to
rationalize yourself into.
And this is a very modest example.
I bought some, uh, ground up turkey meat that I had in the freezer for, I don't
know, a couple of three weeks.
And it says use or freeze by a date that was a few days past, um, but in the
freezer for a few weeks, right?
And yet it looked kind of gray, like a patch of it on the top.
That's not that's what that's
oxidation, like a little bit of brown.
Yeah.
Yeah.
It's still good.
Oh, well, I threw it out because like, it wasn't the healthy looking pink that
I'm used to seeing.
So, um, I was trying to talk myself into using it because I was really
looking forward to eating it and it didn't smell like anything in particular.
I'm like, okay, well, you know, it seems like it should be fine.
Um, and then my wife, like, cause I was showing here, I was like, all right,
like, what, what should I do here?
She's like, well, you know, if we're not sure, let's just toss it out.
You know, it's only like $4.
I'm like, yeah, all right.
That's, that's fair.
Um, yeah, I was trying to rationalize
myself into eating the thing I wanted to eat, knowing that it had a
non-negligible, uh, probability that I might be poisonous.
And now I have to have an instance.
That just means that it's oxidized for some reason.
Like even though it's in an airtight container that was just in the freezer.
Yeah.
That little bit of air that got stuck in with the packaging.
Very well.
Well, when it freezes, but yeah, like it's probably a good
realistic if you're, if in doubt, throw it out.
I mean, you took the safe option, definitely.
Well, but now that I know if it's just a smidgling gray, I can still
eat it. I'll try that.
And if I get poisoned, I'll complain to you.
Okay.
You might be able just to cut off that little gray part.
I thought about that.
And yet, like I had this before where like a few years ago, I had like a thing
of bagels and like only the bottom bagel had mold on it, but I'm like, I'm not
going to eat like the top two bagels that are left.
Just if I move them from the thing that has mold, because like there's no way
that the mold hasn't moved through the whole thing.
It just hasn't grown a colony on these two, two.
Sends like little roots through your bed.
Yeah.
I wasn't about to, these were, these were distinct bagels, but they were
distinct bagels, but like I, they were still in the same container.
Oh, okay.
Like they were in discreet containers.
No, no, they were, they were in one sleeve, but they were, they were, like,
they weren't one piece of bread.
You know, they were, you're good.
I just didn't want to fuck with it.
Yeah.
So anyway,
the main thing I know about mold is that it'll turn your bagels into bagel
league, monstrosities, and you want to put them down fast.
You can cut a moldy part off of, I think, most cheeses and contribute with
the rest because it doesn't send the little roots through it.
It's just got the one spot.
Cheese is weird for lots of reasons.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Cheese basically is mold anyway.
Exactly.
It's like here, this is like the sticky stuff that you get when you let
cow juice sit out for too long.
Enjoy.
Um, yeah, not a good sales bitch.
So the first person to eat cheese must have been really hungry.
Hey, that's probably the case for pretty much everything that anyone's eaten for the first
time.
We humans make a lot of weird, like, fermented foods.
Uh, actually, speaking of grow, I went and really cooked food at his place.
And I, he asked if I could stop at the Spanish market and get morongo
sausage, which is this, like, gross looking blood sausage.
And I was just like, I wonder, like, what was going on in the head of like the
first human that was like, Hey, I think, you know, it'll be cool.
Let's get some blood and awful and like wrap it up in some intestine and then
just leave it for a while.
What they were probably thinking is like, Oh God, here's some food I've
wrapped up and left for a while.
But if I don't eat something, I'm going to die soon.
Yeah.
Have you, speaking of that, have you guys ever tried nature balls?
Uh,
that's not the actual term.
I was feeling more awake out of thought of a great joke to throw in there,
but no,
it's what I call like little berries and just brightly called colored
balls that you find out in nature, growing on bushes.
Like oftentimes when I'm out hiking out, there's, you know, little nature
balls on, on, on bushes and stuff.
And I'll pick them.
I mean, I don't eat it.
I take it and I put it in my mouth and just kind of break one or two with
my teeth and I taste it.
And if it's bad, I spit it out.
And if it's good, I also spit it out, but like, I think this is the process
for like finding what things you can eat.
You just try a tiny bit and if it's bad, you stop.
And if it's not bad, maybe you swallow, but you wait like a day afterwards
to see if you get sick and experiment from there.
There's probably a procedure for this thing.
Don't.
Yeah.
Like that, that's the, some berries are poisonous.
Yeah, I know.
But I figure like 200 pound person, if you eat one berry, it might be sick,
but it's not going to kill you when you get sick, you know, not to eat it.
Just don't do that with mushrooms.
Are mushrooms extremely poisonous in tiny doses?
Many kinds of mushrooms are that there's like a mushroom called death cap.
Well, yeah, I've heard of the death cap mushroom.
That is bad one.
Because you don't know if I went on site.
Oh, I just don't put mushrooms in my mouth unless I bought it from a dealer.
Smart.
Or a food or a drug.
All right.
I don't have much else to add on this one, but we do have to say that next week
we're doing a rational argument.
We change our minds less often than we think and avoiding your beliefs.
Real weak points, which I can already remember is one of my favorites.
Cool.
And there are three because the first two are really short.
So I figured let's just get three in.
So we have something to talk about.
Sounds like a plan to me.
All right.
Okay.
Moving on to everyone's fun week.
So Wednesday morning, this is always a fun thing.
I'm not sure if this ever happens at your guys's jobs.
You ever get like a company-wide notice to be like, hey, in an hour and a half
we're having a company-wide meeting.
I am trying to think and in my two years at this job, that's never been good news.
They never hold emergency meetings for good news, right?
So I was thinking, oh, shit, like more essential people are quitting.
No, it's actually way different than that.
So the like my company was acquired in like October of 2018.
It made no difference to the company up until like maybe a year later
when the parent company started actually doing stuff.
And then, let's see, the pandemic hit, tanked our numbers.
And they announced in September that they were sunsetting our product.
And so like all the salespeople were let go that day, almost all the support
people were let go and all the engineers weren't because we were all going
to be offered lifeboats to stay with the parent company.
The job was basically going to be just maintain the product, keep it running
for another year and then dump it.
So Wednesday, they announced, hey, somebody bought the product.
So five of you guys are going to go work for this new company, completely
different from the company that's currently signing your checks.
And you'll, you know, you guys get a choice, but you'll get offered
letters and stuff.
It's a whole new job, but you're not being fired.
So very different from where I thought this episode was going.
Well, it was just weird because so there's two things with that.
One, I'm not a business person, but if I'm looking for someone to buy something,
I don't tell all my customers, hey, we're quitting.
We're not, we're not re-upping your contracts.
We're not, we're not listening to customers.
I first go look and see if someone will buy the product.
And then when everyone says no, then I, then I announced that we're shutting it down.
Right.
Okay.
So instead, what they did is I kind of fuck everybody and completely fuck
like our, our user base by saying, yep, we're shutting this down.
Everyone get ready to jump ship and then they went and sold it.
So that'll be weird.
But the other thing is like, for the last month, we've been, uh, like
planning out the next several months worth of work and we're building like this
dope ass thing on bleeding edge technology that now I'm being told, Hey,
you know what, you get to go keep working on this product instead, which is fine.
It's not a big deal, but it's just like, it was weird.
So never mind.
Yeah.
No, I'm just, I'm going to keep maintaining the product that I initially
started this company working on.
But the, the scary part is that then I also learned that the, like the most senior
Dev and the company who only had like another year and a half above me, um,
because literally every other engineer has left, uh, he's also leaving.
Yesterday was his last day.
So that makes me the most senior developer working on this product when he
moved to the next company, and this is going to suck.
So that's interesting.
How do you feel about that?
But I think he just answered.
Yeah.
I mean, it has its pros and cons.
Um, but we'll see how it all shakes.
Well, the dollars for it though.
Do what?
Do you get fat sacks of dollars for it?
Well, so that's the thing is I haven't received an offer letter yet.
I have, I haven't received an offer letter yet from the new company, but I'm
going to demand a fat stack of cash because I am like, in fact, everybody's
who moved over is business critical.
Like they just spent, I'm assuming tens of millions of dollars on this product.
And, or I'm guessing several millions.
I have no idea what it actually sold for, but some, some, some gigantic
amount of money and like, if we were just to give them the product, give
them the code and say good luck, they'd be completely fucked.
We, we are worth a fortune to help with the transition to make this actually
a product for them and not just a, a spaghetti mess of code.
So, um, I think, I think we all are in a position where we're very well poised
to roughly, or not, not harshly negotiate, um, very competitive salaries.
So that's cool.
Um, so then, yeah.
So that happened at like 10 30 up until like about one o'clock, we had
like meetings about that and then like talked about what this meant for like
the work we were going to be doing going forward.
And then it was just me and two of them, people who are being
horse-traded to this new company talking about like what all this meant and how
we felt about it and stuff and whether or not we're going to quit.
Um, and then we had a thing at two that we were going to jump on and all, it
was like a tech demo for something that one of the people was working on.
And I was skimming through something, reading the news or, uh, while eating
lunch and then somebody, oh, uh, Matt messaged me and said, Hey, yeah,
there's a firefight opened at the Capitol.
I'm like, wait, what?
Um, so I found a live feed on the Guardian's website.
Um, and it was just being updated every few minutes from like tweets from
sent or from, from senators inside the building, uh, messages from, um, like
what do you call it, uh, media people, um, photographers and that stuff.
And so I'm watching this whole thing unfold for like an hour, just sitting
there before like this meeting to like try and just like, all right, cool.
Let's, uh, let's all change gears and talk about this cool thing I put together.
Um, yeah, the, the, the, yes, so everybody knows what we're talking about.
Um, on Wednesday during the confirmation for, uh, the election results, there
were initially protesters soon to be rioters.
Um, you know, it's, it's one thing to stand outside and wave signs.
Some of these signs are rather creepy and weird.
Um, some of the flags are not, uh, patriotic to put it lightly.
Um, but yeah, then, then it quickly escalated to the escalation part.
There's probably plenty to unpack there.
Um, you know, parts of it were them shoving the way past barriers.
Other parts were cops moving barriers, waving them through and taking selfies.
Um, which I don't quite understand.
Uh, so yeah, I mean, I'm not summarizing this well because I, I'm just
summarizing how my day felt with it.
It was so surreal.
Like I was already having a weird morning and then I'm watching this go down
and like, is this real life?
It's such a weird year that like I kind of saw that and I was like, yeah,
that might as well happen.
Seems like a fitting end to, or maybe it's not the end of the whole debacle.
Well, uh, hopeful, I guess we'll see.
I mean, so yeah, I mean, I'm, I'm not doing it up.
Summarizing it, just kind of giving my own stream of consciousness on it.
So like, you know, I, I had heard a report that someone died.
It took like three hours for the National Guard to get there.
So, I mean, some protesters made it inside the building.
Um, the, the Senate was evacuated, you know, Pence was ushered out immediately
with a secret service guarding him and, uh, you know, people were like hiding
under chairs and behind, uh, podiums and shit.
And I think it doesn't do justice to say some protesters got inside the building.
Like some, right.
Yeah, I, I'm not particularly well riders rushed the barricades, overwhelmed
the police, apparently beat one of them to death with fire extinguishers.
That sucks.
Uh, and then broke windows and kicked indoors and forced their way into the
Capitol building.
And fortunately, everyone important was evacuated in time.
And I believe the guards inside shot one of the people rushing them, uh, lady
who later died in the hospital.
I saw the video of that.
Um, it's, it's not safe for life.
I mean, you don't get to see her die when you see her get shot.
Like it's the final barricade behind which the, you know, the, the
elected officials are hiding in rooms and there's like a hallway behind the
doorway and they've got like chairs and desks and guards on, on the, you know,
the reverse side of it holding the, holding the guard.
And like, uh, they, the protesters break a window.
This cop standing there with a gun set, you know, you can, you can tell
that they're shouting, but you can't hear it over the pandemonium.
And then gunshot, the person falls back because the person was climbing
through the window that they'd shattered.
And it's like, well, no shit, you're going to get shot.
Like, you know, it, nobody likes police violence, et cetera.
But this, this is like exactly what you want cops for.
So like, that's what they do.
Ideally.
Yeah.
What, what they don't do.
And that's why I like, and, and, and, and Enya's summary is, is closer to accurate
than the one I was giving, but like the thing that's weird about it is, I mean,
you can see videos of them moving barricades and literally just waving
protest, they were, at this point, they were like protesters, whatever
rioters, soon to be rioters through.
And then when they're inside the building, you see cops taking selfies with them.
There's videos of this.
It's so weird.
Like half, half the cops weren't doing shit.
I don't, I don't know what numbers, numbers were.
I'm not sure if half is right, but enough.
We're just completely complacent.
And like these, these nut jobs, you know, scaled the sides of the building,
couple fell and died.
Um, they, they, they took down the American flag and hung up a, a Trump flag.
Um, it, it was like, to me, the, the weird part was like, this is the group
of unorganized, ridiculous lunatics.
And they had presumably a super easy job of doing this.
If you'd had two dozen people, I guess what helped was the size of the crowd.
But if you were there with the crowd and you were there with two dozen, like
highly coordinated individuals, you could have gotten some shit done.
Right.
Oh yeah.
Like the thing is, you use, I've, you see these movies, like a white Olympus
fallen or White House down or whatever they are.
And there's always like this super trained elite cartel of foreign or, uh,
foreign agents or, um, or well-trained, like, uh, organized criminal people.
And they have like Gatling guns and helicopters and like all the shit to break
in and all it really took was like a whole bunch of people with clubs.
Yeah.
They're just like, yep, yep, rushing this place.
And I was like, wow, I made for the least exciting capital takeover movie I've
ever seen.
I kind of had, I don't know, it's, it's like, I thought that they had better
security.
Like that would have always been that like, yeah, it looked like what you were
saying, that it would be actually difficult to do such a thing.
Apparently security is really good as long as they prepare.
Like when, uh, BLM marched on the Lincoln Memorial, there was like tons of
National Guard out front standing and, you know, waiting.
And, uh, with the, for the Capitol protests, they, they told the National
Guard not to come in.
Uh, they just had a few of the Capitol police there because, well, I mean,
honestly, I think it's because they, uh, they treat right wing protests with a
lot of deference that, that the entire law enforcement community sees them as
an in group.
And so, you know, they don't think they're going to get attacked by them.
And, uh, maybe, maybe this will wake up some people to, to realize that
right wing protesters can be violent murderous lunatics too.
Yeah.
Yeah.
There was, there's a 538 article that summarizes, uh, that left wing protests
are about twice as likely to be shut down by the police, the right wing protests.
Uh, we're like the other side, whereas the right wing is our guys and we
don't got to worry about our guys.
They're good guys.
Well, it's a good thing that, you know, all this rationality nonsense, like we've
been worried about people not having good, like thought processes, but it, you
know what, like, it's good to know that the world is fine and nothing happened.
I mean, honestly, I'm glad that the people that were there are so bad at
rationality that they were disorganized and incompetent and couldn't do anything
when they got in the building.
That's my thing is imagine, like, if some of them were coordinated, it would have
been, this could have been insanely worse.
Someone could have stolen the Declaration of Independence.
Then they found the map on the back of it.
Yeah.
I mean, you would think that, you'd think that breaking into Nancy Pelosi's office
during a Senate, Senate congregation would actually be really hard, but turns
out, no, it's actually super easy, barely an inconvenience.
You get a thousand mobsters to rush the building with you and then you get
to just walk in and put your feet up on our desk.
Like, it's madness.
You know, there's been, I don't know, at this date, I think something like 60
people arrested.
I don't even know how they got all out of the building.
You'd think that all would have been, you know, by the non-complacent officers.
You'd think that all have been shut down immediately, but I don't quite get what
happened on the inside.
I'll look forward to watching the documentary in a month of what the
fuck happened in there.
That's a little bit totaled.
What the fuck happened?
So, yeah, that was weird.
Um, to me, the most interesting part was like, what happened once the people
got inside?
And I think I want to talk about this more a little bit later, but first, like,
let's just talk about the fact that once they got in, people didn't know what
to do.
It was like, I believe movie Bob said they got in the capital and they expected
for the, uh, the quest to be completed.
The level's over.
Cause it's like, I don't know, I don't know, I don't know, I don't know, I don't
know.
And after that, people just kind of milled around and took selfies and it almost
turned into like a music festival party.
You know, where people were just like, eh, let's, let's wander around and see this
place.
Cause no one really knew what to do at that point.
Yeah, that was the real thing, just seeing people wandering through like this was,
you know, an exhibit somewhere in Coachella or Burning Man or something.
That was the weirdest part.
Like I said, that would have been a little bit of a bit of a, of a, of a
or something.
That was the weirdest part.
Like you said, it would have been one thing if they ran in and they had carefully placed
napalm to burn the building down or something, but no, they just got in and they're milling
around for hours.
Yeah.
Like just...
Well, we did it.
High five.
Yeah, exactly.
Yeah.
We did it.
We saved our democracy.
The nation is secure.
That's something that like when I was watching this unfold, I was kind of just sitting there
like just taking it in for like the first hour and then I was like trying to like actually
process it and like it's not hard to put yourself in the heads of these people and say, okay,
yeah, I totally get what they were doing.
Like it's much how I can imagine people would react if say this went down, if say the day
didn't have the Trump protesters break in and Pence had said, you know what, I reject
your reality and substitute my own Donald Trump won this election and like stamped the
paper and disagreed with everybody, right?
Like that's not how it works, but pretending like it had this.
Like if we had seen the democracy, the Democratic vote fail and it was announced that Trump
was going to win, right?
You can imagine that there'd be riots and people saying, no, fuck you, you guys can't
destroy our republic like this.
And that's what these people think they were doing.
Like they, and they were, you know, of course this is the result of just, no, just years
of bullshit, bizarre propaganda and then months of Trump saying, they stole our election,
they're lying, they cheated you, whatever.
And right up until that morning when he said, all right, now I'll join you guys, let's march
down Pennsylvania Avenue.
I love Pennsylvania Avenue and we'll all go break it, we'll all go, we'll all go show
them what we're made of or something.
And like, yeah, I think this really ties into the, the what evidence filtered evidence
post because like I, every now and then I watched the Hodge Twins on YouTube.
They're also known, I think the YouTube channel is called conservative twins or something,
but they're these twins, black dudes that have a, you know, they're very charismatic,
they're fun to watch and they seem to more or less encapsulate what the right is thinking.
So every now and then I'll watch, well, the right as in the Trump right, I'll watch them
just to like get a, get a feeling for how they're doing.
And like a week or two weeks before the, before this thing went down, I was watching one of
their videos and it was crazy.
They were like, they were legit, just talking to your audience, like liberals, if you're
watching this, you know that this was a stolen election.
Like no one out there believes that we had a record turnout for Joe Biden.
No one there really believes that this many people came to vote and like they honestly
literally believe that everyone in the US knew that this was a fraud because it was
so blatantly obvious.
And that was like what a good chunk of probably the vast majority of Trump supporters feel
that this was, this was just blatant theft and that the left was okay with letting it
happen because it meant Trump would leave office.
And so they were, you know, looking the other way this one time.
It's insane to me that like you can be like, you know, we've all heard over and over again
about fake news and the media being like putting people in a bubble of their own, you
know, like it's like a sense of having their own facts that you can be that like insulated.
And really just the uncritical questions, you know, like what the same piece of paper
that people check the Lindsey Graham box and check the Joe Biden box were like part of
that paper was fraudulent, but the rest wasn't.
It's not like you sent in different pieces of paper voting for the president and the
senator, like this blows my mind.
It's, I don't know.
I just want to be like, what evidence did they have for the, like, did anybody even
like present a good case for the election being a fraud?
Like, so I don't know what they did it or did they just say the words enough times and
everyone's like, yeah, it's a fraud.
I don't know what your standards for good are necessarily, but yeah, there is always
some evidence that something untoward has happened and that's, you know, if that's all
you hear and it's reflected and magnified over and over, and that's what you hear everybody
else is also talking about.
It starts to sound convincing.
Yeah, I mean,
I think that they're just repeating it's a fraud, but not saying like how they found
that out or what, like how they suspect someone pulled it off.
That's asking one question too deep, right?
Like their first piece of evidence and their probably primary piece of evidence is that
the outcome of the experiment wasn't what they expected.
And so like, I don't like that.
No, I don't like it either, but I don't know what I mean, like that was their evidence was.
Oh, yeah.
I don't like this reality.
Exactly.
So I mean, I mean, in one way, you know, like, if I had a very low probability
estimate on something and then my experimental result said it was that something, I'd be
like, OK, let me double check.
Like that's not unreasonable in general, right?
It so like one of their pieces of evidence, it's interesting, was that all the courts
when they were approached with the protesters didn't or not the protesters,
but the people saying, hey, throw out these results.
They did not even look at the cases for the most part.
They like they took a look and it was like, this has no standing.
There's no evidence here.
We're just throwing it out, which for everyone else in the world was like, yeah,
it's so obvious that they court didn't bother wasting his time with it.
But for them, it was like, look, they're not even looking at it.
They don't want to see it.
They are hiding things.
Yeah.
And when you're when you're primed to be things to a certain lens, that's that's
also evidence.
And then, of course, you're getting evidence from authority, people who you would
expect to be very in the loop on these things.
If you're primed a certain way, saying, yes, this was a fraud and it was stolen.
So like, if the president himself comes up and says this was a fraud, it was
stolen and you're like, I already trust the president.
He seems to be in the know.
He has privileged information.
Totally read about coronavirus after all.
Eventually, sure.
Yeah.
I mean, it's like, I it's weird.
Like the, I mean, some parts of this are so farcical.
You know, it's like every, every death has a tragedy and I, I'm an immortalist.
You know, everyone, everyone should know that that's my position.
And yet, like I turned that switch off for a second.
And then I hear that a woman with a don't tread on me flag was trampled to death.
Like, I mean,
so it happened.
So I hear, I didn't verify all the deaths, but I think that's, that's one of them.
So like, you know, if they would have paid attention to the flag, she'd still be alive.
But like, if I put that on a TV show, people would have dismissed it as being, you
know, farcical, right?
Yes.
Like, and yet that, that's what happened allegedly.
So I like, I, I don't know, man, it's, it's wild.
I, I don't have much else to add on it.
Like, I'm looking at a simulation because that's what I said, but I heard this, but
that was literally my joke.
I'm like, okay, is this a simulation?
Is this a TV show?
Yeah.
Where's the camera?
I think my, my favorite joke that I've heard from this so far is one that
apparently is going around in South American countries, that the reason the
coup failed is because there was no U.S.
Embassy in D.C. to provide logistical support.
Right.
Yeah.
I mean, it's just, I mean, this, I can link to this Guardian post that has the
timeline of all of this.
They can just start at the oldest and go to the newest.
And it was just, it was surreal watching this unfold.
You know, it, it, and the other thing too, I guess this is worth talking about, you
know, part of the fallout of this.
So it was spurred on by, you know, Trump's morning message of saying, go down
there and give him hell.
And they did.
And so like, oh, so I've got mixed feelings on it, but they're mainly positive.
And I think there's nuances to why it took so long.
But so the day of, you know, Trump put out that insane video and I watched it 90
seconds after it came out where, where he's like, okay, yep.
You guys, you guys did a fine.
I don't remember enough to summarize the whole thing, except for the end where,
and it was like a minute and 13 seconds, so you can bear listening to it for that
long, but he couldn't be more tacitly opposing what happened.
But he just says, okay, yep, we're going to stay up.
Well, that's the thing is he was tacitly encouraging, but it was, it was supposed
to be a message of like, you know, knock it off.
You guys are fucking ridiculous.
Go home.
No, stop.
Yeah, you know, you're very, you're very special and we love you.
It's time to go home or something.
Like, so, so shortly after that, he was suspended from Twitter, which, you know,
to many people, you know, great four years too late, but we can talk about that in a minute.
So then the next day I did watch to see what he would say when he got back.
He posted a video that was like clearly written by his lawyers saying, look, read
this verbatim or I can't defend you in court.
That, that was like unambiguously condoning the, or not what's
opposite of condoning, disparaging and condemning.
Thank you.
The violence and everything that, and the, and the riots, everything that happened
and conceding the election already lost the coup.
Like when it was still going on, he, that's when he was giving them encouragement.
Yeah.
But this was written like you try to get losses.
But the three, the three or so minute video the next day was just so clearly
written in not Trump speak that, you know, it was a verbatim, pre-prepared
note for him.
And then, yes, yes, you can be, you can be sure it wasn't a free flowing Trump thought.
And so a lot of his stuff is, it's, it's coherent as long as you look at the emotion,
like the video that you mentioned, the 92nd video, it is all about saying like,
we have been wronged.
This is unfair.
You are fighting for justice.
Good job guys.
And even though like the words at the end are like, and all of you should go home
with peace and love, like, sure, those were his words, but you can tell what the
message was, the message was, we have gotten royally fucked.
And it's a good thing that someone's doing something about it.
Yeah.
Like I, I get that the, the emotional core of that was consistent, but I meant like
semantically consistent.
Oh yeah, never happens with him.
Yeah.
So then the only other thing that day was some innocuous tweet that I can't remember
what it was, but it was, uh, it was not like perma banned worthy.
And yet he got perma banned.
Um, the president, you know, like, so if I get on Twitter and I'm like, let's kill
all the senators or something, I get banned because I'm a nobody, right?
Like, and that makes sense.
The, the, the president of the United States is delegated the same, uh, like
response by social media platforms that me, a nobody would get.
And it, it's like, so when I heard that, I'm like, wait, I didn't believe it.
I'm like, wait, what?
And I went and checked and his accounts blocked or it's still, like it's, it's
deleted.
Um, it was announced on the news that like, or on various news outlets that he was,
he was blocked from Twitter, then Facebook, then Instagram, then left my butt off.
And then for some reason, like Spotify and a bunch of other people, like, like
he's getting as much as out through Spotify, whatever.
He's bent from Cole's shopping.
Like, I don't know.
Yeah.
Pinterest.
Banned from everything digital.
So like, again, this would make sense if it was like Alex Jones, right?
Like, and don't get wrong, it makes sense for Trump, but it's so surreal.
Like the, the president is no, is, is, is no longer trusted with the
responsibility of handling a Twitter account.
I mean, like, like, like what he did with it, though.
I, well, I know, don't get wrong.
They made the right call.
But what weird TV show do we live in where it's like, Oh yeah, you know what?
My 13 year old isn't allowed on Twitter because they're not old enough.
Neither is the president for similar reasons.
I found, I found what I found really interesting.
And I think this is going to maybe have bad repercussions for people in power, but
maybe good for the rest of us.
I'm not quite sure is that basically for four years, they just tap
danced around, around Trump's bullshit.
They were like tacitly, you know, being like, yeah, but okay.
He's the president.
We can allow him to do stuff.
Republicans sort of, sort of had his back the whole time.
And like they, they accommodated it.
They used his lies and his bullshit for their own advantage because it would get
them votes.
And it wasn't until their personal physical safety, like they literally
could have been maimed or killed for this, uh, as soon as that went down, then
right away they snapped into this president is awful.
He's a liar, uh, like Pence basically denounced him.
I suspect that there may have been a secret 25th invoke that we just
haven't been told about, but who knows.
Um, I had a weird thing about that, but yeah, but like Mitch McConnell finally
turned against him and was like, this president has got to get out of here.
Like there's still some diehards out there.
Like the fucking Ted Cruz's of the world that will lick his butthole forever
because they know their constituents want that.
But, uh, for the most part, right away, people just stopped humoring him
and took it seriously.
And I'm like, huh, so if you want, uh, politicians to actually take your
suffering and problem seriously, all you have to do is personally threaten
their physical safety.
I'm not sure that's a lesson that politicians wanted to get out there,
but it's certainly a well, loudly received message.
I mean, it's not controversial that like, or I don't know, uh, I think it's
a generally understood fact about humans that they will start to like take
things seriously when their life or yeah, personal safety is on the line.
Like, yeah, I don't think that like people didn't think that until now.
I think one of my favorite, uh, book series is Altered Carbon.
Um, by Morgan, which has a terrible Netflix adaptation.
Which I don't know, okay.
Yeah.
The adaptation in my opinion is awful.
Just go read the books.
The books are fantastic.
But at one point, like someone tells him, look, this, this was just business.
This wasn't personal.
And he's like, it was fucking personal to me.
So now I'm making it personal to you.
And that's what happened to the, the lawmakers here.
Yeah, it's, it's wild.
I'm sorry, go ahead, Jayce.
No, that's just a green, just, I don't know.
I'm still kind of like trying to check around to see if I'm on the
candid camera or something.
I know, right?
It's, it's surreal.
I, for, for me, it's just watching, you know, like, yes, it makes sense that
of course they're going to change their tune now because they're like,
Oh, turns out there's consequences to what we've been saying for the last
three or four years.
But like, I just, I, I saw, I was trying to think about like the Twitter thing,
you know, because I saw a lot of things and I don't, I don't, I don't like when
people shit on people for doing the right thing, even if like it's too little,
too late or whatever.
It's like, yeah, but it's still like, you know, it's like articles, articles
impeachment will be introduced again on Monday.
They're not going to go anywhere.
Well, they probably won't.
But like, does that make it, does that make it a pointless gesture?
Like should they have done it earlier?
Probably.
Yes, they should have been at the same day if this shit happened.
Oh, yes.
I mean, they should have done it last week for sure.
But I mean, like, so they've done it a month ago again, probably.
Yes.
Like all of this, this has been incited for a long time.
This didn't just spring up on Wednesday morning.
So like the, but I don't want to give people shit for eventually coming
around to doing the right thing.
And yet, like the, that's been the response to like him being banned from Twitter
is like, well, great, but you should have done it four years ago.
And it's like, yeah, sure.
But like, I do want to say it literally is better late than never.
Like that is actually better.
But the other thing is like, I remember Jack Dorsey was on
Sam Harris's podcast a couple of years ago, and he's the CEO of Twitter.
And Sam asked him like, look, why is Trump still allowed on the platform?
He violates the terms of service.
You know, he's threatened nuclear war on there.
Like, and I can't remember Dorsey's response exactly.
I should go back and listen to the episode, but it was something along
the lines of like, I mean, on the one hand, this isn't what he said.
They do have different standards for world leaders on that platform.
So there's, there's more leniency given to world leaders, which I think
kind of makes sense.
Like, I think, I mean, don't be wrong.
Not that you should be allowed to do anything.
And yet they're not the average user.
So I haven't fully fleshed this out, but I think that there's at least
a case that can be made there that I'm not going to make yet.
But the other thing is like, I, the analogy I was giving when I was
talking about this the other day was like in Europe or many parts of Europe,
it's against the law to voice the belief that the Holocaust was a hoax.
I think that's a stupid law.
Like I get why, and my context isn't there on the ground.
There might be good reasons for doing that that I'm unaware of.
And yet I like the idea of letting stupid people broadcast how stupid they are
rather than not let them do it.
So we don't know how stupid they are.
Like, I think that that a case can be made that says, yes, let these, let
these people go on TV and say that they don't believe in the Holocaust.
And then we'll all know they're idiots.
I think there's a difference there.
They're like, and I'm not exactly sure, kind of mixed thoughts, but I feel
like banning Trump from Twitter doesn't, it's not silencing him.
It's just saying we like, you know, you violated the terms of our platform.
Like, I don't, I actually think that, you know, as a democracy, like, shouldn't
the leaders also, like, have to follow the same rules as everybody else?
I mean, like, contact, uh, uh, with regard to conduct, that's the word.
I don't know.
I mean, I personally think they should.
And, uh, the fact that they don't, in my opinion, you know, points out the
fact that we live in an unfair, unjust, stupid world.
But, uh, yeah, I personally think that everyone should be held to the same
standard, even if it's a stupid standard.
I, I, I'm on the fence, like, I, because I, I agree on paper, that, that makes
perfect sense.
And yet, like, I think that it's, it's nice to have the historical record of
all of this insanity that otherwise wouldn't have come out, right?
Like, I think I wouldn't have been on Twitter.
I mean, but, but on TV, he's, he's less insane because he doesn't get a
spot at three AM on TV.
Like when he's tweeting at three in the morning, that's like, okay, you're
seeing a that the president is up at three in the morning with nothing
better to do than tweet.
And, uh, you're, I, I don't know.
I, like I said, I, I think I'm probably on your guys' side and yet I can
kind of see.
I think you would have found alternative platform that would have become
really popular with like Trump supporters.
Well, he's tried that with Parler, but Parler is now off the Google
Play Store and it'll be off the App Store.
I'm guessing by next week.
Oh, dude, at some point, I don't know.
I want to talk about like what's going on with Parler, but like if I'm not
necessarily even saying that everybody should be, uh, that the
president should be censored the same as all the other users, like I'm just
fine if everyone else is allowed to say the same stuff.
Trump is allowed to say, like, I just want the standards to be the same for everyone.
I see what you're saying.
Yeah.
I, and I think you make a good point.
I, like I said, for me, it's just been, I think it's, it's, it's revealing
an important to have this, this, this public record of, of insanity.
So that it's, it's available to everybody forever.
Uh, like granted, he's still, like I said, he has, he has ways to communicate
with the public and get on the TV whenever he wants.
He still has access to that national service that can, you know,
emergency paying all of our phones with cofefe at three, three, three in the
morning.
Um, I really kind of hoping I get one of those before the end of the year, over
the end of the month.
Um, like, I mean, how hilarious would it be if he just decided, yep, that's
how I'm going to ping every phone in the country and I'm going to give
some bullshit insane message, but more fun than that.
I'd love if it was just another cofe fe like that would blow my mind.
Um, so like it's, it was also interesting too.
I think that the, uh, when, when Twitter blocked his, his support video or his
endorsement video, like the minute long one during the, the actual assault on the
Capitol, they, they, they, uh, I don't know what kind of block it is.
I'm not fluent in Twitter, but like you couldn't retweet or reply or something.
And yet I still saw them retweeted and replied.
I'm not sure how that worked.
But, uh, there was, um, the, there was, uh, uh, a warning there that said, like
risk of, you know, you can't, you can't use, you can't retweet this because of
a risk of violence.
And that was the first time that, that message had ever appeared as like a
warning label on Twitter.
In fact, I don't think they introduced warning labels on, on tweets until
Trump started tweeting out coronavirus bullshit.
Was that literally the first time that risk of violence thing had been used on
Twitter?
Yes.
Oh, neat.
Like other, other ones, they just delete, right?
Um, so like, but it's, it's, I don't know, the whole thing was fucking weird.
So I don't know what much else I have to say on it, other than like, on the
plus side, Georgia, flip blue, um, there's a good chance we'll get some shit done.
Uh, progressively going forward the next four years, like, don't get me wrong.
You know, and this is, you know, speaking of letting the perfect to be the enemy,
the good, you know, like the better, too late, the never kind of mentality.
Like, you know, I, I would never have campaigned for Joe Biden, but I would
have crawled through glass to vote for him.
Right.
Like, you know, he's, he's, I don't think, I don't know, anybody who has a stoked
Biden's or a, yeah, Joe Biden supporter, but it has a sticker on their laptop
that says Biden sucks vote Biden.
Yeah.
I mean, I think that that's kind of the attitude.
And like, I guess, I guess I'm getting at those that I do trust a, a return to
like five years ago when, and I've been told by a couple of people that like,
yes, Steven, but you were just out of the loop.
Things actually were bad five years ago, but I am prepared to, to, you know, fight
on the hill of they weren't this bad.
They weren't even close to this bad.
You know, Obama didn't walk on water, but he, like, he was not three in the morning
screaming that, you know, Pocahontas was being treasonous by endorsing the
articles of impeachment against him.
Right.
Like this, that's, that's, that's how the current president of the United States
spent his time.
Like,
I do think, I mean, while yes, he is the worst president that we've had in living
memory, at least, I don't know how bad they were back in the 1800s.
Possibly he's the worst in history.
I'm not sure.
Like, I think Andrew Jackson could be worse.
And the, the vice president that took over when Lincoln was shot, very likely
much worse, but Jackson, Jackson wasn't as a complete shit.
But I think he at least advanced the goals of the country.
Yeah.
So Trump, definitely absolutely terrible president, but, um, I, I believe
that you are strongly having the same filtered evidence thing because there
are some good things that Trump did.
Uh, and I don't want to like list all of them because I don't want to seem
like I'm supporting him here, but there were definite bright spots to the
administration and, uh, he, he like Obama just kept sending more troops into
foreign countries and bombing more people.
And Trump actually curtailed that a bit.
So if nothing else, he killed less foreigners than the previous presidents.
Um, yeah, I mean, and that's a good point.
You know, there, if, you know, if called upon to name positive things that,
that Trump's done, I mean, he did follow through on his promise to donate his salary.
Um, he reduced the power of the FDA, obviously not nearly enough to stop
them from fucking us all with COVID shit, but, uh, he, he helped a little bit in
that regard.
Yeah.
So, you know, it's, it's tough to say, like, I think a good or no, no, I mean,
the harm was, was really bad.
I just want to point out that like there's a filtered evidence thing going
on here as well, where I don't want to go on the record that like everything
he did was the worst ever.
Right.
Exactly.
Yeah.
I wouldn't, I wouldn't go so far as to say that.
Like I will, I will, I will confidently assert that everything that he
did that had any positive outcomes were done for self-serving reasons.
Um, like it's, and I think that's like motivations matter for that reason.
Like I can count on somebody to do repeat behavior of this vein.
If their motivations were, uh, of a certain clear of a certain kind, right?
Um, like I can't, I can't count on, uh, I mean, it's, it's, it's, it's the intent.
Right.
Um, that let's, that's like why manslaughter is a different charge than
murder, even though the outcome is, you know, dead people on either case.
Like I think that, that intent matters a lot.
And like his reasons for doing things is, um, self-aggrandizement.
Yeah.
And, but like I said, you know, if, if it, well, not if it worked out that a handful
of times that, uh, the, the blind squirrel found a nut a couple of times
over the last four years, great.
Um, and I don't want to be like just a complete, you know, uh, leftist shill.
Um, I mean, I'm registered independent.
Like I, I have never voted, uh, Republican on any tickets because since I've
been old enough to vote, it's been pure insanity over there.
And it's only gotten worse since I've gotten older.
Um, but it's just, uh, I don't know.
I don't have much else to say on it.
Like I'm looking forward to, uh, the next four years in the sense that like, you
know, I, I wasn't, I didn't, I, the, the amount of time and bandwidth in my brain
that, that what's going on in the White House has taken up over the last four
years is not positive.
Like I didn't, I didn't feel like I needed to be in the loop five years ago
cause there was, it wasn't as insane five years ago.
I have at least two things to touch on before we move on.
Uh, the first thing being, do you guys, uh, and let me explain myself before
you jumped down my throat about this.
Do you guys think maybe this attempted coup was a net positive for the nation?
And I, oh, okay.
Well, that was easy.
Um, really quickly, my, my, my, uh, reason behind this is that like, if it had
never happened, I think things would have gone on as they were before with
Trump and his supporters having some legitimacy, uh, and being still coddled
and treated like, uh, like participants in the game.
And now that this has happened, like everybody has just, or everybody except
for the insane hardcore, uh, supporters, which hopefully are going to be, um,
dwindling and not increasing, uh, has been cast aside by the body,
politic and by everybody reasonable.
And they've just been, you know, galvanized into this.
This must be rejected.
We cannot, uh, we cannot put up with this shit anymore kind of thing,
which I think is ultimately probably a, a, a good thing.
I think some positives I see coming from this are better security and
thicker glass at important government buildings.
Um, I don't, I don't mean that as a joke.
I mean, like for, for, for real, you shouldn't be able to smash your
way into the Capitol building with, with the pole.
Like it should be really hard to get in there.
And like, I get it's an old building with a lot of historical value to it.
And that's probably, you know, that glass I'm assuming was really old.
Um, cause it hadn't been physically tested like that before.
And it had no, it had no cause to me.
Um, I think that these people should be hidden behind bulletproof glass, right?
Um, or at least secured behind it, uh, while they're conducting government business.
Like I don't want it to be easy for anyone to just barge their way and
start shooting people like we talked about.
These people were the least bit organized.
We would have had tons of dead government leaders.
And I don't see that as a good thing.
Um, some people will say they do.
And I don't think that they know what they're talking about.
Um, like the, the community, like you said, uh, some will
probably dwindle off, but I think we'll see some of that evaporative cooling.
I think the ones that are left will be even more, uh, charged than they were
last week.
And I am desperately worried about the safety of the inauguration.
Um, you know, and oh, that was the, that was Trump's last tweet.
I will not be attending the inauguration or to many people have asked me, no, I
will not be attending the inauguration.
Um, which people took as a, um, if you read, if you, if you're dedicated
to read between the lines there, I never like want to give Trump the credit to
say that he is smart enough to put things between the lines.
Like, I think he's just saying, I'm not going to be there because I don't like him.
Me, I'm a sore loser.
I think that's what the tweet meant in its entirety.
But what it, what it also conveys is that, Hey, if the bomb goes off there, it
won't kill me.
Um, and so that was his last tweet before he got banned.
Uh, like, so I do worry that the, the galvanized base there, uh, will be less
unorganized next time.
Um, I also don't think that they'll make a bunch of security gaps at the
inauguration.
So I'm not losing sleep over it, but I, I don't expect it to go peacefully.
Um,
Jase, you had a strong agreement with me to convey.
Basically, I mean, um, I'm like trying to think of a way to put it.
And, uh, it's like, I sort of also just feel like there's good that came out of
coronavirus too.
And like, it's just the sort of like shaking somebody by the shoulders.
Like pandemic was, pandemic outbreak was something I was super worried about.
Like since I was the little nerd kid reading about like virology and stuff.
It's just, it was always this like, like the, the, the pandemic we got could
have been so much worse.
Yeah.
Um, and we still kind of fucked it up.
But I mean, like it, like it woke people up.
Oh shit.
Like, you know, like people are dying.
I remember like, I mean, one of the things that, uh, one of the outcomes, like I
think I've told you that like my parents and my dad in particular, like just
like anti-science based medicine.
And my dad's a like global warming denialist.
And I remember that when reports of like the pandemic were first coming out of
talking to my parents and they're like, Oh yeah, they're totally overblowing this.
This is, this is ridiculous.
And like their tune has changed now.
Like now they're like, Oh my God, it's horrible.
I'm watching the news.
It's like there's all these people in ventilators and I'm like, you know,
scared about your grandma.
I'm just like, yes, thank you.
Take things seriously.
And that's kind of like, yeah, this was like a bumbling attempt at what could
have, you know, been like the riot we could have gotten could have been so much
worse, but like now, you know, people are, have been woken up that like, okay, like
this isn't just a funny joke, I guess.
Yeah.
It's, yeah, it's, again, it's really hard for me to like say that like, yeah,
that like this was a good thing.
Cause obviously these are both terrible things.
Like, but I mean, I think like, I'm just grateful that like what we got wasn't,
you know, a organized militant group with like 30 bombs or something.
We just got like the people that kind of broke the windows and then walked
around and like took a selfie of themselves, like their feet up on Nancy
Felici's desk.
Ryan and luckily too, they were nice enough to use, you know, their own phones
and post to their own Twitter's like, so a lot of them are really easy to track down.
Not the sharpest crayons in the box.
But all right.
And let it not be conflated that like this event had positive outcomes.
That's not the same thing as saying this was good that it happened.
The thing I was saying is like, I wasn't saying that this is a bad thing
that had happened, but it has some positive sides.
Like I was literally putting forward the proposition that it is a good thing
that this happened because it has resolved some things that the future
could be much worse if they hadn't been resolved at this point.
And I don't know if that's actually true.
I think we will find that out as time goes on because maybe this is just
another step in the escalation escalator and things are keep going to get worse.
And this was just the one time where people realized, all right, now both
sides can use lots of violence to advance their agenda.
But on the other hand, this this may be a thing where finally people stop
treating it like a game and treating it and treating the Trump like some
a serious problem that needs to be acknowledged and dealt with quickly
and firmly.
And so I think it's entirely possible that this whole thing was indeed
a good thing that it happened.
Yeah, we as a species need to or at least like maybe just we as Americans
really need to do postmortem analysis like, OK, like, how did this even happen?
How do we like prevent this sort of thing from happening in the future?
Like, I just am sort of like exasperated that it took this this long
and like this ridiculous of an outcome for people to start realizing
that just the insanity that's been going on.
Yeah, I guess I'm less interested in like attaching like good or bad label
to things and just like looking at the outcome of it.
And I think that you're right, it may well have a net positive.
On other hand, like you said, it could show people like, oh, all we need to do
to get our way is to start throwing Molotovs through the Capitol building windows.
Well, I wouldn't show them that because they didn't get their way.
Well, good point.
What it kind of proved is like you won't accomplish anything with this idiocy.
Maybe it'll show how easy it is.
Maybe it'll open the door to say, oh, look, it's actually a lot easier
than I thought to to assault our elected officials.
Like, I'm not really sure exactly what it'll take or what the outcome will be.
I'm hopeful that that things will be less insane going forward.
And I mean, that's that's the thing too.
Like imagine if we had imagine this alternate universe where we had a liberal
Trump, like I can't quite picture what that would be like
because I want somebody just as unorganized and selfish and insane as he is.
And imagine you what I can kind of imagine.
Like I imagine like some of the people I'm like, you're doof discord.
Yeah, absolutely.
OK, yeah. All right.
You gave me some some concrete examples.
So imagine how much worse the next four years would be
if we had a polar opposite of Trump and like we had
like instead of Biden, his accepted his his
it wasn't his acceptance speech.
It was the yeah, that's what whatever it was, his victory speech
that he gave when he won the electoral vote.
He stressed over and over like I am not the president for people who voted for me.
I am I am everybody's president.
You know, we as we as Americans are going to come together and come.
It was it was a whole unity message, you know, and granted it's political
platitudes, but I think that's going to be more or less like the kind of
sentiment he's going to be pushing forward for the next four years,
where imagine if instead it was like, all right, we got him.
Fuck these guys.
We're going to get them back.
Like they tried to get us like that that could have happened.
Right. That would be terrible.
Yeah.
Did you see his speech that he gave in the middle of the Capitol, right?
I read the highlights of it.
Like I call on President Trump to get on TV now and tell him to stop.
Yeah, it was really interesting.
It was only like five minutes.
One of the things he said right near the beginning is like we this is not us.
This is not Americans.
We don't do this sort of thing when he was referring to, you know, the writers.
And like on the one hand, sure, it's a unifying message and all that.
But like I noticed that he was authoring the people that were currently
looting the Capitol because at least it's struck to me that like if they need
to send people in, like send the guard in to sweep these people out and have
massive casualties and people killed in on the floors of the Senate to get them out.
Like they are not true Americans is what he's saying.
This is not us.
These people are not Americans.
And I thought it was subtle and I'm not sure if it was effective or not
because we never had to find out.
But I thought that was an interesting thing he did.
I mean, I'm trying to think of what else you could possibly have said that
wouldn't have been exactly like what Trump said other than, hey, you're just like us.
I understand you, you know, like other than endorsing it, I can't imagine
what he would have done other than using some other language.
I mean, like I don't like that it's sort of it's suggesting that like sort of
the way like Nazis are like almost in retrospect, like being characterized
as these kind of like mythical demons, like this, this is what can happen.
Like this is the way people's minds can get turned if, you know, they're
following the wrong, like the crazy figurehead.
And like my understanding is really a lot of like Trump's effectiveness was
just sort of that he is sort of incoherently emotional and people were
able to sort of just project their own anxieties.
Like, you know, a lot of like rural poor, opioid epidemic affected, like, you know,
like people losing jobs.
Like there's people that are just like people in the suburbs that are.
Yeah, I'm sort of like anybody who did end up becoming a Trump supporter.
Like some of them are just as nuts as Trump and believe all the like
conspiracy stuff, but like some of them are just like, I don't know.
Like people genuinely suffering who have like real concerns.
And I think that it's a little bit, it's a little bit invalidating of like of
that to kind of go like, you know, I'm not being very like coherent with this.
I think you get what you're saying.
Yeah, like I always like don't, I don't know, that's kind of like the identity
politics thing that bugs me about that too, or like, or any of the us versus them.
Like, I don't, yeah, I don't know.
If it feels overly simplistic, it feels tribalistic.
Like I would prefer having a leader that could actually face the people and be
like, like, hey, that happened.
Let's pay attention to that.
Let's not like, you know, laugh at it or brush it aside or be like, well,
like we fixed that and that's gone forever.
It's like, no, there's like, we've got issues in this country.
Maybe let's look at that.
And I guess I trust Biden and his administration to be able to do that
more, certainly than we've seen.
I mean, I should hope I can hardly imagine doing it worse.
Well, I mean, I could trust Trump to point at the issues and yell and like
basically scratch at the wound, right?
Just keep inflaming it and infuriating it and making things much worse.
Yeah.
Where I think I can trust Biden to completely ignore the wound and pretend
it's not fair and let it get septic, which probably is not as bad as
constantly making it worse, but isn't that much better?
The things things we're building up until we got Trump, though, and that
was, I think, the result of, you know, Obama was doing the same thing with the
like unity and like, you know, we're going to try to like have this bipartisan
thing. And it's like kind of ignoring the fact that like, actually, there are
like people that hate each other.
Like, what are we supposed to do?
Like, I mean, like, I feel like pushing forward message of let's work together
to solve our problems, rather than let's fight until we're all too tired
and bloody to solve our problems.
Yeah.
I mean, I'm not trying to say that we should we should have a war or something.
But I mean, like, yeah, what I'm just trying to, you know, when I'm
ignoring it, the like, or the like dismissing it as, you know, that
was us versus them and we won so they could suck it.
Yeah, I totally agree that like, it is a thing that we should work on together
and not a thing that we should fight each other about, because I think
fighting is like violent fighting is the worst thing you could possibly do.
It's it just leaves one side bad as opposed to anything resolved.
But yeah, but I think that like a lot of times, at least up until Trump was
elected, when people said, let's work on this together, what they meant was,
let's let the let's let the the elites in power that are leaning liberal left
just enact their policies and the the other side has to suck it up
because they know what's right.
Like work together was a code word for you are racist and sexist and wrong
and you must change and be like us instead.
And that's that's not working together.
That's just kind of imposing your own view on the other side.
I don't like this mystery code talk.
I mean, what more could it have been?
Like, I guess if your real message is let's work together to solve this.
What will you what what more could you say?
Like, I guess you could do things differently.
Is that what you guys are saying?
Say let's say I would say like I think when people make the when people
come back and say affirmative action feels like reverse racism to me.
And that's not great.
What the response was was no, it's not.
This is just, you know, equalizing things for people.
You're a racist for even saying that and there can be no such thing as racism
against white people because of structural inequities.
Like the the pushback was basically shut up.
You're a racist as opposed to, you know, let's take their concerns seriously about things.
Yeah, I guess I I mean,
I maybe I'm revealing inside myself some partisanship.
I didn't know I had, but like part of me thinks that like it if someone says,
you know, I want a an ethnic and ethnic ethnically pure United States
and I want all those, you know, non whites out of here.
Like, where do you meet in the middle on that?
Right, you don't fuck those people.
But I mean, like I guess like those are actual racists and we don't want them around.
Oh, so you oh, you're talking about like just the tribalism thing is,
I don't know, I feel like think about what you mean, rather than branding
anyone who disagree with us, the hated enemy.
Yeah.
OK, I thought that you were saying like the the the actual small subset
of those people that we brand that way, who actually are that way.
OK, yeah.
Yeah, God, I just like to lighten the mood.
I was sort of when we were talking about Trump and Twitter earlier,
I was like, I wonder what it would look like if like Hitler had Twitter.
I wonder if anybody is like doctored tweets, like if not,
somebody please make a blog and do that.
Like, I want to see Hillers 3M tweets.
Like from what I hear of Hitler, it would have been very similar to Trump
in that it was the very emotionally pure and relevant, but kind of incoherent
and semantically fucked up mess.
I think for me that the horrifying part is that like Hitler was effective.
Like this, this is how bad it can get with an effective imbecile.
Like I and I am not an expert, maybe Hitler was actually completely stupid.
But I feel like you don't you don't successfully overthrow government
and like run a campaign to take over the world if you're a complete idiot.
So like I think that he must have not been as stupid as as Trump.
And like that's the thing that I I see people worry that, well, you know,
Hitler went to jail and then he came back and took over the country.
And like, I don't really see that happening with Trump, like in terms
of both governance and military, I hear Hitler was a fucking disaster.
Yeah, he was just incredibly persuasive.
And like the thing with Germany was they were so fucked at that point
that almost the entire nation was like the hardcore Trump supporters we have now.
Yeah, it's like the deal, actually, where it was just somebody getting up
on a podium, flailing and giving speeches about, like, you know, that showed deep
emotion. And he also gave, you know, the German populace, the scapegoat
or a bunch of scapegoats, you know, it's you people aren't failing.
It's their fault. It's, you know, these others fall.
Like imagine if Hitler, instead of having a hardcore base of 20 percent
had a hardcore base of 60 or 65 percent of the populace, that's that he still
would be absolutely incompetent, but he'd have a ton of power and would likely
be, you know, dissolving the Senate right now.
OK, fair enough. Yeah, I was just reflecting earlier this week
that my knowledge of history is complete bull, is complete garbage.
Like I don't know if you ask me what World War Two started about
and who the main players were I couldn't couldn't tell you other than like the
obvious superpowers. Like an arc duke for an end.
That was World War One. Oh, did I say World War Two?
I meant World War One. Yeah.
So like I don't I don't know fuck all about history.
So I it is I was just thinking about it earlier this week that it's a gigantic
blind spot in my like knowledge base.
Yeah, I don't know history.
I absolutely cannot recommend enough listening to the entire backlog
of Dan Carlin's hardcore history.
It goes deep into stuff and he presents it in a way that is very compelling
and fun to listen to. So anytime you want to learn more stuff about history,
check out Dan Carlin. He's awesome.
I always keep meaning to it.
And I've heard three hours of his podcast, but that means I listen to half
of an episode. So I need to get back into like actually dedicate time.
The older ones were a lot shorter.
Right on. All right.
I got one last thing before we go on.
And this this is part of the reason that like I think what happened may have
been good is the fact that it didn't really have any bad side effects.
They were this started out like as sort of a riot slash coup attempt slash
something and basically devolved into people meandering around and taking selfies.
And it turned it turned into a meme.
It was a meme protest or protest meme and an amazing login over on our
basing conspiracy discord server pointed out that like this should be taken as
empirical evidence as to how riots can be handled and that, you know,
maybe the hard handed approach being used to be a BLM approach is BLM protests.
Is is bad.
And and I was like, so, so what do you mean?
Like when there's a writing mob, you just kind of evacuate the area of anyone
that could be hurt and just let them just let them go until they get tired
and they wander away.
And it sounds like, yeah, kind of a little bit more nuance about like, but like,
yeah, I mean, I think you're taking that into account too.
Like, yeah, an amazing login said like, okay, so this style clearly does
some things we like, like nobody or almost nobody was killed and buildings
weren't burnt to the ground, but property damages there might have been
if they had encountered resistance.
Yeah, yeah.
So like, how can we get this where it turns into a meme and people wander
away unhurt and we can avoid the bad things that happened like the entire
capital building being wrecked.
Like we would like to avoid property damage and looting and stuff if possible.
But like, this is a point of evidence and the fact that I don't
know, like again, the same, I'm going to reference altered carbon again,
because I really love that series.
At one point, the author says in the form of the main character that all
wars are hormonal, that they're just things people need to get out of their systems.
And I think, I think that's why we attacked Afghanistan after 9 11.
Or rather, why we attacked Iraq after 9 11.
Because when in Afghanistan, it was like, you know, something terrible happened
and people needed to point a finger at somebody and be like, and have a sense
that someone's doing something about it.
Yeah, we went to Afghanistan.
The country folded like in a month and we just didn't, the populace in general
didn't feel like the Arabs had been punched hard enough.
And so they went after Iraq after that.
And like, I mean, that's not the reason our leaders did it, but I think
that's why the populace was behind it.
They were like, we need to do more violence in revenge.
And, and I, you know, Maisie and Logan kind of made the point that like when
you have the resistance of the cops, you get more and more people stoked up
and things escalate, whereas if like one side folds entirely, the other side
eventually gets some shit out of their system by breaking some windows
and then gets tired and goes away.
Yeah.
I mean, like, but also putting this in the context of 9 11.
Oh, okay.
What about also just like, try not to get to the point where people are rioting?
Like when people are, I mean, like, again, like, you know, there was, you could
see stuff building up to the Trump administration, like people were unhappy.
There's a lot of, yeah, I don't know.
I'm obviously like, huh?
I said, unrest.
Yeah.
Yeah, there was an arrest, but there were people with like real concerns.
And maybe like, you know, I think that the fact that we have our two
party like us versus them system and like, you know, you guys are dumb
hicks shut up and it's like, oh yeah, like, well, you liberals and your
educations and like, it's kind of like maybe like, can we grow up as a species
and start like, no, we cannot.
Not until we get immortality.
So we'll speak for over a hundred.
So kind of frustrated.
No, I mean, the thing is, I'm sure this wouldn't work in all contexts.
Like I don't, I'm not sure if you guys were like alive and or conscious to
the news when the, the LA riots happened.
Rodney King was beaten by some cops almost to death and then they were
acquitted and then LA erupted in fire for like a week.
It was insane.
But like, I, I'm not, God, now I don't remember because it was so long ago
and I was so young.
I don't know if there was like a big counter riot police force at the time.
I kind of thought that it just sort of spontaneously happened and nothing
would have changed that, but maybe, maybe there were a lot of cops out for
them to have someone to fight against.
Shit.
Now I feel like should lift that up before I started talking.
I don't know.
So like very confused about whether, whether they're, whether backing off
would have had any effect on preventing those riots from getting worse.
Yeah.
I guess we can't know.
Well, we probably could look into that, but I didn't right now.
But I mean, like, Logan points out, nevermind, go on.
Yeah.
Well, Logan points out one of the end states of these riots is that they turn
into a fucking meme and we want to encourage that as much as possible.
And like, this should be some evidence as to how that can be done.
And can we incorporate that into the future, as opposed to just cracking
down harder and harder and making things worse?
If this is a way that we can make, that we can guide riots into, into resolving
themselves, that would be much better, I think.
I guess I still sort of think like it's sort of ignoring the root cause though.
Like I'm looking at the 1992 Los Angeles riots and it kind of like people
started rioting because of excessive use of force by the police.
And then it was resolved by the California National Guard, the US
military and several federal law enforcement agencies coming in and just
like stamping it out.
So it's like kind of proving the point, actually.
Like, oh, you know, the police uses excessive force that it's just like,
we're going to stop that with more excessive force.
Yeah.
One of the points for force will be required.
Like force should have happened on this insurrection.
Like, I mean, especially if they were in there with hostages, right?
We wouldn't call it excess.
And I'm not saying that that's analogous to the LA riots.
I'm just saying that like, just because there's a military response doesn't
mean that it's an excessive use of force.
Right.
But like, what if there had been National Guard at the Capitol building and
they'd opened fire on the protesters?
Like either we'd have a massacre on our hands or we'd have like people going
crazy and burning fucking the Capitol to the ground in riots, as opposed to just
sort of, you know, trashing one building.
I guess I don't know if I want to place trust that every, you know, every
riot will be a meme riot like this one.
Right.
And so if like, how do we get that?
Well, I think I'm liking Jayce's proposal more and more to just not let it
get to that point.
Yeah, I think we can't always get that.
But like, it just happened that these people were unorganized and didn't know
how to do proper guerrilla warfare.
Like they didn't have a plan.
But like, that's yeah, like next to none of them even had guns.
Like, and this is the, I mean, it's going to be the case.
Yeah.
I, I don't want to, I think it's an interesting idea.
Like, all right, go in there, scream your little hearts out and get tired and go
home.
Like that, I mean, it's like letting your kid hold its breath when it's
pissed, right?
Like I suppose there are circumstances where like, yes, it's just going to yell
itself until it's, you know, yell until it's tired and falls asleep.
Like that's the issues are going to go away that caused them to have the tantrum
in the first place, though, that just like, they're going to quiet down for a
while and then probably more angry later, though, that like,
That's what I'm saying.
But the thing you really want to prevent is people be dying and cities burning
down, and then you can work on the longer things in the long term.
Suppose as long as you're working on them.
I don't really know exactly.
I mean, I can't really run enough.
Like, I don't have enough, uh, like, uh, I don't
have enough RAM or data to run that simulation enough times in my head to
see how it would work out.
Well, I mean, you don't need that.
What I think would be great is if the government actually ran experiments.
I mean, obviously, covertly, they can't say they're doing this, but like when
there is violent BLM protests or violent protests of any kind, instead of pushing
back, just like withdraw, withdraw everyone, let them do their thing, let
them smash some buildings and like, see what happens, see if it does make
things die down instead of escalating.
And if so, like maybe this could be a new playbook.
I mean, it's worth, at least putting a pin, a flag in the fact that like the
overwhelming super majority of BLM protests were nonviolent, like, and
to the extent that there were violence as people getting their asses whooped by
the cops, like, there was a lot of burning of buildings.
I think in the, in the like subsequent days, maybe that's what kind of what
you're talking about.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yes.
So you go to, you go to stand peacefully in line and hold a sign and you get
your mask gripped off and maced in the face that, yeah, next day, you're going
to come back with a brick.
Um, yeah, keep escalating.
Yeah.
Well, I mean, the majority of people who went to the capital protests were just
holding signs too.
And then, you know, it escalated.
Yeah.
I'm not an enough of a political scientist to have a strong opinion on how
to work out.
Like I, I don't like the idea of just saying, yep, let them, let them, let
them scream, and then we'll, we'll see if we can get around to solving their
problems, um, especially too.
There's certainly no way you can solve a problem in a night while people are
screaming.
No.
These are long-term things that are going to take a while.
But it never starts with a, with a, with a riot in the streets, right?
The, the, the, the, the contentions that people have that, that spark riots and,
and, uh, protests never first appear with people screaming in the street by in
the, in the tens of thousands.
Like, so, so you get, you adjust the points before that point.
Yeah.
But again, that's, that's hard.
And, you know, who do you capitulate to?
And, um, how do you make it happen?
Like, yeah, this is not an easy problem.
This is going to require massive coordination.
Come to think of it.
Isn't that basically what they did with the Chaz area in Seattle?
Chaz, the, the, the free republic in that, that took over the Capitol Hill
of Seattle for like a month or two.
Yeah.
And the, the US government was basically like, okay, this few square
miles is now an independent republic.
Now have fun.
And after a couple of months, they kind of got tired and went away.
Governments is hard.
Yeah.
Right.
Maybe, you know, once we're all living in a simulation and we can be weird
experiments, I don't know.
Uh, or once we're all immortal.
I mean, like, yeah.
Hopefully, you know, we're not in one of those simulations.
People are running to see what would happen.
I mean, it kind of feels like it lately, but.
Like the, the, I guess the only part that sucks about Chaz is like the people
who had businesses there, just having their, their businesses ruined for the
number of months that, that that thing was around.
I like don't know very much about this.
Did they just, they just had to like evacuate and like, and then they were screwed.
Like, okay, your, your house and your business are now like in this independent
republic of whatever the fuck.
And like, did anybody take care of them or like, no, not really.
It was a place that had no laws for a period of time.
I need to look this up actually.
Like, I, I, I didn't hear very much about it because it just kind of went away
over time, but, uh, yeah, there was, I don't know how many weeks it was where it
was just like, we, we hold this property now.
US government come at us, bro.
And the US government was like, yeah.
Well, I think space travel is the answer.
Mars colony, you know, like get people off the earth, spread people out
enough that they can all form their own little like Dyson colonies.
And yeah, you know, we just need to get like unlimited resources, UBI mortality.
You know, it's, that's how we fix it.
Yeah, and the rights, it's not like riots have no body count.
They're people were burnt to death in, in some of these things.
Yeah.
I think, I think we've got a, I think it's like, you know, getting the
amount of damage though is the thing that we're trying to figure out.
Like, yeah, I think we just hurry and solve problems.
Like you said, you know, yeah, I, I don't know.
I mean, I, there was another point I wanted to keep jumping in my mind and
then slipping, like, I don't think we've used the word terrorist yet.
And like, it's, it's mainly because people want terrorists.
Well, I wasn't, uh, I know you're joking, but like, I, I was just going to
say that like, I feel like the, the, I also want to give this the credit of
a terrorist attack, right?
Like, don't get wrong, you know, some of the people who jumped in
with weapons and, uh, those hog tying zip ties, I think it's unequivocal.
Uh, there are a few people who wanted it to be terror attack, but right.
Like, confidence doesn't weigh into whether or not you get labeled a terrorist.
I, I, I almost does.
In my mind, just as like an, like an implicit handle, but you're right.
I think, uh, realistically, it doesn't.
Um, I'm also just skipping back through this guardian article and like, uh,
you know, I'm in, uh, representative Mondaire Jones.
I, I disagree.
Uh, he says that Washington DC is designed to be one of the most
secure places on earth.
And I'm like, no, it's not.
Yeah.
What if that thicker glass?
No, I was just thinking with the whole pulling back and letting the
riot burn itself out and become a mean thing that could work for like government
buildings, but like part of the death count that happened in the, the BLM riots
was people trying to loot small businesses and, you know, property owners who
like, this is their livelihood fought back.
They like had guns.
They're like, get out of my shop, get out of my house, or I will shoot you.
And then they didn't, and they shot them.
And like, you, what, what are you going to do?
Unless you have the national guard go and evacuate everyone in the area that's
going to be, that's going to be damaged.
And even though it's sort of like the Republic of whatever the fuck, like then
what happens, like, you know, you evacuate everybody, they come back.
They're, they're out home and like their business is burned to the ground or like
looted and it's like, well, but at least, you know, the death count was low, which
I guess, like, I'm actually still looking at this Wikipedia about the 1992 Los
Angeles riots.
They destroyed Koreatown.
Yeah.
400 million dollars damages.
And then it says Korean America's, the rioters and the National Guard.
What did the rioters have against Koreatown?
Uh, it, it was there in Koreatown and it's saying that like, because
Korean Americans, you know, where had a low social status and a language barrier,
they got like no aid or protection from police.
And then like that, that sort of exact happened.
Uh, yeah, a bunch of people and businesses were burned down their whole like, so
yeah, that, that's like, I want to like minimize also just collateral damage like
that.
If they could channel rioters into like government buildings that are designed to
be destroyed until people are happy and then rebuilt over the next week, that,
that would, I guess that would turn into theater and people would stop doing that
soon.
Yeah.
So the, the proposed solution here is to build an easily breachable government
buildings that are designed to be destroyed.
And when riots start, like leave the doors to target Walmart open so that people
are incentivized to go after those places first, hopefully they get too tired
carrying everything out of there before a giant distraction.
Like, what if there was just a big inflatable Trump that they sort of threw
now, like Trump and the Trump supporters, like whatever, like, I don't know, a big
inflatable police officer, like just, yeah, I give everybody like sticks and make
a big pinata.
I feel like once we get to the point where people are throwing bricks and
molotovs, we've already lost.
And like, yes, you can lose harder after that, but I don't want to, uh, I don't
want to allow, like, I don't want to concede and say, let's let it get there and
let them get the, you know, I don't think anyone's proposing that.
I just, I feel like, uh, we can do better than have to run those experiments.
And even if it's hard, like, I don't know what to say.
Um, yeah, I mean, if I knew the answer, like, or, you know, if anybody knew the
answer, um, we're just, we're going to have to figure it out.
But like, I think, yeah, first step is like, and I know we're going to be
hearing about it forever, but post mortem, like what the fuck happened?
How do we prevent this in the future?
Like what, you know, what were the failure points?
The downside is that the, you know, more interaction is to be asking
themselves those exact questions and looking for, uh, you know, from the other
angle, maybe like, how can we fail?
What can we do to do better in the future?
Uh, well, maybe, I don't know.
Like it, again, sort of seemed like this is just like flailing in anger.
I don't even know if they had, like, you know, it sounded like it's, okay,
we're going to like take the white house and then like, then we're going to
dot, dot, dot.
Yeah.
That's partly why I've been gravitating more towards the use of the word mob
than terrorists.
Cause like granted, like I said, a handful, no doubt, unequivocal terrorists.
And yet, like most of this is just mob mentality.
I don't know if they just wanted to like stir shit up.
Right.
This, I think, I think a small group of people definitely did.
And like the rest of them wanted to be there to protest.
And then they see, Oh, look, the barriers are down.
Whoa, look, you can just walk right into the building.
Why not?
I'm near the front of the line.
Like I think, and that, that I'm assuming that's one thing through the head
because that's how they actually, when they got in there, right?
They did not know, like very few, very few people entered that building
looking like they had a plan.
And so it makes me think that this was not a, uh,
a part made this thing.
Exactly.
Yeah.
So that's where I just see it.
Like as a mob thing where it's like, Oh, look, I didn't know this door was unlocked.
Hey, check this out.
And then everyone else, you know, they had no intention maybe
at the beginning of going through this door.
And they, the end of the doors were unlocked.
I'm now inventing a bad hypothetical one.
I could point into the real thing, but like, Oh, look, this door's been kicked in.
How convenient.
Exactly.
Yes.
You get one, you get a handful of disgruntled dick bags at the front of the line.
And of course the ones who are most disgruntled to be closer to the
front of the first place.
And then people saw them walk in.
No problem.
And I, I, I would be unwilling to bet a thousand dollars that a handful of people
just walked in wondering, Oh, what do it looks like in there?
Like, looks like it's free.
I'm curious.
I don't even know if that winch was going through people's heads.
Honestly, like you get like tunnel vision, like, you know, people are riled up and
they were like, actually, I was like, If I was at a protest, like, assuming, I'm
just putting myself personally in the shoes.
Like if I was upset at the president and I was or at the Congress and I was at
the Capitol building, just, you know, protesting, holding my sign.
And some people rushed the Capitol building.
I'm not going to rush it.
I'm not a violent maniac.
I'm going to stay back.
But like, if it's been an hour and a half and there's people milling in and out
of the Capitol building and nothing's going on, I'm going to be like, you know
what, I'm going to go in there and just going to look around.
I always wanted to see the inside of the Capitol building.
Like, why not?
Maybe take a few pictures because it's not going to be that lucid though.
Like this is like people getting really riled up and like the initial people.
Yeah.
But like, when you see the video of after now, people just wandering around, I
could totally see myself being in there and being like, all right, well, the
doors kicked in, the cats out of the bag, the horses have left the barn.
I'm just going to check out the barn while it's open.
Yeah.
I've never been to a real like protest.
I did the initial, the first year, the women's march after Trump got elected.
And like, I didn't attend any of the protests this summer.
And part of me felt bad about that because like I had friends who were going
and I supported the efforts.
I just, I mean, really what it can do is I don't want to get hurt.
And I realized that like part of that is like, you should be willing to get hurt
for the cause, et cetera.
But like, I knew that like one good kick and I'd be limping for the rest of my life.
Like I'm more fragile than maybe the average protestor.
And I didn't want to, like, I mean, so I guess what I'm saying is I don't know
what it's like to be part of a protest where we're all like chanting and holding
signs because I've never done that.
Maybe it is just kind of like a thing.
You can just get totally swept up in it.
Right.
So that's what I'm saying is I, I can't imagine what it would be like to be
swept up that way.
So maybe I'm not doing it right when I'm pitching my hypotheticals here.
I've only had like good examples of this, like being a, you know, an awesome rave
and having people spontaneously like do cool shit.
But I've been very easily having had those experiences.
I can very easily imagine having the other experience.
And I imagine it would feel kind of similar.
Like it's this heady feeling.
This like sort of, yeah, I'm invincible.
Like we can do anything.
Oh my God, this is great.
But like flipped dark version.
And, you know, raising the sanity waterline, we need to probably like give
some lip service to that.
More than lip service.
If we can think of a way to actually do it, it would be great.
I don't know, man.
I, I think that my, I feel like I'm about to spend on things to say.
I don't know what else to, I feel like I've gotten everything out that I wanted to
get out.
Yeah, I think I'm the same place.
I mean, I'm sure glad nobody died.
And I, I include, you know, I mean, they went in there and they, they
erected a gallows and they talked about killing Mike Pence.
Like I'm glad they didn't kill him.
Oh, so you're glad no politicians died.
Right.
Excuse me.
Yes.
I, I know that, uh, that, uh, civilians and officers died.
I meant, yeah, I'm glad no politicians died, even the ones that disagree with.
I'm glad they failed to lynch, uh, Mike Pence.
Like I, uh, I, I think that would have been a catastrophe.
Um, so, see what the aftermath is going to be.
I don't like Mike Pence.
I'm, I, I wish he wasn't vice president, but if, if a mob could run in there
and kill the vice president, you know, to them, they can do it to us.
And I don't want that to happen.
Right.
So if we're thinking in them bad, us good terms, I think you still don't want
this to happen.
Still don't want that to happen.
Um, yeah, uh, I don't know.
I feel like I keep talking about it, but I also don't feel like it's
terribly productive to do so.
Yeah.
I don't know.
Cause there's just something we had to get out.
Like originally we had a different, uh, episode planned and then this happened.
Do you guys remember the last time we had a different episode planned and it got
preempted by, uh, events?
No.
It was when Trump won the election in 2016.
Long.
Yeah.
So both, both times have been due to Trump political stuff.
God damn it, Trump.
Stop de-villing us.
Well, let's, let's try and find some positive notes to end on here that probably
aren't related to January 6th.
Uh, I already, I already tried to open on a positive note and what good things
are happening, but they don't have any like random good news.
Yeah.
Uh, we were talking about the vaccine earlier.
I don't know if it's going to be kept in or not, but, uh, I did look further into it.
And so yeah, winter is going to be healthcare workers and people 70 older.
Uh, but then the spring phase is going to be the 60 to 69 and 16 to 59.
Uh, summer is going to be open for the general public.
Uh, that is the color of vaccine information, but like it's coming.
We're, we're going to have, you know, assuming that we can trust that the
manufacturing is going to continue to, you know, create the product, scale it up.
Um, by summer, it sounds like a, you know, all us regular folks who aren't in the
high risk, I mean, uh, and then I don't know, I'm talking to a bunch of listeners.
You might actually be in that category.
So sorry to assume that we're all young 30 somethings.
Well, although I think actually our demographics.
At the current rate, we're not going to hit the, you know, we're not going to get
to everybody by the end of this decade.
Like we definitely need to up production and distribution.
The more people get it, the more herd immunity is going to be a thing.
And like, I'm just looking forward to being able to see other humans again.
And yes.
Locker.
Yeah.
By the way, the race builds out where I'm asking fear of touching something.
And, and Biden has said that he's going to try to get a hundred vaccines in 100
days and his first hundred days.
So a hundred thousand or a hundred, wait, a hundred million.
Excuse me.
Right.
What I meant to say.
Yes.
A hundred million days.
A hundred vaccines is, is 50 million people is working at the point.
I believe we are going, uh, pivoting to the, everyone gets one vaccine shot first thing.
Oh, well, yes.
That seems to be the vast majority of the protection anyway.
And the booster shot is just kind of a little bonus.
You know what?
Okay.
Yeah.
For science-based medicine.
And by God, I mean, scientists.
Yes.
The only true God.
We, we didn't, you know, again, like I'm glad that the pandemic we got wasn't as,
wasn't the worst pandemic we could have gotten by a long shot.
And that now, uh, people are going to take things more seriously.
Like science-based medicine.
We almost did, you know, after the Ebola quote unquote pandemic.
Then it became a meme.
Well, yeah.
But, but we had, we had put things in order to be prepared and have a proper
response, which were then immediately disbanded when dipshits came in and had
the ability to do so.
So like, I'm hoping that we take a positive, you know, move from this as
well and, and, uh,
Can the lesson for both of these be like, maybe listen to like intelligent
experts who warn you about like potential catastrophes and like, uh,
how can I get back into my frustration?
Back to happiness.
Who else has happy?
No, no, I can say that all sounds like barn until we all disagree on who the
trusted experts are, but the scientific method at least, like, I don't know.
Uh, pandemic is one of the things, you know, that like could, could be an ex
risk, um, and I, you know, definitely talked about pandemics before.
I don't know.
I'm like a weird married kid.
I liked reading books about pandemics and virology, but like, it was always
just this like, you know, potential extinction event.
And I would like talk about it, you know, like being in the medical field and
stuff and bits and people just like didn't take it seriously.
It's like, after we did start getting good healthcare and sanitation, uh,
germ theory of disease, et cetera, people seemed to think that like, oh,
okay, well, we're, you know, we as a species are past this like whole
disease thing.
And it's like, yeah, no.
Y'all don't remember a few generations ago.
Like, yeah, and really it wasn't, it wasn't that long ago.
You know, how many like, children died in childbirths, like women dying in
child, but like, you know, there were diseases that would really mess you up.
A lot of people had childhood diseases that even if they didn't kill you,
you left permanent scars and neurological things.
Like just, mm.
We're still in the up and up.
Polio was eradicated last year in, uh, Africa, right?
I thought so.
At least I've been telling people that and I hope I'm right.
Cause I thought I heard it somewhere trustworthy.
You're right in that, uh, wild polio.
Yeah.
Africa is free from wild polio virus says the who.
Yeah.
Positive stuff.
Right.
Yeah.
I think it's just like Afghanistan and Pakistan where it's left now.
One of my coworkers, uh, got ahold of a PS five, um, as far as just like
random, random, happy news, he really wanted one.
So he wrote a Twitter bot that would monitor Twitter for like the word sale,
um, or, you know, PS five sale or whatever.
And then it would ping his phone only when that came up and then he
could go check it out and, uh, that's smart.
Very immediately.
Yeah.
I think it took him much purchases more.
Yeah.
I mean, uh, it certainly, uh, I could send you the code for his, uh, his PS five
hunting bot.
I mean, I'd appreciate it.
I like know how to do it.
What I'm just saying is I should stop being lazy and start like,
yeah, I'm finding the virtue of just like looking for, like when you're
looking at making purchases to look on different platforms.
It was funny.
I bought YouTube premium, like for the month free trial a month ago.
And if I looked at buying it on my phone, it was like 17 bucks a month.
Right.
So when I went to my computer and said, all right, YouTube premium promo code,
I, it just took me right to the regular page, but it was 14 bucks a month.
And I, I checked and for whatever reason, if you're buying it on your phone,
it's $3 more a month than if you buy it on your computer.
And I've no idea why the fuck that is.
I was looking at buying a nice office chair that I just saw in Shark Tank.
And if I look it up on my computer, it's $100 more than if I buy it on my phone,
because my phone has like a pre-order $100 off.
What the fuck?
I don't, that actually is why I didn't pull the trigger on buying that yet,
because I'm like, this seems so disingenuous screw you guys.
But, um, it does have a six a day money back guarantee, so I'll probably get it.
But like, I, it, anyway, if you're shopping, look, look on different for
whatever reason, different, uh, hardware to see if you can get different prices.
That is bizarre.
All right.
Who else has something positive?
I don't have something positive, but I have like a listener feedback thing from earlier.
Hit it.
We'll end on that.
Okay.
Uh, so this is back from when we did the Einstein's arrogance, less wrong post.
Uh, one of the posters in our discord was wondering like, why, why is this okay
for Einstein to like say, no matter what the experimental result is, I feel bad
for the person doing the experimental result.
If it doesn't match the theory, like that really does seem the opposite of how
we want to do science, where we always go with what the experiment reveals.
And, uh, there was some discussion about this.
Cause you know, it sounds like a good objection.
Uh, eventually our user do the math gave the answer.
He said, Einstein had a mathematical proof that if the speed of light was
constant for all observers, something which can be proven using Maxwell's
equations and verified by just looking at every experiment done on the matter,
then the only possible world we could live in is one with time dilation.
If he was wrong, then not only would he be wrong, but ZFC set theory would also
be proven wrong.
And we would no longer be able to make predictions about the world because the
world wouldn't have a logical structure that or every experiment we did to try
to change the speed of light would have yielded spurious results.
And Maxwell's equations would be wrong in their way, which would allow us to
change fundamental constants of the universe and generate free energy.
Too bad we're not living in that universe.
Yeah.
So the difference here is that there's more than one logical step between
Maxwell's equations and relativity.
So people can't realize how absurd it is to get a result proving the theory wrong.
Said, uh, I hear you write that the post view is named to do the math.
Yes.
And, and they said, because, because math.
Yes.
What I love about that is I was like two things.
One, I was there for the, the beginning of that conversation and I was able to
like respond a little bit.
And I was like, we're going to need a mathematician to come in here and settle
this and I miss the mathematician coming in to settle this.
So thank you, do the math.
Uh, and thank you for bringing it to my attention because I didn't, didn't get
to see the, the wrap up on that.
Uh, yeah.
And, but that's one of those things too, where it's like the, the summary in the
post wasn't given, like you're, you're the thing to their explanation would have
been, I think duly included in that less wrong post to explain why it wasn't arrogant.
Um, just saying he had good reasons and we can trust that they were good reasons.
Um, definitely left to open a very legitimate question of like, how is
that not the most arrogant thing anyone's ever said ever.
So, um, yeah.
Yeah.
All right.
You have a lot of wrong posts next month or next week or next, next fortnight.
We are doing, um, pull up a minute.
I almost had it.
We are doing, I guess, I know, but just to remind people you're doing a rational
argument, we change your mind less often than, often than we think and avoiding
your beliefs, real weak points.
Yes.
Wait, everyone's safe.
Have fun.
Wait, what were you going to say?
Okay.
I think a patron it.
Oh my God.
Do I save in the day?
It was such a like politically charged episode today.
Do we want to like lay this on a patron's feet or should we something?
Okay.
Alrighty.
People that listen to this podcast, I like have the same interests, or at least
I don't know, like Hobo demon, we couldn't have done this about it.
Yeah.
Hobo demon is also on the discord.
And I hope we'll enjoy the call out on this episode.
So, um, he's totally fucking rock.
And, uh, it's always, I, I, I'm enjoying, you know, I, I don't engage much with,
with much that happens on discord, but I do watch some of it.
So it's nice, uh, seeing your, your contributions as well.
So.
Yeah, I'd like to give extra props to hobo demon real quick because hobo demon was
one of the people that helped together the, uh, audio book for my book, um, what
lies dreaming, which hopefully that'll be, and you know, available in its entirety
soon, but it is available in all the different chapters currently.
And yeah, like you just did it free out of the goodness of his heart.
And I really appreciate it.
So thank you for enjoying that.
Thanks over demon.
I think what we're getting at is we definitely owe you one.
We owe you at least one, probably two.
So, um, whatever you need, whatever you'd like, give us a shout.
It's yours.
One wish, possibly two wishes, depending on how intense the first wish is, but none
of those wishes can be for us to teach defense against the dark arts next year.
But yeah, by all means, please reach out.
We owe you and you rock and with that, I think we can call it.
Uh, yeah, let's quickly remind people that they can subscribe to us on all the
various podcasting places, please give us a review.
If you haven't, you can support us on patreon.
And if you don't want to support us weekly on patreon, you can't just buy
some neat merch to wear around or to put on your phone or, you know, whatever.
We have a merch store with our logo on it.
I did buy the, the slim phone case and it's awesome.
Um, not only does it look good, but it's minimalistic.
Like it's, I don't know how thick it is, like less than half a centimeter.
And it adds no bulk to my phone.
Like my old case had like a kickstand on it that never used and it was like big.
This thing is, is sleek and sharp.
And I know I'm like sounding like I'm selling it, but I, I bought one.
So like, I think it's cool to see if there's a lot that fits my phone.
I've got a weird phone, but there was a variety of options, but I don't think it
had a ton.
So I've got, um, what the fuck?
Is it a Modo bullshit phone?
Yeah, probably I don't have it, but there's like stickers, right?
Yeah, I can just put a sticker there are.
All right.
All right.
Good point.
Good point, Tiniash.
All right.
Everyone have fun.
Have a safe couple of weeks.
And enjoy watching the aftermath of this thing.
And do something fun.
Yeah.
Watch some of my videos.
There's a, there's a Netflix show called the history of swear words hosted by the
greatest actor to ever grace the screen, Nicholas Cage.
And the first episode was on the, on the history of the word fuck.
And it was delightful.
Oh, that sounds really good.
Yeah.
I've watched, I've only seen the first episode, but I was looking for some
levity this week and found that.
And I was like, this is what my life needed today.
Send that to me.
I'll send you some puppy videos.
I found some really good puppies.
This is just on Netflix, the history of swear words.
Okay.
Then I'll have to check that out.
To be available to everybody or anyone with Netflix anyway.
All right, everyone.
Have fun.
See you in a couple of weeks.
Bye.
