Lee M. Silver is Professor of Molecular Biology and Public Affairs at Princeton University.
He is a member of both the Department of Molecular Biology and the Woodrow Wilson School of Public
and International Affairs, with joint appointments in Princeton's Program in Science, Technology,
and Environmental Policy, the Center for Health and Well-Being, the Princeton Environmental
Institute, and the Center for Law and Public Affairs.
Professor Silver received his bachelor's and master's degrees in physics from the
University of Pennsylvania and his doctorate in biophysics from Harvard University.
He received postdoctoral training in mammalian genetics at New York's Memorial Slung Kettering
Cancer Center and in molecular genetics at the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory under the
direction of Nobel laureate James D. Watson.
Professor Silver's books include Challenging Nature, The Clash of Science and Spirituality
at the New Frontiers of Life, and Remaking Eden, as well as textbooks and genetics.
He has published more than 200 scientific articles in the fields of genetics, evolution,
reproduction, embryology, computer modeling, and behavioral science, as well as other scholarly
papers on topics at the interface between biotechnology, law, ethics, and religion.
Professor Silver is an elected fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of
Science and the recipient of a National Institutes of Health Merit Award for Outstanding Research
in Genetics.
He has also been elected to the governing boards of the Genetic Society of America and
the International Mammalian Genome Society.
He is currently a trustee of the American Council on Science and Health and a member
of the Scientific Advisory Board of the Non-Profit Institute of Systems Biology in Seattle, Washington.
Professor Silver prepared the course guidebook that comes with these lectures.
The course guidebook includes a detailed outline of each lecture, a timeline, a glossary, biographical
notes, and a bibliography.
To get the most out of this course, you may find it useful to review the outlines before
or after each lecture.
