Music
Welcome to the first lecture in my course.
Before we get started, I'd like to introduce myself.
My name is Lee Silver. I am a professor at Princeton University,
and I have a broad range of interests that span all of the sciences,
especially the biological sciences.
I'm an inveterate traveler and amateur photographer,
and many of the photographs of animals and places that you see in these lectures
were taken by me.
And you'll see many photos of my family as well,
because my family are my true teachers and always have been in my life.
Now, over the course of these 24 lectures,
I hope to impart some of the excitement that is occurring now
in the field of genetics, genomics, molecular biology.
Those words have all come to mean basically the same thing.
And there are stunning advances that are taking place in this field right now.
Some of the material that I will present to you,
I've just read that was just published in the last month
to give you an idea of how recent this material is.
Now, molecular biology, genetics, as I said,
you can use either description to describe the field.
It's funded by the government, the United States government,
and other governments because of the belief that this research
will provide cures for diseases that are suffered by citizens.
And no one expected, however, how much we would learn about the human condition
by studying the basic ingredients in genes and cells and an organism.
So I'm going to provide you with a modern scientific understanding
of genetics and evolution from the perspective of DNA and information.
And it won't be easy, but it will be worth it.
I can guarantee it. If you stick through the first group of lectures
where I present the basic concepts that you need to know
before jumping to using those concepts to better understand
how we are human and how we are different from animals,
how we're similar to animals, where we come from,
where our brains come from, both in the sense of where they evolved from
and in the sense of how they work,
and also why our brains sometimes misfunction.
All of that is going to be dependent upon understanding
the basic principles of genetics and evolution that I present to you at first.
Now, in this lecture, I'm going to give you a background to science in general,
but I just want to give you a little bit of a tease
of what we're going to focus on throughout the entire course.
And that is the molecule DNA.
It has the familiar DNA double helix structure
that you have seen, I'm sure.
And the molecule DNA is so important because
it enables organisms like myself, any cell, any living organism
to carry digital information.
And the digital information is carried within bases
which are adenine, thymine, cytosine, and guanine.
And these four bases, and that's all there are in the DNA alphabet,
these four bases allow an organism to develop instructions
that can cause a single cell to grow into a whole human being.
These bases should be thought of like letters in the alphabet.
And just like with our 26 letters in the English alphabet,
we can create novels and histories and amazing stories.
We're not limited by the number of letters in the alphabet.
The same thing holds true for life.
It's not limited by the number of letters in the DNA alphabet.
So at the end of the first set of lectures,
you'll get a sense not only how we have learned a lot
about the digital code inside of DNA,
but how we've gone far beyond that in understanding
how that code is interpreted by biological organisms
at the molecular level and then at the whole organism level
and even how we've begun to use this technology
to get a sense of how we think.
I'm still amazed by the fact that a single cell,
smaller than I can see, is all that it takes
to create a complete human being with a human brain.
That's quite amazing because life has been around
for over three billion years
and cells have been swimming around all of that time.
And human beings come from cells that are not very different in size
from most of the protozoa swimming around.
And yet somehow, and we'll explore this throughout the course,
somehow in these cells there are DNA molecules
that contain the complete genetic information required
to give rise to a person who can think
and who can present lectures as I am doing today.
Now, for tens of thousands of years, if not more,
human beings have been contemplating the meaning of life
and what makes life different from non-life
and what makes human life different from life.
The contemplative capacity that we have
is because of the evolutionary benefits
that it provided to our ancestors.
But as a byproduct of those evolutionary benefits,
we get to think, we get to take courses
that don't necessarily give us any benefit
in terms of survival or reproduction.
That's the nice thing about being a human being.
And for the longest time, people have been able to look at nature.
They've been able to see waterfalls that are moving and active
and know that those waterfalls are not alive.
And yet they can look at a tree that is not moving at all
and know that it is alive.
And that tree is alive in a different way from my wife
who is standing next to this particular tree.
This particular tree is hollow
because it begins its life by strangling another tree,
by going around the other tree growing until the tree inside dies.
And so what you're looking at is what is left on the outside,
one of the consequences of ruthless evolution,
even in the plant world.
And so people have known for a long time
that life is different from non-life,
that human beings are a different kind of life
from other forms of life.
And people have wondered for a very long time where we come from.
When was the first human being around?
How did it come into existence?
What is the ultimate destiny of our species?
These are all questions we've been thinking about,
we meaning the human species for a long time.
Now we can answer some of these questions,
the questions that concern the past,
where do we come from?
I'm going to tell you we have a pretty good idea
of what our species history was over the last three billion years.
Where we are going, well, nobody can predict exactly where we're going,
but in the last lecture of this course,
we'll consider the possibilities
based on the understanding that we have of genetics and evolution.
So we're going to start today with an understanding
of how science is practiced
and what has allowed biologists,
especially in the 20th and now the 21st century,
to carry out the experimental explorations that they've carried out
to come up with the knowledge that they have come up with.
And the important thing to understand is that
there are two aspects of practicing science.
There is empirical science and there is theoretical science.
Now most scientists go back and forth between the two.
Empirical science owes its origins to Francis Bacon,
the great scientist of the 17th century,
and Bacon said that you have to measure and measure again
to see patterns in nature.
And it's through measurements and doing this in an unbiased way
where you can develop rules, where you can see something happening,
see that it's reproduced,
and have a good sense of that particular phenomenon happening again.
So you can see how things happen.
So Bacon was the father of the empirical method.
Empirical science is based on measurement.
It's based on looking at the world, measuring things,
and making a general hypothesis that you're going to test
about the way things should be in the world.
Hypothesis testing, which comes out of Francis Bacon's scientific method,
is based on the idea that you have some data
which allows you to consider a particular generalization.
And I'm going to give you an example of a hypothesis that I actually had on my own
when I visited the Galapagos Iowans with my family.
And the hypothesis was that all pink flamingos are pink.
Now, I made this hypothesis because one morning I got up,
I looked at a lake, and I saw flamingos on that lake,
and all of them were pink.
So that was my preliminary data.
And with that preliminary data, I could make the hypothesis
which is that all pink flamingos in the world are pink.
Now, in order for a hypothesis to be a scientific hypothesis,
it has to use objective terminology.
And I've purposely used pink flamingo to illustrate this fact.
If a pink flamingo is any flamingo that's pink,
then there's no hypothesis because any flamingo that is pink is a pink flamingo.
But if you use the term pink flamingo as the name of a species,
then pink flamingos are not necessarily pink,
even though I am hypothesizing that they all will be.
So you have to be very objective, very, very careful in the words that you use
to set up your hypothesis.
They have to be objectively understood words.
And then you have the beginnings of a scientific hypothesis.
Then you also have to have an experiment,
a way of collecting data to see whether your hypothesis is supported or not supported.
And so in this particular case, I saw pink flamingos in the Galapagos.
I would have to travel all over the world,
find every other pink flamingo in the world, and see if they're all pink.
Now, of course, that's an absurdity.
I'm never going to see all the pink flamingos in the world,
but I can make an estimate.
I can go to a number of places and I can sample the pink flamingos in the world
and see if my hypothesis holds up through this sampling technique.
And if I find that all the pink flamingos that I see are pink,
and that supports my hypothesis, I can never prove it,
but I can gather support for it and I can also destroy it
with a single observation of a flamingo, a pink flamingo that is not pink.
And so I was surprised because I thought my hypothesis was true.
When I went to Malaysia and went to a park to see pink flamingos,
and these pink flamingos were mostly white.
And this told me that my hypothesis was not properly generated,
that I didn't put together the hypothesis,
because now I saw these pink flamingos, they're mostly white,
they have a little bit of pink at the ends of their tails.
Do I count them as being pink or not?
Well, I have to restate my hypothesis to know whether or not this is true.
So it's very important to understand empirical science,
which is based on hypothesis testing,
and there are three essential components of hypothesis testing.
First, you have some preliminary data that leads you to believe
that there's a pattern in nature.
Second, you describe your hypothesis with objective language
that anybody can understand in the same way.
And third, you set up an experiment to collect data
to see if the data support or don't support your hypothesis.
Now, no hypothesis has ever proven absolutely to 100% reliability,
but hypotheses that are important and are tested over and over again,
hypotheses in the medical world, for example,
gain enough support such that scientists and doctors will assume they're correct.
In other words, the benefit of the doubt is on the side of the hypothesis,
even if it's not proven absolutely and can never be proven absolutely.
Now, the second kind of science that is done owes its origins to Rene Descartes,
another one of the European scientists during the Scientific Revolution age.
And Descartes, he didn't like the idea of messy experiments.
All the experiments that he did were in his mind.
And his idea was that if you think about something rationally,
you can come up with a mathematical solution to the problem,
and you can develop a mathematical formula or formulas that explain the phenomenon
that you are looking at.
And so scientific theory is very much tied to mathematical formulas.
It's tied to the idea that you have a formula which will give you an understanding
of how something works and how other things work as well.
And that formula, in order for it to be a scientific theory,
that formula has to predict an event or some aspect of nature
that you previously didn't know about.
And a good example of this is Isaac Newton,
and he had his theory of motion and gravity,
which he published in his book, Natural Philosophy,
was the beginning of modern physics,
and his theory of motion and gravity.
One of the nice things about a theory like this
is that the theory brought together a phenomena
that were thought to be completely unrelated to each other.
He had a single theory which not only explained how the planets
and the orbits of the planets around the sun
and the orbit of the moon around the earth,
but it also explained why when you throw a ball up in the air,
it has a certain arc before it comes down.
And Newton showed that with a single equation,
you can actually explain both of these phenomena.
They're part of the same underlying physical principle.
Now, for a scientific theory to be scientific,
it has to predict something.
The great philosopher Karl Popper of the 20th century
called this notion falsifiability.
A scientific theory has to be falsifiable.
It has to predict something, and then you have to wait and see
if the predicted event really occurs,
and if it doesn't, then you've falsified your theory.
Now, in the case of Isaac Newton,
one of the easiest things that one could detect
that was predicted from his theory were the dates of lunar eclipses.
So there was no other way that people could determine
when the moon would move behind into the earth's shadow
and you would have a lunar eclipse.
They happened at random times is what it seemed to be
before Newton's theory of motion.
And so with Newton's theory, scientists were able to say
that there should be a lunar eclipse on a certain date
in a certain place, at a certain time,
and when that happened, that provided very strong evidence
for Newton's theory of motion.
Now, important scientific conclusions are constantly reassessed
in the light of new knowledge and technology.
And so even though Newton's theory is essentially
what we all use all the time to consider the motions
of things that we can see,
it's what airplane builders use to build airplanes,
and it's the basis on which airplanes fly in the air.
Even though Newton's theory works fine in the world we can see,
when you get to the world that we can see,
in the larger cosmological sense,
Newton's theory doesn't work very well,
and it also doesn't work very well
on the tiny, tiny world of fundamental particles.
And this is where Albert Einstein came in
in the early part of the 20th century
with his theory of general relativity,
which took Newton's theory as the foundation
and extended it into realms that Newton's theory didn't work in.
Einstein's theory of general relativity predicted
the curvature of space,
and one of the ways in which his theory was tested
was to look at where stars appeared to be behind the sun
during a solar eclipse.
It's just coincidental that eclipses helped both Newton
and Einstein prove their theories.
Now, modern science especially,
since the scientific revolution in Europe,
but more so during the 19th, 20th, and now the 21st centuries,
modern science is driven by advances in technology.
Technology allows you to carry out experiments,
empirical experiments.
You have empirical experiments,
give you ideas for new theories,
which will suggest new empirical experiments,
and so much of science today
is driven by advances in the technology.
I'm going to give you a few examples here
of the kinds of technologies that have been developed over time
and what the advances allow us to do.
The first example is the microscope.
The microscope was originally developed in the 17th century,
and when the earliest scientists peered down into the microscope,
they saw a whole new world,
a whole new world of microorganisms swimming around.
Nobody knew that world existed until that microscope
and showed it to those earlier scientists.
The microscope has become more sophisticated,
and in the 20th century we had electron microscopes,
which use electrons instead of the photons of light
to give you an image to look into a slide organism,
a much higher resolution.
And with the electron microscope,
you can look deep inside of a cell
and you can see not just that there are cells,
but you can actually see the particles of the cell,
the nuclear membrane, and the various little organelles
that are carrying out the different functions of the cell
as it makes protein or RNA.
The second technology I'll give you as an example
of one that has evolved greatly is chemical analysis.
So chemical analysis first began
with the discovery of the fact that matter is made up of elements,
and elements are all atoms,
and this was a discovery made by Lavoisier.
In 1800, scientists, young chemists,
were able to look at simple molecules
that were made up of three to five atoms
and discover what the structure of those molecules was.
So water is H2O,
and early chemists understood that oxygen was in the middle
and that there were two hydrogen atoms attached to the oxygen.
That was chemical analysis.
By 1900, the beginning of the 20th century,
chemists could take apart the structure of molecules
which had 40 atoms or 100 atoms.
That was kind of the level at which they could do things then.
And then at the beginning of the 21st century,
and very relevant to this entire course,
scientists left the laboratory behind
and built machines that could automate the process of chemical analysis.
And in 2001, they obtained the first determination
of a complete human genome sequence.
And to give you a sense of the difference
in the analytical ability here
versus the analytical ability a hundred years earlier,
a DNA molecule has 20 billion atoms.
And in 2001, scientists who had uncovered
the sequence of the human genome
knew exactly where all of those 20 billion atoms were
in this molecule.
Of course, you can't keep that information in your head,
but a computer can store that information.
So this incredible advance is taking place
in chemical analysis and in microscopy.
And those are just two of the many important categories of technology
that have advanced tremendously over the years.
Another category that I'm not going to mention now,
but is obviously very important to modern biological science,
is the computer.
Programmable computers have only been around for 60 years,
but the computer ability, the technology of computers,
advances very, very, very quickly.
And advances in computers are essential to the advances
in the field of genetics and biotechnology
because so much of genetics and biotechnology today
is generating large amounts of data
and then having a computer analyze that data for the patterns
that tell us about the phenomena of life.
So what is science?
Well, I gave you two of the main aspects of science.
One is the testable hypotheses based on well-defined terms
and carrying out the hypothesis testing with good experiments.
The second is falsifiable theories,
which are based on using mathematics to develop formula,
which have generalizable abilities.
And the third is the knowledge accumulated in the pursuit of both.
And so a modern scientist will very often have an empirical hypothesis,
test that hypothesis, and then use the results of the test
to create a theory, perhaps, and go back and forth.
It's not that some scientists are empirical and some are theoretical.
Most combine those two, especially academic scientists.
And so the third aspect of science is the way the public sees science
is the knowledge accumulated in the pursuit of both hypothesis testing
and falsifying theories.
Scientific understanding doesn't stand still,
and science is always going to be looked at again
and refined just like Einstein refined what Newton had done.
And a mark of an ideal scientist.
So now I'm going from the science to the people who actually create the science.
The mark of an ideal scientist is a healthy dose of skepticism
because not all claims of scientific truth, even by scientists, are valid.
Unfortunately, human nature can interfere with unbiased thinking.
And Natalie Angie is a reporter for The New York Times, explains it well.
And she said, quote,
scientists try not all of them, but the good ones, to be their own worst enemy.
They try to disprove their own pet theories.
Like everyone else, scientists have a lot of preconceived notions
and they have to fight against them all the time.
Really good scientists will do that.
It's an ideal, obviously hard to reach.
And you can see why it's so hard to reach
because our nature is to want to believe in ourselves.
We see a result, we think it's exciting.
We don't want to learn that it was just a coincidence that something happened.
And scientists even are guilty of this.
So just because a scientist says something doesn't necessarily mean it's true.
And scientists know that and that's why we demand replication of results.
Now through this course, we're going to trace the path of scientific discovery.
So we're going to go back to the beginning.
We're going to look at what the ancient Greek philosophers thought about
the meaning of life and how living things were different from non-living things.
We're going to jump forward from the ancient philosophers
to the scientists at the beginning of the scientific revolution,
see how they teased out the actual components of organisms
and we're going to see what organisms are composed of,
the different molecular components of organisms.
And then we're going to get to the point where we're going to spend some time
going deeply into genetics.
Genetics is one of the foundations.
I would say it's one of the two foundations in conjunction with evolutionary science
that provides the tools we need to do all of the modern research
that I'm going to be talking about in this course.
And so we're going to talk about genes as abstract entities as they were imagined by Mendel
and then we're going to jump to the idea of genes as being digital information
along the DNA molecule.
And we're going to talk about how genes are still undergoing change
in what we think they are and how all the information in the DNA molecules
of an organism, all the information together is called the genome.
And we're going to talk about how all the genetic information in a genome
operates together to allow a piece of matter, DNA and other molecules,
allows those pieces of matter to come together,
those inanimate pieces of matter to come together,
and to have life emerge at the other end.
And we will use this knowledge of genetics to explore what it says about human beings
and human minds, and we'll end up looking at the future
and what we can say about the future path of the human species.
So in the next lecture, we'll start with the question,
what does it mean to be alive?
What is it about a plant or a cell that makes it alive and different
from objects nearby that might look very similar to it?
I look forward to seeing you.
