Welcome back.
During the last lecture, I gave you a sense of what science is, how science is performed
in theoretical ideas and in empirical experiments.
And today we're going to use some of the knowledge of what science is to actually gain knowledge
about what life is.
This is a question that has occupied the time of philosophers for many, many eons.
What is life?
What is it that makes a living thing alive and a non-living thing not alive?
Now for the longest time and still today, most people believe that a living thing actually
is composed of two different substances.
This is a philosophical term.
It doesn't mean the same thing that it means to physicists today.
The two substances that were thought to come together to create a living thing were a material
substance, matter, and another substance that is called spirit or soul by different people.
And the idea is that the spirit-soul substance interacts with the matter substance, the organic
body, and the two of them together make an animated organism.
So the spirit behaves like an immaterial puppeteer, pulling the strings of the organism
as if it's pulling my hands and using my mouth to speak.
That is being done by the spirit in terms of dualism.
Now for a very long time and still in some pre-scientific cultures, the spirit substance
was thought of as a vapor, a vapor that could go into bodies and animate them at the beginning
of life.
And then at the ends of life, the vapor would migrate out of the body and up into the sky.
And cremation ceremonies are based on this notion of a soul leaving a body, migrating
up into the sky where it stays until it reincarnates within another body, comes down from the sky.
It's a very useful way for people who had no scientific knowledge to conceive of what
made a living body alive and a non-living body not alive.
It was the presence or absence of a spirit.
Now with scientific knowledge, which came about during the scientific revolution in
Europe, it became clear that vapors, gases and smoke and things like that were not a
separate substance from other forms of matter.
They were a phase of matter and that was clear in the 16th and 17th centuries.
And so Descartes, René Descartes, elaborated a new concept of the spirit substance and
he said it's not vapor, that's a primitive concept that we can't abide by.
The spirit substance is actually nothing that you can see or feel or touch in the physical
world.
The spirit substance exists outside the space-time dimensions of our universe.
So this is known as the Cartesian notion of spirit.
It's the idea that a living body, in particular in Descartes' mind, it was a human body only.
A human body had this immaterial spirit within them that animated them and that spirit when
the body died, that spirit went off to a different place, a different dimension, it didn't go
up to the sky as other people had thought.
This Cartesian notion of a spirit as being quite distinct from the material universe still
predominates in the western world today.
But over 2,000 years ago actually, Aristotle presents a different view of life that was
remarkably prescient.
It was a scientific model of life.
Aristotle was a Greek philosopher and he was also a scientist, one of the first people
that you can call a natural scientist.
He did experiments on organisms, he wrote an enormous amount about the biology of lots
of different organisms and biological phenomena.
And what Aristotle suggested is that an object, every object, not just living objects, non-living
objects, living objects, everything, everything has two component parts.
And one is the material substance of the object and the other is the form taken by that substance.
So for example, we now know that, as I'll explain to you in a few moments, we now know
that all material substances have the same basic elements.
So we can look at a plastic bottle, we can look at a rock and we can look at a piece
of wood and we know that in essence, in their substance level, they are the same.
What makes them different is the form those substances take when the substances come
together.
So in Aristotle's mind, there wasn't a separate spirit substance, there was material, and
then there was the form that material took, which gave that material its properties.
Form derives from the word information in formation.
And so really what Aristotle was talking about, if he was in the modern world, he probably
would have talked about it in this way, is the information that is contained within a
substance is what gives that substance its properties.
And there is nothing else except the substance and the form or information that it contains.
Now to Aristotle, the soul of a living organism was a particular category of forms.
In other words, he thought that a living object was made up of a material substance, just
like non-living objects.
And what gave that object life was a particular kind of information that animated the organism.
This was very different than the notion of soul that his teacher Plato had.
Plato had the notion of souls being a spirit that left the body at the time of death.
But to Aristotle, the soul which just meant to him the principle of life, the soul to
Aristotle was the information contained in the living substance.
So when the living substance died, when there was no longer a life form there, in Aristotle's
mind the form didn't go anywhere because the form is dependent upon the material.
You only have a form if you have a material that can be formed.
And so that was Aristotle's view of living organisms, which is essentially the view that
modern biologists have in terms of looking at life.
Now today in the 21st century, we can analogize a living thing, in Aristotle's terms, to
a functional computer.
A computer is composed of two distinct features.
One is the hardware, the material substance, and the second is software and data.
The software and data are both kinds of information, and the software data information is stored
inside of the hardware.
The memory chips, which are storing the information, the information is stored there by groups
of atoms having different rotations.
That's one way to store information.
But in every case, the software is stored in the hardware by the form that microscopic
parts of the hardware take.
So you can see life in an analogous way, which is that the hardware of life is the organic
body, and the organic body is very complicated, but so is a computer chip.
And the software part of life is the information encoded in those organic molecules, in the
shapes those organic molecules take.
And this analogy is much stronger than it was 100 years ago, for example, because scientists
have created robots that behave just like dogs.
These are robots created by the Sony company in Japan.
The robots can see and they can be programmed to play soccer.
So the program to play soccer is not to take specific actions with their electronic legs,
but to have this notion of a goal.
So these robotic dogs are goal oriented towards getting the ball into the net of their opponent.
And if you watch these robots play soccer, nobody's telling them what to do on a moment
by moment basis.
They're working according to general rules.
But this is just like simple living things.
If you look under the microscope at single cell organisms, it's the same thing.
They're floating around and nobody is telling them what to do.
In fact, we don't think they have any form of consciousness themselves.
But there is a program inside of each of these cells, which is giving them instructions in
a way to make certain motions, to move in certain directions.
So a living thing has hardware, which is the organic substance of which it is made.
And it also has software, which is the information that is driving that living thing.
And that's the analogy that is very tight between modern computers and living things.
The paradoxical properties of life and computers are that software controls hardware.
If you have a computer without any software, it doesn't do anything.
But software is information.
It cannot exist in the absence of hardware.
So if you don't have a piece of hardware, there can't be any software.
And you might think, wow, I have the software stored in my head.
That's a great example of the software being stored in the hardware of your brain.
You always need a material substance, otherwise the software can't exist.
And hardware can't function in the absence of software.
So we have this going back and forth between hardware and software, both being dependent
upon each other to produce a functional computer.
And in the sense of life, both being dependent, the organic matter and the information that
we're going to talk a lot about in this course, both genetic information, other forms of information.
You need that information and the organic matter together to have an animated information
system.
It's actually a complex system of dynamic information processing that defines both
life and computers.
Now the implication of Aristotle's view is profound.
If the life essence exists within the organic matter rather than transcendent to it, which
is the way many people have always thought, then the life essence disappears when the
life disappears.
And we have a guinea pig that is a pet of my sons.
It's alive.
It clearly has a life essence.
And then when we went to South America, we ate guinea pig.
And this guinea pig is clearly not alive, but its life essence is non-existing.
It didn't go anywhere.
So the pre-scientific notions, a pre-scientific notion is that the living organism has organic
matter.
This is what many people believe, and that inorganic objects are inorganic by the very
fact that they are not living.
In other words, organic matter and inorganic matter were first defined as separate from
each other based on an operational definition.
This is alive, therefore it's organic matter.
This is dead, or it wasn't produced by a living thing, therefore it is inorganic.
But so the idea was that organic and inorganic were fundamentally different from each other.
This changed in 1780 when there was a revolution in understanding the nature of matter, and
this revolution came about due to the experiments of the French scientist Antoine Lavoisier.
Lavoisier essentially created the science of chemistry, which didn't exist before then.
Lavoisier showed that all forms of matter are made up of the same basic elements of
which there are less than a hundred in nature, and he called these different primary components
of matter elements.
Each element is an atom, and Lavoisier put forward the idea that all substances are created
by different combinations of the same small number of elements, and he created what became
the periodic table.
The periodic table is a way of looking at the relationships of elements to each other.
Now, Lavoisier showed experimentally that liquid and gas and solids are the same substance.
He was able to take hydrogen and oxygen gases, which are in the air right now, and he was
able to show that he could bring them together to produce water.
It was a pretty dramatic experiment, showing the essence of matter being the same in the
liquid water as it is in the oxygen and hydrogen in the air.
The British science popularizer, John Tyndall, I think said it best when looking at the nature
of organic material, the nature of living bodies, and Tyndall said, quote, the matter
of the animal body is that of inorganic nature.
There is no substance in the animal tissues, which is not primarily derived from the rocks,
the water, and the air.
Every portion of every animal body may be reduced to purely inorganic matter, which means that
the essence of organic matter is not different than the essence of inorganic matter.
Now, matter can take on forms at multiple levels.
We're not going to go below the atomic level, because this is a course about life, and the
below the atomic level doesn't matter in terms of understanding life.
Above the atomic level, the first level of information is at the molecule.
A molecule is defined as a group of two or more atoms that are locked together or bonded
in a particular configuration.
And the demonstration that the same elements can give rise to substances with very different
properties comes from comparing seltzer water to granular sugar.
The seltzer water and granular sugar both are composed entirely of the same three elements.
There is carbon, oxygen, and hydrogen, and both of them are carbon, oxygen, and hydrogen.
But the form that those elements come together in is different.
In seltzer water, there are two types of molecules.
There is water with the well-known H2O, where there's an oxygen atom bonded to two hydrogen
atoms, and the bubbles are produced by the carbon dioxide.
Carbon dioxide has a carbon in the middle bonded to two oxygen.
So all in all, there are only three types of elements.
The elements come together in two types of molecules, which give the gas and the water.
Now, if you look at sugar, granular sugar, it is also just made out of carbon and oxygen
and hydrogen, but they are attached to each other in a different way.
There's a more complex structure in sugar, and so you have sugar, which is a solid substance.
It's sweet.
It has calories, and you compare that to seltzer water, which is a liquid.
It's not sweet.
It has no calories.
Both have the same elements, but the elements are combined in very different forms to give
very different properties.
So this is the knowledge that we had of chemistry through Lavoisier and his pupils that followed
him, and the periodic table, which has a list of all the elements, and rows and columns
according to their fundamental properties.
We can look at the periodic table, and we can also take a living thing and decompose
it down to its primary elements.
And our bodies, and the bodies of all other living things, are 93% carbon, oxygen, and
hydrogen, just like the sugar.
There are a few additional elements, but if you add in some nitrogen, phosphorus, and
potassium, and sodium, that's 99% of the matter in our body.
All those elements together, that's it, if we decompose our body.
And there's a few other elements that are present in very small amounts.
The element carbon is a central component of organic molecules.
And I am now going to define an organic molecule for you.
An organic molecule is defined by the fact, originally defined by the fact that these
were the molecules that existed in living things.
Organic molecule is a complex molecule that has a carbon element as its main feature at
its core, and sugar is an organic molecule, but organic molecules can be very large.
And the reason that carbon is so important to an organic molecule is because of the particular
place in the periodic table that carbon lies.
Where it lies in the periodic table is such that it is the equivalent of this element
having four hands.
So it can make four different bonds.
And the reason that's important is that if you have a carbon backbone to a molecule,
the carbons can connect to each other.
They're using two hands for that.
And they also can connect up and down to other atoms, and you can get an enormous complexity
of combinations of these atoms together when you use carbon because it is so multi-dextrous.
And you can form very complicated molecules this way.
Now if you look inside of a living thing and you take all of the molecules inside of our
body and you separate them, you'll get five major categories of organic molecules that
are present in all living things.
The first category is called nucleic acid, and that contains DNA and RNA, which are very
similar to each other.
And DNA and RNA do the same thing.
They're both used to store and transmit genetic information.
They're very long molecules.
DNA, if you stretched out all the DNA in just one of your cells, it would go over three
feet long.
So they're very, very long molecules, and they contain information along the length of the
molecule.
The second category of organic molecules that are present in all living things are proteins.
And proteins are different than nucleic acids.
DNA in every organism always takes on the same structure.
What distinguishes one DNA molecule from each other, as we'll learn about in a few lectures,
is the particular chemical bases and the order in which they occur along the DNA molecule.
But once you come out and you zoom out, the DNA molecules always look the same in every
organism.
Proteins though can be very different from each other.
Proteins can form complex configurations.
Proteins are responsible for my hair.
My hair is just protein.
And the lens in my eye is also made out of protein.
Most of the surface of my skin is protein.
So proteins can take on many different forms.
They are composed of amino acids, and there are 21 different amino acids with different
chemical properties.
You can put these 21 amino acids together in a lot of different constructions.
And the different organization of amino acids and sequence of amino acid will give you a
very different protein.
So proteins are used by living entities to carry out most of the functions of life.
They're the ones that read the information in the DNA and then follow the orders and
go down the line doing all the other things a living organism does.
The third category of organic molecules are the fats.
The lipids and cholesterol are both fats.
And you may not like the intake of fats, so you may try to limit your intake of fats.
But actually fats are essential to the proper life of every cell in our body and every other
body.
Because it's the fats, the lipids and the cholesterol, that come together to form the
membrane structures of a cell.
The most important membrane structure is the membrane around the cell that defines the
cell separate from the outside environment.
That membrane structure is made mostly out of lipids, mostly out of the lipids that all
line up next to each other, but cholesterol is also important in maintaining this structure.
And throughout the cell there are other membranes internally that allow molecules or that drive
molecules in different directions inside of the cell.
The fourth category of organic molecule is the carbohydrate.
Carbohydrates are sugars and they are used for energy storage by the cell.
A carbohydrate that we know well is sucrose, it's just ordinary sugar.
You buy at the store, it's granular.
And sucrose is composed actually of two sub-components called glucose and fructose.
And sugars are always defined by ring structures.
Carbons are around a ring, there are sometimes six carbons, sometimes five carbons around
a ring, and it's this structure that allows energy storage to take place.
So sugars contain energy and they store energy for the many uses that the cell needs it for.
The fifth category is a kind of broad all-encompassing category, which is small metabolites.
This category includes a diversity of little molecules that can't be put into any of the
other categories.
It includes the vitamins, vitamin C, folic acid, and includes a number of other small
molecules that are essential for life, usually essential in very, very tiny quantities to
allow a living cell to function.
And they typically are involved as transfer agents.
They will transfer information or energy from one part of the cell to another.
So with this information, with the understanding of the categories of organic molecules, insight
into the computer analogy between life and hardware software, we can bring this all together
now and think of a conceptualization of life, which is essentially the scientific conceptualization
of life.
So a living organism, all living organisms this will hold for, a living organism is alive
because it is bringing in energy in the form of food.
Animals always have to get energy from other living things, but plants can also get energy
from sunlight.
In any case, the energy comes into the organism and the organism has a system for processing
and storing that energy, just like a battery would do.
So there's a subsystem in the cell whose purpose is to hold on to the energy and to keep it
there for when the cell needs it.
Now what the cell does with the energy, most importantly, is it uses the energy to process
information.
It gets information from the genes, the genetic information present in the DNA is one source
of information.
It also gets information from the external environment.
It brings those two forms of information together, it uses the energy to allow it to do its processing,
its calculations, and it brings all this energy together and if the organism is doing its
job well, the purpose of this information processing is an active response which allows
the organism to find more food.
And this goes around and around, that basically is the scientific definition of life.
An organism is something that can use energy effectively and it uses energy effectively
by carrying out dynamic information processing.
Now organisms have other functions as well, they can grow, they can develop, and they
can reproduce, but those phenomena are not essential for defining a living thing.
I'm not growing, I'm not developing, I'm not reproducing, but I think I am alive.
So it really is the ability to take an energy and process information.
If you withhold an energy source from the organism, the organism will die because it
cannot process information without an energy source.
So to molecular biologists, the essential features of life are not a mystery anymore.
Of course there are lots of unknowns, but scientists don't generally consider this to
be a mystery.
So in the next lecture, we're going to go a step beyond this general view of life that
I've presented to you today, and we're going to look specifically at human beings.
Human beings are alive, but they're alive in a different way than the tree that my wife
is standing next to, or microorganisms, and we all know this.
Human life is special.
Most people are able to recognize this without being able to verbalize what makes a human
being special and different from other kinds of living things.
And this is what we're going to explore in the next lecture.
