Welcome. In the last lecture, we discussed the science of life and explored all of the
advances that have occurred over the last several hundred years in understanding life
at the chemical and physical level. We saw that life could be explained in an Aristotelian
like way in terms of matter and information and that the matter was specialized organic
molecules that carried information and were able to utilize energy in order to look at
the information present in the genome and in the environment in order to carry out an
active response. So that was what we talked about in the last lecture and we owe a great
debt to Aristotle for his giving us down through the ages this notion of hardware and software
or as Aristotle referred to it as matter and form. Today, we're going to go a step
beyond life in the general sense and consider what it means to be a human being, a special
kind of life. Now, Aristotle's second major contribution to an understanding of biology
and life was the realization that life actually has different meanings. In Aristotle's mind,
there were three different tiers of life. There was vegetative life, sentient life,
and human life and they were distinct from each other, although they built on top of each other.
Vegetative life is defined by the ability to carry out metabolism, which we talked a little bit
about previously, by the ability to use energy productively, to grow, to develop, to be aware,
be aware in a chemical sense, not a conscious sense of the environment. And vegetative life,
of course, is all around us. It's called vegetative because it refers to grass and plants. But in
fact, every living thing is vegetative in the sense that it is carrying out metabolism and
undergoing life processes in an unconscious way. And so Aristotle understood that. He saw that
every living thing had what he called a vegetative soul. And below our necks, our bodies are pretty
much running themselves in terms of our heart beating and our blood flowing. But above the
vegetative tier of life, Aristotle realized that animals were different from just being alive,
like plants were alive. Animals were sentient, which means that they could see their environment,
they could emote in response to the situations in which they ended up, and they could act very
quickly in response to environmental signals. And this is a great video clip in which a mouse
is stuck on top of the wall, and it's afraid to come down. Another mouse goes right up and over,
but the one mouse is afraid. Plants are never afraid. Only animals can be afraid, be fearful,
feel pain. And those were the aspects of what Aristotle saw as the second tier soul, the sentient
or animal soul. Now, Aristotle thought that human beings represented a third tier of life,
or soul. Aristotle used the word soul and life principle interchangeably. They were the same
thing to him. And just like every other philosopher and scientist before Darwin's time, Aristotle
assumed that human beings were special. We weren't just animals. We were individual forms of life
that could undergo self-reflection, could think about future consequences of our actions. It's a
great metaphor to look at the great sculpture, The Thinker, by Rodin, to get a sense of what
makes a human being different than an animal. This third tier of life, and that's the way that
Aristotle saw it. Now, all living things start out in a vegetative form. Here, I have a plant cell,
and you can see that even simple plant cells are actually not motionless. The ancient Greeks, of
course, couldn't see the motion going on inside of a cell. They hadn't invented the microscope,
but even individual cells undergo motion, and individual plant cells are going to grow and
divide to give rise to this field of rice that you see here. In Aristotle's mind, they start out
vegetative, they end up vegetative. That's the only tier of life that they ever reach. Animals,
all animals, develop from embryos. And the embryo initially has one cell, and it divides
into two, four, and eight cells. And at the very beginning of every animal's life, the animal
embryo can be imagined as being vegetative. It's just a bunch of cells. There's no consciousness
present in the embryo, and it is undergoing the same kinds of activities in terms of metabolism
and use of energy that a plant cell is undergoing. So really, they're not different from each other.
And if Aristotle was alive, I certainly think that's what he would say. But when animal development
proceeds, the embryo can develop into a fetus and then into an animal like this mouse here. And
Aristotle's notion was that everything starts out vegetative. Some things never get past the
vegetative state. But animals, at some point during development, on top of the vegetative form
of life, they have a sentient life that emerges on top. So you have to have the vegetative life
before you can generate a sentient form of life. And that's Aristotle's notion of how it would occur
for animal development. Now, when it comes to human beings, we also start out as embryos
just like mice. In fact, at the very earliest stages of embryogenesis, the embryos of a
mouse and of a human are indistinguishable from each other. They're both very similarly
sized cells, and neither of them is conscious. Both of them are vegetative in the sense that
Aristotle described. And they actually look pretty much alike for a while during development.
The fetus is going to develop into a mouse. A mouse has an animal, tear of life, but it's not human.
On the other hand, the human embryo will develop into a human fetus that will develop into a human
being. And like so many other philosophers, Aristotle assumed that the human being that came
out of that fetus was as different from an animal as an animal is from a plant. Now, we have a much
better understanding today of what it is that causes both the second and third levels of life or soul,
as Aristotle referred to it. And you cannot, you cannot have sentience. You cannot have the ability
to think and be able to respond rapidly to situations unless you have a brain. And it's not
just enough to have a brain. You have to have a brain in which the neurons in the inside the brain
are connected to each other in a massive network that we don't understand yet in terms of how it
really works, but we're gaining understanding. But it's not just enough to have living brain cells.
You have to, on top of the living brain cells, there have to be connections that are formed and all
of these connections form and work together to give you a thinking animal or a thinking human
being. So you start out with a vegetative state when the brain is just alive. In the early fetus,
there are brain cells there, they're alive, but the brain cells are not connected to each other.
And then during development, connections are made between the brain cells and you get to the point
where you can think and carry out the activities that are unique to animals and then further on to
human beings. Now at the end of life, in some cases, people's bodies, people's bodies fail and
their brains fail, but they're kept on life support systems. So in fact, their brain cells can remain
alive even though they're disconnected from each other. And this is where the term vegetative
state came from, to describe patients in this kind of situation. And it also points out very,
very strongly the fact that here you have a human body that is alive in the general sense that we
talked about in the last lecture, but the human being is no longer there. The person has died
and it's just a vegetative form of life that exists, not these higher tiers of life. So really,
this Aristotelian view gives us a lot of insight into the kind of ambiguous ways in which we use
the term life and why the term human life in particular is not a very useful term because
you can have human life and not have a human being. So as I said, Aristotle thought that
human beings were as different from animals as animals were from plants and all philosophers
and everybody else thought that until Darwin published his monumental work in the middle of
the 19th century. And the notion was that there was a superior being and that superior being
independently created each species on the earth. And so we have all these different species and
they're not connected to each other. This was the way that people thought because no one could
conceive of a way in which these different species could be connected to each other. It looked like
they were all independently created. And nobody could conceive of anything that could explain
the relationship between animals and plants and humans until Charles Darwin published his book,
The Origin of Species, in 1859. Now what Darwin's work suggested very strongly is that if you go
back millions of years, you reach a point where there's a primate ancestor who is not a human
being. And yet, according to Darwin, at every point along those millions of years that a new
generation was born, the child was not very different from its mother and father. And yet
over thousands and thousands of generations, you end up with a species of human beings that is
very different from where you started thousands of generations previous. Now the other interesting
aspect of Darwin's ideas is that if you go back in time, you'll come to a common ancestor
to both the human being and the chimpanzee. And so that even though the modern day chimpanzee
and human beings are clearly different from each other, Darwin showed that they were connected,
that there was a continuum. Now there are people who are willing to accept the facts of evolution,
the facts of evolution are, that a physical process has occurred very slowly, very gradually,
in which a non-human primate has evolved into a human being. Some would like to believe that
there is something special about human beings still. And so the suggestion has been made that,
yes, there's a physical continuity between the non-human primate and the human being,
but there's an ontological discontinuity. And the idea here is that you have animals,
and the animals are evolving until at a specific point in time you jump from animal to human.
That's the idea, to preserve the specialness of human beings at the same time not denying the
reality of evolution. Now the problem with this idea, it can't be proven or disproven by scientists,
we can't go back and talk to the individuals that lived back then before and after the supposed
ontological discontinuity. But the problem with this idea is it means that an animal mother had
to have given birth to a human child. So an animal mother, a human child, again as I said,
we can't test this hypothesis. But most biologists don't think this is the way in which evolution
took place. Most biologists agree with Charles Darwin that there was no first human being.
And this is a very disturbing hypothesis. It's analogous to the color spectrum,
where you can start out at the green frequency, and you move over to the blue frequency,
and there's no cutoff, there's no point at which you turn from green to blue. There's a continuum
from green to blue. So even though you can recognize the two extremes as being clearly different
from each other, there's no point in the middle that you can describe non-arbitrally as being the
cutoff between non-human and human. So that's where we stand ever since Darwin in terms of
understanding our evolution as a species. It occurred gradually, it occurred continuously.
There was no first human being. And we can use this way of looking at biology in another parallel
discussion, which is to understand how human life, individual human lives, come into existence.
So we all begin from an embryo, which has a single cell. That single cell divides into two,
four, eight, and so on. And it slowly develops into a fetus, and the fetus slowly develops
into a baby. No one would suggest that a live-born baby that's breathing on its own and
feeding on its own is anything other than a human being. But there's a lot of dispute about whether,
if you go all the way back to the single cell embryo, whether that should be considered a human
being as well. And the main logic that people use to make that claim is that if you look along
this line from the single cell to a baby, there's no moment in time where there's a substantial
difference between the organism that existed first and then the organism which came next.
There's a continuum. And when you have a continuum, each moment follows the previous one and is
imperceptibly different from the previous one. And so there's a continuum from a single celled
embryo all the way out to a complete human being. And people say, therefore, the single cell embryo
must be a human being. And that single cell became a human being at the moment of fertilization.
Now, the idea is that fertilization is actually a momentary event. That's the idea that lots of
people have. But in fact, we know that's not true. And that fertilization is a process that occurs
over a period of as long as 24 hours. And it's worthwhile to look at this process in a bit
of detail to understand the biology behind the emergence of a new human being. The first
thing that happens is the sperm bind to an outer wall that surrounds the egg. And this outer wall
is called the zona pollucida. It's not alive. It doesn't metabolize. It's just basically an inert
material that surrounds the egg proper. And the first thing that sperm have to do, of course,
sperm are not conscious. We're being anthropomorphic when we talk about what sperm have to do.
But the first thing that sperm do prior to getting into the egg itself is they have to
barrel through the zona pollucida and into this space that is between the zona pollucida and the
plasma membrane of the egg itself. And then fusion occurs between one particular sperm
and the egg. So the process of fertilization occurs over an extended period of time. And
there's no specific point actually during fertilization when you can say that the entity
of sperm and egg together are substantially different than they were a moment earlier.
Because of this continuous process, it means that we can't non-arbitrarily identify a point
when a human being begins. And so it's useful to look at a human life, an individual human life,
in the same way that we look at the human species as a whole. And just as the human species
evolved from a non-human to a human form in a continuous way, an individual human being
can evolve in a continuous way from a vegetative form of life. Now, the second problem that we have
with the calling the embryo human life is the fact that human embryos are not distinguishable.
They're not distinguishable visually from mouse embryos, and they're not distinguishable
in the way they function and the proteins they have from chimpanzee embryos. And yet
one kind of embryo that is created from a human sperm and egg will develop into a human being.
The other kind of embryo will develop into a chimpanzee, but there's a continuum. Again,
a continuum in the developmental process just like there's a continuum in the evolutionary process.
And this brings us to the fact that the term human life is an ambiguous term. Here we have
three different video clips showing an early human embryo with a couple of cells. The second video
clip shows cells, human cells isolated in the laboratory. And the third clip shows a beating
human heart tissue that was created out of embryonic stem cells. Now, all three of these videos show
human life. These are living organisms, but they're not human beings. And so it points out the
importance of distinguishing between something that is a human being from just being human life.
Not all human life forms are human beings. So what is it that distinguishes chimps and humans
from each other? It turns out that we have now sequenced the chimpanzee genome. We'll talk more
about this in a couple of lectures. And when we compare the DNA sequence of a chimpanzee to a human
being, there's a remarkable 99% identity. There's only one out of every 100 base units on average
that is different between a chimp and a human. And somewhere in those differences, those small
differences, somewhere is the code for what makes a human being with a human brain that produces a
human mind. I'd like to present to you the following thought experiment. Again, to give you some sense
of how difficult it is to define a human being as separate from both vegetative life and animal
life. Let's imagine that you start out with two chimpanzee embryos produced by two chimpanzees.
And so if these embryos were allowed to develop naturally, each one of them would develop into a
chimpanzee baby. But we're going to take these two embryos. Remember, this is a thought experiment.
And we're going to treat them in two different ways. The first embryo, we're going to genetically
engineer with the genes, with the DNA differences that are responsible for the development of a human
brain. And we're not going to touch anything else in this embryo. So we have a chimpanzee embryo.
It has been engineered just at those spots, which are responsible for developing human brain.
We don't know what those spots are right now, but we will know that within a decade or two.
And what comes out of this genetically engineered embryo is something that thinks like a human
being, but looks like a chimpanzee. It's a chimpanzee with a human brain. This is obviously
a contrived situation, but I want you to imagine that this really could happen.
Now, the second embryo, we're going to engineer in a different way. We're going to engineer just
the sites in the DNA of this embryo that are responsible for the appearance of the individual
that is born. And so we're going to engineer those sites that cause the difference between
chimpanzee and human face and eyes and skin and hair and all of that. But otherwise, we're going
to leave the embryo alone. And so what comes out of this is a mutant chimp. It's a mutant chimp
because it's otherwise a chimpanzee, except for the fact that it happens to look like a human
being. And so the question then becomes, which of these two individuals, if either, is a human
being? Are both human beings, are neither human beings? And there's no answer to this question.
Intellectually, we associate human beingness with our minds and our ability to self-reflect.
And so intellectually, rationally, we would take the creature that looks like a chimpanzee,
but thinks like a human, and we would say that's a human being because it has a human mind.
But actually, emotionally, and we'll talk more about this later in the course,
emotionally, we are attracted to the baby on the bottom because it looks like a human being.
And so even though appearance is really superficial, instinctively, we look at this,
we see a human face, and instinctively, we respond to it as if it is a human being.
So in the end, the definition of a human being is really in the eyes of the beholder,
and whether you consider a human embryo, a newborn baby, and even a chimpanzee,
some people think should have the same rights in terms of freedom to live as human beings.
And you can see this chimp that I've taken a picture of with a little smirk on his face.
It gives you a sense that there's a lot going on inside that head.
Now, this is not just all theoretical and hypothetical philosophizing.
This is really quite important to understand the boundary between human beings and non-human beings
because modern biotechnology is mounting that boundary, is breaking it down,
and it's breaking down in two different ways. One is genetically and the other is cellularly.
And this is a picture of a mouse that has been created that actually contains a human chromosome.
The arrow points to a little green spot in this picture. All of the blue things in the picture
are mouse chromosomes, and the green spot is a human chromosome that has been engineered into
this mouse. The purpose of this experiment was to better understand Down syndrome, which is caused
by an extra copy of chromosome 21. We'll talk about that in a few lectures. But we see now
that we can put in one human chromosome, two human chromosomes. There's no limit to how many
chromosomes, human chromosomes you can put it, put into an animal cell, and we have to ask,
at what point do we stop? At what point do we say, no, this is the boundary. We don't want to go
past here. We're too close to human beingness. The second kind of experiment that's pushing the
envelope is putting human cells into mice, living human cells, and not just any old human cells,
but human cells that are neurons, brain cells. And in the picture here, you can see these
neurons that are green colored. The green color is tagging human neurons inside of a mouse brain.
Those cells were put into the developing mouse fetus in such a way that these cells became part
of the mouse brain. And so the mouse is actually doing its thinking and it's emoting with these
human cells. And again, there's no limit to how far we can go. Of course, a mouse head is not very
big. We don't think that a mouse head could ever create or contain a brain that's large enough
to represent a human being. And the last idea I want to present to you, again, is something that
scientists are thinking about doing, which is using large animals like pigs to grow human organs.
And there are experiments now to be able to put human cells into an embryo, a pig embryo,
that's been modified in such a way so that the pig, instead of developing a pig heart,
it actually uses those human cells to develop a human heart and not just any old human heart,
but let's say you have a patient who has heart disease needs to have a heart transplant. Well,
you would take that patient's cells and put them into this pig embryo. The pig would develop a heart,
which could then be transplanted into the patient and it would be his own heart. Most people don't
have a problem with that kind of technology, but it can go further than that. We could produce a pig
with a human arm, for example, to give an arm to a veteran who has lost his arm in war.
There are reasons you'd want to do this, but this makes people uncomfortable and it comes back to the
fact that we see this human extremity on the pig and we think of it as a human being, even though
it is only superficial. We're going to go forward and look at the differences
that actually exist inside of animals and human beings and are responsible for an embryo developing
into a human being or into an animal and the responsibility lies within the genes and in
the next several lectures we'll be talking about genes, both from an abstract point of view
on to an actual material sense when we look at the DNA that contains the genetic information.
