Welcome back. In the last lecture we looked at the science of what distinguishes human
beings from other kinds of living organisms and we took a particular look at chimpanzees
and human beings and what distinguishes them from each other. We briefly touched upon the
role that genes play in the process of development and the difference in development between
chimp embryos and human embryos. And today is going to be the first of several lectures
on the gene, on the gene itself. Today's lecture is going to be focused on the gene as an abstract
entity as imagined by Mendel and in the coming lectures we'll talk about the gene in terms
of its material substance DNA. But before we get to the Mendelian view of genes and genetics,
I want to go back 10,000 years when the human species gained the ability to control the breeding
and genetics of many different species other than human beings. The control of other species to produce
special crops and domesticated animals was based on some very specific general principles of
heredity that people began to understand at least 10,000 years ago. The first principle is that every
living organism can be cataloged or categorized in a particular species group. So we look at
organisms intuitively, instinctively, and we say that's a crocodile or that's an iguana or a python.
Each time we look at an organism there is the sense that this organism belongs to a particular
species that we can identify by certain species characteristics. And each species has different
characteristics that define that species as distinguishable from all other species. Some
species are very different from each other like the octopus and the crocodile and the python,
for example. Other species look more similar to each other, but we know that they're different
species because of two other characteristics of the species. The second characteristic besides the
fact that species look different from each other is that individuals within a species can breed with
each other and generally individuals from two different species cannot breed with each other.
This of course only refers to sexual reproduction, which is the way most animals and plants carry
out reproduction. So this is an important definition that allows us to determine whether
two animals, even if they look alike, are members of the same species if they are able to breed with
each other. And when they do breed with each other, they produce offspring that are members of the same
species that they are. So for example, this is a baboon mother cradling her baby and her baby is a
baboon. It can't be anything else. So baboons reproduce baboons, octopus reproduces octopus,
and every other species is the same. This is an example of a flightless cormorant on the
Galapagos Islands and you can see the baby bird is like the mother. Babies, children in general,
tend to look like their parents and that was clearly in the minds of people in many different parts
of the world 10,000 years ago. Now, in addition to the fact that species have characteristics which
distinguish them from each other, there's also variation within the species. And this is an
example of several different kinds of roses, which are very distinct from each other. They have
different colors. Their petals are different shapes. The swirl that describes the flower is a
different shape in these different breeds of roses. But in addition to these individual differences
among the roses, we can recognize all of these flowers as being in the same species of rose. So
there's individual variation which sits on top of species wide characteristics. Now, this idea,
the idea that children tend to look like their parents, both for plants and for animals, was
exploited by people starting 10,000 years ago in several parts of the world. People were able to
take certain forms of plants. And this is one example. It's called teosinte. It's a weed that
grows in Mexico naturally. And the people living in Mexico 10,000 years ago were able to breed
variant forms of this weed into corn or maize that is now all over the world. And this allowed
people to greatly increase the food supply that they had from a particular plot of land. And it
sustained much larger populations than previous to it. And now all over the world, agriculture
sustains human life. In Indonesia, rice is grown across the country. France grows a number of
different grains. And Vietnam now has corn growing, which originated in Mexico. In Sweden,
there's canola, which is a plant crop that gives us vegetable oil that originated in Canada. This
was a turning point in the story of the of the human species. And it was really based upon the
ability of human beings to understand some basic biological principles about the idea of genes,
although they didn't call them genes back then, but the idea that there were hereditary principles
inside individual organisms that were transmitted from parent to child, children tended to look
like their like their parents. There wasn't just plants. It was animals as well. The domesticated
cow that we know well today was modified out of a wild species. And it is friendly. It doesn't try
to kill you produces milk, which has actually been changed over the years unconsciously by breeders.
So the milk is actually more nutritious to human beings. And sheep are another example of a species
that has been bred to produce a very large coat of wool. The animal that this domesticated sheep
came from did not have a woolly coat like this. This is something that human beings produced
by taking advantage of genetic principles. And people also took advantage of modifying animals
so that they could be a source of labor to plant crops in the field. And it's not just for those
utilitarian purposes that people use genetics. Genetics has also been used to create things
of aesthetic value, which also have monetary value in our modern economy. This is an example of
tulips, different kinds of tulips that are grown in Holland. And they fetch a very large sum of
money. And it's just the aesthetic quality of the tulip, which is based on the genes of the tulip
that allow it to fetch money for the people who breed this, which is all based on genetics going
back to genetics. So how does inheritance work? Well, until the last 150 years or so, nobody knew.
The idea that people had when it came to human beings as an example is that somehow the reproductive
fluids of the woman and the man were blended together during the process of reproduction.
And the reproductive fluids represented blood particles. The blood was known to flow through
the body. And the idea was that somehow the blood transmitted all of the ways in which we are unique
into the reproductive fluids. And the reproductive fluids come together to form an embryo until
150 years ago. Nobody had ever seen an embryo, but they knew that a fetus developed inside of a
woman's womb and the fetus developed into a child if the two parents are human beings.
Now, the idea of blending inheritance sometimes works. If you breed red rows with white rows,
you will get a pink rose, which is a blend of red and white. So sometimes blending seem to explain
inheritance in certain situations, but very often it didn't explain what was going on.
This is a picture of a mother dog with a couple of her puppies, and her puppies look different
from each other. If it was simply a matter of blending together the blood of the two parents,
we would expect all the offspring to be identical to each other, and they're not identical to each
other. And nobody could understand why. It's not just that they're not identical to each other.
It seemed to people that traits skipped generations. And so you would have a cat which had black
and white fur. It had one kitten that looked like it, although the kitten had different eyes
than the mother cat, and then it had a second kitten that looked totally different from the
first kitten. And the second kitten was expressing a trait that was present actually not in the
mother or the father in this particular cat family, but in the grandparents. And so people
had this notion that sometimes traits could quote skip a generation. We now understand the
fallacy of this kind of thought, but that wasn't until Mendel explained how it could happen in a
particular way through his laws of genetics. Now Mendel, as most people know, was a monk. He practiced
in what is now Slovakia. And what a lot of people don't know is that Mendel also trained
as a scientist. In particular, he had deep training as a physicist and a mathematician.
And this was not like most biologists of his day. But because he had this training in the
heart sciences, he could think about doing experiments in a much more systematic way
than they had been done previously. So he had a garden where he famously grew peas,
but he also grew other species of plants. And then he counted the plants that came out of
his breeding experiments and tried to understand the principles of inheritance, how different
properties were inherited differently. And it was very important that he was able to
quantitate, to count his results, to count the number of plants, because this gave him the
ability to see patterns in the data. And the first thing that he did, and this was very important
for genetic studies, is that two individuals of a species actually differ in many different
characteristics. And Mendel realized that it was too difficult to try to understand all the
differences at the same time. And so what he did first is he focused on a single trait. And in
this example, which is actually not one that Mendel used, but I will use, in this example,
you create a variety of roses that breeds true for red. And what that means is you have reached
the stage, you keep on breeding red roses together. And in the beginning, you might get different
colors out besides red. But eventually you get to a point after breeding many generations,
where the only thing that comes out of the red rose variety are red roses. And you do the same
thing for white roses. And you keep on breeding plants together until all they produce is white
roses. When you breed two individuals together from a species that are genetically the same,
that's called an incross by geneticists. So the first thing that Mendel did before starting his
experiments was to generate these inbred lines through incrossing. They're like identical
twins, all of the plants that are red or the plants that are white. And so he just focused
on a single trait. Now when you take a red rose and breed it to a white rose, that's called an
outcross, because you have two different varieties that have been inbred. And now you're crossing
them together. An outcross gives you a hybrid. And when Mendel did this, or if Mendel had done
this particular cross, he would have discovered that all of the offspring from this cross are pink.
Just pink flowers, no red flowers, no white flowers, no other color. Just pink came out of this.
Now I want to give you a term that's very important to geneticists. This is one of
several terms that are important to learn today. And the term is phenotype. Phenotype means what
the organism looks like, the characteristic or the trait of the organism that distinguishes
that organism from other organisms in your experimental protocol. So in this particular
example, there is a red flower phenotype, there's a white flower phenotype, and there's a pink
flower phenotype. Just looking at the organism, looking at the properties or characteristics
of that organism. Now in that example of roses, we actually did get blending of the red and white
rose to give pink rose as a hybrid offspring. But hybrids are not always blends of two parents.
Even hybrids based on color are not always blends. If you take a standard blue peacock,
and it's been in bread, and you outcross it to an albino peacock, which is white,
all of the male offspring are blue. So you don't get any kind of blending in this particular
example, even though you're doing the same kind of cross between two separate varieties that have
been in bread for a difference in a particular trait. Now the next step in the process of
understanding genetics that Mendel took was an intercross between two hybrids.
So an intercross is when you take two organisms, two individuals that have themselves been crossed
from two different varieties, and you breed them together. And when this is done with pink roses,
there is a very curious result that you get. You find red roses are members of the offspring
pool. So the red flower color didn't disappear. It was hiding somehow in the pink flowers,
and you get it again when you breed the two pink flowers together. Not only that, you also get
the white roses as well when you breed together the pink flowers. And Mendel realized that he
could do the same kind of experiment over and over and get the same results. And in this particular
situation, when he was breeding together, if you breed together two pink roses, you breed enough
roses from that cross, you'll find that approximately a quarter of them are red, a quarter of them are
white, and half them are pink. So this led Mendel to the basic concept of the gene. And the first
principle that he developed was the idea that each organism, every individual organism, plant,
animal, or human has two copies of each gene. And the gene is a particular unit of heredity
that determines the expression of a particular trait. And so in Mendel's mind, there was a gene
for flower color, and there are two copies of this gene in every individual plant that makes
flowers. Now the second point that Mendel established is that these genes, the flower color gene,
any other gene, the genes can occur in different forms that are called alleles. And alleles have
different ways of interacting with each other. And so if we look at the red, pink, and white
rose experiment, Mendel predicted that the red rose had two alleles that were the same allele,
and that's called a homozygote if the two copies of the gene are the same. The white rose also,
he predicted, was a homozygote for a different allele, for the white allele. And the pink roses
were heterozygous, which means that they have two different alleles. If we call the allele
causing red color to be big R, and the allele causing the white color to be little R, then
we see that the pink roses have one big R allele and one little R allele. Now unfortunately,
geneticists who work with different model organisms in their studies use a different
nomenclature to show the genotype. The genotype is the particular two copies of the gene that an
organism has. Some geneticists have the two alleles separated with a slash, and some geneticists
have them together. It's the same meaning in both cases. It's showing you a representation
of what the two copies of a gene in this particular organism look like. Now once you have this
information, once you realize that there are two copies of a gene and you realize that the two
copies can be the same or different, you begin to understand the results that were obtained in the
flower color experiment. In particular, you want to look at the hybrid. You want to see
what the color of that rose is because that flower should have one copy of each allele,
a big R and a small R. Now in the case of flower color, the big R and the little R together
give you a blended color of pink. In the situation with the peacocks, the big R and the little R
gives you a blue male offspring, which looks like one parent, not the other. And depending on what
the hybrid looks like, what characteristic is expressed by the hybrid, that tells you how the
alleles interact with each other, whether one is dominant or recessive or semi-dominant. In the
case of the pink rose, you have two different alleles. A hybrid does not look like either
of the parents. And so the big R and the little R allele are called semi-dominant because the
hybrid, which has a heterozygous genotype, has a pink phenotype to use all the words in the
terminology we're learning about today. With the peacock, you get a different result. The hybrid,
which has a big R and a little R, and the letters, names of genes don't mean anything. They're just
a shorthand for scientists to be able to communicate with each other. If you look at the peacock,
the hybrid looks like the parent that is homozygous for the big R. The hybrid has a little R, but
it's not expressed. And this situation is called dominance. The big R is dominant to the little
R. Now, what that means exactly in molecular terms, people didn't really understand for another
hundred years. So we're just talking about the concept. You have two different alleles in a
hybrid. What does the hybrid look like? Does it look like one parent or the other or neither?
If it looks like one parent, that allele is dominant. If it looks like neither parent,
both alleles are semi-dominant. Now, the next kind of cross that you can do in this
analysis, and Mendel did crosses of this kind, is called a back cross. A back cross is a breeding
experiment in which you take a heterozygous hybrid. In this case, it's a pink rose with big R and
little R alleles. You cross it to one of the parents. For the purposes of this experiment,
you would cross it to the white flower parent. And what happens when you do a cross of this kind
is you find that 50% of the offspring are pink and other 50% of the offspring are white. And that
can be best explained by hypothesizing that the big R and the little R, those are the two alleles
at this particular gene that determines flower color, that they are segregating apart and only
one or the other is actually going into each offspring. And they're going in randomly, one
or the other, into each offspring. And that's why you're getting a 50-50 offspring ratio.
Because the pink roses are receiving the big R with the little R from the homozygous parent,
and the white roses are receiving the little R from the pink flower
together with a little R from the other parent. So Mendel called this equal segregation.
And what he meant by this is during the process of sexual reproduction, each parent has starts
with two copies of the gene, and each parent has one copy randomly selected to give to each
offspring. The other parent does the same thing. Each parent gives one copy of the gene,
and that means the offspring get two, just like every other member of the species.
Now, a back cross can show you what are called hidden heterozygotes. For example,
if you have a blue peacock and you don't know anything about its heritage, that peacock could
be homozygous for the dominant allele, or it could be a hybrid, because both of those kinds of animals
look the same. And the way you uncover the question as to whether or not it's a hybrid
is by breeding it back to the parent that is homozygous for the recessive allele,
which is albino in this case. And this particular bird had offspring, 50% of whom were albino,
and 50% of whom were blue. If you get that kind of result, it tells you that the blue bird in
question here is actually a hidden heterozygot. Now, let's go through the whole two generation
cross that Mendel did. He started with a purebred red rose variety and a purebred white rose variety.
He bred those two to each other, and in the first generation of breeding,
all of the offspring were pink, every one of them. And then if you take these two pink flowered plants
and you breed them to each other, what happens during the process of breeding is the two alleles
separate from each other, and then they combine with one allele from the other parent. And to figure
out what the probability of each flower color should be in this experiment, you multiply together
the probabilities of receiving each allele from each parent. So for example, the parent on the
bottom left gives a probability of 50% that it's going to give a big R to its offspring,
and the same thing holds for the hybrid on top. It's the same kind of plant. There's a 50% chance
that it will give a big R allele to its offspring. And so to determine the number of red roses that
you expect to see, you multiply the probabilities of getting a big R from one parent with a big R
from the other. That's one half times one half is one quarter. And it's easy to see the kind of
probabilities that you'll get in a simple cross of this kind by building what's called a punent square
where you see the four different genotypes that can be derived in this cross. And in this case,
you're going to see 25% are big R, big R, red, 25% little R, little R, which is white. And there's
actually two classes of pink. They're both big R over little R obtained in different ways from
the two parents. If you did this experiment with the peacock, you would get a different result
because the heterozygote is going to look like the big R parent because big R in the peacock
is dominant to little R. And so in the punent square, you'd find that three parts of the square
are going to be blue and only one part is going to be albino. And that three to one ratio was predicted
by Mendel's work. And it always comes across approximately like this. Whenever you do an
experiment with a gene looking at a gene that has a dominant and recessive allele and where you've
inbred the two parental varieties. Now, this can be taken to the level of human beings, meaning
that you can look at the way in which human beings transmit genetics, transmit characteristics to
their children. And it follows the same principles that Mendel enunciated for plants. And with human
beings, we use a particular kind of notation, which is called a pedigree diagram. And in a pedigree
diagram, the boxes represent males. The circles represent females. And if the box or circle is
filled in, it means that that individual expresses the particular trait that you're interested in. And
if the box or circle is empty, it means that individual doesn't express the trait. So here's
an example of a case where one parent carries a dominant allele. I'm calling it big D over an
allele, which is recessive, which I'm calling plus. Very often, the most common allele at a gene
is called the wild type, which is signified with a plus symbol. So the mother in this particular
pedigree is plus plus. She has the two recessive alleles. And so you would predict that we wouldn't
call it a cross in people. You would predict that a family formed by these two parents, 50% of the
individuals should get the big D allele from their father and 50% won't. And so 50% of the
offspring, whether they're male or female, it doesn't matter, should express the trait. And
indeed, that's what is found with particular dominant traits that are known to occur in human
beings. If you have a recessive trait, and an example here that I've used is the trait
cystic fibrosis. Cystic fibrosis, if you have a cystic fibrosis allele and a wild type or plus
allele, then you express no abnormal characteristics. But if a mother and a father
have children and they both have one cystic fibrosis allele, then based on the Mendelian
three to one ratio, a quarter of their children, unfortunately, will be born with the disease
cystic fibrosis because they'll be homozygous for the CF allele. So today, we talked about
genes from an abstract point of view, trying to understand how Mendel came to his conclusions
about the way that genes are transmitted from parent to child. We discussed the terms alleles.
Alleles are very important to geneticists. The idea that a genotype is a description of the
two alleles that exist. A phenotype is the way in which those two alleles produce a characteristic.
So a phenotype is what you see. A genotype is what is inside of the parents. Now, so far,
all of what we've talked about is very simple, straightforward Mendelian genetics. What we're
going to find out in the next lecture is, in fact, that most traits are more complicated than this.
And most traits are influenced by multiple genes and environmental
influences, as well as noise and chaos in the background. And that's the subject for the next lecture.
