Welcome back. In the last lecture, we explored the laws of heredity that Mendel formulated
in the 19th century, and Mendel's laws were a huge advance over the human understanding
of genetics that had been very, very vague for the previous 9,000 years. In fact, Mendel's laws
were such an advance that no other scientist really understood what he was talking about
until his laws were rediscovered in 1900, long after he was dead, unfortunately.
Mendel's laws can explain a number of rare diseases and the occurrence of these diseases,
like sickle cell anemone, cystic fibrosis, and Tasex, and other diseases like this,
which are given to children, herded by children, from two parents or just carriers of the mutant
allele. And these diseases are recessive diseases. The normal wild type allele is dominant to the
recessive either sickle cell or cystic fibrosis allele, which means that two heterozygous parents
will transmit the disease to 25% of their children on average. There are other rare diseases,
like Huntington's disease and Lou Gehring's disease, which are dominant relative to the
wild type allele. And this means that individuals who have the mutation for Huntington's disease,
they can have it on just one of the two copies of their genes, and it will cause them to get
the disease. The disease occurs later in life, so very often people with these dominant diseases
will have children before they know they even have the disease. But because the disease is dominant,
Huntington's disease will be transmitted from one parent to 50% of his or her offspring. Now,
these are rare diseases, Huntington's, sickle cell, cystic fibrosis. There are thousands of other
diseases which occur very infrequently. They're not the kinds of traits that distinguish one
individual from another in a normal non-disease population. In fact, most common variability
is not Mendelian. It's important to know what that means exactly. We're going to talk about it today.
Not Mendelian means simply that there's not a simple ratio of offspring born
with the characteristics that are present in each of the parents. You don't get a one-to-one
or a three-to-one ratio of the kind we discussed for the different kinds of crosses that Mendel did.
In fact, what happens is you get not ratios at all very often when you have differences in
appearance and physiology and personality. We're going to talk about all of these things later on.
In terms of something like hair color or height, there's a continuum. There are not just one,
two, or three different heights that a person can be. The continuum means that it isn't a
simple Mendelian calculation to figure out how many children will be born of a certain height
rather than another height. Whenever you have a trait where there's a continuum of possible
phenotypes, the trait is called a quantitative trait. Examples of a quantitative trait are
height, blood pressure, cholesterol levels, weight, and right away you see something here
with these quantitative traits is that none of these traits are purely genetic. There are other
factors that come into play with the expression of these traits, and that's going to be the topic
of the lecture today. Now, before we can speak about the complexities of quantitative traits,
it's important to first see how Mendel dealt with two traits expressed by the same two parents.
In other words, two parents who differ not just in one gene but in two genes. And I'm going to
give you this example to show how you can use Mendel's laws and an understanding of probability
to figure out how many offspring will have each combination of traits. So if we look at this
pedigree here, and let's imagine that the father who's filled in with black has a particular trait
that is dominant to the more dull color in the pedigree, and what will happen is he will transmit
that trait down to half of his offspring. So you can see in this particular pedigree, it's an idealized
pedigree, because of course 50% probability doesn't always give you exactly 50-50 in a small
family of this kind. But in this idealized pedigree, you see that there are four offspring with the
black filling in, representing the fact that they've received the gene responsible for that
from father. There's a 50-50 ratio, and that's because of the equal segregation of alleles
from the father to his children. Now, another trait you can follow is going to be called,
I'm going to call it just blue-green, just for the sake of simplicity. And once again,
we have a father who carries the blue trait, and he transmits the blue trait to half of his
offspring. Again, because it's a simple trait, and there is an equal segregation of the two alleles
to the offspring, and the blue is dominant over the green, and you get this kind of result.
Now, what happens if the two parents have both traits? The traits are controlled by different
genes, and you have a father who is heterozygous at the gene which controls the black trait,
and also at the gene which controls the blue trait. Will Mendel provide a way to understand
how these traits get inherited relative to each other? And Mendel came up with the idea,
he called it independent assortment. And what that means is when the alleles of the black
forming trait segregate, it's 50-50, that's independent of the segregation of alleles for
the blue forming trait, which is also 50-50. And so it means that to get a black allele at one gene
and a blue allele at another gene, the way you figure out that probability is by multiplying
them together. And so even though both black and blue are dominant in and of themselves,
to find out the number that are going to carry both of those dominant alleles, you would multiply
one half by one half and you would get one quarter. And if you look down at this pedigree here,
you'll see that one quarter approximately have both black and blue as opposed to the
other combinations. Now, independent assortment is based on the idea that you have these two
different genes and they are unlinked to each other. In other words, they are passing from parent
to offspring independently. The probabilities are independent, that's why you can multiply the
probabilities together. Now, in fact, as we will learn in the next lecture, genes are carried on
chromosomes and there are many genes on each chromosome. And if two genes are on the same
chromosome, they're not going to assort independently of each other. Depending on how far apart they
are, there's going to be a different probability. There's going to be a more likely chance
that alleles on the same chromosome in a parent are going to be given together to a child. But
we'll talk about that in the next lecture. This idea that sometimes genes don't assort independently,
that sometimes they're linked to each other, provides the key for actually determining
the chromosomal locations of diseases. And this is a very important component of this course.
So, there are three different categories of interacting influences on a phenotype. And I'm
going to use the example of roses again to give you a sense of how these different attributes
will connect and interact with each other. One of the categories is the fact that some trades
are controlled not by one gene, but by many genes. Height, which we'll talk about in a moment in more
detail, is something that is controlled by many genes. And it's a single trait because a person
is one height or another, but the genetic basis for that height is determined by many genes
interacting with each other, as opposed to the single gene model that Mendel presented.
The second kind of category of interactions that will alter the expression of a trait are
environmental. And environmental interactions include the air we breathe, the food we eat,
whether we get enough food to eat, as well as our interactions with people. And when we talk about
mental disease, we'll see that the environment in which somebody grows up refers a lot to the
interactions that that person had with parents or foster parents or particular behavioral situations.
The third category of influences on a complex trait is called noise. And basically this means
it's not genetic, it's not environmental, it's just the random movements of particles that
occur in every biological creature. There's a certain amount of randomness that is there
that will alter the expression of a trait. So identical twins who have exactly the same genes
usually have pretty much the same height, but never exactly the same height. And the difference
between the heights of the two members of an identical twin pair who grow up in the same
exact environment is almost always caused by developmental noise, just the random behavior
of physical particles during biological development. Now in this particular example of flowers,
the differences are polygenic, meaning that there really isn't just one gene that controls flower
color as we talked about in the in the previous lecture. There are actually many genes that control
flower color. Mendel was able to do his experiments and to formulate his laws of heredity because he
erased all the variation in every other gene except one. But if you just look at the variety of
flower colors that you can have, it's clear that one gene can explain all of this variety.
And we now understand the biochemical principle for the expression of different color traits. Each
one of these colors is expressed because of the presence of a particular pigment. The pigment is
a particular chemical that absorbs and reflects light at different frequencies. And the red pigment
is different than the yellow pigment and there's also an orange pigment. And the complexity
of color genetics can be seen in the way in which pigments are created inside the flower.
In fact, the pigment is a molecule, a chemical, that is created through a whole series of chemical
reactions and each chemical reaction is controlled by the product of a different gene. So in fact,
there are 15 different genes which will affect yellow color inside of a flower and there are an
equal number of genes, if not more, that will determine whether or not and how red a flower
is. And the same thing goes for all of the other colors of flowers that one can observe. In fact,
there are hundreds of genes that affect the production of these different color pigments to
give you the great variety, millions of colors that a flower can assume. So flower color, the great
variety of flower colors do almost completely to the fact that there are many genes involved
in the process. And the process is pretty straightforward. Each color is due to the
presence of a different pigment and each pigment is created through the action of multiple genes
and you mix different pigments together, just like you mix paint together and you can get a variety
of different colors. Now, the second influencing feature on trait expression that causes traits
not to be expressed as strictly Mendelian fashion is the environment in places where people don't
get enough to eat. They're malnourished. It's going to have a huge effect on many, many different
traits of that person. That person won't grow as tall as he or she has the potential to grow from
his or her genes. That person will have a different physiology. All of the characteristics of that
person will be different if that person doesn't have enough to eat. And then on the other hand,
in advanced societies like our own, there are many people who eat much more than they need to eat
in order to sustain their lives. And this again is the environment, various aspects of the environment.
It's the milieu of people that we are all in contact with as well as our media,
as well as many other aspects of the environment that affect people's eating habits and will
cause a person in an indirect way to eat much more than they should. And people who overeat
can also lose weight if they put their mind to it. But the genetic background of the person
is extremely important. We now know as to whether or not a person is able to maintain
a weight that's considered healthy or not. So the environment can have a large influence. It
can also influence cholesterol levels in the blood and blood pressure. All of these different
physiological characteristics, their quantitative traits, they can be moved up and down. They have
a huge genetic influence, but there's also the environment that modulates how much the genes
will determine the outcome in any individual person. Now the third category of influence on
trait expression is background noise and some people call it chaotic fluctuations.
And a good way of seeing the effect of this particular influence is to look at mice that
are genetically identical to each other. These are like identical twins. They've been produced
by inbreeding over hundreds of generations and so they are genetically identical to each other.
We know that. And you can produce hundreds or thousands of these mice. You can grow them up
in exactly the same environment with exactly the same food of exactly the same temperature,
exactly the same number of hours of light and dark. And then you can weigh them. And what happens
is, well there's a difference between male and female because male and female are genetically
not identical. The males tend to weigh more than the females in this species, but even among the
males who are genetically equivalent to each other, you're still going to see this variation
in weight and the variation will grow as the animals get older. And so this is what scientists
would call background noise. There's something that we can't measure, that we can't attribute to
the environment or to the genes that causes this trait and other traits as well to be different
from one individual to another. Now what scientists can do is they don't know for sure exactly what
the weight or the physiological properties of a single animal will be, but they do know the average.
And so if you take a group of mice and you measure their weight in one month and you'll get a
particular average and you do the same experiment a year later, you should get the same average.
That tells you that the genes are the same and that it really is the noise factor that's influencing
individual differences from each other. Now height is a good trait to measure in people
because you can measure it objectively, unlike many other traits. You just measure how tall
somebody is. It's a quantitative trait, which means it varies continuously over a spectrum
of heights and in an environment like the one that we live in, most people have proper nutrition
and if you have proper nutrition, then you reach the height that you are genetically capable of
reaching. And if you look at people in any population, you will see that there's a
distribution of heights. This is a distribution curve that you can see here and the height of each
of the columns in this curve represents the proportion of the population that has that
particular height. And you'll see that there is a mean height and then as you get further away
from the mean, either taller or shorter, there are fewer and fewer people who have that particular
height. And so for a particular population, you'll find a particular distribution. Now in fact,
there are populations around the world that differ from each other somewhat genetically,
but if you take a particular population that is healthy and you measure the height of that
population from one generation to the next, you'll get the same kind of distribution. Now this
is a quantitative trait that is mostly due to genetic influences. And the reason that we know
this is that we can look at the distribution, the variation in height in a general population,
and we can look at the distribution in siblings, brothers of each other or sisters. It's always
important to just look at males versus female because the male versus female difference is
pretty big in many different forms of trait expression. So if you just look at brothers,
right away, you'll see that the two brothers are more likely to be similar in height than two
random people from a population, which suggests that it's the genes of their parents that are
distinct and separate from the population as a whole. There are only two parents in one family,
in the population as a whole, there are millions of parents. And so you get a smaller distribution
suggesting that genes are at work. And then if you go to the extreme and look at identical
twins, so these are two people born from the same original embryo. They are genetically equivalent.
They're not equivalent to each other in a phenotypic sense. We know that even though they are called
identical twins, but genetically they are identical to each other. And if you look at large numbers
of identical twin pairs and look at how the height varies between the two members of the pair,
you'll see a very narrow distribution. So on the one hand, the very narrow distribution says
two people have the same genes are going to have very similar height. On the other hand,
it says, but there's a difference. There's a difference between these two individuals who
have the same genes. Just like we saw with the mice, the difference is probably due to
developmental noise because there's an assumption that the two identical twins have grown up
in the same environment. So the environmental factors on height tend to be negative. And what
that means is that if you have a sufficient balanced nutrition, you're going to reach the height
that your genes allow you to reach approximately. If you have a negative environment, if you don't
get enough nutrition, then that's going to push down your height. You can't get taller by eating
more than a proper nutrition. So it's an example of environment having a negative effect,
but not a positive effect as long as you get a proper nutrition. And the height is also,
as we said, highly, genetically influenced. And we can get a sense of how genes can produce
the kind of distribution that we see, this quantitative distribution. It looks like what
scientists call a bell curve. And that's what happens when you have multiple genes which
add together to give you a particular trait. When there are two or three or more genes
that are interacting with each other, and you have two parents that are heterozygous for all
of these genes, you can look at a probability curve. The chances that you'll get one extreme
are low, and the chances that you'll get the other extreme are low, but they do happen.
And another example which is parallel to the height example is skin color. Skin color like height
is controlled by many genes, multiple, we don't know exactly how many, and skin color even more
so than height is very much genetically determined. And so it's interesting to see that certain
couples have children that are apparently of different races. This particular couple had
twins, they were not identical twins, they were fraternal twins, and one of these twins had blonde
hair, blue eyes, light skin, the other twin looked like she came from much more of an African
heritage, and you might ask well how can these be twins? How can they be siblings of each other
and be of different races? And the answer is because these two individuals or at least one of them
was heterozygous for a number of the genes that are involved in pigment production in the skin,
and there was a certain probability, small probability, that two siblings would be born
with very different distributions of alleles from the father in this particular case. It also
points out the fact that race is a pretty meaningless concept because in this situation
you have a child who looks white, another child who looks black, and they have exactly an identical
heritage. All parents, grandparents all the way back is identical, and so you have them as being
identical and society sees them as being different. When genes interact with the environment and with
noise is when you get a bell curve like continuous distribution. If you just had six or seven genes
involved in a trait you should get these absolute spots on a particular graph where people would
end up with a particular height or skin color or whatever the trait is, but you don't get this
discontinuous distribution. What you get is emerging of these columns with each other because
in each case there's noise and there might be environmental differences that cause some variants
and so it ends up looking like a bell curve when you put together the fact that there are
many genes involved and that the individual is being affected perhaps by the environment
but always by noise you get this continuous curve. This is what fooled people for the longest time
and probably why Mendel's laws were not discovered until they were because there were so many traits
that looked like they were continuous and not non-continuous which is the way that Mendel
presented his laws and the way we see genes actually being inherited in a non-continuous
fashion. It's when you put all of these different factors together that you get this continuity
which hides the underlying intact genes that are involved in this expression.
I want to talk about two other features of complexity involved in the expression of some
traits and one of these is deafness. Now deafness can be a very simple trait. A deaf particular
mutation, a particular alteration in certain genes will cause a recessive allele that prevents
a person from hearing and so if two parents are both carriers of that same recessive allele
then 25 percent of their children will be deaf but in fact what happens very often is that two
deaf people will get together and marry and have children and their children won't be deaf.
How is this possible? The answer is through the idea of genetic heterogeneity. Genetic
heterogeneity means that the same trait or phenotype of deafness in this case is being
caused by different genes in different families and so when two people come together and one person
might be homozygous for a mutation causing deafness in gene A the other person might be deaf
because she's homozygous for a mutation causing deafness in gene B and both of those mutations
are recessive and when they come together to have a child the child is a double heterozygote.
The child has one normal allele of gene A, one normal allele of gene B and the child has full
hearing and that's how we explain this observation through the idea of genetic heterogeneity.
Cancer is an extremely heterogeneous example as well. Different kinds of cancers are caused by
mutations or variations in different genes and finally there's the example I want to show you
of breast cancer and there are certain mutations in certain genes that cause a higher probability,
a very high probability of a woman getting breast cancer but it's not 100% complete so any woman
who carries this particular allele mutant allele called BRCA1 if you carry this it's dominant
but it's incompletely penetrant and that means that you have this allele then you will have a 70
to 80% chance that you will come down with breast cancer at some point in in your life but there's
also a 30% chance you won't get breast cancer so it's a dominant allele with incomplete penetrance
is is how we describe it. So most of the traits that distinguish one person from another are due
to an interaction of genetic environmental factors and noise and until recently we couldn't really
tease apart all of these different factors from each other and it was one of the reasons that
Mendel's work remained entirely unappreciated during the 19th century. At the beginning of the 20th
century however scientists began to see the function of chromosomes that existed in the middle
of the cell every cell and they began to see chromosomes segregating apart from each other
visually under the microscope and it was at that point when they could connect the abstract idea
of a Mendelian gene with the very material visual site of chromosomes undergoing segregation
according to the same rules and so once again Aristotle plays a role in going from the form,
the information which is what Mendel uncovered to the actual material substance of the chromosome
which is the topic of the next lecture.
