Welcome back.
In earlier lectures of this course, we talked about genes and genetic transmission through
heredity in abstract terms.
And two lectures ago, we explored the work of Mendel, who considered genes to be abstract
entities that were transmitted from parent to child in all species.
And then in the last lecture that was given, we looked at chromosomes and found out how
scientists during the beginning of the 20th century associated abstract genes with chromosomes.
Chromosomes and genes seem to be connected to each other because they're both transmitted
similarly.
And it's useful now to think about chromosomes as being the hardware of the genetic system.
And the genes, the genes that Mendel was following without knowing what they were, the genes are
the software, the genes are encoded in the chromosomes.
And that's what scientists knew during the first quarter of the 20th century.
Now that you know that the genes are actually encoded in the chromosomes, the next question
is how does it work?
How do chromosomes actually encode information?
If we look at a chromosome chemically, we see that it contains all of the different components
of organic molecules that are known to be in cells.
But there are two main categories of organic molecules in the chromosome.
One is DNA, and the other is protein.
There's about an equal amount of DNA and protein in isolated chromosomal material.
In addition, there are tiny amounts of fats and tiny amounts of sugars and also small molecules.
And RNA, which is a molecule that's very similar to DNA, and we'll talk more about in the next
lecture.
So here we had this chromosome mass, chemists had this chromosome mass in the 1920s and 1930s.
The first question they wanted to ask was, which category of molecule that's present
in this chromosomal material actually contains the genetic code?
Actually is what contains the information of heredity that's going to be passed from
parent to child?
And to find out the answer to this, scientists developed an assay, which was actually one
of the first purposeful genetic engineering experiments ever done, although they didn't
see it in this way.
And the way this experiment works, the way the assay works, and again the assay was developed
to try to figure out what component of the chromosomes contained the genetic information.
The way the assay works is it's based on a cell, a bacterial cell, that normally infects
mice and when this cell infects mice, the mice die.
It's a very serious, very quick infection, the mice always die.
But there was a mutant cell that scientists derived out of a culture of these lethal cells
and this mutant cell could survive perfectly well in a culture dish, in a laboratory.
When this cell, the mutant cell was put in some mice, it didn't kill the mice.
So it was missing something that allowed the cell to kill the mice.
And what scientists figured out they could do is they could actually take the original
cell, grind it up so that it was no longer living, it was just the material substance
ground up and in a test tube from the original cell which had the ability to infect and kill
mice.
Now this material by itself doesn't do anything to the mice, you put the material into the
mice, there are no cells there, cells don't come into existence from this material alone.
So we have three different kinds of conditions that we've used on animals in this assay.
First is the original cells infect the mice, kill the mice.
The second is the ground up substance of those original cells.
The substance is not alive, you can put it into a mouse, it does not kill the mouse.
And the third is the mutant form of the cell which lives but is unable to kill the mouse.
Now what scientists realized during their experimentation is that if they took this material, this non-living
ground up material that they had obtained from the original bacterial cells and they
added it to the mutant cells, they then can restore the lethality, restore the toxic potential
of the cells that didn't have it before, the mutant cells.
And so they can put this material into these mutant cells, they put these cells into the
mouse and now they've restored the cell's ability to kill.
In other words, the cells now have the trait again that they had lost.
So even though it's just bacteria, we can still consider it in the terms we were talking
about with Mendel.
There was an absent, a trait was absent, the trait was put back in with this material
substance.
So now you have an assay to figure out what it is in the chromosomes that causes this
trait to be transferred between one kind of cell and another kind of cell that doesn't
have it.
And the scientists called this genetic transformation, it's no different than what we today would
call genetic engineering.
And so what they did now is they took the material substance they had from the active
cells and they took it apart chemically into the different chemical components that were
present.
And as I said, mostly DNA or protein, they separated the DNA and the protein and they
separated all the other categories where there wasn't very much material.
And then they took the separated material and added it to the cells that were deficient
to see if they could bring in the trait which each of these categories of organic material.
And the only one that worked was the DNA.
The DNA which they had isolated had a peculiar property in which it was very stringy and
very viscous and we'll see why that's the case in a few moments.
And they could take this DNA, add it to purified DNA, add it to the deficient cells and the
cells became transformed with this new genetic property.
So this localized the genetic factor to the DNA.
Now they did one more experiment because they really wanted to make sure it wasn't a contaminant
in their DNA preparation and this is actually one of the first uses of biotechnology.
The difference between biotechnology and chemistry originally is that biotechnologists actually
use enzymes and other products of living cells for purposes of doing experiments.
And some cells make an enzyme called DNAs.
And what DNAs does is it breaks DNA down into its component parts.
And when they treat it their DNA with DNAs, the treated material no longer had the capacity
to alter the cells to genetically transform the cells.
So this gave them further information.
It was not just that the DNA had the genetic information, but if you broke the DNA apart
into smaller parts, the same substance is still there, it no longer had the information
to change the cells.
So that told us, this is in the 1930s, that DNA was the genetic material.
It took a while for people to believe that because DNA seemed kind of boring for a reason
that I'm going to tell you in a moment.
People, scientists in the 20s and 30s thought that protein must have the hereditary information
what's called proteins are more complicated than DNA.
But if you look at DNA, it might not be complicated chemically, we'll look at that in a moment.
But if you open a bacterial cell very carefully, you can actually watch the DNA flow out of
the cell and what you see is an incredibly long molecule.
In fact, we now know that each chromosome has a single DNA molecule.
It's compacted into a very small form, but it's a single DNA molecule in this compact
form, which has a very long length and is very, very narrow.
So that's what we know about DNA.
And you'll see why that's the case in a moment as the discovery was made as to how DNA carries
out the activities that it has.
Now there are two main features of the genetic information that scientists wanted to understand.
The first was that the genetic material had to have a recipe for developing the organism.
So that's one thing that genes do.
They actually provide the recipe for a single embryo cell, single human embryo cell, with
just 46 DNA molecules.
Those 46 DNA molecules tell the cell how to develop into a human body.
So that's one thing that genes do, we want to figure out how they do that.
And the second thing that they do quite separately from carrying out their function of development,
the second thing they do is they replicate themselves so that an organism can reproduce.
So the DNA, the information in the DNA, somehow has to copy itself with extremely high fidelity.
And these are two separate aspects of the problem that scientists needed to understand
and didn't understand at all until 1953, when a paper by James Watson and Francis Crick
was published in Nature, the preeminent journal, the preeminent scientific journal of the time.
And the title of the paper was Molecular Structure of Neuclatic Assets.
It was only one page long and it was probably the most important scientific paper ever published,
at least during the 20th century, because it revealed answers to both of the problems
of how genetic information is used as a recipe and how genetic information is replicated.
And it all came out of the structure that Watson and Crick perceived for the DNA molecule.
And I use the word perceived because the data wasn't quite there for them to actually figure
out what the structure was. They needed a lot of intuition to be able to come up with the structure.
Now there are a variety of ways of looking at molecules and there are all ways to help us
understand the essence of the molecule. The molecule itself is made up of atoms and you can't see
atoms and atoms are quantum entities, which means they don't actually exist as hard balls as they
were thought to originally. And when you look at the molecule DNA, you can look at the wire and
stick structure that Watson and Crick built to show their colleagues the structure. You can look
at a picture of DNA that just has the atoms as dots connected by lines and the lines represent
bonds between the atoms. Or you can look at what's called a space filling model, where you're actually
looking at the space that is filled by the energy levels, the electron orbitals of all of the atoms.
It's easiest to see the importance of the structure of DNA by looking at an example,
a metaphorical view that is less busy than space filling. We're just looking at the bare atoms as
points and lines connecting them as chemical bonds. And if you look at this picture, you see immediately
the iconic double helix structure that was at the core of what Watson and Crick found.
There are two what are called backbones along the sides of the DNA molecule and in the middle
are bases and there are four kinds of bases called ATC and G as shorthand for their chemical names.
And the DNA molecule can be extremely long. It can have hundreds of millions of base pairs
and it's like a ladder going up with base pairs on top of each other having the ATC
or G in the way that I will show you in a moment. And then along the sides going up is a repeating
backbone. And what makes this ladder different than a normal ladder is that you're taking this
ladder which can as I said be any length and you're twisting it around each other and that's
what forms the double helix. And that twisting is really important for the chemical stability
of this molecule because a lot of the atoms in the molecule, the atoms throughout the backbone and
the atoms that bind the backbone to the bases, the ATC and G, all of those atoms are bound with
very very strong covalent bonds. But in the middle where bases come together the bonds are
hydrogen bonds. Hydrogen bonds are very flimsy and if you just have a hydrogen bond, a hydrogen bond
is just an electrical slight attraction. A couple of hydrogen bonds are not going to hold
two atoms together. Hydrogen bonds are what holds water in a liquid state. Now in the DNA molecule
in the middle, bases are attached to each other with either two or three hydrogen bonds. And the
most important aspect of this structure is what Watson and Crick discovered is that there are
only specific pairs of bases that can come together properly. That means that the sequence of bases on
one chain, one chain is one backbone with its bases sticking out. The sequence of bases on
along that backbone determines, absolutely determines what the sequence must be on the
other backbone. And the cell takes advantage of this redundancy in information to replicate
its DNA. And this is how it works. At the time that the cell wants to undergo DNA replication,
which is the core thing that it has to do in order to become two cells out of one, the cell has
enzymes that has a mechanism for separating the two strands of DNA, the backbone with the bases,
from each other. And now there are these empty hydrogen receptors on the bases and the cell
will actually go in and try to find a base that is complementary to each of these bases. It'll try
if the top base is a T, it's trying to find something complementary to T. If you put a G
in there, it's not complementary. The hydrogen bonds are not aligned properly. And if you put
an A in, it works perfectly. This is a perfect alignment. The cell recognizes that alignment
and it will put an A next to a T. And it will do the same thing for the other three bases.
T's always are paired with A. The G is always paired with C. And it goes the other way as well.
So if you have a C, the cell's going to pair it with a G. And if you have an A, the cell's going
to pair it with a T. And this strategy is what the cell is, what every single living cell in the
world uses to replicate its DNA. And I like to show you that in a more metaphorical way, without
actually using the chemical structures, but just using letters to represent the bases. And this
shows you how replication goes about. So here is a representation of a DNA molecule. And I'm
representing each base by a letter. And there are two sides. There are two strands. And of course,
in reality, these are wound around each other. But to make it easier, we're just going to see them
as letters touching each other. When the cell gets ready to replicate its DNA, it pulls the strands
apart. And then the cell can read each of the strands and create a new strand that is complementary
to the original strand. Now, the new strand has the same information as the original strand. It's
just a complementary. It's like a mirror image. In other words, it's not identical to the original
strand. But it's the same information in the sense that you can use the information in the
strand you just made to go back and make the original strand. So there's a redundancy in the
information that allows the cell to take its DNA and replicate its DNA. And we know now that the
replication process, the process by which it puts these letters along new DNA molecules,
the fidelity of that process is 99.99999 percent accurate. Mistakes are extremely rare. So even
though all these little bases are really submicroscopic, they're atomic, they're perfectly
suited for allowing the cell to copy its information in a very effective way. Now, the reason this
information is copied so effectively is because it is digital. And it's very important to understand
what digital information is and how it differs from analog information. As a great example of a
digital system of information, we can look at the English alphabet. And I have a sentence that is,
the sky is blue. And if I read that sentence to you, you have an image in your mind of a blue sky.
That particular sentence is digital information that I'm providing to you. I can write the
sentence down. It has letters. It has four words and two of the words have three letters. One has
two letters. The word blue has four letters. And if I asked you how big is the word blue or how long
is the word blue, you're not going to give me the answer in inches. You're going to give me the answer
in the number of letters that it has. That's digital information. Digital, all digital information
has basic building blocks. And you can't go below the basic building block size.
Or the information is meaningless. There's no information there. And so when we're talking
about the English language, the basic building block is the letter. And the letter, there are 26
letters in the English alphabet. And there are punctuation marks as well. And there's a small
number of values that each letter in a word can take on. And that is a fundamental component
of the digital system. The digital information has fundamental units that you can't go beyond.
And each fundamental unit can take on one of a few values for itself. So the difference between
copying digital information and analog information can be seen by just looking at a painting.
This is an actual painting that sits in a museum, painted by an artist. And imagine that you want
to make a copy of it. Well, in fact, it's impossible to make an exact copy of this painting,
because there's an infinite amount of information in the painting. There's no
fundamental unit of matter unless you get down to the level of protons and electrons,
and they're fuzzy. So it's impossible to make an exact copy of a painting which has analog
information. And if you made a color copy of this, on a color copying machine, and then copied that
and copied that, and you did this several times, you would lose information each time. And the
painting would become fuzzy. Now, however, if you took that painting and you digitized it,
by digitizing it, you do lose the sum of the original information. But now that you want to
make digital copies, all of the digital copies are perfect, because the original painting is
defined now in your digital file by a specific number of units, a specific number of pixels
that have a specific value. And you can copy those easily from one painting to another,
just using the technology of modern computers. Now, let's go back to the genes and DNA.
Genes are files of digital information that are represented in the specific
ordering or sequence of base letters along the DNA molecule. So we can read genes just
like we read books. You look along the DNA molecule and you will see A, C, G, T, C, G, T.
There are only four kinds of letters. So it's simpler than the English half a bit. And they can
come in any order. There's no restriction on the order in which they can come. And if you have a
line of DNA letters, that line of letters totally defines its complementary line. And the cell takes
advantage of the fact that DNA molecules always come in a double helix to be able to replicate
itself. Another way of thinking about genes is, and the fact that they are actually just information,
they're not a material substance, is to make the analogy with music songs that you download from
the internet. If you want to go to an internet store and purchase some music and you pay a dollar
and you get the music onto your computer, what is it exactly that you're purchasing?
It is not any material substance that you've obtained and your computer doesn't have any
more material substance than it did before, but you're willing to pay a dollar for something.
What you're paying a dollar for actually is the information. The music is encoded. It's encoded
digitally in information. And when you buy the music, it comes into your computer. And in your
memory, in the memory of your computer, some atoms change their position. So there's not any material
that's added. It's just that the atoms change their position. The atoms change the information
that they contain so that when you click on the music file and you put in your headphones,
you can listen to the music because the music is being stored digitally in the structure that
atoms inside your computer have taken. And genes are essentially the same way. Genes are particular
structures of DNA, particular segments of DNA with a particular sequence of letters.
But it's just the information. And this gives rise to a interesting fact, which is that if I ask you
where did your DNA come from, you'll say to me probably, well, the DNA came from my mother and
from my father. And that's actually an incorrect answer. You didn't get any DNA from your father
in particular. What you got from your father are genes. You got information from your father,
but no DNA. If you remember the slide on which I showed you the DNA replication,
where does the new DNA come from? Well, the new DNA comes from the food that you eat or
that your mother ate while she was pregnant with you. So the DNA comes from cows and lettuce and
those are where the fundamental components that build DNA come from. And especially when you're
talking about your father, your father only put 23 molecules of DNA into a single cell,
the single cell embryo, that gave rise to the trillions of cells in your body. And so your
father's DNA is essentially zero. It's gone. It's probably in a cell that was taken off your skin
a long time ago. All the DNA in your body comes from somewhere else, not your father. And that's
not to say that your genes don't come from your father. Your genes do come from your father
and your mother. But all you're getting is the information, not the DNA. And in fact, we can see
ourselves in a history all the way back for three and a half billion years. That's as long as the
DNA information has been traveling in a continuous line before it got into our bodies. The materials
never preserved. It's just the information that is preserved. Now there's something very interesting
about this situation that I just told you, because it really, with modern technology, we can do a
thought experiment which changes our ideas about what it means to be a mother and a father. And
this is the thought experiment. And we're practically able to do this, not with humans yet, but
certainly with more simple cells. Let's say that a man and woman wanted to have a baby together,
but they weren't on the same planet. This is a science fiction scenario. So let's say the woman
was on Mars and the man was on a moon around Jupiter, and they fell in love over the internet,
the galaxy wide internet, and they decided they want to have a baby. They don't actually have to
get together to have the baby. The DNA sequence of the man can be read by a computer. The DNA
sequence of the woman can be read by a computer. And then the computer can bring together particular
alleles from the two parents inside the computer, because it's digital information from the parents
that brings the digital information together to bring the sequence together of a possible child.
And then that sequence that the computer has generated can be turned into actual DNA
that can then be placed into a proper environment, a proper cytoplasm such that a child could be born.
Now, the question is, who are the parents of this hypothetical child? The answer is,
it's the woman and the man who went through this long process who never met each other,
who never came into physical contact with each other or with the child. The child still has
the genes from that man and woman, because the genes are information, they're not material
substance. And it's very important to keep this view of genes in mind as we go through this course.
So today, we looked at how DNA holds information that can be replicated to reproduce life.
And the other function of DNA that I mentioned today was the fact that DNA holds the recipe
for building an organism. And in the next lecture, we're going to explore that recipe,
how the digital code in DNA is transformed into the animated analog nature of a living cell.
