Welcome. In the last lecture, we looked at the basic molecular biology of the cell, knowing
that the cell is the basic unit of life. And we went through the process by which the digital
code within the DNA is expressed through a process known as gene expression into messenger
RNA and how the messenger RNA codes for proteins and how all of the genes acting together give
rise to a large interacting set of proteins that give rise to life. Now, the question
that was left unanswered last time was how do molecular biologists know this? How do we
figure out the processes that take place inside of a living cell and inside of a living body
ultimately as well? And the answer is through a technology which has come to be known as
biotechnology. Biotechnology really is a tool chest of many different tools, biochemical,
physical tools that scientists use to decipher the intricacies of living things. Now, a lot
of biotechnology is actually based on the use of products and substrates and things that
the organisms, living organisms themselves produce. Organisms produce enzymes and biotechnologists
have figured out to use those enzymes in their own test tubes to be able to carry out sophisticated
analyses. And the first kind of biotechnology I'm going to talk about, because it gives you a good
sense of how rapidly technology is evolving in this field, the first kind of technology is DNA
sequencing. DNA sequencing is our means, a technology or a process to decipher the sequence
of bases within a particular DNA molecule. And now, of course, in 1953, Watson Crick discovered the
double helix structure of DNA. And it was known at that point that there were DNA sequences because
DNA sequences were base pairs lined up next to each other, but nobody knew what any particular
DNA sequence was. It wasn't possible back then. In fact, it wasn't possible until the 1970s to
actually look at the details. We understood the principles, but we didn't really have a detailed
understanding what any DNA sequence was and how DNA sequences encoded different proteins and other
components of the cell. It was in 1973 that a first short piece of DNA was sequenced, which means
it the sequence of that short piece of DNA was read. And that was an experiment that took seven
years for a Harvard PhD thesis student. And at the end of her seven years, she was able to read
the letters in a particular region of a bacterial chromosome. And she read 63 letters. That's what
she got out of her seven year PhD thesis. Now, advances occurred pretty quickly after that point.
And a much faster way of looking at DNA sequence, of reading a DNA sequence,
was invented in 1977 by Sanger. And it took advantage of one of the enzymes that cells have,
that all cells have, called DNA polymerase. And it also took advantage of another natural phenomenon
known as hybridization. We talked last time about the fact that a DNA has a double helix and that
certain bases align with other bases. A and T align together, C and G align together. And the
hydrogen bonds between any two bases is rather weak. But if you can get a whole row of bases
lined up that are complementary to each other, there are enough hydrogen bonds there that add up
so that the two strands of DNA can stick together. And what Sanger did, starting in 1977,
is he created a short piece of DNA in a test tube. And that short piece of DNA was complementary to
whatever region of DNA he was interested in sequencing. It was complementary to the beginning.
And these short pieces of DNA were allowed to base pair with DNA sequences that he was interested
in reading. And this is very important because these short pieces of DNA will hybridize, the
hybridization means the short piece of DNA will bind through base pairing very specifically
to a DNA strand. And then DNA polymerase, which is an enzyme that the cell uses to replicate
its DNA, DNA polymerase will recognize this short strand and it will go down the strand of DNA,
incorporating base by base that is complementary to the bases along the sequence that you're
interested in. Now that by itself is not going to give you a DNA sequence. There was one more
factor that Sanger put into the into the situation. And that is he spiked the reaction mixture with
a little bit of T or A or C or G that was defective so that when the enzyme incorporated one of these
defective T's opposite an A, for example, it couldn't go any further. Now there was only a little bit
of defective T. Most of the T's were okay. And so during the process of the DNA polymerase going
along the strand, every time it hit an A and put a defective T in, it would stop. But there were
other strands in the solution that would go further and some would stop at the next T,
others would stop at the next T. And in this way, he could get a whole series of strands that were
of different lengths according to where the base T happened to be present. And then he could take
this whole mixture and he could run it out on a electrophoresis gel. Electrophoresis gel will
separate molecules according to their size. And he used a particular kind of electrophoresis gel
that could separate molecules that differed in size by one base. And he had four different lanes,
one for each of the bases that's present in the DNA sequence. And in each of these lanes
was a reaction that had a defective form of one base. So there was a reaction with a defective
form of A that everything else was okay reaction with a defective form of C, G and T. And he ran
these mixtures after he was done ran these mixtures in this gel in this electrophoretic
apparatus. And he could read up, he could actually look up and see in which lane was the next longer
DNA sequence from this reaction. So he could actually look up these four lanes and find out
what the sequence of DNA was. That was an incredible advance in 1977 because it meant
that instead of taking seven years to read 63 bases, a good molecular biology graduate student
could read 500 bases in a day quite in advance. But then another advance occurred, which took
this to a much higher level, which is that a scientist named Lee Roy Hood automated the entire
process. And Hood took the reactions, the chemical reactions that Sanger had described. And he took
all of those and put them into a robotic computer so that the robots actually carried out the same
reactions that used to be done by people. And robots have a lot of advantages over people when it
comes to doing experiments. They don't make as many mistakes. They work 24 hours. And they don't
ask for more fringe benefits. And you could put a whole bunch of them in a room together. And in
this way, you can have each of these robotic stations working out a different DNA sequence and
reading the DNA. And the information comes out in a computer format. You can look at each of the
bases. You can tag them with different colors. And you can read along the DNA sequence and figure
out what the sequence is. So this process of automation, by the early 1980s, scientists were
reading tens of thousands of bases of sequence a day. And the technology kept on getting better
and better, which is what technology does do. And it became possible to read hundreds of thousands
of bases. And so if you just look at a sequence, it's not very interesting in its raw form. It's
just a series of A, T's, C's, and G's. And you may want to ask why scientists care to look at such
a boring array of letters. And the answer, of course, is because there's hidden information
inside of those sequences, and especially the sequences of our own chromosomes inside of our
genome. I want to tell you what the word genome means. So genome is the sum total of genetic
information in a particular organism. That is the meaning of the term. The human genome,
because people talk about the human genome a lot. And the human genome is the sum total
of genetic information in a generic human being. I say generic human being because actually individual
people differ from each other in about one out of every thousand bases. So each of us has a different
genome. But we can still talk about, quote, the human genome in a generic sense and how
that genome contains features, characteristics that are true for almost all people in our species.
So that's the idea of the human genome. It's this generic genome. It's not going to be the
same as you are at every single base, but a 99% or more of the positions it will be.
Scientists forgot very excited about the rate at which technology was improving
in the 1980s. And they proposed to both the United States government and the British government
that they could sequence an entire generic human genome. It's actually made up of
pieces of DNA for multiple people. But they said to Congress and to the Parliament that they could
sequence the entire genome. The technology was getting better and that having a whole genome
sequence would give lots of scientists a foundation on which to do experiments to figure out which
parts of the sequence had genes which were associated with disease. Now, many of us thought
this was a great idea. And we also thought that it was going to expand at a rate that
most technologies expand at. And by early 1998, we saw that there were already two
billion bases of sequence that had been generated. The human genome has a size, remember it's
digital, so its size is in number of units. The human genome has a size of three billion base pairs
for each set of chromosomes. But to be able to sequence the human genome is not just
good enough to read three billion base pairs. You have to read the same piece of sequence over and
over again to make sure that you get it right. And so by 1998, we can make the prediction that
in 20 years or so, it would be possible to sequence an entire human genome. And I wrote a popular
book called Remaking Eden in 1998 and I predicted that the whole genome would be sequenced in 2020
and that we would find all of the ways in which people differ from each other by 2030. And what I
didn't anticipate was that the technology would explode in power so much more quickly than we
thought it was possible. It became possible to sequence much faster and to, with better computers
and more software and better power to understand the patterns being generated by the sequencing
machines, the entire process went much, much quicker. And the way that a basic sequencing
project takes place is the machines will only sequence a short bit of DNA, maybe 500 bases
at a time or 700 bases at a time. So if you can only sequence 500 bases, how do you get a complete
sequence for every chromosome in a genome? Each of the chromosomes has about a hundred million
bases and how can you possibly get the whole sequence, all as one, as opposed to lots of little
parts? The answer is you sequence random parts of the genome over and over and over again. You
have billions of little bits of genome that you've sequenced and then you go to the computer and you
ask the computer to find overlaps between sequences. This is all possible because there's a digital
code. If you find an overlap at one end of one sequence and another end of another, you can see
how many of the bases overlap and what's the probability that you'll get that just by accident
or whether it's real. The computer can make all of these calculations and then the computer inside
can string together the whole series of bases that make up a chromosome. And this was actually
accomplished for the first time in the year 2001 and it made the covers of the two most
preeminent scientific journals in the world, Science and Nature. There were actually two teams
competing with each other and one of them published in these two journals. Now this process,
sequencing the human genome, was begun in 1990 and went until 2001. They were about 99% finished in
2001. They spent about two billion dollars, all told, to generate a single human genome sequence.
That's pretty expensive. It's not something that you can do on an individual. But the cost
of DNA sequencing analysis is dropping and it's dropping at an incredible rate. It's dropping
at a rate of tenfold every couple of years. And so the cost, it originally cost $10 per base.
That's the way in which you gauge how expensive something is. It went down below a dollar,
below ten cents, and now it's below a penny. So it's dropped many orders of magnitude,
the cost of doing DNA sequence. Now the reason it has dropped so far down is because
technology keeps on getting better and people invent new ways of doing things. And it's now
possible to do a sequence of human genome, any human genome, in less than two weeks. And that's
clearly going to become even a shorter time. So sequencing the three billion bases in your genome
in less than two weeks. And this is one of the interesting techniques that's being used here.
Now the idea is to label each of the bases, ACGT, with a different color and then use an enzyme
it's like a natural enzyme but it's been produced in the laboratory. And what happens is when this
enzyme incorporates a new base to put along the strand of DNA that it's trying to sequence,
every time that happens there's a flash of light. And the flash of light is a different color,
depending on whether it's an AC or a G or a T that's been incorporated. And you say, well,
so what? Well, the so what is that you can look at the surface of a slide and see literally
millions of spots. Each one of those spots is a different piece of DNA being sequenced.
So simultaneously you can sequence a million pieces of DNA and of course you can't see that
when I say look, I mean metaphorically, you have a computer attached to a microscope with a laser
beam finding each each flash of light and recording the the additional base that goes into the
sequence with with that flash of light. And so the the idea is to bring the cost of sequencing
an entire genome down to the level where it's a standard part of a medical workup. You do it once
because your sequence doesn't change and then your doctor can see your DNA and can decide
on particular course of action or a particular drug that he'll use to treat you in in response to
disease. And one of the incredible things about this is that it's become so easy and so fast
to do this, that there are companies now in business that will provide you with information
about your own DNA sequence. And recently I got information about my DNA sequence
and this is just a few of the things that I discovered. Most of it is just for for fun.
There is a gene named ACTN3. The names of the genes don't matter so much except that at this gene
some people have two C's. A genotype always has two copies of a gene. Some people have two C's,
some people have two T's and some people are heterozygous at this gene and that's what I am.
If you have two C's this has an impact on your muscles and makes you a better sprinter and if
you have two T's this gives you the ability to go long distances better. And in fact I have a C and
a T which means I'm not good at either. If you are an Olympic level sprinter or distance runner
you're going to have to have one or the other of these genotypes but just having a sprinter
genotype at this particular locus is not going to make you a world sprinter. This is just one
part of the problem. I also have and this was not surprising to me, I have a genotype at another gene
which means that I can't taste bitter. Foods that taste bitter to other people don't taste bitter to
me which is why I like to drink my espresso 10 times more concentrated than most people. Now I
also have a medical problem or not a medical problem actually. I have another gene which gives me a
higher level of good cholesterol which I've always known from my medical exams. I have another gene
that causes me to metabolize caffeine quickly which means that I can drink coffee late at night
and it doesn't keep me awake. A very interesting gene that I have is one that is very much involved
in adult attention deficit disorder and novelty seeking and I have two copies of the allele
that increases your propensity to have this kind of a personality and I can look deeper
into my own genes and this is a taste of what we're going to talk about later in this course.
I can look at along the genome all of the genes have been identified and there's a gene called
dopamine receptor 2 and the dopamine receptor 2 is involved in the brain in the reward process
in in the brain and there are a number of different sequences that different people
have in this particular region of DNA sequence and I can see what my gene looks like or my two
alleles look like compared to everybody else and I can see that I have a particular genotype that
causes me to jump from one thing to another more frequently than the average person and in fact you
can look at a brain scan of people who have my genotype and when you do this you find there's
a particular region of the brain that's more active in people with this genotype relative to
people with other genotypes so this is a new era we're entering with personal genome and personalized
medicine we're just at the beginning of this era right now I want to talk about another technology
that just to give you a flavor of the the kinds of things that biotechnologists can do now with
with incredible miniaturization and computer power and this is the DNA microarray it's being
held in a person's hand right now and inside this tiny little square space there are over a million
detectors that can detect the presence of particular molecules particular DNA sequences or
particular RNA sequences in a complex solution and give you a sense of how this works the DNA
microarray is built kind of like a computer chip is built and what scientists do is they build up
on each of the spots each of the microscopic spots in this array they build up a particular DNA
sequence and this is all done through through microchemistry and so they have a million of
these little spots that are present a million or more present in the in the DNA microarray
and then you can add and each one of these little spots is going to detect the presence
of a particular DNA strand for example and you can use this DNA microarray to see how people
differ from each other because you can detect different alleles that's how fine this this
technology is and you can see the results on a computer and you can see people who are
homozygos or heterozygos for different alleles you can also use the same technology to look at
gene expression and so here what you would do instead of putting DNA onto this chip this
microarray you would put the RNA contents of a particular tissue onto the microarray and
then you can read out the level of expression of each gene in the genome you can read out and you
can see based on color representation whether a cell is making a lot of a particular transcript
or less of that transcript and then you can follow that process through time so you can look at a
tissue or an organ as it develops you can watch all of the genes turn up or turn down turn off or turn
on throughout the entire cell or the entire tissue this is something that no scientist thought would
ever be possible to do and now we can do it and by being able to see which genes are turning on or
off relative to each other you're getting a sense of how the genes are interacting it may be the
case that this gene always comes on it always turns on before a group of genes over here are
able to turn on which would suggest that the product of this gene is going over here and turning
on those genes that's that's the kind of information that you can get from this technology you can also
use this technology in combination with pattern finding algorithms on computers to diagnose different
forms of cancer as an example and the example would be that you can you can look at a person's cells
and maybe just by looking at the cells the person has leukemia but you don't know what class of
leukemia the person has and it matters what class the person has because each class of leukemia
does best with a different kind of therapy and you can feed in when you do further analysis
the RNA expression information into a computer and look for correlations of particular patterns
of gene expression with particular classes of leukemia and this has been very successful
for leukemia and for many other cancers to be able to look inside you see the exact pattern
of gene expression that tells you what kind of cancer it is and it also gives you insight into
what kind of therapy you should use to to treat that cancer so the DNA microarrays work both in
terms of looking at our genotypes which are static and also looking at our transcription profiles
which are dynamic and sometimes go awry in cancerous tissue the third kind of technology and these
are just a few of the many technologies that are available now is three-dimensional protein structure
analysis and this combines information from chemistry and from physics you can look at the
sequence of a DNA learn what the sequence of the protein is and then use computer models to figure
out how that protein is going to fold and if you're interested in drug discovery how that protein is
going to interact with a particular drug this is all being done virtually do all of this on the
computer first to understand what might be a good therapy that would work to treat a particular
disease and in the process of doing this and for and for further research you want to understand
how all the components of the cell interact with each other and that requires a very powerful
level of visualization the problem isn't getting data in biotechnology the problem is that we have
an enormous amount of data and how do we actually visualize what it all means and there are some
very very good tools now that allow you to to virtually go into the network of interactions
that are occurring in the cell and to focus in on certain interactions and then you can perturb
the interactions on the computer and see what happens to your pretend cell on the computer
and that gives you insight into what might be happening in the real organism and then you
would actually do the experiment with the real organism see if your prediction is correct
this is hypothesis testing and if it is that's great and if it isn't you get a sense of what you
left out of the of the process and you make the computer program that you're using more powerful
through this feedback mechanism this is just a representation published recently it's very hard
to represent these these interactions which are occurring in four dimensions the three dimensions
of space and the dimension of time but certain people have the knack of creating programs that
let us do this and in a yeast cell 50,000 different interactions are known to occur between different
genes and proteins and they've all been modeled such that you can you can get a vision of of
how the yeast cell actually actually works now in this lecture i talked about some of the technologies
that have been developed in biotechnology by biotechnologists i am continuously amazed by the
new technologies that come along which completely displace the technologies that were absolutely
critical five years ago and i suspect this will continue to happen in the future but in the next
lecture we're going to focus down on the human genome we're going to look at what
the sequence information that we've obtained tells us about how the genome works what is actually
encoded what i call the landscape of the genome where are the genes what are the other pieces
of dna doing that's going to be the focus of our next time together
