Welcome. Today we're going to put together a number of the topics that we've been talking
about for the last 10 lectures. And we're going to look at how they all come together
not just to produce life, which most of the topics we've been talking about relate to,
but how they produce a whole body, a whole human being. Now we've talked about genes
first in an abstract sense as Mendel defined them. And then we saw how genes are regions
of digital code, that code for a protein. And we talked about gene expression, how the
information in a piece of DNA gets transcribed into RNA and how that information is translated
into proteins. And then in the last three lectures we've been talking about the genome.
And the genome is simply the sum total of all the genetic information that a particular
organism carries. We've looked at the genome both in terms of its structure and also in
terms of the way that scientists can study it. But there's a problem so far, which is
there are many different cells. There's the liver, the heart, the kidney, the brain in
our bodies. How do these different cells differ from each other if they all have the same
genome? And that is the topic of today's lectures. Today we're going to talk about
the genetic program. And what the genetic program means is the particular genes that
a particular cell uses to express a particular function or a particular trait. And we're
going to look at how a genetic program is defined by gene regulation. So let's first
review gene expression, which we talked about in an earlier lecture. The DNA is in the nucleus
and the DNA has digital information along its length. And portions of the DNA are read,
what scientists call transcribed, into a single-stranded RNA molecule. And the RNA molecule contains
the same information that a portion of DNA contains. That RNA molecule leaves the nucleus,
it goes into the cytoplasm. And in the cytoplasm, the cellular machinery takes the information
in the RNA molecule and translates it into protein. And proteins carry out the main functions
of the cell and of the entire organism. So initially, the protein is just a series of
amino acids that correspond to the code in the DNA. That's called the primary sequence.
But that particular primary sequence, that particular linear arraignment of amino acids,
will come together to form a three-dimensional structure, which actually carries out the
function of the protein in the cell. Now, inside of a human body, there are a large
number of very different kinds of cells. Just think about your liver, your kidney, your
heart, your skin. And if you look at this little video clip, you can see blood coursing
through a vessel. In this little clip, where you can see some of the individual cells, you
also get a sense of how different cells are from each other. There are red blood cells
in the blood vessel, which we're going to talk about more in a moment. And then around
the blood vessel, there are the tissue cells, many, many different cell types. Now, how
does each of these cells differ from all of the others? What causes one cell to have a
particular shape and a particular function that is different from other cells? And the
answer we now know is that different cells are actually using different portions of
the genome to make proteins. So if we look along the genome, there are segments that
are coding regions that can code for proteins. And if we look in a single cell, what we'll
find is that some of those segments, some of those protein coding segments, are actually
being transcribed into RNA. And those are called active genes. Other segments that have the
potential to create RNA and ultimately protein are not being used by the cell. And those
are considered inactive genes. Now, of course, the active and the inactive is cell-specific
because a different cell might have a different set of genes that it is transcribing into
RNA. So there are a different set of active genes in cell type B compared to cell type
A. And it's not just that the different genes are being used in some cells and not other
cells, but in fact, the cell actually controls the amount of RNA being transcribed from the
genes that are active. So it's not just active and inactive, it's also active in how much
RNA. And the amount of RNA that is being transcribed, the rate at which RNA is being transcribed
from a coding region on the DNA, corresponds to the amount of protein from that gene that
the cell is making. And so a particular cell will have a genetic program, which means that
of the 20,000 or so units that scientists have traditionally called genes, one cell might
be using 10,000. Another cell might be using 10,000, which overlap with the first cell.
But there are certain genes which will be expressed at a higher level in one cell than
another. And what we now know is that this entire program of gene expression is very
specific to each cell and extremely reproducible. So if you have a kidney cell from one person,
a kidney cell from another person, you look at what genes are active and you'll find that
it is essentially the same set of genes active in basically the same way. Now how do scientists
study this process? Up until about 10 years ago, it wasn't actually possible to actually
to go into a single type of cell and see simultaneously what genes are being expressed active and what
genes are inactive. But that changed with the invention of DNA microarrays. A DNA microarray,
which we talked about previously, is essentially a small chip which has microscopic spots on
it. And each microscopic spot has a single strand of DNA which is specific for a particular
sequence. It's complement. And there can be millions of spots on this chip. And a DNA microchip
or microarray, it means the same thing, can be used to look at all of the genes that are
active in a particular cell at a particular time. And the way scientists accomplish this
is that they'll take their tissue or their cells and culture and biochemically they will
extract the RNA from those cells and then the RNA is tagged. Each individual molecule
of RNA is tagged with a fluorescent probe. So in this particular example, the RNAs are
all being tagged with a green probe. And then you take this mixture, a very complex mixture
of RNA, you put it on top of the chip and you give the RNA a chance to hybridize, to
make a hydrogen bonds and to form double helices with the DNA which is on the chip. This is
the kind of result that you'll get. This is one little part of the chip. You'd have
to look under a microscope to see this kind of result. But what you'll see is that a lot
of the spots are not labeled and some are. The green label represents fluorescence which
is coming from the RNA that is bound to that spot. And so you actually can look at a two
dimensional pattern because we're looking under the microscope at a slide, a two dimensional
pattern of the complete set of genes that are active in a particular cell type. And
you can do the experiment over and over to confirm that all kidneys and all people have
essentially the same pattern or if they don't, what the differences are between people. And
you can also try to quantitate the amount of RNA that is being transcribed from each
gene. Now that's actually very difficult to do in a picture like this where you're just
looking at the amount of greenness in each spot because it's difficult to quantitate
the level of green from one spot to another. And so what scientists will do is that they
will mix together differently labeled RNA from two different cell types. These can be
either cells that have undergone development from one stage to another or they can be kidney
versus heart cells. And the RNA from one cell is labeled with a green fluorescent tag. And
the RNA from the other cell is labeled with a red fluorescent tag. And then they're mixed
together and put onto the DNA microarray chip. And what happens is that if there's a particular
gene represented by a particular spot that is active in cell type A but not cell type
B, it's just going to have the green fluorescence. You're going to be able to see it as being
green. And on the other side, if there's a particular gene that is expressed in cell
type B but not cell type A, then the spot is going to be red because it's just going
to have the red fluorescent RNA from cell type B. Now, if both cells are expressing
the gene at equal levels, equal ratio, it ends up being yellow because yellow is what
you get when you mix together green and red. Now, the nice thing about this kind of assay
looking at active genes in this way is that you don't actually have to figure out how
much red or green, or if you're a little bit oriented towards the cell type B, it's
going to turn a little bit orange. And you don't have to worry about actually looking
and figuring out the colors of the spots because a computer is doing that for you. Laser light
is going through a microscope and it is hitting each of these spots and looking at the color
and the amount of green and the amount of red. And so you're really comparing how much
of each gene is being expressed in each cell type. And you can do this for any pair of
cells and in fact, scientists have developed many different colors of fluorescence that
they can put on to RNA from different types of cells. For example, a normal cell and a
cancer cell, which we'll get to a little bit later. And you can look at the differences.
You can identify a small number of genes perhaps that is different in a cancerous cell versus
a normal cell and you can see those genes. Those are the genes that are active. And then
you can go in and study those genes. So now the question is, how come some cells will
express a particular coding region and other cells won't? And what we're going to talk
about now is the process by which that occurs, which we call gene regulation. How is a gene
transcribed in a regulated fashion? Now, we already talked about gene expression where
the sequence of DNA is transcribed into RNA and the RNA is translated into protein. And
some genes actually transcribe an RNA that creates a protein whose function is to go
back into the nucleus to sit on the DNA and to cause a region of the DNA to be active.
So some protein products have a purpose of going in and turning on another gene and turning
on maybe multiple genes. The protein being made by one gene can interact with the DNA
at several different sites. And in addition, some genes make proteins that actually go
back into the genome. They'll bind to a particular DNA region and they turn off the expression
of a gene. They make a gene inactive. Now this is a very simplified view of what's actually
happening. It's a very complex network and it's not just the question of proteins turning
genes on or off, but also turning genes on in a certain amount relative to another cell.
So the regions that these proteins bind to are called cis-regulatory regions. And we've
come across this term before. And these are regions of the DNA that don't code for proteins.
The regions of the DNA where it's actually the three-dimensional structure of a particular
DNA sequence which is binding to a particular regulatory protein. And the regulatory protein
will bind to this particular DNA and cause the gene to be expressed or not to be expressed.
Now cis-regulatory regions come in varieties and the most important variety is called the
promoter. And the promoter is a region of DNA that sits right next to the coding sequence
of the gene. And the promoter is always allowing proteins that are present in all cells to
bind to it so that the RNA will be transcribed from this DNA. And this is the ground state
of the genome. There's a low level of transcription of every gene from its promoter. Now this is
that doesn't explain how you get gene regulation to be different in different kinds of cells.
And the way that's explained is by another cis-regulatory unit called an enhancer. And
the enhancer is a piece of DNA that will bind a regulatory protein that is only expressed
itself in a particular cell and not others. So for example cell A has a protein expressed
that is binding to the genome enhancer. And of course the genome is the same in every cell.
But cell A creates a protein which binds to the enhancer. And what that protein will do
is it will come interact with the promoter and cause a high level of expression of a
particular gene. Another cell won't be making that protein and therefore it will just have
the background level of expression of the same gene. Now the DNA and protein come together
in very complicated orientations inside of the nucleus. It's not just naked DNA. The DNA
is associated with lots of proteins all the time. And we understand now that the way an
enhancer will work is that the protein will bind to the enhancer and then it will loop
back on itself so that the enhancer will bring together, the enhancer binding protein will
bring together that piece of DNA with the promoter DNA. They'll interact and that will
cause the gene to be expressed. There's a third kind of cis-regulatory element called
a silencer. And this as its name suggests makes sure that a particular gene makes no
RNA, that it's completely inactive. And there are regions of the chromosome where there
are a whole series of elements. So for example, an enhancer will be between two genes but
a silencer will stop it from acting on one gene and it will only be able to act on the
other gene. These are the kinds of very complex networks of genetic regulation that you can
find with lots of different elements. Some enhancers will be bound to proteins in one
tissue, another enhancer will be bound to, not bound to protein in tissue A but will
be bound to protein in tissue B. And so you can get very complex networks. And just in
a very simplified format you can represent these networks in electronics kind of schematic.
So you can see gene A will turn on gene B and then gene B will turn on gene C and
gene C will turn off gene B. And you can imagine all of the different kinds of networks of
gene interaction that you can get. And the proteins are not just going one to one in
their interaction. Regulatory proteins will bind to many different places in the genome
and in combination with other regulatory proteins a gene will be expressed at a particular
level. So now I'm going to go to a specific example of how gene regulation is altered
in a particular type of cell during development. And the cell type is the red blood cell. Now
the red blood cell is very important because its function is to take oxygen that you bring
into your lungs to take that oxygen and push it all throughout the entire body and release
it. So that all your tissues get oxygen which is essential for metabolism and for life.
The way that this process occurs is through a single complex protein molecule called hemoglobin.
Now hemoglobin is actually a molecule made of four protein components. Two of them are
called alpha-globin. They are translated. They're coded for by the same alpha gene. And
the other two are called beta-globin. And two alpha, two betas come together to form
hemoglobin. And hemoglobin is called hemoglobin because it actually contains a little chemical
entity that binds to oxygen. And it will bind to oxygen in the lungs. It will pick up that
oxygen and the hemoglobin molecules all inside of the red blood cells will course through
the body. And when it gets to tissues and organs with a low level of oxygen, the protein
shape changes slightly and the oxygen is released. And then the hemoglobin comes back up through
the heart and through the lungs and the process goes on and on. This is the circulatory system.
Now hemoglobin expression has to be fine-tuned for optimizing the life of an organism. And
this is a region of the DNA, a region of the genome from chromosome 11 where the beta-globin
gene is located. Now what you'll see in this picture, which was obtained from the National
Center for Biotechnology Information, are that there are six different genes, gene-like
entities that are very similar to each other. They're called beta, delta, psi, two gammas.
The two gammas are actually equal to each other and an epsilon. And the reason I call
this fine-tuning is because different genes code for a version of the beta-globin protein
that can bind oxygen or create a hemoglobin molecule that will bind oxygen to a greater
or lesser extent. And this is needed by the organism because if you think about the embryonic
state of an organism, the amount of oxygen going to the embryo through the mother and
through the placenta is actually quite low compared to the amount of oxygen we are bringing
into our lungs. And then as the organism develops from an embryo to a fetus, again the amount
of oxygen the fetus is receiving is different than the amount we receive as adults. And so
the way in which the organism has optimized the ability to grab onto oxygen, grab onto
enough oxygen, transmit it through the body, then come back again and grab onto more oxygen
is that at these different developmental stages it uses a slightly different gene which makes
a slightly different beta-globin product making a slightly different hemoglobin. Now
there's something very interesting about this set of six genes as well which is useful
to point out and that is that one of these genes, the one that's called Psi, that gene
actually doesn't function anywhere. It is a coding sequence but it is never transcribed
into RNA. And so we call this a pseudo gene. And the other genes are transcribed at different
developmental periods in time. Now also on this picture there's another track of information
which is useful and that is the track which shows where there are regions of the human
genome that are conserved. In other words the same DNA sequences are present in the mouse
genome or the fish. Actually there are many, many genomes where the sequence is known and
where you can make this comparison and the mouse is just used as an example of another
mammal. And what you see in the mouse and especially in the fish is you see that both
of these organisms, this is a zebra fish, have conserved DNA. They've maintained the
DNA where the beta-globin is encoded. That can't change. The other DNA between the
genes has evolved, has changed actually quite a bit. So in any case, to follow up here,
what happens during development is that the Epsilon protein, it's Epsilon for E meaning
embryonic, is turned on and turned off very quickly. And then during the process of development
the cells switch over to the gamma genes to make protein. There are two gamma genes that
are identical. And then the gamma gene comes off and the beta gene comes on and there's
another gene called Delta which turns on to a small extent. So this very complicated pattern
of switching beta-globin genes that are being used during development. And the alpha-globin
gene pretty much stays along the same throughout development. And all of these changes in expression
are controlled by another cis regulatory element called the locus control region. And this
is another way of looking at the information that has been obtained from molecular biology
experiments. You can actually see where along the genome the proteins that regulate genes,
where they bind. And there's a region that is sort of upstream from the Epsilon gene,
which binds a particular regulatory protein. And what that regulatory protein will do is
that actually in sequence goes from each gene during development and turns it on. Now this
is a program of gene regulation that changes through development. Of course every cell
in the adult organism at the same time has a different program of gene regulation. So
genes are regulated and you have different programs that come up constantly in different
kinds of cells. And in another way of looking at microarray data instead of looking at spots,
an easy way to look and compare microarray data which shows you which genes are active
or not, is to look at columns of bands. That way you can compare many columns to each other.
And this kind of analysis can be used to identify cancer cells, cancer cells in the brain for
example. And here is an example of looking at normal cells which have a normal gene program
for the brain. Certain genes are expressed and other genes are not. And then what happens
during the cancerous transformation is the genetic program changes unfortunately to something
that is aberrant. And by looking at the particular ways in which the genetic program changes,
you can correlate that with particular types of cancer, particular types of cancer of different
kinds of brain cells. And that correlates with the treatment that you would presumably
give to somebody. Now this is another example of change in genetic program which is very
important to the future of biomedicine. What scientists have done here is they've looked
at the program of gene expression which genes are active in embryonic stem cells. And they've
compared that to other cells, adult cells. And then what they've tried to do, what they
want to do is take an adult cell and tinker with it in a way that gives them an embryonic
stem cell because embryonic stem cells have great potential for overcoming a lot of human
disorders in many different tissues and organs. And so in the laboratory they have identified
what perturbations, what molecules and proteins they can put onto an adult cell that will
turn it into a cell that expresses the gene program of an embryonic stem cell. And that
is all they need to do because the program of gene expression defines the cell. And so
they can look very, very rapidly at lots of different kinds of experiments and see which
one is going to give them a gene program that correlates with the embryonic stem cell. And
this has been done and they've found a small number of proteins actually. And these are
regulatory proteins, three or four regulatory proteins that they can put into an adult cell.
And those regulatory programs then have a cascade of effects. And this is a picture of
the cascade of effects that they have, turning on many genes which turn on other genes which
turn off and turn on many other genes. And so you end up with a genetic program. If you
put these three primary proteins in, you end up with a genetic program which is the
genetic program of embryonic stem cells. And then you can confirm that these really are
embryonic stem cells because in the laboratory you can take these cells and treat them in
certain ways and they'll become liver or they'll become heart-like tissue or any other tissue
that you want to overcome a particular human disease. So today we talked about how cells
regulate gene expression according to developmental programs. And what you should get, the first
point to come out of all of this is how complicated multicellular organisms are. I just gave
you a couple of examples, especially the beta-globin protein example. But that is repeated millions
if not hundreds of millions of times simultaneously along the genome in many other regions. There's
an enormous amount of complexity that is required to produce something as complicated as the
human body. Where did this complexity come from? Well, this complexity arose as a product
of natural selection by evolution, which is going to be the topic of the next lecture.
