Welcome back. In the last lecture, we went deep inside the nucleus of a cell to see how gene regulation works and how organisms run a genetic program to achieve complexity.
And we also got a sense of how complex organisms are, especially the human organism.
Today we're going to try to understand where that complexity comes from.
And until 150 years ago, no one had a clue.
Now actually, back in the 18th century, there were a number of scientists and naturalists who conceived that species might evolve into other kinds of species, the process that we now call evolution.
And they perceived this because they could look at places in the world where you can see geological strata.
In other words, these are places where the ocean and the weather have worn out the side of a mountain, for example, and you look along this wall and you see these layers.
And in each layer, you can recover different kinds of fossils.
Now the interesting thing about geological strata is that they are the same, the same pattern of strata. You can find hundreds or even thousands of miles apart from each other.
And the other thing that is the same between strata and in different places is the idea, is the finding that as you go deeper through the strata, different fossils appear.
And they are fossils of organisms that no longer exist today.
And in some cases, there are fossils of organisms that look very similar to existing organisms today.
And so based on this finding, based on this observation around the world, the scientist Lamarck published an 1809 book called Zoological Philosophy,
in which he proposed that species are evolving one into another.
He had no idea how species evolution took place, but he did propose that evolution was taking place.
And actually in France, because Lamarck was French, Lamarck is honored as the founder of evolution, which is different than the British.
British think that Charles Darwin, their own local son, was the founder of evolution.
Now Lamarck and no one else understood how evolution could possibly occur.
And in fact, nobody had a clue, had an idea of what was going on until Charles Darwin came up with the idea that he published in his 1859 book that changed the world.
What Darwin did is he gathered a massive amount of data over a period of 20 years, the what of evolution.
He looked not just at fossils, but he looked at pigeons and other kinds of animals that exist and have that exist in a variety of different forms.
And he collected all of this data, a huge mass of data over the 20 year period.
Now, in addition to the data, the data would have been fine, but in addition to the data, Darwin proposed a theoretical foundation for the way in which evolution occurs.
And the theoretical foundation that he proposed was based on three simple axioms, which individually we know to be true.
And Darwin put them together in a way that demonstrates not only how evolution occurs, but that evolution must occur.
The book that he published, The Origin of Species in 1859, changed the way that human beings think about themselves and their presence in the world and the universe as a whole.
Now, it's interesting to contrast the effect that Darwin's book had versus the effect that Mendel's paper establishing genes had.
Both Mendel and Darwin worked at about the same time. They never met each other, they never read each other's work, but Mendel was completely unappreciated until the beginning of the 20th century.
Darwin, on the other hand, was a legitimate scientist, he was well known in scientific circles, and when his book was published, immediately scientists around the world picked it up and many of them accepted it as the truth.
So, what was the evidence that Darwin had for evolution? What was the empirical data?
Well, as I said a moment ago, a big part of the empirical data was fossils of extinct species, and one particular species that Darwin looked at was the horse.
And if you go back through the geological strata back in time, millions and millions of years, what you find are versions of the horse that are not quite a horse, but are similar to the horse.
And as you go through time, over many millions of years, you can watch as the horse begins, as a small species, and it grows in size, it changes in characteristics, and eventually you come to a modern day horse.
At least this is the way an evolutionary biologist imagined how these different fossils fit together with what we see at the present time.
Now evolutionary biologists of the 19th century only had fossils and existing animals to use as their research material.
And they didn't know about genes, they didn't know about DNA, and they were looking at changes that occurred in the traits expressed by a particular population of animals or plants.
Today we understand that DNA carries the genetic code, which is the basis for animal and plant development, and we understand that evolution actually occurs at the level of the DNA sequence.
It is changes in the DNA sequence that are responsible for changes in the organism, and so fundamentally evolution is a change in the sequence of DNA rather than a change in the traits.
That are controlled by that DNA sequence.
Darwin took a five-year journey around the world on a British ship called the HMS Beagle, and he was on board the ship to be the naturalist.
He had no idea what he was going to find or how his mind was going to change in terms of the origin of different species.
And while he was on the HMS Beagle, they went down into the South Atlantic Ocean, around South America, and up to the Galapagos Islands.
And they only spent a few months at the Galapagos Islands, which were on the equator just west of Ecuador.
But in those few months, his entire world view changed because of the curious creatures, as he called them, that he found on the islands.
The Galapagos is an entire group of hundreds of islands, some closer and some further apart from each other, which have remarkable animals on them.
And this was the basis for Darwin coming up with the spark of an idea that evolution occurred by natural selection.
Now, Darwin's idea is based on three axioms. The first axiom is the Strong Principle of Inheritance, which basically means that children look like their parents.
And in this picture of penguins, which I took, like many other pictures in this lecture, during my trip to the Galapagos Islands, you can see two adult penguins and their child penguin.
Now, what's odd about this picture is the very fact that there are penguins on the equator, because all other penguins are found in the frigid environment of Antarctica.
And in fact, if you take penguins from Antarctica and brought them to the equator, they wouldn't survive very long.
And yet here you have penguins, which are clearly penguins, but not quite like other penguins, because they have the ability to survive on the equator.
They look a bit different, and the children who are born look like their parents, not like other penguins.
So the Strong Principle of Inheritance has been accepted for a long time, but it was the first of Darwin's three axioms.
Another example of the Strong Principle of Inheritance that Darwin saw in the Galapagos Islands is the Flightless Cormorant.
And this is a species of cormorant that has useless wings.
All other species of cormorants that look very similar to the Galapagos cormorant, except for the fact that they have wings that work.
Cormorants are normally very strong flyers, and yet here on the Galapagos, there was a cormorant that had these useless wings,
and the babies, the chicks born from a couple of cormorants, also has useless wings.
So again, it's the Strong Principle of Inheritance.
The baby is a cormorant, but not quite like other cormorants.
And all of the birds on the Galapagos Islands are different than the other cormorants that exist anywhere else in the world.
The second axiom that was part of the Foundation for Natural Selection is actually the opposite of the Strong Principle of Inheritance to a certain extent.
It's the fact that variation pops up occasionally.
So genetic variation, what we would now call mutations, they do occur.
Children are not clones of their parent.
And puppies, nursing from a single mother, can actually look totally different from each other.
As you can see in this picture, there is a black and white puppy and a brown and white puppy coming from the same mother,
which means that there is variation among this breed of dog.
And in fact, there are different breeds of dogs, which are variants of each other.
And once a variation occurs, it occurs in a single generation,
once it occurs, it is then transmitted in future generations according to the Strong Principle of Inheritance.
So variations occur very rarely, but when they occur, they get transmitted properly from generation to generation.
And we now understand how this works in terms of DNA.
DNA contains a digital code. It doesn't change very much.
It's mostly reproduced in an exact copy from parent to child, but sometimes changes occur.
And when the change occurs, it is then transmitted just like all the other DNA, very completely and without changes.
This is an example of a cat and her two kittens, another example of genetic variation.
And the two kittens look very different from each other in terms of their coat color.
One looks like the mother, the other one doesn't.
But the two kittens actually have the same colored blue eyes, which are both different than the mother.
And this is kind of a reflection of Mendel's laws, looking at how genes are transmitted independently of each other.
So variation does arise within a population of animals and plants.
And the variation, once it arises, it can be transmitted faithfully from one generation to the next.
Now, it was the boobies of the Galapagos that really got Darwin to think about the origins of animals that look similar to each other.
On the Galapagos Iowans, there are actually three different species of boobies.
There's a Nazca booby and a blue-footed booby and a third species.
And if you look at these two kinds of birds, they look very similar to each other, and yet they're different from each other.
One bird has green webbed feet, the other bird has blue feet, that's the reason for its name.
Their beaks are different in terms of their color, but the animals clearly are very similar to each other.
But they don't breed with each other.
And so Darwin thought that these animals must have a common origin, but they're separate species.
Now, one of the big debates of the 19th century among naturalists is or was determining whether two populations that are similar to each other are separate species or are just separate variants.
And the reason this was such a big debate, and it occurred in every order of animals, in every family of animals, there were debates like this.
It was a big debate because everyone assumed that species had an origin that was separate.
The creator created each species separately, but variants could be obtained by breeding within a species.
And so you have two populations that look similar to each other.
The question that naturalists asked was, do they have a single origin or do they have two different origins?
And in looking at the blue-footed boobies and the Nazca boobies, Darwin realized that they must have the same origin.
They are practically identical to each other, but they had both accumulated variants that were then transmitted by the strong principle of inheritance.
And he realized that this could occur by just looking at what was around him, around the world, which human beings have been modifying for years, which is plants that have been used to create crops for agriculture.
And one of the most extreme examples of how an organism, a species, has been modified was in the creation of maize or corn.
There was a little weed in Mexico, it still grows in Mexico, called tiosente, and this weed had been modified by people living in Central America 10,000 years ago until it emerged into what we call corn today.
And corn looks nothing like this weed, and yet through a process of selection, the characteristics of corn were added in one by one.
They were accumulated over a period of time to give rise to what we can now eat, and corn, of course, reproduces corn.
It doesn't reproduce weeds.
And the most dramatic example of how a species can be altered by human beings is, of course, the transformation of wolves into dogs.
So all dogs derive from a Siberian wolf or a population of Siberian wolves, rather.
And yet there are different breeds of dogs, very different from each other, in addition to being very different from the progenitor wolf.
There are poodles and there are chihuahuas, and what is clear is that the properties of the poodle are maintained from one generation to the next.
A poodle doesn't give birth to a chihuahua, and a chihuahua doesn't give birth to a poodle.
So these are two different breeds that maintain their unique characteristics, and yet we know they came from the same original species of wolf.
So Darwin realized the implications of the natural world and the human controlled world around him.
And he said man can and does select the variations given to him by nature, and thus accumulates them in any desired manner.
He, meaning humankind, thus adapts animals and plants for his own benefit or pleasure.
And then Darwin jumped from the obvious to say, quote, there is no reason why the principles which have acted so efficiently under domestication should not have acted under nature, and quote.
But the question is, who is the selector in nature in terms of agriculture?
It's human beings who select plants or animals with certain characteristics and then accumulate the characteristics that they want the organism to express.
Who in the real world, the world of nature that is not affected by humankind, who in the natural world is actually selecting for the different characteristics that populations of organisms derive?
And the answer Darwin realized was based on the third axiom that he used in formulation of his theory of natural selection.
Individuals in a population will reproduce and expand until they hit a wall.
And the wall is the amount of resources that can support the population.
There's only a certain number of organisms that can survive in any environment.
And since there are many more organisms that are born than can possibly survive, it follows that those organisms that are better able to survive are going to be the ones that have children.
And the organisms that are not as well adapted are going to die and eventually disappear because they will not have any children.
In this particular volcanic island that's part of the Galapagos, there is, as you can see, a finite space. It's a very dry island.
And so what would happen if you had finches on the island and Darwin's finches are very famous for what they contributed to his theory?
If you look at the finches on the island, only the finches with very big, strong beaks can survive in a dry year because the seeds are very hard, they're difficult to crack.
And so the finch with the big, strong beak is going to be able to get food out of these seeds while the finches with smaller beaks are not going to be able to get food and they're going to not survive.
And so essentially because there are many more individuals of each species that are born that can possibly survive, as Darwin said, it follows that any being that vary however slightly in a manner profitable to itself,
this is Darwin's language, will have a better chance of surviving and thus being naturally selected.
So this in a nutshell is Darwin's theory.
Now, species change is the rule, not the exception.
In the Galapagos Islands, Darwin saw a dozen different species of finch, all very similar to each other, but each one having certain characteristics that allowed it to function optimally in its particular environment,
so that when the competition occurs, which inevitably will occur because too many offspring for the amount of resources available, there's going to be competition and the ones that are better able to survive on those resources are going to be the ones who have children and the other ones will not.
Now, adaptive variants are of many different kinds.
In this picture is a monkey with a can of soda and it's clearly adaptive in an environment surrounding human beings and this is in Indonesia to be able to recognize a can of soda, an open can of soda,
because there are going to be drops of liquid, sugar and energy inside that can and so even something as simple as recognizing a can of soda is a trait that can be selected.
Monkeys that can do this are going to be much more likely to survive in an environment with limited resources.
And there are many other examples of adaptive traits, animals can produce poisons, animals can look very ugly and mean but actually be harmless and many other traits that one can imagine that will help a particular organism in a particular environment.
The best way to illustrate Darwin's theory of natural selection is to use an example and in this particular example, I'm going to suggest, hypothesize that there's only a capacity for 16 individuals to live on the resources that are present.
However, fertility is such that each animal has three children and so there's only room for 16 but 48 children are born and what happens is that if a particular child has a mutation or a variant that allows it to survive,
then you can see just going from the offspring stage to the adult stage, the percentage of the population represented by that variant increases because it's going to survive while others die.
Now, it's going to give birth to three offspring just like the organisms that don't have this particular variant and this is not where the percentage of animals changes, it's going from childhood to adulthood in this particular case where the proportion of animals that have the variant increases
and the proportion of animals having the variant increases not because the number of animals increases but because they're more likely to survive than other animals in this environment which has a capacity of 16.
And what you can see happening is that very quickly, if there's a variant that provides an advantage to survival, very quickly within a few generations, that variant which happened in a single animal will be transmitted and will grow in terms of the proportion of the population that carries it
and in four or five generations all of the animals in this population will carry the variant. In other words, they'll all have the same optimized ability to use the food and the resources that are on the island.
Now, evolution doesn't sit still and what happens at this point when they all have the same variant, then competition reoccurs, it's occurring constantly and an animal that has a new variant in addition to the first one which all the animals have,
an animal which has a new variant which optimizes its life even more in terms of getting resources will now out-compete the animals that don't have that new variant. And so evolution is a process of random mutations and non-random selection and it's ongoing continuously at every
gene and it every generation. There are many different genes. Each gene is undergoing selection so that the version of the gene that gives the organism an advantage is the one that's going to be reproduced more than other versions.
And then by organisms mating through sexual intercourse you have offspring which accumulate many different variants which together give those offspring a better chance at surviving and reproducing.
So, as Darwin said, there are many more individuals born than can possibly survive and the struggle for existence inevitably follows in Darwin's terminology. In other words, if you model this on a computer, just the facts that I just told you, evolution has to occur.
As long as you have genetic information which is usually transmitted with very, very high fidelity, but occasional mutations occur and you're in an environment which is every environment on the globe that has limited resources, then there's going to be competition and those that have genes or variants that provide an advantage are going to be the ones that out-compete the others.
Now, Darwin was very clear that a species, the idea of a species is a human construct and a good example of this can be seen in the Greenish Warblers which are a species of bird that originated in the Himalayas, the eastern part of the Himalayas near Bangladesh.
And these birds over many tens or hundreds of thousands of years, the population of birds spread and actually spread around the desert that exists in Central Asia. And there's a continuum of birds in this population, but the birds at one end on the northern end of this population can't breed with the birds at the southern end.
They're different from each other. Even though all along this line, birds can breed with each other, the birds that are near each other can breed with each other in a continuum, at the ends of the line you have what appear to be two different species.
And this is even more dramatic with the Greenish Warblers because the population has also expanded around the western edge of the desert and come to the top and you have two populations of birds that are clearly different species even though you follow the lines back to the original population and there is a continuum.
And this is an example of why it is impossible to define a species. A species is a construct that we make up in our mind to try to categorize different kinds of organisms. It often works, but not always. And when populations are similar enough to each other, it makes no sense to argue about whether they're members of the same species or a different species.
So today we focused on Darwin and his theory of natural selection. Nature is the selector. Nature selects one variant over another. And next time we're going to look at exactly what it is that varies. What is it that nature is selecting? And we can answer that question now far more thoroughly than Darwin could have ever possibly imagined.
Thank you.
