Hello, and welcome back.
In the last lecture, we talked about natural selection, Darwin's theory of evolution,
and the theory of natural selection has at its fundamental core the idea that variation
occurs spontaneously in individual organisms, and that some of those variations, some of
those variants that occur, give an advantage to the organism in terms of survival or reproduction.
But the question is, what exactly is the variation?
What is appearing in a variant organism?
And in this lecture, we will answer that question far more thoroughly than anybody
could have imagined in the 19th century.
Now every individual receives a few mutations from their parents.
There are three billion bases of information that we get from our father and from our mother,
and the copying mechanism, the way in which DNA is copied, is extremely accurate, but
we still have somewhere between 10 and 50 differences that exist in our genome that
we didn't get from our mother or father.
These are new variants.
Now generally speaking, these new variants are not detectable at all.
Sometimes they cause disorders that we will talk about later in the course.
But because mutations are occurring constantly, some of these variants will be selected, some
will just rise in frequency, and so if you compare one individual to another along the
human genome, what you'll see is differences.
Every person has similarity, huge similarity, as well as some differences along the DNA
from one person to the next.
And today we're going to talk about what kinds of differences actually occur when we
look at the DNA of two people or many people in comparison to each other.
Now the most common type of mutation, the most common kind of difference between people,
is called a SNP, a single nucleotide polymorphism.
The single nucleotide polymorphism is the simplest kind of mutation that you can imagine.
It's a single base, what scientists call a nucleotide, that changes.
So you start with an A, and because of a mistake during copying, that A may become a G, and
that G and the A are different at a single nucleotide or base, and polymorphism just means
there are multiple forms of this particular base in the population.
So during the DNA copying process, the cell will separate the two strands of the double
helix, and then it will read each strand and make a complementary copy of that strand.
And as I said, the copying process is extremely accurate, but occasionally a mistake will
be made, and there will be a base that is placed into a position where it doesn't belong.
So it should have been a C for example, but a T will arise.
And then at the next step of copying, that T will be accurately copied now into an A
in the complementary strand.
So what began as a CG is now a TA, and if that TA survives and sometimes is actually
good for the organism, you may end up with a polymorphism, an SNP or SNP in the population.
Some people will have the TA, some people will have the CG in that particular location.
So this is the simplest form of alleles at a locus.
Alleles are defined just by different forms of information, traditionally alleles used
to refer to differences in the DNA or differences in genes that cause different traits.
SNPs don't have to give rise to different traits, but they're very useful for scientists
to use as markers for particular regions of the chromosome, as will become apparent in
the next several lectures.
So allele number one could be a TA at a position, a particular position in the genome, allele
number two, the same position in the genome, but now it's a CG.
But of course, because the information in one strand is complementary to the other,
we don't have to go through the process of showing both strands when we want to communicate
scientific information to somebody else.
And so typically a double helix of DNA is represented within a single strand.
And so the shorthand notation for representing these two alleles would be a sequence of letters
with a T, a sequence of letters with the C, and it's just assumed that the other strand
is complementary to the first strand of each of these two kinds of alleles.
So this is the simplest kind of allele pair, and these alleles get transmitted from one
generation to the next according to Mendel's laws.
So if a person is heterozygous, one of his chromosomes has the T, other chromosome has
the C, then he will transmit them.
The T will go to half his offspring, the C will go to the other half of his offspring,
and because of the transmission according to Mendel's laws, you will get the appropriate
ratio of homozygots and heterozygots for each of these SNP loci.
And the representation of the genotype, the notation we use for this representation, is
just putting the two letters next to each other.
A particular point in the genome is going to be TT, or TC, the heterozygote, or CC,
the other homozygote.
Now these kinds of alleles are a very, very powerful tool that biotechnologists and geneticists
use when they're trying to discover the identity and the location in the chromosomes of particular
diseases.
And once again, we come back to our friend, the DNA microarray, and so on a DNA microarray,
you can have millions of little spots, and each spot is going to detect a particular
allele at a particular SNP.
And so in other words, there are two spots that will distinguish the genotype of this
SNP in a particular person.
And one spot will recognize the T, the second spot on the microarray recognizes the C at
the same genomic position, and a person who is homozygous for the T will have one spotlight
up, a person who is heterozygous will have both spots light up, and a person homozygous
for the other allele will have the opposite spotlight up.
And this is very easy to automate, which makes it much easier to do genetics, genetic analysis,
and genetic mapping more quickly than was possible in the past.
Now a sense of how people differ from each other can be gained by looking at the complete
DNA sequences, the complete genomes of individual human beings.
Two of the leaders in the field of molecular biology, James Watson and Craig Venter, have
had their entire genome sequenced, and so it becomes possible to line up their genomes
next to each other and see how many differences there are in single bases or SNPs.
There's also been complete sequences of other individuals, including an anonymous man from
Africa, and so you can do pairwise comparisons among these individuals, and you can also
gain information with all three individuals.
And one of the interesting findings of this comparison is that the differences between
two individuals are pretty much the same in any kind of pairing.
So from James Watson to Craig Venter, you look along their entire genome and they differ
at 1,359,000 SNPs.
If you compare James Watson to the anonymous African subject, they differ at 1,413 SNPs,
and those two numbers are practically equivalent.
And again, the third kind of pairing, the anonymous African subject, and Craig Venter
again gives this difference of about 1,400,000 SNPs.
So the average pairwise difference between two people is about 1 in 2,000, and you calculate
that because there are 3 billion bases in the genome, so about 1.5 million over 3 billion
gives you 1 over 2,000, or about 0.5%.
So that's the average difference that exists in the DNA sequences of two human genomes.
That means that people are essentially 99.95% the same as each other, but that's still a
lot of differences, over a million differences between any two people.
If you look just within this comparison of three people, you find right away that James
Watson, who has almost 1.4 million differences compared to Craig Venter, has only 1 million
unique SNP alleles compared to both of the other people that were compared in this experiment.
And that's because some of the alleles that are unique between Watson and Venter are not
unique when Watson is compared to the African man.
And in fact, when you compare very, very large numbers of people, you discover that there
are actually very few SNPs that are unique.
In other words, when you have a polymorphism, two versions of a particular base, it's usually
the case that there are many other people who have the same version as you.
So there are very few unique DNA sequences in the genome in terms of comparing all people
to each other.
What makes individuals unique is not the not uniqueness at a particular SNP or a particular
gene, but a unique combination of many possible genes and alleles.
So now let's go into the genome and look at the differences.
And one of the questions that we can ask is we look at the two genomes, one person and
the second person, and we'll see a difference where in one person it's a T, in the second
person it's a C. And the question we can ask is, which is the mutant and which was the
original base?
Now the term mutation, when it's used by geneticists, doesn't mean a bad version of the gene.
It just means the newest version of the gene.
So for example, if the original DNA in our ancestors was a T and a mutation took place
that turned that T into a C, then the C would be the mutant allele, even if that allele happens
to benefit people in some way.
So in this particular example, we have a T in some people at this position, we have
a C in other people at this position.
How do we find out which one was first and which one was second?
And the answer is we can compare both of those people to the genome of the chimpanzee.
And the chimp genome and the human genome are 99% the same.
So you look along the genome, it means 99 out of every 100 bases is going to be identical,
but there will be differences.
And so we can look at the chimp genome and see now that at this location where there's
a polymorphism among humans, the chimpanzee has a C. And that tells us right away that
that C was the original version of the DNA and the T is the mutation that had to occur
later.
In addition, let's look down the chimp sequence and we see another position that we recognize
where the chimp is different than all humans.
So the chimp may have an A at this other position while humans all have a G. So we wouldn't have
recognized the difference unless we had looked at chimp DNA and compared it to human.
So we can now look at these differences.
We know that all people come from a common ancestor, common ancestors, and all people
in the world today diverged from those common ancestors at a point several hundred thousand
years ago, which we'll talk more about in the next lecture.
But we also can see now that the two people who have the C and the T and that the T mutation
had to occur within one group of humans, not the other, because the C allele was present
in the chimpanzee and the progenitor to all human beings back five million years ago.
It's the T that has only come into some people's genomes, not other people's genomes.
And this is very interesting because it means that in this small part of DNA, in this example,
this woman is more closely related to the chimpanzee than she is to human beings who
have that T replacement at that point.
Now the second locus, which I showed you, the second SNP locus, where all people have
a G and we saw a A in the chimpanzee genome, how do we decide whether it was the chimp
or the human where the mutation actually occurred?
And we have to step back in evolution, now going back to the rhesus monkey, to see what
the common ancestor had at that position.
And here we see an A in the common ancestor, which means that the G occurred along the
line leading to humans.
This kind of analysis is very important for geneticists to understand what the original
version of DNA was and what the version of DNA that we've inherited in all people is
or version of DNA that is currently polymorphic.
It gives us a lot of insight into what different regions of DNA are doing in the genome.
So as an example of how this becomes relevant to people, the Fox P2 gene, like there are
other genes like this, the Fox P2 gene is involved in language ability in human beings.
And so it's a gene that's been studied very intensely.
And if we look around the Fox P2 region, we'll find particular spots where all human beings
differ from all chimpanzees.
So these are places where either the chimp or the human had a mutation and then all members
of the species derived that mutation from the original person who had had the variant.
But there are other places in the same region of the genome, in every region of the genome,
where there is a polymorphism.
And in each of these locations, people either have the chimp version or the human version
of this DNA sequence.
So we actually have a lot of our genomes that are more closely related to chimps than to
other members of our own species.
So how do these genetic changes accumulate in a population?
And well, the answer we can see is a combination of chance and selection.
And if you look at just three different allele sets, in other words, there's one locus, the
second locus, the third locus, there's a mutation that occurs at all three of these loci.
And you can do mathematical modeling to follow whether the new allele rises until it completely
is present in all members of the species or whether it disappears, in which case we would
not know anything about it.
Or if it remains in the population as a polymorphism.
So those are the three possible fates for every mutation that occurs.
Most mutations will be lost.
A few will become fixed.
Fixed means that all members of the species have this new version of DNA.
And some remain polymorphic.
In other words, there's two different versions of DNA in the population.
And this occurs with enough regularity that you can actually see the number of DNA bases
that are different between species.
And you can calculate how far apart those species are in terms of evolution.
And this concept is called the molecular clock.
So if you look at the differences between a human and chimp who diverged from a common
ancestor five million years ago, and you look at the difference between a human and
orangutan who diverged from our common ancestor fifteen million years ago, you would expect
and in fact you find three times more differences in the DNA between orangutan and human versus
chimp and human.
So what do these SNP mutations do?
Well, because most of the genome is not coding for protein, in fact most of these SNPs, most
of these single-base changes that distinguish one genome from another actually don't have
any effect on the coding of the protein, they don't affect the protein directly.
Some of them do affect the expression of the protein because they occur in cis-regulatory
regions and some of them actually have no effect at all.
They're just polymorphisms which are wandering in the species.
When a SNP occurs inside a coding region, it can have several effects.
Some SNPs will change the base from a T to a C for example, but that will have no effect
on the amino acid of the protein because there are a number of three base codons that
code for each amino acid and so some single-base changes won't change the amino acid.
Other single-base changes will change the amino acid and those kinds of SNP alleles
are much more likely to have an effect on the traits that a person expresses and sometimes
that cause a disease phenotype.
Now in addition to SNPs, there are other kinds of variants that are common between human
beings, between members of the population.
Sometimes when the DNA is copied, a mistake or an accident occurs and a piece of DNA is
lost from one of the genomes in the offspring.
A piece of DNA is lost and then the remaining DNA is spliced back together.
This cell has mechanisms to try to repair DNA when it gets damaged in this way.
But then this genome has what's called a deletion.
A piece of DNA is missing in this particular genome.
And if you compare one human genome to another, in fact this is kind of a common occurrence.
It's a common occurrence that some people have pieces of DNA not present in others and
as we just discussed, some people have one base versus another base at the same position.
So we really cannot speak about the human genome because there are many versions of
the human genome.
We really should call it human genomes and scientists have a way of expressing human
genomes by writing the sequence along in a row and then at points where there are differences,
putting both bases that are present, for example, at a SNP locus, putting them both on top of
each other.
That is a better way of diagramming the whole human genome, the whole species genome.
When we look at an individual, of course, we can look at the sequence that that particular
individual has.
In addition to mutations that are caused by single base copying mistakes and then we
have pieces of DNA that are accidentally broken out of a chromosome, you can also get mutations
by faulty recombination.
Now recombination is a natural process that occurs between the two copies of a chromosome
that you get from your mother and from your father.
So you have two copies of every chromosome.
This is straight Mendelian genetics.
And what your cells will do is they will recombine these chromosomes.
It's also called a crossing over so that alleles that have accumulated on one end of one chromosome
will come together with alleles that have accumulated on the other end of the second
chromosome and you'll build a new chromosome that has this new combination of alleles.
It's an efficient way of bringing together variants that have occurred in different
members of the population that actually provide an advantage.
So you bring these together by recombination, this natural process.
Now sometimes the process doesn't work quite right.
The chromosomes don't line up exactly in the correct orientation relative to each other
but recombination or crossing over still occurs and when this happens you end up with two
kinds of chromosomal products.
One chromosomal product has a deletion, it's missing a piece of the genome.
The other chromosomal product however has a duplication because of the ways in which the
chromosomes were lined up.
There's a piece of DNA that is present twice in these offspring.
Deletions more often than duplications are likely to cause harmful effects.
Duplications often don't cause a harmful effect and so there can be differences between people
in regions of the chromosome where some people have two copies of a chromosomal region, some
people only have one copy.
And in fact this is a very, very common variation and again there is no single human genome.
When you look across the entire span of a chromosome from one person to a next and you
look at many, many people you'll find many, many examples of copy number variants, places
where there are zero, one, two, three copies of a particular DNA sequence which again says
there is no such thing as a single human genome.
There's a lot of variation that exists.
And sometimes that variation is associated with disease.
There are particular deletions especially that have been associated with schizophrenia
I will talk about in a later lecture.
Now there are some regions of the genome that are very variable in terms of how many copies
of a gene are present.
For the reason that the particular gene that varies in its copy number is not as important
to human beings as it was to our distant ancestors.
And a really interesting example of this are the genes that code for olfactory receptors.
Olfactory receptors are proteins that exist on the cells inside of our nose and they allow
us to smell different odors.
And the smell is accomplished by chemicals, the source of the smell coming into our nose,
chemicals interacting with our receptors, our olfactory receptors and that stimulus
is then transmitted to the brain allowing us to smell certain things.
Now it turns out that when you look at one person and compare them to another they can
differ enormously in the number of olfactory receptor genes that are present.
So you can have people who have 500 genes which gives them a certain level of ability
to smell certain things.
Another person might have a thousand or a thousand five hundred of these genes which
gives them an ability to smell many, many more odors or smells.
There are people hired actually in southern France by perfume makers.
They have a very keen sense of smell and their job is to smell different fragrances which
they can detect much, much more sensitively than anybody else to smell these different
fragrances and to see what happens when you combine different fragrances with each other.
Now the reason there is so much variation in these particular genes, the olfactory genes,
is because smell is not as important to us as vision.
When you look at the mouse genome a mouse on average has about 1200 olfactory receptor
genes while the human genome on average has about 765.
In fact among all of the mammals we have the least on average number of olfactory receptor
genes but we have three color vision and vision is much more important in our survival than
smell is.
Most mammals only have two or even one color vision.
Now one of the things that can happen with duplications, duplications caused by recombination
which is not exactly equal, what can happen is you have two copies of a particular region
which might contain a very important gene but because there are two copies there one
copy can maintain its function that the organism requires and the other copy can mutate without
any consequences to the organism because the organism has one good copy, second copy can
and sometimes mutations will accumulate that give that second copy of the gene a new function
which is related to the original gene but a new function and this is the basis for generating
families of genes where each member of the family, these are a group of genes where each
gene is pretty similar to the other genes in the family but they're slightly different
so they're slightly optimized for different purposes and with the beta-globin example
that we discussed in a previous lecture the different beta-globin genes make beta-globin
proteins that bind to oxygen with different affinities which are best for either embryonic
fetal or adult life and in fact our entire genome is made up of an enormous number of
gene families so duplication and divergence within a single genome within a single species
is a very powerful aspect of evolution so we discussed evolution in the abstract in the
last lecture before today today we were looking at evolution in a molecular context what's actually
happening at the DNA and chromosomal level and in the next lecture we're going to look at a real
example of evolution the evolution of the human species
