Welcome back. In the last two lectures, we've looked at evolution from two different perspectives.
First, we looked at Darwin's theory of natural selection as the process by which evolution takes place.
And then in the last lecture, we looked at the particular molecular mechanisms that are responsible for evolution,
the changes in the DNA sequence, the changes in the chromosomes that allow evolution to occur.
Today, we're going to look at evolution in detail, the actual process of what actually occurred over the last three to four billion years,
and how human beings emerged out of this process.
So let's begin at the beginning, as far as we can tell, which is somewhere between 3.5 and 4 billion years ago.
That's when the first cell that resembles the cells today, that's when that first cell came into existence.
Now, we don't know what was before that cell, whatever was pre-cell, has not survived.
There are lots of theories to explain how the first cell came into existence,
but there's nothing that really proves to us what existed before the first cell.
Some people actually think that the first cell arrived from outer space onto our globe from somewhere else.
This is a century-old theory called panspermia.
But we know that about 3.5 to 4 billion years ago, there was a cell.
And we are the direct descendants of that cell, as is every other living thing on the planet.
In fact, all living things are actually quite similar to each other in many fundamental ways.
The first fundamental way is the fact that we all use us, bacteria, fungus, all other organisms,
use the same molecule to store genetic information, the molecule of DNA.
The second is that we actually use many of the same genes.
About 25% of our genes are essentially the same as the genes that bacteria use to replicate DNA,
to carry out some of the processes that all cells must carry out.
So all living things have this ancestry which we can still detect by looking at our DNA
and looking at other aspects of our life.
So somewhere, 3.5 billion years ago, there were single cell organisms like bacteria came into existence.
And for 2 billion years, nothing very much changed.
It wasn't until about a billion years ago that slime molds,
which are kind of halfway between single cell and multi-cellular organisms, came into existence.
It wasn't until 700 million years ago that animals came into existence.
In fact, 700 million years ago, animals and plants and fungi all separated from a common ancestor.
This has interesting implications because it means if you could ask a fungus,
whether it was more similar to a human being or a bacterial cell, the answer would be obvious.
It's more similar to a human being.
So 700 million years ago, animals came into existence.
It's not exactly clear what happened then,
but there was an explosion of many different types of animals in the pre-Cambrian period, as geologists call it.
And the insects came off from a common ancestor of us about 700 million years ago.
And then there were further branches and vertebrates came into existence about 420 million years ago.
That's the evolutionary distance between human beings and fish.
And then about 166 million years ago, mammals came into existence.
Now the first mammals had mammary glands, that's the definition of mammals, but they didn't have a placenta.
It wasn't until another 50 million years had passed before placental mammals came into existence.
And so 75 million years ago, there was a common ancestor between human beings and mice that existed.
And many people think that in fact it was 60, 65 million years ago when there was a single little rodent
scurrying around the Earth when an asteroid came from outer space and destroyed all of the large life on the Earth.
And what happened is that the Earth's surface was opened up, the plants came back, the Earth was green,
there were no dinosaurs to compete with, and so that little rodent exploded in speciation
and turned into many different kinds of mammals today, including us.
75 million years ago there was the rodent and today there's a mouse and there's a human being.
Now there are many other mammals that were related to.
The reason I look at the mouse specifically is because the mouse has a long history as a model of scientific observation.
And if you look inside the mouse at early development, if you look at the one cell embryo, two, four, eight cell embryo,
the remarkable thing is that you can't distinguish a mouse embryo from a human embryo at the same stage.
I'm an embryologist by training and I couldn't distinguish human and mouse embryos at this stage.
And in fact in early development the mouse forms its vertebrae and a skeleton that at first is not very different
than the skeleton being formed inside a human fetus.
Now obviously the human develops in a different way than the mouse.
There's obviously a huge difference in the size of the mouse and the human,
which makes it all the more remarkable that mice and humans begin their development as embryos that are essentially equivalent in size.
So we can look at DNA and we can actually see the differences,
the divergence that has occurred at several different levels with chimpanzee,
who we had a common ancestor with five million years ago, with mice 75 million years ago,
with chickens as a representative of birds 300 and so million years ago and fish.
And if we look at the DNA sequence in regions of coding sequence,
we actually share most of our coding sequences all the way back to fish.
Vertebrates all share a commonality of a large set of genes that is responsible for producing all of the bones and organs that we all have in common.
There's a particular family of genes called the hox genes,
which are very important in the development of the spinal cord and all the vertebrae.
And if you look at the chromosomal region where the hox gene family is located,
and you compare the human version of this family to other species with the chimpanzee,
of course, you see complete conservation.
That's because we are so similar in terms of having evolved very recently from chimpanzees.
And as you go back from mouse to chicken to fish, you see less and less conservation.
A lot of the sequences between the genes have changed,
but the genes themselves are still maintained over this period,
which is one of the strongest points of evidence, I think, for the theory of evolution.
So let's focus now on our more recent ancestors rather than all mammals in total.
We're going to look at the great apes.
And there aren't that many existing species of great apes.
The most distant great ape from the human species is the orangutan,
a big animal that lives in Indonesia and Malaysia.
And it separated about 15 million years ago from the line leading to human beings.
Then there's the gorilla.
And then 5 million years ago, human beings separated from the line leading to two other species,
called chimpanzee, which we all know, and the bonobo.
The bonobo used to be thought of as a race of chimpanzees,
but we now know, in fact, that chimps and bonobos diverged apart.
They're different species.
They diverged apart from each other about a million years ago.
The chimp is very, very similar to the human in many aspects of its physiology,
the way it looks, the way it thinks.
We'll talk more about how its brain can pairs to the human brain later in this course.
And it's similar to a human being even at the level of looking at chromosomes.
Another aspect of evolution, besides changes that occur in the DNA sequence
and deletions and duplications,
another aspect of evolution is that chromosomes will break apart sometimes
and reattach to each other in different ways.
And when you compare two species to each other, the further apart they are,
the more breakage has occurred in chromosomes.
And so you can use a fluorescent tag that is made up of gibbon DNA,
gibbon is one of the primates,
and you can use that and probe the human chromosome set, the human karyotype.
And you can look at the segments of gibbon chromosome
and see where they're located inside the human karyotype.
And what you see is you see that each chromosome contains about five fragments
that used to be from other chromosomes of the gibbon.
Now, when you compare the human karyotype to the chimp karyotype,
there's almost no difference.
The chromosomes essentially all line up next to each other.
And the only difference is one chromosome where it used to be two chromosomes in chimp,
the common ancestor,
and these two chromosomes attach to each other in the human line.
This is the only difference between chimpanzee and humans,
which has interesting implications.
The implication being that a chimpanzee human hybrid would probably be viable
and might even be fertile.
So, if we look now more recently,
after the divergence of the human line from the chimpanzee line five million years ago,
there are actually a whole series of different species,
of human-like species, which we call hominids.
And from four to three to two million years,
there were many different species living simultaneously in Africa,
which is where most of the human evolution has taken place.
Homo habilis is considered to be the first species of our genus, Homo,
because it's the first species to have used tools,
and it came into existence between three and two million years ago,
and then between two and one million years ago,
something interesting happened in Africa.
Essentially, there were three different lines of human-like species
that had emerged as the winners.
They'd killed off directly or indirectly the other human species,
and one group moved into Asia from Africa about a million years ago,
and they became Homo erectus.
A second group moved from Africa into Europe,
and they became what we call Neanderthal man,
and a third group just remained in Africa.
Now, what's very interesting about these three different human-like species
is that up to about 150,000 years ago,
the Neanderthal men and the erectus man,
those two species were actually a lot smarter
than the primitive pre-human species that existed in Africa,
and it seems that they actually prevented the migration of pre-Homo sapiens
into the other continents from Africa.
But human species, the Homo sapiens species, caught up.
Something about 150,000 to 200,000 years ago happened
that caused a burst of brain evolution in our ancestors in Africa,
and it was still the case that until 50,000 years ago,
they were unable to get off the continent of Africa.
And then 50,000 years ago, there was another burst of brain development and innovation,
and our ancestors, Homo sapiens, went across Saudi Arabia and into Asia,
and by 40,000 years BC, they had eliminated Homo erectus,
who had been living there, remember, for a million years.
And it took a little bit more effort to invade Europe.
The Neanderthals were more advanced than Homo erectus,
and it wasn't until about 30,000 years ago that Homo sapiens wiped out the Neanderthal man.
Again, a species that had been around for hundreds of thousands of years
until our ancestors moved into Europe.
And in fact, there is some evidence that there was a small tribe of Homo erectus
that survived on an island in Indonesia up until 20,000 years ago,
although the evidence for that is still under dispute.
So by 8,000 years ago, the only hominid species left was Homo sapiens, our ancestor.
And by 8,000 years, we had taken over the world.
On every single habitable continent, we were everywhere.
We had taken over the environment.
We had slaughtered a lot of the large species of mammals that used to exist in North America
and in Asia and in Europe.
And I'm going to talk more about our evolution in the last 8,000 years in the next lecture.
But right now, I want to drop back and look at Neanderthal humans, Neanderthal man,
in particular, and ask the question as to whether or not Neanderthal was human or was not human.
A remarkable advance in DNA technology allowed the sampling of Neanderthal bones
and the recovery of small amounts of DNA that have allowed us to actually obtain DNA sequence
of Neanderthal individuals who went extinct 30,000 years ago.
The bones are anywhere between 30,000 and 50,000 years old.
And DNA has been recovered from a number of different Neanderthal individuals.
And you can compare the Neanderthal DNA to other Neanderthal DNA.
You can compare the Neanderthal DNA to human DNA, human to human.
And you will see a big difference, not as big as the difference between humans and chimps
when you compare this particular region of mitochondrial DNA, which is maternally transmitted.
When you compare humans to each other, the variation is about 100 to 150 bases in this 10,000 base region.
When you compare humans to chimps, the difference is around 1,500 bases.
Now, when you put Neanderthals into the story, it's very interesting what you find.
First, chimp and humans we know diverged from a common ancestor 5 million years ago.
And what about Neanderthals?
And clearly Neanderthals and Homo sapiens diverged from a common ancestor, but how long ago was that?
Well, by looking at the DNA sequence inside Neanderthal,
we can see that Neanderthal was distinct but very similar to Homo sapiens in this sequence
and in many of the other sequences that have now been looked at.
And we are on the verge of obtaining an entire sequence of Neanderthal genome very soon.
So when we compare Neanderthal to human, the average difference in this region of DNA is 200 bases.
That compares to a human-human difference of about 100.
And using this information together with the molecular clock, which I described in the previous lecture,
we can get a sense of when Neanderthal and Homo sapiens had a common ancestor, which was about 700,000 years ago.
So compared to the chimp, Homo sapiens and Neanderthal are much more closely related,
10 times more closely related than chimp is to human being.
So how human was Neanderthal?
This is a fascinating question that we can ask and we can say,
well, what is it that makes a human being human?
One aspect of humanity is the fact that we have language.
And one of the genes that we know is involved in language, one of many, is called Fox P2,
which we've looked at previously in the previous lecture.
And if we look at the Fox P2 gene, defects in this gene cause the birth of individuals who can't speak,
who don't have any verbal ability.
If we compare the Fox P2 gene between humans and other species, we see particular DNA changes,
particular sites at which DNA changes have occurred that produce different amino acids
in the Fox P2 protein of human beings compared to all other mammals, in fact, all other primates.
So what happens when we look at the Neanderthal DNA?
Does Neanderthal have the same sequences as humans?
Or does it have a sequence that is more similar to other primates?
And the answer is that Neanderthal had the same sequence as humans.
We can look at the changes in the Fox P2 gene that occurred in the divergence of humans from chimps.
And it's clear that Neanderthal has those changes, those changes had to occur before 700,000 years ago.
And it suggests that perhaps Neanderthal had some kind of language, not clearly as sophisticated as our language,
but they could have had language abilities, which makes us think how we would treat them if they were alive today.
Now the second aspect of what makes us human besides our minds and ability to use language is the way that we look.
And we have a particular appearance that is very different from the way chimpanzees and other primates look.
And we can ask the question, what did, for example, the skin color of a Neanderthal man look like?
We've identified a group of genes in the genome that are known to affect pigmentation in the skin.
And Europeans evolved over the last 10,000 years mutations that caused a lightning of the skin in response to the fewer light rays that came
and went on to the skin in Europe relative to Africa, which is more direct angle towards the sun.
And we need a certain amount of ultraviolet radiation from the sun to produce a mature form of vitamin D.
So what did Neanderthal people look like?
Well, this is very interesting because we can look at one of the genes that's involved in skin pigmentation.
We look in the Neanderthal DNA at this particular gene and a large group of them or a large percentage of them seem to have a mutation.
And we can look at the function of that mutation by producing this Neanderthal protein in laboratory situation where you can see what impact it has on pigment production.
And so this is a resurrection of a Neanderthal gene in a laboratory experiment shows that this particular protein makes pigment or doesn't make pigment
in the same way that many modern Europeans have a lighter pigmentation.
And so we can develop a artistic rendition of what Neanderthals look like and a lot of them had light skin, not all of them.
Many of them seem to have had red hair again by looking at their genes and how those genes function in the laboratory.
And we see individuals who look very human like although they are not members of our species.
We know that and the question is how they would be treated if they were actually alive today.
Now one of the ideas that has come up over the last couple of years is that we actually have little bits of Neanderthal DNA inside of us.
Actually up until 15 or 20 years ago there was this assumption among anthropologists that Neanderthal was our direct ancestor.
It's only with DNA analysis and with more sophisticated anthropological and archaeological analysis that we realize that Neanderthal was a side divergence from humans.
Neanderthal was not our direct ancestor.
But nevertheless between 40 and 30,000 years ago Neanderthals and Homo sapiens both were in Europe, both were in the same place.
And they could have interbred and everything we know about human natures suggests that they did interbreed and did anything end up in our genomes.
Well the answer is so far based on the data we can't see any remnants of Neanderthal DNA.
Which means that most of our DNA is attributable to common ancestors of Homo sapiens that existed 250,000 or 200,000 years ago.
And remember that Neanderthal diverged off 700,000 years ago.
So the DNA that has been looked at so far suggests that we don't have any Neanderthal sequences inside of us.
However, it will take a sequence of the entire genome to see whether that is really true.
So what makes a human being a human being?
There's the mind, there is the appearance, there are the genes, and different people give different weight to these different aspects of what makes us human.
And there's the culture that human beings have.
And remarkably, if you go back and you look at archaeological sites where there are Neanderthal remains, you see that they could cook, that they could hunt,
that they used tools in a very sophisticated way, that they had homes of a kind that they built.
All of these things are associated with our ancestors.
And again, this was a separate species which had many of the same traits as our ancestors have.
And it comes back to this question of whether we consider them human or not is really in the eyes of the beholder.
They weren't considered human enough for early Europeans to preserve them.
They were when extinct either directly or indirectly because of us.
And in fact, if we go back 100,000 years in the past, or 150,000 years in the past, it's clear that the predecessors of Neanderthal were more sophisticated than the predecessors of Homo sapiens.
So this gives us pause to think about how we would treat them.
Now, we used to say that extinction is forever, but that's no longer the case necessarily.
As I told you in this lecture, we can actually take pieces of DNA, the information in the DNA from extinct species like Neanderthal.
We can take that information and read it.
We can put it into cells that are growing in the laboratory.
And then we can actually look at that gene functioning inside a life form and seeing what that gene does and how that gene functions differently from the human version of the gene.
And when we have the entire Neanderthal sequence, it is possible, not saying that anybody would want to do this, but it is possible in theory that you could create an entire Neanderthal genome in the laboratory based on the digital information that has been recovered from the fossils
and put that new DNA into an empty egg, cytoplasm, and you could reproduce or resurrect a Neanderthal person.
It's a thought experiment only, not something that anybody would do in reality.
And you wouldn't have to stop at Neanderthal.
We can go back into time to even more primitive human beings.
And this allows us to see that there really is a continuum between homo sapien and chimpanzee.
That if we have the, if our technology becomes powerful enough to look at even older fossil bones and recovered DNA, we're going to be able to go back, look at all of these even more primitive hominid species, look at their entire genome.
And in theory, in a thought experiment, you could take all of this and actually make these individuals, again, individuals of a species that has been extinct for a very long time.
So today we looked at the details of evolution, the actual organisms that have existed since the beginning of life on Earth about three and a half billion years ago.
All the way down to the hominid species that came before us and our own species that came into existence about 150 to 200,000 years ago.
In the next lecture, we're going to focus in on the last 50,000 years.
In the last 50,000 years, different populations of human beings went to different parts of the world, and there has been some genetic divergence between these populations.
And we'll take a look at the genetic secrets or whispers that exist inside of our own genomes and see how we can look back and get an idea of what our ancestors look like.
And where they came from.
