Welcome.
During the last several lectures, we've been examining the origins of our species, Homo sapiens,
all the way back, starting with a single cell that evolved into multicellular organisms
that eventually evolved into vertebrates and mammals and then the human species.
And in the last lecture, we focused on the last five million years of evolution during
the period that we diverged apart from chimpanzees, which is our last existing species that is
most close to us.
Today, we're going to go beyond the evolution of Homo sapiens, which had already been completed
by 50,000 years ago, and we're going to look at the more recent history of the human population
or the many populations that are part of the human species today.
So first, we're going to examine what happened when Homo sapiens took over Europe.
This happened between 40,000 and 30,000 years ago, approximately, and nobody knows exactly
the way in which humans beat the Neanderthals, which they did.
But one idea is that it happened very slowly and that, in fact, over the period of 40,000
to 30,000 years, humans made strides every century or so and moved further and further
and beat back the Neanderthals until there were no Neanderthals left except those people,
or the Neanderthals, rather, who were in Spain.
And then, ultimately, the Spanish Neanderthals, the final contingent, was wiped out.
And so by 28,000 years ago, we had wiped out Neanderthals, we, meaning our ancestors, had
wiped out Homo erectus, and that was it.
Only Homo sapiens was around as a hominid species that has taken over the entire Earth.
Now 28,000 years ago, it was minimum in terms of the Ice Age.
There was warmth, and Western Europe was mostly covered in forest, and so people could migrate
all over Europe, and these people were hunters and gatherers.
They were people who went out and gathered food and berries and used spears and arrows
to hunt big animals.
And this culture is called a Paleolithic culture, and it was predominant across Western Europe
at the minimum between the Ice Ages, 28,000 years ago.
Now between 16 and 12,000 years ago, the Ice Age came back.
It was a very massive Ice Age and all of Northern Europe, England, Scotland, the Scandinavian
countries were covered in glaciers, and most of Western Europe was uninhabitable.
It was what is called tundra, which means it's frozen Earth.
So what happened is the Paleolithic people, the people in that culture, retreated into
Spain, which was still habitable, and into southeastern Europe around the Balkans.
And so for a couple of thousand years, these are the only places that people could occupy
in Europe.
At the end of this time, about 10,000 to 12,000 years ago, people living in the mid-East,
what we now call the country of Turkey, around the Fertile Crescent that extends to Israel
all the way to Iraq on the East, people living here invented agriculture, which was a completely
new way of living.
The first time this had ever been done, people took control over their environment.
They domesticated crops and animals, and they were able to produce much more food and to
have their populations grow much more quickly into larger numbers.
This was called the Neolithic Revolution, and the people living in the mid-East at that
time were called Neolithic people.
Now at about 10,000 to 8,000 years ago, the Ice Age went down, the Ice retreated back,
the Glaciers retreated back into Northern Scandinavia, and most of Western Europe became
habitable again.
So what happened at the beginning of this period is you had this Paleolithic population
of people in Spain, and they had been separated from the Neolithic people in what is modern-day
Turkey for at least 10,000 years, and you also had groups of Paleolithic people along
the North Shore of the Black Sea.
And now Europe was habitable, so who invaded Europe, who took over Europe, and in a sense
the question that we're asking is who are the ancestors of modern-day American Europeans?
Did our ancestors come from the Paleolithic people of Spain, or did they come from the
Middle East?
We know that the culture of agriculture spreads slowly from the Middle East across Europe
to the West over a period of a thousand or several thousand years, but the question archaeologists
have argued about is whether it was the culture that spread, and the people stayed put.
In other words, the Paleolithic people were in Europe learning the culture from the Neolithic
people, or whether the Neolithic people themselves replaced the Paleolithic population that extended
throughout Europe.
Now to understand how geneticists are able to use the information in currently living
people to be able to probe our past and where we came from, I have to show you a diagram
of two perspectives of how genes change, how variants will increase in a population, and
the first perspective is from the present to the future.
I want you to imagine a population, a simple population in this model of about 50 people,
and one person in this population has a mutation.
I'm going to call it the red mutation in a particular gene, and that red mutation gives
that person the ability to survive and reproduce better than other people in the population.
As we learned in a previous lecture, there's a certain capacity to an environment.
The population can never go above that capacity, so if this individual has a gene which he
or she passes on to their offspring, which allows them to survive at a higher rate than
others, then this gene, this red gene, will increase in proportion to the previous version
of the gene that was present in people.
This increase happens because other people are more likely to not survive, and so in
a relative sense, those with the red gene, the good variant, will increase in percentage
in each generation.
Now what will also happen is as this particular variant, which provides an advantage to certain
people, as this moves through from generation to generation, other mutations will occur,
and so for example, I have a situation here where I pretended that a second gene had a
mutation, I'm going to call it the purple mutation, which ended up in a person who also
had the red mutation, and so in the next generation, some people will just have the red mutation,
some people will have the red and purple, and then a third mutation might happen on top
of the red and purple, and a third gene, so you end up in a situation where some individuals
have the three mutations, some have two, some have one, and some are just left with the
original version of the gene.
Now that was the perspective from a present to a future.
We were looking all of the individuals in a present population and watching how evolution
took place, how the percentage of different gene variants changed, and in the future,
we saw that one variant that was present now took over, and many more individuals in the
future generation had that variant then at the present day.
But now we're going to take a look at that same scenario, but we're going to go from
the present to the past.
So imagine a present population of people, I'm going to make it very simple, we're going
to talk about nine people, and molecular geneticists have looked at these nine people, and they
see that all nine people have the red mutation, and then they look at other areas of those
genomes of those people, and they find that a subset six out of the nine have the purple
mutation and three out of the nine have the blue mutation in addition to the red and to
the purple.
Now what geneticists find consistently is that there will always be a correlation between
the mutation that's present in the least amount relative to the mutation that is present in
more people, such that the blue mutation always is present with the purple mutation.
And the purple mutation can be present without the blue, but it's always present in conjunction
with the red, and the red can be present with either of those two.
Now with that insight, what you can do is you can imagine going back in time and seeing
that there was a common ancestor to the individuals who carry the blue mutation.
So in other words, back in time there was a person who had the blue, red, and purple
mutation.
It was the blue mutation that had occurred in this particular individual who was the
progenitor to the three people present today, and we know that because if we look at the
people who have the purple and not the blue mutation, we can imagine they had a common
ancestor who did not get the blue mutation, just had the other two, and you can trace
back from the common ancestor with the blue mutation to the three present people with
the blue mutation, and the other three who did not have the blue mutation.
Those two common ancestors can be traced back to a common ancestor that is further back
in time, and using the same idea, we can take the other chromosomes with other combinations
of mutations and trace back when these mutations must have occurred relative to each other,
and then trace them all back in time to a common ancestor.
Now if you extend this to a larger population, what you'll see is you'll see all of these
people that are presently alive, and you've looked at all of their genomes, and then you
can figure out with the help of a computer how they're related to each other, who is
most related to each other, where the common ancestors are in this tree of divergence from
this single ancestor in the past.
Now this is a very different picture than looking at the present to the future, because
the only people, or the only symbols of people we see in this picture, are the ones whose
genes survived.
If a person's genes didn't survive, they don't show up in this picture, but if a person's
genes did survive in me, or you, or other people, then we can look at those genes, that's just
digital information that's been copied over the generations, and we can see that digital
information and see how it's related to digital information in other people, and surmise who
the common ancestor was in terms of his or her genome.
So I'm going to take this idea and show you how it really works with the Y chromosome
first, which is transmitted from males to males, and then we're going to look at a particular
piece of DNA that's always transmitted maternally from mother to children.
So when scientists look at the Y chromosome in reality, what they see is exactly what
I just described in my hypothetical scenario.
They see that there are different variants in different people on the Y chromosome, and
when you look along these lines, you can find common ancestors at different distances back
along the tree, and the variants add up one after another.
And that's because the Y chromosome is actually contributed to offspring in an asexual way.
It goes from father to son.
There's no recombination of the Y chromosome with any other chromosome, so that means the
Y chromosome is transmitted intact, generation after generation, and if mutation happens,
and that Y chromosome gets transmitted, that mutation will be present in the child, and
then another mutation can occur in the Y chromosome in some people that have the first mutation.
So we can build a tree of all the Y chromosomes across the human population.
We can also use the idea of the molecular clock, which I talked about in a previous
lecture, to get a sense of when the common ancestor to all human beings lived, because
there's a certain rate at which mutations occur and are fixed in the population.
And when you do this analysis, you find that there was a man alive about 150,000 years
ago that evolutionary scientists now call Pop.
We used to call him Adam, but that gave the wrong idea that there was only one man present.
There were actually many men present at the time, but only one man's Y chromosome has
survived to today.
Now such a man had to exist.
Really what we were doing with this genetic analysis is figuring out when that man existed.
That was the father to all of the men in the human species today.
Now it's interesting when you look at the different branches on the evolutionary tree
of the Y chromosome, and sometimes scientists have their tree facing to the right, where
the present is at the right, and sometimes they turn it around so that the tree is facing
so that the present is on the bottom and time is going from the top to the bottom.
And this is just a matter of preference.
There are the same kinds of results presented in two different ways.
If we look in detail now at different branches on this tree, we find something very interesting,
which is that the branches correlate with particular geographical locations, so that
there is a branch that correlates with Australia, and we can see that branch comes off of the
other branches of the tree back about 100,000 years ago, and all of the men in Australia
today have a Y chromosome.
It's not identical because the Y continues to diverge, but the Y chromosome all comes
from this single line that broke off from the rest of the male people at about 100,000
years ago.
And the same kind of thing has happened in Southeast Asia.
You can see a couple of branches that give rise to all of the men in Southeast Asia right
now.
Other branches gave rise to the European, the Paleolithic Europeans, and then there
are people in the Fertile Crescent, and there's another Y chromosome that predominates among
men there.
Now in a very complicated, but it doesn't have to be complicated way, scientists can
actually look at the distribution of different Y chromosomes around the world by using a
pie chart.
And if we focus in on just one of these circles, what you'll see is it's just like a pie, but
there are different sizes for each piece in the pie represented by different colors.
And what those different colors represent is the proportion of people in a particular
population with a particular genetic version of a Y chromosome in this particular instance.
And so for example, if you have this circle, this pie diagram, and the pie is three quarters
filled with red, and then it has a couple of other colors in the last quarter, it means
that three quarters of the men in that population have the chromosome that is symbolized by
the red color.
Now it's very, very complicated when you look across the entire old world, but if you pull
out just certain portions of the old world, you see a great deal of information.
You see real differences between different parts of the world.
And so for example here, I have a comparison of the men in Southeast Asia with the men
in Northwestern Asia.
And you see in Southeast Asia there's one chromosomal branch that is symbolized in blue
that predominates.
There was one man that gave rise to most of the Southeast Asian men alive today.
And that looks very different.
You can just tell with a cursory glance at the pattern of Y chromosomes present in Northwestern
Asia where there's predominance of yellow and purple, and there's almost no blue at
all.
And the same thing happens when you compare other areas of the old world.
If you compare Western Europe, you see this predominance of the red Y chromosome.
The colors really don't mean anything.
They're just there for us to distinguish different branches of the evolutionary tree.
But in Western Europe, there's a lot of the red chromosomes.
It only reaches about 50% in most populations.
And then you look over further east into Eastern Europe and Western Asia, the red's not there
anymore.
There you have more yellow.
And this gives us a sense of how the world was settled by men.
It basically says that men went across people, went across the world, and men in any one
region eliminated their competitors.
And the founding members of the population are the ones who transmitted their genes to
the present day.
And people haven't moved very much.
Now all of these studies are done on older people who have been in Europe and whose ancestors
have been in Europe for a long time so that you can get a sense of what happened in the
past.
Today, of course, people move around much more quickly.
So I don't think this kind of analysis could even have been done 100 years in the future
from now.
One last thing that's interesting about the Y chromosome and its analysis is what it can
tell us about large migrations of people that have sometimes been in dispute in the
past.
And we can look at the people of the New World, of North America and South America.
And we can see that their Y chromosome comes out of Asia.
In other words, native people of the Americas clearly migrated from Northern Asia into the
Americas based on the DNA sequence of their Y chromosome and comparing it to present day
people in Northern Asia.
OK, so if we go back to Europe now and we look at the people, the men alive now in Europe
and we can also look at fossil bones, not of another species, but fossils of Europeans
that lived 10,000, 20,000 years ago.
We can recover their DNA just like we can recover Neanderthal DNA.
And so we can look at the proportion of different Y chromosomes in Europe 10,000 years ago or
20,000 years ago and compare it to the proportion of those Y chromosomes today.
And what is clear is that after the last Ice Age, Paleolithic people from the Spanish
area migrated into the newly occurring forests of Western Europe.
We know that from the fossil DNA studies and we also know it from the fact that people
in Europe today, some have this Y chromosome that comes from the Paleolithic people.
But we also see that there's been an invasion of the Neolithic Y chromosome and that people
in the Near East also moved into Europe and displaced the Neolithic men.
Paleolithic men were there first.
We can tell that by the fossils.
And then the Neolithic families and men came in from the Near East and displaced the original
Paleolithic inhabitants of Europe.
And that's what we can see inside the DNA.
Now let's take a look at the maternal side of the story.
Mitochondrial DNA is a little bit of DNA that is actually not in the nucleus like all the
rest of our DNA.
It's actually in little organelles called mitochondria that are in the cytoplasm.
And mitochondria are transmitted to you and to me only by our mothers.
And so if you look at mitochondrial DNA, it's transmitted from mother to children,
from mother to children, all along through the generations.
And so a father doesn't contribute any of his mitochondrial DNA to his children.
So the mitochondrial DNA is a really good way of probing our maternal heritage.
We go back along our maternal line.
We can see what it looked like by looking at the mitochondrial DNA of people alive today.
This is a tree just like the Y chromosome tree except that the originator of this tree
lived about 250,000 years ago, not 150,000 years ago.
So that means that in the maternal case there were more women surviving each generation
who went on to breed.
Fewer men actually participate in breeding from generation to generation.
But what's interesting about the maternal story is if you look at just one side of the
tree, you'll see that all of the people outside of Africa are two small branches off of this
tree.
All the other branches of the tree are in Africa.
Now, in fact, that's exactly what you would expect because the African people have been
evolving, have been diverging from a common ancestor for a long time for the 250,000
years.
And it was only about 50,000 years ago that a small population moved out of Africa.
And so you can see that there indeed was a small population, that there were two main
branches of the mitochondrial DNA that went out of Africa to the rest of the world, fascinating
evidence for the archaeological findings.
So if we look at a world map, it's possible to draw arrows of migration where people have
ended up in looking at how they migrated along different paths.
One of the things that we find right away is that Europe looks different from a maternal
perspective than it does from a paternal perspective.
From the maternal perspective, all of Europe seems to have originated from the original
Paleolithic Spanish people.
And from a paternal perspective, it seems that the Near Eastern men had a major effect.
And so the way to explain this is that men went across Europe, they conquered Europe,
they eliminated their male competitors who were there, and they married the women.
And that would explain why everybody in Europe and all people who have European heritage
can claim a maternal line that goes back to the Paleolithic people.
But many Europeans have a Y chromosome that comes out of the Middle East.
Now I've looked at my own DNA to try to get a sense of my own heritage.
I've looked at the Y chromosome, and I'll give you an example of how you also can trace
your history back along the Y chromosome and the mitochondrial DNA.
I see that the first mutation that distinguishes my ancestors from others was about 25,000
years ago, and it happened in East Africa.
And then that Y chromosome evolved for a while.
And by 12,000 BCE, it was present in the Near East because other mutations had occurred
on that line that we can see, that I can see in my own DNA.
Now what happened at about between 10,000 and 1,000 years ago is that most of the people
who had this kind of chromosome actually migrated to Europe.
These are the people who invaded to the Neolithic people who invaded and took over from the
Paleolithic.
My ancestors didn't migrate to Europe.
Instead, they stayed in the Middle East in what is present day Israel to about the time
of the birth of Christ and the destruction of the Second Temple when the Jewish people
were dispersed.
And it's clear from my Y chromosome that my Y chromosome comes from a Jewish tribe.
And at about 1,000 AD, my Y chromosome moved to Europe and eventually ended up in Eastern
Europe, which is where my paternal grandparents come from.
Now when I look at the rest of my DNA, and this is an analysis done by 23andMe, I find
something very interesting, which is that 99% of my DNA has a European or Near Eastern
origin, but there are little bits of my DNA that look like they come from the Far East,
from China.
And in fact, when I look at a particular region in detail, and I'll explain how this is done
more thoroughly in the next lecture, when I look at a particular region in detail, I
can see whole chunks of DNA that are very common in China, but not in Europe.
And these chunks of DNA have a certain length, and they're distributed around my genome in
a certain way, that I can predict that about 300 years ago, there was a single Chinese
ancestor that I had.
And that this Chinese ancestor came into an Eastern European population, maybe had an
affair with one of my ancestors, or maybe married her.
And that is the only Chinese contribution that I have in my genome.
So I can trace my entire ancestry back, it's kind of fun.
I can see that my maternal line migrated to Spain, back with the Paleolithic people about
35,000 years ago, and then about 500 years ago, the maternal line went from Spain up
to Eastern Europe, which is where my maternal heritage is, my known maternal heritage.
Meanwhile, my paternal line, my Y chromosome, migrated from East Africa into Israel and
then went up to Eastern Europe later on.
There are other little bits I know about my genome.
I carry a mutation that causes eyes to be blue.
We know, as I'll explain in the next lecture, where that mutation occurred, it occurred
on the northern shores of the Black Sea about 6,000 years ago.
And so one of my common ancestors, not Y or mitochondria, but one of my nuclear DNA
ancestors comes from the northern shore of the Black Sea.
And then I have an ancestor from Shanghai, a man that came into my family relatively
recently compared to my other relatives.
Now one of the other interesting things that you can get out of this kind of analysis is
you can look at historical figures and see their DNA in modern-day people.
And Genghis Khan was a ruler who existed about 1,000 years ago, known to have a very large
number of children.
And if you just look at the Y DNA, the Y chromosome DNA in people today throughout what was once
his kingdom, you see a very high percentage of men who have a Y chromosome, which goes
back to a common ancestor about 1,000 years ago, who was almost certainly Genghis Khan.
So even though Genghis Khan is dead, we can still see his genetic information in modern-day
people.
And we can do the same thing with the biblical figure Moses, whose brother was the progenitor
for all of the Jewish people in the world named Cohen.
And half of the Coens in the world have a Y chromosome that goes back to a progenitor
about 3,000 years ago, which is when Moses was supposed to live.
So today we discovered the kinds of secrets that exist within our own DNA.
It's actually digital information in our DNA that was present in our ancestors that we
can now read for the very first time.
And some of those genetic variants that we see are actually not very kind to us or our
children.
And the next lecture, we're going to see how we use these genetic tools to associate certain
genetic variants with disease.
