Welcome back. In the last lecture, we looked at the fun we could have by comparing our
DNA sequences to those of other people and how we could trace our heritage back, both
in time and in geography. And that was the fun part of genomics. But sometimes we have
genetic variants that are not so fun, that can cause disease to ourselves or to our children.
And today, we're going to look in this first lecture about genetic mapping. We're going
to look at the way in which geneticists have used an understanding of genetic transmission.
This is Mendelian transmission again, have used an understanding of genetic transmission
to identify the DNA sequences that are associated with particular diseases or disease predisposition.
And today, we're going to look at the simple form of diseases, diseases that are transmitted
as a single gene or allele that causes a trait. In the next lecture, we're going to go to
complex diseases that are influenced by many genes, some of which may or may not be effective
in a particular person. So before we begin our analysis, I want to talk about the system
of symbols that human geneticists use to carry out their analysis. Now, the field of human
genetics is about 100 years old. As soon as Mendel's laws were rediscovered at the
beginning of the 20th century, biomedical scientists at the time started to apply those
rules to human families to try to be able to visualize a transmission diagram of genes
on a piece of paper, which is what they used in those days, and to be able to try to ferret
out the disease transmission pattern by looking at the pedigree. A pedigree is just a formal
way of putting on a piece of paper or a computer screen the genetic relationships among related
people. A pedigree can be very large or it can be very small. It can be just a nuclear
family or it could conceivably be all people in the world. Now, a pedigree diagram is relatively
simple. As soon as you understand what the symbols mean, and there are two symbols to
designate an individual person, two core symbols. One is a square, which designates a male.
The other is a circle, which designates a female. Now, in a particular experiment, scientists
is looking at a particular trait, and there is a pattern that scientists use to distinguish
those who express the trait from those who don't express the trait. So individuals who
don't express the trait are shown with an open symbol, an open square or circle. Those
who express the trait have a colored in a darkened square or circle. So you can see readily
how the trait is being transmitted from one generation to the next or not. If the male
or female are alive, it's just an open or darkened square, as I'll tell you in a moment.
If the person is dead so that you can't get phenotypic information from them, phenotype
remember is the way that genes actually are expressed, what we can see in the differences
between people. If a person is not alive, then you can't recover DNA or other information
from him. That's indicated by a slash going through either the square for a man or the
circle slash circle for a woman. Now, in a particular pedigree, there are lines and
the lines mean different things based on whether they're vertical or horizontal. To indicate
a mating has taken place between a woman and a man, you connect the square and the circle
to each other with a horizontal line that's called a mating line by geneticists. And then
there is a vertical line that comes down from the horizontal line. That's called the line
of descent. And then that's going to lead to another horizontal line which branches out
into all of the symbols representing the children. And single children born one at a time come
off independently from this horizontal sib ship line. And those identical twins or fraternal
twins are indicated by lines that come off from the same point on the sib ship line.
If the twins are identical, there's a line that connects the two circles or squares.
If the twins are fraternal, then there's no line connecting them. So with a simple diagram
of this kind, you can see and visualize very complex relationships in the transmission
of diseases across many generations. And sometimes within a pedigree diagram, you can actually
get a sense of the transmission pattern, whether or not a disease is recessive or dominant
or something else. A classical rare recessive trait shows a pattern of horizontal transmission.
Now, what this means is that if you look at a pedigree diagram in which there is this
recessive trait like cystic fibrosis, what you'll see is a tendency for affected people,
people with the disease to be along the same horizontal line, brothers and sisters, sibs
of each other. And the reason that the pattern looks this way is because this is a recessive
disease, which means that people who carry the mutant variant do not express the disease.
So you can have a couple, a man and a woman who are perfectly healthy. They have no clue
that there's anything wrong with them and that they're carrying any mutation in their
genome and they will have children and they can have a number of children, all of whom
have the disease like cystic fibrosis. And this disease mutation was not only present
in the parents, but was probably present in grandparents and great grandparents. It could
have been present for many generations without people knowing about it until the two mutant
chromosomes, one from the mother, one from the father, come together. And that's why
you can get a couple of siblings in a row who express the disease because the probability
is high. It's 25% that any individual child of two carriers will express the disease, where
as in the general population, the frequency of cystic fibrosis is about one in 3,000 and
most other rare recessive diseases like this also have a similarly low frequency. Now sometimes
you can get more information and this happens when the two parents of the offspring actually
have common heritage. And in this particular example, if we trace back the pedigree for
five generations, we'll see that the mother and father of the disease children have common
ancestors, have a common pair of ancestors, actually five generations earlier. And so
this leads to the hypothesis that the mutation was present in one of those ancestors way
back five generations earlier, and it had been transmitted down two different lines until
it ended up in the mother and the father of the children who express the disease. If
you have a large enough pedigree with large numbers of cousins, first, second and third
cousins, then you'll see a recessive trait express itself as a couple of siblings in
one family and maybe a couple of siblings in another or maybe one sibling because not
all parents have multiple children and not every child of two carrier parents is going
to express the disease. Now a dominant disease shows a very different pattern than a recessive
disease. Dominant diseases in pedigrees are very rare because if the disease is dominant,
it means that there is no carrier per se, an individual who expresses the disease,
has the mutation causing the disease and then transmits that mutation to the next generation.
And typically diseases that affect people at a younger age when they're not, when they're
a child or in their teens will cause that person not to reproduce. So most dominant diseases
don't end up being visible in pedigrees because they cause death so early. But there are a
small number of diseases like Huntington's disease which are late onset diseases and
late onset disease is one that doesn't actually show itself until late in life after a person's
reproductive period is over. Huntington's disease is a good example of this because
it typically doesn't affect people until they're in their forties or fifties. Now Huntington's
disease is quite rare so it only affects about 1 in 10,000 people but when you have
an affected person they're almost always part of a large affected family. Every affected
person has an affected parent and that affected parent has an affected parent and so on. In
other words there is a line that you can see vertically connecting people who have the
disease from one generation to the next and this vertical line is distinctive for rare
dominant traits like this. Now there is sometimes what appears to be a vertical pattern that
is not indicative of a dominant trait and this is when you have a common recessive trait.
If a particular trait, it doesn't have to be a disease, it can be anything else. If
it's common in a population then it's likely though there will be many carriers and if
the homozygous person, the homozygous for the disease of Leo is actually healthy enough
to have children then what you can find is a marriage between somebody homozygous for
the trait, somebody who is a carrier and the carrier and the homozygote. If they have children
together some of their children will be trait carriers. Clearly this is only going to be
the case when the trait is something that doesn't affect somebody's reproductive ability
but you get this false sense of dominance when really what it is is a common recessive
trait and of course it's easy to distinguish this from an example like Huntington's disease
because Huntington's disease is very rare and you see it in individual families, you
see the vertical patterns. When you have a common recessive trait it's common and you'll
see it in many many families and that's how you can distinguish whether or not the vertical
pattern represents a dominant trait or a recessive trait. Now there are some traits that
are actually a combination of traits that are related to each other and some of the mental
traits that we're going to be talking about later in the course which were thought to
be distinct or thought not even to be genetic. We now know have a genetic connection to each
other and two such traits are bipolar disorder and unipolar depression. Bipolar disorder
describes a mental state, a mental disorder where people will go from a state of depression
to a state of mania or euphoria and they will go back and forth. Unipolar depression
is just describes a person who has a very strong susceptibility to being depressed all
the time and it turns out that people who have one of these traits are more likely to
have children or grandchildren with either of these traits. So unipolar depression and
a bipolar disorder are connected to each other in the way that they are inherited through
families and to draw a pedigree of a complex trait like this you need ways to distinguish
the two effects from each other and you can use different colors for example to color
in individuals with one mental trait or the other or a different pattern of black inside
each of the symbols. Now there is another kind of trait which we won't talk about today
but I want to prepare you for the next lecture which is a quantitative trait. A quantitative
trait is one in which there are no expressors and non-expressors it's a trait like height
for example where everybody has a height and the difference between people is indicated
with a number like a number of inches and so when you have a trait like this a quantitative
trait underneath each of the symbols for each of the individuals you put a number that
designates the expression of the trait in that individual. So if it's height for example
and we're measuring people in inches then one person might have the number 65 under
them means they're five foot five another person might have 60 which means they're five
feet tall and you can build a pedigree this way looking at these numbers and you can get
a sense by looking at these numbers whether the trait is being inherited and sometimes
there is a recessive or a dominant effect that works its way through because it's an
important gene that influences a particular trait. Now that is just sort of the basics
of genetic analysis. The second step which is a step that Mendel did not take but geneticists
realized was acting during the beginning of the 20th century is the use of linkage
and linkage represents the fact that genes are not they do not come as isolated entities
inside of the nucleus that there are a series of genes on chromosomes we have 23 pairs of
chromosomes and on each chromosome there are many genes as we've discussed many times in
the past and what happens is that if there are two genes or a gene and a SNP that are
on the same chromosome then more likely than not if they're on the same chromosome close
to each other they're going to be transmitted together so if there's a SNP which has allele
one and allele two and there's an allele which has the disease trait versus the normal and
the disease trait is on the same DNA as the SNP allele one then SNP allele one the disease
trait are likely to be transmitted together to a child or SNP number two and the normal
form of the disease gene are likely to be transmitted together and this is called linkage
when you have two different genetic entities that are likely to be transmitted with each
other rather than randomly. Now you can perform linkage analysis in people with SNPs because
we have SNPs that are markers for all the different regions of every chromosome in our
genome and if you look along any individual chromosome there will be SNPs in every person
that are heterozygous so you can look along the chromosome and there'll be a SNP here
where there's an A on one chromosome and C on the other chromosome pair, other part
of the chromosome pair and you look down the chromosome pair and you'll find SNPs all
along which can distinguish one of your chromosomes from your other. Your paternal chromosome and
your maternal chromosome can be distinguished in this way and then you can use these SNPs
to see whether any of them are linked to a particular trait that you'd like to follow
and so you transmit 23 chromosomes to your offspring and there's a particular trait and
you don't know where it is, you know it's genetic. You look in your offspring at all
the different SNPs and you see which SNPs are transmitted with the trait and obviously
you can't do this with a single child, you have to do this with many children of many
parents so let's look a little further at this and we see that what happens between
chromosomes during reproduction as I mentioned in the last lectures the chromosomes actually
recombine with each other so you have the two copies of chromosome one and what happens
in both sperm production and egg production is the two copies will recombine and so they'll
switch, they will cross over and so children will end up with a combined chromosome one
and every other chromosome where a portion of the chromosome comes from one grandparent
and the other portion comes from the other grandparent and the closer two genetic entities
are to each other the less likely they're going to be separated by a random recombination
event but if the two are very far apart on a particular chromosome and it's very likely
that they'll be separated by a recombination event and you can use this percentage or probability
of separation between a marker and a disease to map the marker and disease to each other
so when geneticists say map or genetic map what they're talking about is taking something
like a trait that is there's a black box between the trait and the genome as far as
you know you know that the trait is transmitted genetically but you don't know where the genes
are that are responsible for the trait and so what you do is you look at the trait being
transmitted from one generation to the next and you try to find snips that correlate with
that transmission and if it's a simple trait a trait caused by one gene then there will
only be snips on one chromosome that correlate with the trait either snippa leels that always
transmit it with the trait or snippa leels that are always transmitted with the normal
version of the gene and this is genetic mapping or linkage analysis and you can actually count
the number of times that a snip is transmitted together with a disease trait if the snip
and the disease trait are on different chromosomes then they're transmitted independently there's
only a 50% chance they'll be transmitted together if they're on the same chromosome the closer
they get or the closer they are to each other the less the percentage chance of being recombined
apart from each other and you can look at the probability or the percentage of times
that there the snip and the trait are separated from each other and that is equivalent to
the map distance so if a snip and a trait are separated from each other only 4% of the
time then that is a map distance of 4, 4 map units is how you would describe that.
Now this process this process of mapping and linkage was first used successfully to
discover a disease causing gene in 1989 less than a quarter of a century ago and the scientists
found markers they didn't have snips in those days but they had other types of markers for
DNA along the chromosome and they were able to find the gene causing cystic fibrosis and
they kept on getting markers that were closer and closer to the point where the gene was
located until they finally had markers that were absolutely linked to the gene meaning
that these markers always were transmitted together with the gene which meant that the
gene was very close to these markers and they looked in this region of chromosome they
found the gene which was named CFTR which means cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator
and once they had the gene they understood the molecular biology of cystic fibrosis which
had been a mystery until that point and so now we understand cystic fibrosis actually
quite well and it's the understanding of the disease that is the basis for developing
therapies to overcome this horrible disease that affects a number of children. Interesting
thing about cystic fibrosis we know a lot about this gene now there are organizations
that are dedicated to trying to cure this disease and understand this disease and since
1989 when children around the world have been analyzed who have cystic fibrosis scientists
have found over 1600 different mutations in this gene that cause the disease so it's not
just one mutation somewhere in this gene that's causing the gene not to function properly
but the mutation or many mutations occurred many many times and we know these are different
mutations because they're at different places along the coding region of the gene and so
a question you should ask yourself now is why are there so many mutations why do mutations
happen in cystic fibrosis well mutations happen everywhere of course but usually they disappear
especially if they're deleterious like this and yet here you have all of these different
mutations in the cystic fibrosis gene that have survived into people alive today and
the answer to why this is the case will be forthcoming two lectures from now. So from
a single gene that had been identified by genetic mapping in 1989 we now have over 10,000 genes
that are known to be linked to particular diseases and you can go and look at the list of these genes
and look at the list of diseases that have been linked to these genes at a website maintained
by the U.S. government called OMIM online Mendelian Inheritance in Man and there you
can get an up-to-date version of the gene we're going to talk about in a little bit about
the list and you can learn anything you want about any of the diseases that are on this
list. Now I'm going to switch to a trait that is not a disease trait but it's an interesting
prototype to look at how we study transmission of traits from one generation to the next
and this is the trait of eye color and in particular blue eyes. Blue eyes are very rare
outside of Europe. If you look at a map of Europe and you look at the proportion of people
who have blue eyes it's very high in the Scandinavian area and then it gets lower and lower as you
go southeast towards the Black Sea and outside of Europe there are very very few people if
any that have blue eyes. Now eye color is a little bit more complex than a simple trait
there are people who have pure blue eyes there are people who have pure brown eyes and then
there's a number of intermediate phenotypes which people call hazel or green or a number of
other words that are used to describe these particular phenotypes and so eye color is
complex and we've known that for a long time but if we do what Mendel did which is to eliminate
the complexity and just look purely at two pure versions of trait expression from this gene
we look just at the blue eye and the brown eye it turns out that eye color becomes very simple
that there is in fact a single position on a single chromosome that distinguishes blue
eyes from brown eyes and if you look at myself or my wife and my three children you'll see that I
have brown eyes my wife has hazel eyes and two out of my three children also have hazel eyes
my third child has brown eyes now the only way this could happen the only way that any of my
children could have any form of blue eye at all is if I'm a carrier I have to be a carrier for
the blue eye allele and it turns out that I am and the mapping of this allele which gives rise to blue
eyes was done in the same way as the cystic fibrosis mapping was performed except our tools are
more powerful now we have snips across the whole genome we could localize the gene responsible
for blue or brown eyes to a region and we can look in that region and we see there are about
seven or eight known coding sequences in that region and in by doing a computer analysis we can
look at what each of these genes does inside of the cells and we just saw and we can find that one of
these genes actually plays a role in pigment production which is what you would expect for a
gene that was involved in in eye color and you narrow in on the site where you have the DNA that
is correlated with the trait and it turns out that the the change that causes blue eyes is a
snip it's a single base change but by doing very careful analysis by looking at recombination
events you can actually place the single base change that causes blue eyes not in the gene that is
associated with pigment production but next to the gene so the blue eye mutation actually lies
outside of the pigment gene itself but by doing experiments in the laboratory scientists have
discovered that this mutation this snip mutation so it's a single base change outside of the gene
regulates the expression of that gene particularly in eyes that's a gene that is involved in pigment
production in the skin your hair and your eyes and this one base this one base change stops the pigment
from being produced just in the eyes it's a base change in an enhancer region and that's what causes people to
have blue eyes even though they can have dark hair and dark skin so it's a great example of what this
technology will will do for us now in this lecture we focused on classical approaches to gene mapping
how scientists use the tools of classical genetics to correlate transmission of a marker like a snip
that doesn't have a function necessarily and a trait and to zero in on DNA markers or particular
snips that are always transmitted together with the trait from parent to child and in that way you can
zero in on the region of chromosome the region of a particular chromosome that carries the gene that can
exist in two different forms that are responsible for for the trait in the next lecture we're going to go
beyond this simple genetic approach and we're going to look at how an understanding about all people in the
world are related to each other gives us the ability to discover the genes involved in very complex traits
including ones that are very important for for medical therapies including diabetes and heart disease and cancer
so that will all be discussed next time.
