In the last lecture, we examined the new technology of genome-wide association studies, which
is based on the fact that we now have DNA microarrays that can assay 500,000 SNPs in
each individual. And those microarrays can be applied to a large population of people.
And the third and most important part of the technology is based on the fact that we inherit
our genome, our genomes as blocks of DNA, not as isolated SNPs. And it's the fact that
we inherit our DNA as blocks that allows us to link particular blocks of DNA with particular
disease traits. Now, one of the things that has come into focus recently is the fact that
risk alleles for common diseases like diabetes and heart disease and other diseases that
affect a large number of people are actually quite common. And today, we're going to ask
the question and we're going to try to answer it as well. Why are there so many alleles,
so many alleles that people carry and that are so frequent? Why are there so many disease
alleles that are present in the population at such high frequencies? And to understand
why this is the case, we have to go back and think about the way that the genome is organized
and the way sexual reproduction takes place in the context of both Mendelian genetics
and evolution. Now, this is an example of a genotype at a single SNP. And we're looking
at the transmission of alleles at this SNP from parents to children. Now, each SNP has
two alleles. And in this instance, I'm just numbering the alleles one and two. They're
obviously A and C or G or T. And the parents are either going to be homozygous or heterozygous.
They can be homozygous for allele one or heterozygous with allele one and two or homozygous with
just allele two. And you can have different matchups in different sets of parents. Two
homozygous individuals for allele number one will have children who are all homozygous
for allele number one. And the same thing would be true if you had two parents who are
homozygous for allele number two. And based on just pure Mendelian ratios, you can calculate
the number of heterozygous that will be born from parents who are heterozygous and homozygous.
Or when you have a parent homozygous for allele two, another parent is homozygous for
allele one, then all of their children will be heterozygous with a combination of allele
one and two. Now what geneticists do, this is a subfield of population genetics, is they
will count in a large population the number of people with each genotype. Now this is
looking at the frequency of genotypes. That's a genotype is an allele combination. We can
dig deeper and look at the allele frequency and you'll find out in a moment why that's
important. And if we want to determine the allele frequency, we have to count the number
of times an allele is present in a population. And actually the number of times a gene is
present in a population or SNP is actually twice the number of the population because
each person has two copies of each chromosome. So if we're looking at this particular SNP,
allele number one, those who are homozygous for allele number one have two copies of
this allele. And if we wanted to count the number of alleles, we'd have to double that.
And those who are heterozygous with one copy of allele number one, we just count that one
copy once and we add the one copy from heterozygous to the two copies from homozygous and we
end up with the number of copies of allele number one in the population. We can find
the number of copies of allele number two in the population by subtracting from the
total number of chromosomes. The total number of chromosomes is twice the number of people.
In the Pi diagrams that I've already shown you in several lectures, we're looking at
allele frequencies. So this is a Pi diagram for this particular example. And the blue
part of the Pi represents allele number one and the red part of the Pi represents allele
number two. And a Pi diagram is a very nice visual tool for looking at the proportion
of each of the alleles at a particular SNP locus. And you can make Pi diagrams where
there is a different Pi for each population that has been sampled. The reason I am explaining
the allele frequency to you is because alleles are actually the units of selection. It's
not genotypes, it's not the traits that are expressed. Fundamentally, it's the alleles.
The alleles individually are either going to be selected for, in other words, the presence
of the allele is going to increase the adaptability of the organisms that carry it, or the presence
of the allele will have a negative effect, or it might have a neutral effect, or as we'll
find out in a moment, it might have a different effect depending on whether the allele is
present in one copy in a heterozygote or two copies in a homozygote. So the allele unit
is very important to understand and to follow. Now, if we assume that a population has what
I would call random mating, in other words, individuals in a population, there are men
and there are women, and they come together and get married, without regard to their particular
alleles at this SNP locus, you can figure out from the allele frequency what the fraction
of children will be that have our homozygous for one allele or the other. And in this little
chart, the allele frequency for allele number one is represented by the letter P, the allele
frequency for allele two is Q, and the fraction of offspring that will be homozygous for allele
one is obtained just by multiplying the P's together, that's P squared, you multiply
0.7 times 0.7 and you get 0.49, 49%. And that says when you know the allele frequency
and you make the assumption that people are getting married, irrespective of what their
alleles are at this locus, you can actually predict the number of children among the population
of children who will be homozygous or heterozygous or homozygous for the other allele. And this
is a simple equation when you put the three possible genotypes together, this is called
the Hardy-Weinberg equation because scientists named Hardy and Weinberg independently derive
the equation. And the equation is P squared plus two PQ plus Q squared equals one. P is
the frequency of the first allele, P squared is the fraction of individuals who will be
born homozygous for the first allele, and the same thing will hold true for Q, the second
allele, Q squared is the fraction out of the total that will be born homozygous for the
second allele, and two PQ is the fraction of people who will be born heterozygous.
Now this is important because we can use this background knowledge to predict how likely
it is that a mutation with a certain increase in survival advantage is to reach fixation
in a population. In other words, if one individual starts out with a mutation, for example, in
a population of 500 people, you can run a computer model assuming that individuals with
this mutation have a 2% increase in survival, you can simulate this, and what you'll find
is that very often because the mutation has occurred in just one person under 500, the
mutation will disappear just by chance, it won't be transmitted to offspring, and the
mutation will be gone from the population. But occasionally, if mutation gains any traction
just by chance, if it is transmitted into enough individuals, it will take off. It will
take off in the sense that eventually everybody in the population will have this mutation,
even if it provides an advantage of just 2%. To give you an idea of how quickly this can
happen is if you have a population of 500 with an advantageous mutation occurring in
one person, then within 500 to 750 generations you're going to see this allele take over
and eliminate all of the alternative alleles at this particular locus, and then there's
only this allele. And 750 generations of people, if you assume generation time of 20 years,
is only 15,000 years. So this means that alleles that have a very small advantage that they
give to people can be selected, can eliminate the alternative allele, and be the only one
that survives in a population. The degree of benefit that a particular allele provides
does not have to be very large. We know this mathematically, and we also know it from
empirical studies. And a great example is what happened in Bangkok, Thailand, during
the 1960s when the authorities there decided to spray the entire land side for mosquitoes.
They sprayed with DDT, which is a very strong chemical, which eliminates mosquitoes. They
wanted to get rid of mosquitoes so they could eliminate malaria. Now what happened within
a year of when the spraying started is that mosquitoes in the population gained resistance
to the DDT. And within two years, nearly every mosquito in the countryside was resistant
to DDT, so there was no reason to spray anymore. And the resistance was due to a large amount
of pollution in an individual mosquito that provided a huge advantage to survival for mosquitoes,
because all the other mosquitoes were dying from DDT, and this one mosquito was resistant,
so it was able to breed, and it's offspring were able to breed. Within two years, boom,
all the mosquitoes in Thailand are resistant to DDT. So the authorities stopped spraying
DDT, and then this is where the remarkable thing happened is that as soon as they stopped
spraying DDT, the allele that allowed resistance to the chemical came down in its frequency.
It shut down almost as quickly as it shut up, and within a couple of years there were
no longer any homozygotes for this resistant allele. And the reason this is so interesting
is because the allele that gives mosquitoes resistance to DDT actually has a tiny negative
selection on insects when they're not exposed to the chemical, because the insects have
to actually produce this mutant protein, and it takes energy to produce every protein.
So if you don't have to produce the protein, then you're not using energy in a way that's
not beneficial to you, you're using a little less energy. You have a tiny advantage in
surviving, and if there's no DDT around, boom, the resistant insects disappear over
several generations. So this shows you how powerful the process of selection can be.
And it shouldn't have been surprising when we started to analyze populations in a very
sophisticated way, looking at SNPs and looking at the different alleles that people have
in Europe and Asia and Africa, but it was surprising to geneticists when they discovered
that many of the alleles, thousands of alleles, in fact, present in populations, have actually
been selected in the last five to ten thousand years. This is quite remarkable, but now we
realize that this, in fact, is the case. And so we can look at individual SNP allele for
frequencies, and this is an example of a situation where mutation occurred in sub-Saharan Africa.
And you can look at the different pie charts in this picture of the globe, and you'll see
that outside of Africa, nearly all people have the normal allele, the ancestral allele,
and only in Africa is there a second allele represented in green that is at a high frequency.
So clearly there is a selection that has taken place in the African population, and it turns
out that this particular allele, this mutation, provides a protection against malaria. Malaria
is endemic in sub-Saharan Africa, and there are a number of genes that have mutated to
provide people with protection against malaria, and when those mutations occur, they are increased
in terms of their frequency in the population because they provide this advantage to people.
Now another example of an advantage that is provided to one population but not another
is a gene or a number of genes that are involved in skin pigmentation. And in this example,
scientists can look across the region of the genome, and they can identify parts of the
genome which have much larger blocks. In other words, a block of DNA that's larger than
you would expect if our common ancestors were more distant in the past, and there is a very
large block of DNA that is inherited together only within European populations and not within
African or Asian populations at this particular SNP, and this is a particular SNP which is
a marker for the regulation of a pigment, and the mutation which is indicated with the
green part of the pie charts in this figure, the mutation decreases the amount of pigmentation
in a person's skin, and you can see the dramatic difference in the allele frequency of this
mutation around the world. The mutation is almost completely fixed, it's almost 100%
frequency in Western Europe, and this mutation also has a very high frequency in Southwest
Asia, and it doesn't exist in Africa or the Americas or in China. So it's an example of
a mutation that occurred that was selected on one continent, and there is another mutation
and a different gene also recognized by a SNP polymorphism, which is also very prevalent
in Western Europe, and this particular SNP is not present in Southwest Asia, and this
SNP represents another allele that plays a role in pigment production in the skin and
reduces the amount of pigment that is made in the skin. Now, if you look at a map of
the world and you look at the skin pigmentation of people in populations from around the
world, you'll see a very clear difference between people who live near the equator and
people who live at higher latitudes. People who live near the equator have darker skin
color and people at higher latitudes have lighter skin color, and the reason for this
is the fact that there are two different selective forces that are being balanced in the determination
of skin color. On the one hand, if there's a lot of sunlight, then you want to be able
to have protection against skin cancer. The sunlight has ultraviolet rays that will hit
your skin, and if you have a light colored skin, it's more likely that the UV radiation
will mutate DNA and cause cancer, and so for people living near the equator, an allele
at these different pigmentation genes, alleles at all of these genes that give you a dark
skin color are selected for. Now, what happened is that when people left Africa and moved
into Europe and Asia, there is less sunlight there because the Earth's angle of orientation
is such that there's less sunlight coming in each unit, square unit of space on the
Earth, and with less sunlight there's less chance of cancer, but there is also more chance
of having a vitamin D deficiency because you also need UV light to work in the process
of producing vitamin D, and so it's actually an advantage to people as they get further
away from the equator to have a lighter skin color, and the lighter skin color allows more
sunlight to go in, to be able to produce vitamin D, and with the fact that there is less sunlight
in general, you don't need as much pigmentation to protect yourself against skin cancer.
Now, of course, none of this is conscious. This is all selection that is going on in
a Darwinian sense. This is all selection that has gone on in the last 5,000 to 10,000 years
for the most part. The other interesting point about selection for light skin color is that
different mutations occurred in different populations. People living in China also have
light skin color, and they have mutations in other genes involved in pigmentation. You
can see the two genes that are involved in lightening the skin in Europe are not mutated
in China, so there are other mutations in China which cause a lightening of skin.
Now, another example of selection, which occurred actually in one continent originally, is the
selection for the ability to drink milk as an adult. A normal person, meaning our ancestors
before the Neolithic Revolution and before the domestication of cows, people then only
got milk when they were infants, when they were nursing from their mothers. Once children
were weaned, there was no opportunity to drink milk again because they had to survive by hunting
and gathering. But once cows were domesticated, which occurred in the area of Turkey and then
spread into Europe, once cows were domesticated, then milk was available for everybody of every
age to drink. The problem is that the ancestral allele for the enzyme that breaks down lactose,
the main sugar in milk, that allele, the ancestral allele, turns on the gene in a child, and then
as soon as the child doesn't need it anymore, by the age of five, the gene is normally turned off,
so you don't waste any energy making an enzyme that you don't need. What happened in the European
population is there was an advantage to having this gene beyond for a longer time because it meant
that adults could drink milk and eat cheese without having indigestion. What you see when you look
at pie charts of the distribution of alleles at the lactase gene, you see that in European
populations there's this mutation which has become very frequent in parts of Europe and Finland
and the mutation is high as 70 or 80% in frequency. And this is a dominant mutation because what
this mutation does is it doesn't affect the protein structure or function, it's a mutation in a
regulatory region such that people who have this mutation have this gene expressed throughout their
lives and these people can digest milk and this increases their chances of survival and the
mutation provided no advantage in Africa or Asia where there wasn't any milk in the diet. But more
recently actually, more recently meaning in the last couple of thousands of years, domesticated
cows were brought into Africa as well and then you began to see in Africa over the last several
thousand years selection again for mutations that allowed lactase to be produced in in adults. Now the
last example I'm going to give you of selection is a very interesting one because not only because of
the disease it causes and the protection it provides but also because it very well illustrates the
concept of balanced selection which is an important concept to understand to be able to perceive why so
many diseases are so common. And this is a picture of a tiny species of mosquito that is infamous
because of the fact that it can transmit the malaria organism from one person to another. The
organism that causes malaria will infect red blood cells and you can see how the organism takes
over the cell causes the cell to die and people who have malaria have a high risk of dying and it's a
very serious disease. Now if you look at the distribution of malaria in Africa you see that it
is in sub-Saharan Africa, malaria, the mosquitoes cannot survive in the Sahara Desert and they've
been pretty much eliminated from from South Africa and then if you look at the allele frequency of
a mutation at the beta hemoglobin gene you'll see that the allele frequency of a particular mutation
matches the distribution of malaria. This mutation is the sickle cell mutation and the sickle cell
mutation allele frequency is at high 20 to 25 percent levels in regions where malaria is endemic. And
the reason for this is because this mutation provides protection to people when they're infected by
malaria, when they're infected by the organism, there's a much less chance that the organism will
actually get into red blood cells and cause disease. And this mutation is a single base change at a
single amino acid coding location in the DNA. That single base change causes a single amino acid
change, that single amino acid change changes the three-dimensional structure of the hemoglobin
protein. So instead of it being like a sphere, it's extended and the extended structure of the
hemoglobin protein produced by heterozygotes for this mutation causes the red blood cell to be
extended in shape and that protects the red blood cell from infection with the organism that causes
malaria. Now the problem with this mutation is it provides an advantage to heterozygotes, but a
very serious disadvantage to people who are homozygous. It causes sickle cell anemia, which is a
terrible disease that was lethal before the age of five, before modern medical treatment was available.
And the birth of sickle cell children is a consequence of the high frequency of the sickle cell
mutation. If the sickle cell mutation has an allele frequency of a quarter, you can calculate what
percentage of the children are going to be born homozygous for the sickle cell mutation, which
causes the disease, by multiplying one quarter by one quarter and getting one sixteenth. Now the
sickle cell mutation in one copy is providing an advantage. It's only in two copies that it's
providing a disadvantage. So how is selection going to work in this situation? And the answer is
that the allele frequency is balanced between these two different effects. When the allele
frequency is low, so the allele frequency is at a low level, there is less of a chance that two
carriers who are protected against malaria, two carriers will will marry and have a child
because the allele frequency is low. And that will make the allele frequency rise because carriers
are selected for the advantage of being protected against malaria, so there'll be more of them
surviving and the allele frequency will go up. But soon it'll reach a point at which it's high
enough that the frequency at which carriers marry each other gets high enough such that there is a
higher frequency of children born with sickle cell anemia, and that's a negative selection. And so
what happens is in terms of evolution and selection, you see this balancing of forces. There's a
force that's pushing down the allele frequency because the homozygotes have this horrible disease
which causes death. But when the allele frequency gets too low, there's a force pushing it up
because the heterozygote gains an advantage. And this is called balancing selection. And
balancing selection has turned out to be very important in a number of different traits.
And one example that we're going to discuss in a later lecture has to do with a gene involved in the
the transmission of dopamine signals in the brain. And it turns out that one allele
causes people to be more risk-taking, the other allele causes more risk aversion,
and actually it's best for people to be in the middle, not too risk-taking, not too risk-averse,
and the heterozygote has an advantage. And you look all over the world at the allele frequency
at this gene and you see that the allele frequency is about 50-50 all throughout the world,
which is evidence that being about average in terms of risk-taking or risk aversion is beneficial
to people in every population. And so it is this fact that there are many genes throughout the genome
where a heterozygote has an advantage over others. And in this situation the heterozygote
has a selective advantage while people who are born homozygous are disadvantaged. And you get this
situation where selection is balanced, keeping these mutations present in the population at a
certain level relative to how strong the force is in favor of heterozygotes versus the force
against homozygotes. Now in this lecture we talked about the importance of looking at specific
alleles and the impact that the alleles themselves, single bits of DNA on one of your chromosomes,
the effect that that has on your survival or the survival of your children. And in the next
lecture we're going to look at the concept of the selfish gene. This concept explains or tries to
explain why particular alleles are so prevalent in the population even when they have such negative
effects.
