Music
Welcome back.
In the last lecture we examined how natural selection operates on human beings as well as other animals and plants.
And we learned that natural selection doesn't always operate according to the way that Darwin thought it should operate.
And one of the most striking examples of that is the fact that in sub-Saharan Africa about 5% of children are born with sickle cell anemia, which is a horrible disease.
And if you were following Darwin's concepts of natural selection, this should be a trait that is eliminated from the population and yet it is maintained at that level in that population.
Today we're going to learn more about the actual reasons for deleterious traits to be present like this and maintained in a population.
And a lot of it has to do with where we focus the operation of natural selection at the level of the individual, the level of the gene, or at a different level.
And we're also going to talk today about what it is that makes human beings moral and what it is that makes human beings different from other animals.
And the answer to that question is not very simple to come by if you think about it hard.
Most importantly, what is it that is unique and important about being a human being?
There are lots of things unique about our bodies that are not very important.
We have an immune system that's distinct from the immune systems in other organisms.
We have certain bone structures that are unique, but that's not really what makes us human beings.
Well, perhaps it's our genes.
If we look at the DNA of a chimpanzee, our closest living relative, and the DNA in ourselves, we'll see differences, differences that are unique to the chimpanzee or to the whole human species.
But those differences don't seem like they could actually be the cause of humaneness.
We now understand what SNPs are, SNPs are single-based differences that exist between different human beings.
And if we look at a chimpanzee genome and compare it to a human genome, basically what we see are SNPs.
We see 35 million SNPs, but those SNPs are just a change of a T to a C.
Just one little bit of information is being changed.
In addition to those SNP differences, there are also copy number differences, about 5 million pieces of DNA which are duplicated.
So there are two copies in the chimp and one in humans or vice versa.
So at the DNA level, we see these material differences and DNA is static.
So it's hard to associate a static entity with what it is that makes us a human being.
Furthermore, we can grow human cells in the laboratory that have a full complement of human DNA, a complete human genome,
and nobody considers those cells to be a human being.
In fact, there are cells in the laboratory growing right now that have been growing continuously for 70 years since the woman who provided those cells died.
So it's not simply our genes, it's not simply our genes being in something that is alive.
That's not what defines our humanity.
What about our appearance? Is that unique and important?
Well, it's certainly unique. We don't look like the chimpanzee very much.
Actually, if you look deeper into the chimp's face and into the chimp's body, you'll see that we are actually extremely closely related in our appearance,
but we are distinct.
But that's not what makes us human.
There are a lot of people born who don't have the appearance of the typical human being, and that doesn't stop them from being part of human society.
So appearance is really quite superficial.
It's not something that really is so important in describing what a human being is.
Now, what about intelligence?
Well, clearly, human beings are more intelligent than chimpanzees.
We can do all sorts of things.
We can solve very complicated problems.
But in this case, we've actually created things that are not human beings that are nearly as intelligent.
Some would say more intelligent than people in some ways.
And there was an interesting quote in The New York Times on January 28, 2009.
It's an interesting story about the Mars rover.
This is the motorized robot that is running around on Mars.
And the story said that the Mars rover is disoriented somewhat after a glitch.
Quoting from the story, on the 1,800th Martian day of its mission, NASA's Spirit rover remains a bit disoriented.
NASA's mission managers reported that the Spirit had behaved oddly on Sunday.
On that day, the Spirit acknowledged receiving its driving directions from Earth, but it did not move.
More strangely, the Spirit had no memory of what it had done.
Another rover system did record that power was being drawn from the batteries.
So the quote from the NASA scientist was, this means that the rover is awake doing something,
but they had no idea what the rover was thinking about.
But before and after images showed that the Spirit ended the day where it began.
So whatever the rover was doing, it didn't have an effect on its movement.
It's a happy ending to the story.
The report says the Spirit now reports to be in good health and responds to commands from Earth.
So this is very interesting because it's just a nice example of how electronic things, robots and computers,
actually have a lot of the traits that we consider to be rational.
And also they can have mental disorders occasionally as well, which is suggested by this story.
So intelligence isn't alone what makes us human.
Computers can do a lot of things more intelligently than we can.
What about morality?
There's a lot of people who think that that is what is unique to the human species, is our morality,
that no other organism has morality.
And what is morality?
Well, it's defined in different ways by different people, but the basic idea is knowing right from wrong.
The problem is that not everybody's knowing of right from wrong is the same.
Throughout human history, tribes of people have been killing each other,
and they're doing the same thing today.
And our country goes to war and we knowingly kill other people,
but we claim that it's moral to kill in this situation.
Other people will look at exactly the same event and they're just as ethically minded as you or me,
and they'll come to a different conclusion about what is right and wrong.
So it's interesting that the claim is that morality is knowing right from wrong,
but lots of people who think they know right from wrong have a completely different conception of what is right and wrong.
This makes it very difficult, again, to zero in what it is that is moral about people.
Now one moral attribute that people say humans have specifically is the idea of cooperation.
So cooperation means that you will help your fellow citizens, your fellow human beings,
accomplish something that nobody could do alone.
But in fact, biologically, cooperation is really quite simple to derive.
In this little video clip here, there is a group of ants, a dozen or two dozen ants.
They are cooperating to bring a giant worm up a wall in Cambodia,
and you can see cooperation in these little animals that have brains that you cannot even see.
The brains are so small in these ants and yet those brains are powerful enough to convince each of these ants
to work together as a team to do something.
So if ants can do it and lots of other animals do it, then cooperation is not something that is unique to human beings.
Well, we can say the morality we have is at a higher level.
Look, we can build whole cities.
Well, in fact, there are little animals like termites that can build cities that are in proportion much larger than our cities.
If you look at my son standing next to this termite mount,
so this is a mound that has been constructed by 5 to 10 million termites, about the same as the population of New York City.
And this is enormous.
This mound of a city is taller than my son and it has a huge amount of volume and space inside of it and it's organized.
So it has different divisions that are used for different purposes.
So it's not simply that we can build these very complex societies because termites and ants can do that as well.
Well, we can love one another.
Perhaps that's what makes us human.
But that's not quite true either.
If we look at other primates like the baboon in this picture with her child,
there's a great deal of love that is evidenced in this picture as the mother shields the child from harm.
She has her arm around the child in a particular way that we would associate with mother-child relationship in human beings as well.
And the other kind of love, which is romantic love, we see in lots of bird species.
And these are two birds that are so close together that you can barely distinguish them apart.
They're in love with each other.
So it's not love.
It's not our ability to have emotions and feel about each other that makes us human.
But we can now turn the question around, which is what I want to do at this moment,
and ask why do animals have these traits?
We think human beings are unique, and we think we understand why we are moral and why we do these good things.
But if that's the case, why do animals do these things when they don't have the same degree of consciousness or self-awareness as we have?
And it's important to understand what I mean when I say morality.
The most generalized definition of morality is altruistic behavior.
And that means somebody is doing something for somebody else or for other people that is at his or her own expense.
In other words, I am generously helping you off because you fell on the ground.
But I help you up.
Or I generously get together with other people to build a house for humanity.
Now, Darwin was very confused about this because his theory of natural selection was focused on the individual.
And if an individual organism is helping another organism at its own expense that should be selected against.
Those organisms shouldn't survive because they're not optimizing their own energy to create children.
There are some extraordinary examples of Darwinian sacrifice in the ants.
And this is a view of leaf cutter ants.
And this species of ant, the leaf cutting ants will go off and cut down bits of leaves and they'll bring them back to the nest
where they're put onto a farm to grow fungus.
And the ants have lots of different duties and different ants function in different ways.
These are all worker ants.
They're all females and they're all completely sterile.
Now, according to Darwin, that's the worst possible thing to be if you're not dead is to be sterile because it means you can't have any children.
So Darwin was very perplexed by this fact that there are so many species of ants and bees termized other species.
Which seem to give up their reproductive ability and yet they survive.
Another great example is with the praying mantis.
The praying mantis male engages in copulation with the female.
After the copulation is finished, the female eats the male.
Now, you would think that this would be something that Darwin would or natural selection rather would select against.
You're dying in the act of copulation.
You would think that an organism would say I'm not going to copulate or would protect itself in some way from being killed after copulating.
And yet this species of praying mantis, many different species of praying mantis, continue to behave in this way.
So an explanation was missing.
Darwin died without understanding this until the 1960s.
When Bill Hamilton came up with the most significant advance to the theory of evolution since Darwin and actually since then till now,
there's been nothing as important as what Bill Hamilton did.
Bill Hamilton came up with the idea but it was popularized and named by Richard Dawkins as selfish gene theory.
And Richard Dawkins published a book called The Selfish Gene based on this theory.
And the amazing thing about this theory like all powerful theories is that explains far more than was intended.
Now, the basic foundation for the theory is that genes are forms of digital information.
And as we talked about earlier in the course, information is not material.
Information exists. It can be encoded in a material substance, but it's not material itself.
If you purchase online music from a music store online and it comes into your computer and you've paid 99 cents for this piece of music,
what you've bought is not a material substance anymore. It used to be a CD or a record.
Now all you're buying is the information. Lots of other people can buy the same information.
And if we look at genes as being packets of information, then we can see that genes can operate among multiple individuals,
not just in one individual. If all of those individuals have the same gene, then they're equivalent in the eyes of the gene being metaphorical here.
So the gene itself doesn't care which one of these workers transmits it to the next generation.
In fact, none of the workers will transmit it to the next generation.
The workers are working toward the benefit of the queen who has the same genes as the workers.
And the workers carrying out their tasks allows the queen to reproduce many, many, many more workers.
And so the gene itself is being transmitted from the queen, but the gene is also present.
Not a copy of the gene, but the gene itself or the allelic form of that gene is also present in each of the individuals in this community.
And the gene is turning the animal into a machine in a sense.
The gene is controlling animal behavior, making the animals behave the way they do to increase its transmission through the queen.
It turns out that the selfish gene is not a one gene or another gene, it's all genes.
All genes are selfish genes because if they weren't selfish genes, they wouldn't survive.
Now being a selfish gene doesn't mean it knows what it's doing. It doesn't mean it has consciousness.
It just means that the rules of natural selection operating at the gene level will cause genes or pieces of DNA information.
Not the DNA itself, but the information encoded within the DNA will cause that piece of information to be in competition with other pieces of information.
And the competition is won by the packet of information that can get itself transmitted to more offspring.
That's all selfish gene theory says, but it says an amazing amount about so many different biological properties of organism today.
First, we had already mentioned the praying mantis. The male gets eaten by the female. Why would we allow such a thing or why would the praying mantis allow such a thing?
Well, let's imagine it from the gene perspective. What's happening is the male is placing his genes into the female.
Once his genes are in the female, the gene doesn't need the male anymore from the gene perspective.
And so the gene tells the, not the gene, but the whole genome tells the impregnated female to eat her suitor, to eat the male,
because that will provide her with food resources. You don't need him anymore.
And it's a system that has evolved to allow better transmission of the gene. It doesn't care about the guy who gets eaten.
So the selfish gene theory explains lots of other things. One of the most common examples of an altruistic instinct,
an altruistic instinct is one where you're giving out more than you're getting.
The most common example is parental behavior in terms of children.
There's a maternal instinct in mammals, almost every mammal, and in many birds as well.
The maternal instinct is that when the child is born, the mother takes care of the child.
Why does the mother take care of the child?
Well, the answer from selfish gene theory is that the child has the genes that the mother had,
and those genes are telling the mother now that she's had a child to take care of the genes in the child.
In some species like the wingless cormorant, in the Galapagos, the mother and father share duties.
And so the father is actually waiting in this picture to take over for the mother and sit and keep the chick warm.
And again, it's because the father's genes are in the chick, and the genes in the chick and the genes in the father are the same,
and they're determining the behavior to a very great extent of both the parent and the child.
Now, sometimes genes from different species cooperate, and these are familiar examples.
One example is a bee that goes from flower to flower, collecting honey.
And we all know why the bee is doing this. The bee is collecting honey.
Well, that's its source of food, and the flower is producing honey so that when the bee attaches to it, it picks up some pollen from the flower.
The pollen, of course, is the gene container, and then the bee will fly someplace else and drop the pollen off at another organism in that species.
And what that allows this flower organism to do is it allows its genes to flow over great distances, which is a great thing for this organism.
It wants to spread as far as it can, but it can't get up and walk as a flower.
And so it uses the bee to take its genes from where it's located to other sites that can be pretty far away.
Another example of selfish genes in action occurs with reciprocal altruism, and this is a fantastic site where there's this big carnivorous fish called a grouper,
and it has its mouth open, and there's a blue wrasse, a very little fish, inside of its mouth cleaning the parasites off of the inside of its mouth.
And the grouper is not biting down. It's not killing the blue wrasse.
Now, the reason is because the genes of both of these species understand that they have a deal.
The grouper gets rid of its parasites because the blue wrasse is cleaning the parasites away from inside and from the outside of its body as well,
and the blue wrasse gets the food source. It's eating the parasites, and that's its food source, and it's actually protected by the grouper as well.
But why doesn't the grouper just eat this blue wrasse?
It would provide protein for him, and there are other blue wrasse around that could clean off his parasites,
and the answer is because that would trigger a cascade of genetic changes.
The genes which are present in other blue wrasse would realize metaphorically that they shouldn't go into the grouper's mouth,
and therefore you would have blue wrasse stop going into grouper's mouths, and then the groupers would die earlier because they would have these parasites that couldn't be cleaned out.
And that gives you an example of how the selfish gene theory works to explain phenomena like this.
Now sometimes opposite instincts occur in the same individual.
Anytime you have a behavior that is genetically controlled, that's considered an instinct, and each species has certain behaviors that are natural to that species,
such that all organisms that grow up in that species instinctively will carry out certain behaviors.
Now sometimes organisms have opposite behaviors programmed into them,
and one of the clearest examples of this is the fight-flight calculation that many animals do.
The fight-flight calculation is that two organisms, two members of the same species, usually two males, will come up against each other looking for a fight,
and each of these organisms, each of these individuals, has to decide what its chances are of winning the fight,
because if it doesn't have a high chance of winning, the best thing it could do is run away.
If it has a high chance of winning, then there's a reason to stay and beat up your competitor,
because if the male beats up his competitor, it's more likely that that male will get a chance to have more females to breed with.
This fight-flight calculation occurs in all animals.
Another extension of Selva's gene theory is called sexual selection.
The great visual example of sexual selection is what happens in peacocks,
and peacocks can spread out these large feathers and try to attract female to breed with them,
and in this particular example here, this male is pretty ugly.
It has what used to be feathers, but most of the feathers were bitten off by another male.
Now, the genes in the female can see that this male is ugly,
and the genes in the female tell the female not to mate with this guy,
and so instead, the female will mate with the other guy, the guy who ripped apart this guy's wings,
and the winner of this event is the peacock with the full brightly colored feathers.
The female is driven by her genes to mate with the male, who is the brightest, prettiest male.
It doesn't know what she's doing. She's doing this unconsciously because of her genes,
and the male has instincts as well. The male is trying to court the female,
and all of these behaviors are being organized by the genes.
Now, what about people? If animals are driven by genetic instincts, why not us?
Aren't human instincts the basis for human nature?
And the answer is yes. To a certain extent, instincts do drive our behavior,
do drive our behavioral predispositions,
but being instinctive is not the same thing as being right or good.
There are instincts that exist in human beings that are not right or good,
and we can't use the notion of what is natural to determine what is good or ethical.
But there's a uniquely human characteristic that comes out of this whole discussion today,
and that is that human beings alone, among all species on Earth,
can understand that their behaviors are often driven by instincts,
which are a result of genes trying to control them.
They can understand that, and they can battle back.
They can actually go against their instincts when they think they should go against their instincts.
And that's one thing that no other species comes close to being able to do,
and no electronic robot or computer can go against its instincts
because the computer's instincts are what we've programmed into the computer.
So the computer does whatever we've programmed it to do,
even if it sometimes breaks down like the Mars rover.
So this really is what is different about human beings, quite different about human beings.
So today we learned about the importance of looking at genes as packets of information,
because once you see a gene as a packet of information,
then it becomes obvious that the same packet of information can be present in multiple organisms.
And the gene in those multiple organisms can organize the behavior of those multiple organisms
to make more copies of itself from anyone.
So if you have an ant colony, they can all be organized to make more copies of the gene from the queen.
That's the way that works.
So natural selection occurs at the level of genes, not at the level of individuals.
And this goes back to the example of sickle cell anemia I talked about previously.
The reason that 5% of children in sub-Saharan Africa are born with sickle cell anemia
is because the gene is causing this to happen.
The sickle cell gene is sacrificing, unfortunately, such children
to the benefit of being transmitted through the heterozygote that can avoid malarial infection.
So the selfish gene theory explains a lot of different aspects of biology.
And it's very disturbing, because if you think about life, we live for a finite amount of time
and we have children and they have children and so on, but an individual life is actually quite short.
The gene, on the other hand, can survive for millions, sometimes billions of years.
The information is transmitted from one generation to the next,
and it can be transmitted accurately from one generation to the next.
We clearly see within our own genomes, packets of information, huge packets of information,
which are the same as the ones carried in chimpanzees,
and we can go all the way back billions of years to the first cell
and see a connection between the information in that first cell and the information in our genomes.
This is a very disturbing idea, that we are the slaves of our genomes.
And the only thing that makes this less disturbing than otherwise would be
is the fact that we are not the slaves.
We don't have to be, that we can think about what we are doing.
We can say, yes, this is an instinct, but I shouldn't follow this instinct
and I'm not going to follow the instinct.
And that's what makes human beings different from all other species.
Now in the next lecture, I'm going to look at the way in which genes create instincts.
It's through the brain.
It's through the genes determining the development of the human brain.
And the genes also determine the fact that we as human beings have the ability to ignore them.
