Hello, and welcome back.
In the last lecture, we examined the role that genes play in determining animal behavior
and also in determining, to a certain extent, human behavior.
We now understand, through the selfish gene concept, that all behaviors expressed by all
animals are only there.
They're only expressed because they promote the transmission of certain selfish genes.
So the mind comes from the selfishness of genes that are using the mind to create behaviors
and personalities that promote transmission of genes.
Where exactly does the gene operate in promoting behavior?
Well, we know the answer is the brain.
The genes in an organism, in the one cell organism that develops into an animal or human,
those genes have a program that allows that developing embryo and fetus to create a brain.
And that brain is hardwired, to a certain extent, with the instincts that are expressed
by that animal, productively, to allow that gene to transmit itself via the animal's
behavior in life.
So today, we're going to look at the brain in more detail.
We're going to compare the human brain to the brain of other animals to try to get some
insight into what makes our minds different from animal minds.
The mind only exists as an outcome, as an emerging property of the brain.
And the brain, as I said, is in existence because of the genes that were present in
that first cell that developed into a human being.
So the brain has been known about for a long time, but until the 19th century, it seemed
like an amorphous mass with only a vague and mysterious connection to mentality.
It was at the end of the 19th century that Ramon E. Cajal, a Spanish microscopist, was
the first one to break the ignorance.
He was the scientist who went in with his microscope, took slices of brains of various
animals, and he brought forth the entire theory of the way in which the brain works.
And he has some wonderful drawings of the brain tissues that he looked at.
Ramon E. Cajal recognized the existence of neurons.
He recognized that the brain is filled with neurons, these are cells, and that these
neurons are connected to each other through certain extremities that we're going to talk
about more in a moment.
He also realized that there were perhaps millions, hundreds of millions, or billions of neurons
in the brains of some animals, and he hypothesized that it was the network of interactions among
neurons that gave rise to mental capacity.
He was the first person to have any inkling about what was going on inside the brain,
and he got it mostly right.
He won the Nobel Prize for his effort.
Now he was a very good drawer, and he has pictures that he drew of the various kinds
of cells that exist in the brain.
These are all versions of neurons, but there are many different kinds of neurons which
are very different shapes to carry out different functions in the brain.
The similarity among all neurons is they all have a cell body, their cells, they all have
a cell body, which is where the nucleus is, where the cytoplasm is, where translation
into proteins and metabolism takes place, and then they have these extremities that
come out from the cell body.
And there's two kinds.
One kind is called a dendrite, and the dendrites will come off the cell body, maybe only a
few of them come off a neuron, and they branch and branch and branch and branch out until
there are a thousand, sometimes 10,000 endpoints on the branches that represent the dendrites
of a neuron.
Now a neuron also has another kind of extremity, and this is an axon, and an axon branches
off from one point of the cell body, and it usually doesn't have as many branchings
afterwards, it may branch a few times.
But there's a very important difference between the axon and the dendrites for each of these
neurons, and the difference is the signal comes in through the dendrites, signaling
from other neurons always comes in through the dendrites, the signal gets processed in
the cell body, and then the cell body of the neuron decides, metaphorically, whether or
not to send a signal down the axon, and the axon then links into other nerve cells that
are downstream.
So the neuron is a polarized cell, signals always come in through one end, they are processed
in the middle, and then they always go out the other end.
And the neurons are, the signals are coming from other cells upstream, and signals are
being sent to other cells downstream, and you have a brain which brings together perhaps
trillions of neurons in an extremely complex network, and it's that complex network that
gives rise to the mind, which as we remember from earlier in the course, is the second
tier of Aristotle's notion of installment.
So it's not just the fact that we have neurons that are alive in brains, but it's the fact
that those neurons are communicating with each other to give a higher level of life,
a really totally different qualitative level of life, a life of the mind as opposed to
a life of the cells.
So let's look at a neuron more specifically, see how it works, and in this diagram you
can see the cell body with the nucleus, and then there are a few dendrites coming out,
and the dendrites connect to axons from upstream neurons, and the dendrite can connect to multiple
axons coming from upstream neurons, and the signals being sent by the upstream neurons
are looked at as being positive or negative by the neuron receiving the signal, so some
signals are stimulus, some signals turn down the signal inside the neuron, and there are
tens of thousands of signals coming in simultaneously from many, many different axons connected
to many different dendrites on a neuron, and the signals are not just plus or minus, the
signals are complicated wave functions, and so the signal will go up and down like this,
and there are many different kinds of signals, sometimes you have a low level wave signal,
sometimes you have peaks that are following each other at a particular frequency, so the
signals themselves that are coming into the dendrite are very complicated, and their complicated
signals are coming into thousands, if not hundreds of thousands of dendrites, and all
this information, some of it is positive, some of it is negative, all this information
is accumulated in the cell body, and the cell body knows metaphorically how to process this
information and whether or not to send a signal down its axon, and that will then stimulate
a downstream neuron or multiple downstream neurons to think about whether they should
send signals downstream, and so on, and so on. It's an amazingly complex process, and
we are nowhere near understanding how individual neurons make a decision as to whether or fire,
that's what we call the situation when the neuron sends a signal down the axon, either
fires or it doesn't, how the neuron makes this decision is still unknown, but we do
know some things. We know, for example, that the ability to respond to upstream signals
can be changed based on previous experience, so sometimes a lot of upstream signals impinging
upon a neuron will cause that neuron to have a higher tolerance level, so it won't send
a signal in response as quickly, and sometimes actually a lot of signals from the outside
will cause the neuron to react more quickly, and each of the neurons in the brain is of
a type that has different properties and it can behave in different ways, not only in
the shape that it has, but in other aspects of its biology and its morphology. So as I
said, neurons are polarized, they receive signals from upstream axons, and the signals
go across a small gap between the cells called a synapse. Now the signals that are actually
going down the dendrites or down the axon are electrical signals, so when the neuron
fires there's an electrical pulse that goes down the axon, but when it gets to the end,
it gets to the point where it's connected to another neuron that's at a synapse, a little
gap between cells, the signal turns from an electrical signal into a chemical signal,
and the chemical signal goes across the synapse to the downstream neuron and then is received
by the downstream neuron. So let's take a look at the synapse in more detail right now.
The presynaptic neuron is the neuron that's going to release the chemical, it is the upstream
neuron as well, and the signal comes down, it's an electrical signal, and the electrical
signal reaches the end, and when it reaches the end, it pushes vesicles, little vesicles
at the end membrane are stimulated to release their chemical neurotransmitters. So the chemicals
that actually do the signaling, that actually take the signal from one cell to another are
little chemical molecules, there's a number of them, and we're going to talk more specifically
about each one of them and what they do in the next lecture, but for now it's important
just to understand that this is a common feature of all neurons in the brain. So the neurotransmitter
molecules are sent across the synaptic gap and then they're received by receptor proteins
on the membrane of the post-synaptic neuron, and those receptor proteins, if they're stimulated
by neurotransmitters, they'll send a signal into the neuronal body. Meanwhile, the neurotransmitters
that were present in the gap and didn't get into the second cell are taken back up in
a reuptake transporter into the first cell. Meanwhile, signals are coming in from many
other of the cells that are connected to this particular neuron, and those signals are processed,
and the neuron decides whether or not to send a signal on its way. So research on the brain
is difficult to accomplish, and it's very difficult to accomplish on the human brain
since we can't ethically do research on living human beings, and so we use as a substitute
animal brains and lab-grown human cells. And one of the organisms that has been most
fruitful in giving us insight into how the brain works is a tiny little nematode or worm
that's barely visible. It's about a millimeter long. The nematode is called C. elegans,
and it is clear, transparent, which is one of the reasons it was chosen as a model organism,
and it's an organism that has a very highly specific developmental program, so that every
one of these animals of this particular sex, which is hermaphrodite, every one of these
animals has 959 cells, not one more, not one less. And of these 959 cells, 302 are neurons,
and scientists have taken very thin slices throughout the entire animal, and they've
identified every single synapse in this organism, every synapse that connects one neuron to another,
so you can actually see the entire network of neuron connections in this animal. And
this animal carries out complex behaviors. It's not something that is just doing the
things by rote, it moves, and it swims looking for food, it learns avoidance, so it has the
ability to learn, to avoid certain things, it's attracted to certain things, it has
the ability to mate, it has the ability to become addicted to certain drugs and to have
withdrawal symptoms from these drugs. And scientists can use the sophisticated tools
we've been talking about throughout this course to try to tease apart how these behaviors
occur, how these behaviors are encoded, and like a good scientist just like Mendel was
in the 19th century, the way that you study behavior in something as complex as a brain,
even if it's only a nematode brain, is you focus in on one specific behavior and try
to understand why that behavior occurs in terms of the cells that are involved. And
so, for example, in one experiment, scientists wanted to discover what caused the nematode
to recoil from a touch, so the nematode will swim around, and if it bumps into something,
it backs up. That's an instinctive behavior that the nematode has. I should say the nematode
doesn't actually have a brain, its neurons are located throughout its body. And scientists,
using the technologies we have, are able to see individual cells light up with fluorescent
tags, and they actually have been able to determine the network, the network of interactions
that occurs among neurons to cause the C. elegans animal to back up, the original stimulus,
and then the neurons send signals in a certain pathway, in a certain pattern, and ultimately
that pathway of signals causes the animals muscles to react in a way which causes the
animal to back up. So it's not a very biological sounding phenomenon, it sounds very mechanical,
in fact, it is in the sense that it is instinctive, it is hardwired into the brain of C. elegans,
just like all of its other behaviors are hardwired. I should say hardwiring doesn't mean that
there's an absolute determination of behavior. You can be hardwired in part of your brain
to learn something, and so some of the hardwiring says, okay, you are hardwired to experience
certain things in your environment, and when you experience those things, this will be
how you're going to respond, depending on your experience. So hardwiring actually can
promote learning, as well as promote stereotypic behaviors. Now the mouse is another model
organism that has been used quite thoroughly for lots of areas of biological research.
We've talked about the mouse genome previously in this course. The mouse genome is approximately
the same size as the human genome, but the animal is a lot smaller, and the mouse has
been used as a model organism to study many aspects of human biology for the last hundred
years. It's used obviously because it's a mammal, just like us, it has all the same
organs as us, and especially for studying the brain and neurobiology, you want to be
able to look at an animal that has a brain that is similar to ours, in the sense that
this animal has a mind, it can express fear, and it can run and jump and do everything
that we can do, it can remember, it can learn all sorts of things, and it's a good organism,
it's very small, but if you look inside of a mouse brain and you try to figure out how
the neurons are connected to each other, it's very difficult. The neurons in a particular
region will all look the same, and so a technique has been developed recently by scientists
to color code neurons in the living animal, and again with using fluorescent tags, they're
able to get each of the neurons to express a different color, and this is very important
because if there's a cell body, and this happens very often, which is at the base of our brain,
it can have an axon that extends out all the way to the front of our brain, going over
a foot in distance in a human in a mouse, it's obviously less, but axons can go for
a long distance from the cell bodies, and if you don't have a way of distinguishing
which axon comes from which cell body, you're not going to be able to build networks, you're
not going to be able to see what networks are being used, and so this problem has been
overcome in the mouse by engineering mice to have different colored neurons, and then
being able to see how a cell body is connected to a signal at the other end of the brain
based on a signal that occurred before it and signals that occur after it, and the mouse
has a great toolbox in the sense of mutations that have been recovered over the last hundred
years that affect behavior in many ways. One of the mutations or one of the variants of
mice is one that I studied, which is a variant that determines whether or not a mouse is
willing to take risks or whether a mouse is risk averse, and this is due to the expression
of a couple of genes, it's very easy to test, to assay a mouse, to see whether it is likely
to be a risk taker or not, and that can give us insight into the same personality and behavior
in human beings. So if we look at the beginning of development at the very early embryonic
stage, we look at a mouse embryo, we look at a human embryo, they're indistinguishable
as I indicated previously, and they're both the same size. The one embryo will develop
an organism with a human brain, the other develops an organism with a mouse brain that's
not only a lot smaller than the human brain, it's also a lot less sophisticated. So what
is it that is different between these two embryos that allows the human brain to develop
in one pathway, in one situation, rather than the mouse brain? Now, how does the human brain
differ from the brains of other animals? Well, there's a general increase in brain to body
mass, certainly if we compare our brain to a chimpanzee brain, our brain is bigger, but
elephants have much bigger brains than ours, and they're presumably not as smart as we
are, so it's not just a question of how big the brain is. The important part of the brain
in terms of higher level function, executive function in the brain is the cerebral cortex,
and the cerebral cortex is the outer skin of the brain, you can see it when you stain
sections of the brain, it comes in purple, and the cerebral cortex is kind of a coat
along the brain, and what has happened during evolution to allow the brain to become more
complex is that the area of the cerebral cortex has grown larger and larger, and in fact it's
grown so large that there's not enough space just on the surface for it to lie down, and
so what it has to do is it has to fold in on itself, so it folds in, and if you stretched
out the cerebral cortex and you got rid of all the folds, then you would see that the
cerebral cortex is much wider in the human brain than it is even in the chimp, which
already has some folds, but the mouse brain does not have any folds, the mouse brain is
very smooth throughout, it has a much smaller cerebral cortex so it doesn't need to be folded.
If we look at another component of what makes the brain complex, it's not just the width
or the area of the cerebral cortex, it's also the thickness, and as evolution has produced
animals with higher neurological activity and ability, the thickness of the cerebral
cortex has increased, the number of cells that you can see in any slice of the brain
has increased in number over time. Now, as I just said, the cerebral cortex of a human
brain has to fold in order to fit inside of our skull, inside of our brain case, and if
you look at a mouse skull, you see the mouse skull is smooth on the outside, so how does
the cerebral cortex grow and how does the folding take place? Scientists weren't sure
if the folding itself was programmed into the genome, or perhaps it just folded because
it didn't have anywhere to go, and so to answer this question, there was a gene in mice that
was engineered so that the cerebral cortex in these mouse fetuses, the cerebral cortex
underwent a second division with mice, so in other words, the cerebral cortex of these
engineered mice had twice as many cerebral cortical cells, but going this way, not in
terms of thickness, and they looked at these mice and they found that because the cerebral
cortex was so wide it couldn't fit on the surface of the mouse brain, you got folding,
and the cerebral cortex actually produced folds inside of the mouse brain, which says
that folding is a secondary consequence of the size of the cerebral cortex, and everyone
always asks whether these mice were twice as smart, and the answer is no, they weren't
twice as smart. It's not just a question of size, there are other things that are involved
in giving us our intelligence. So in the evolution of a chimp-like brain into a human brain,
there was an increase in size, there was an increase absolutely in the cerebral cortex,
which was increased in size much more than other parts of the brain, and what was responsible
for this? Well, we now know what the human genome looks like, where there are coding
regions in the human genome, and we know what the chimpanzee genome looks like, and we compare
the chimp genome to the human genome, and there are essentially no differences in the
genes that are present in our genome and the chimp genome. So how come we've developed
this extraordinary brain? And the answer seems to be based on all of the data that it's
not particular genes that are causing our brain to become more developed and more sophisticated
neurologically. It is the way in which these genes are regulated, coming back to what we
talked about earlier in the course. In the human brain, you can see a large number of
genes which are regulated differently. So there are changes that have occurred in the
regulatory region next to the gene, and these changes cause the cells in the developing
human brain to produce a larger cerebral cortex and to cause other kinds of changes as well.
So the difference between human and chimp, what makes us human, what makes us and gives
us human minds, is mostly a small number of SNPs, small number of base changes that have
occurred over evolutionary time that regulate gene expression during the development of
the brain. Now research on the brain is also possible, not just in model animals, but also
possible by using cells. And embryonic stem cells, which have been recovered over the
last decade and are proving very useful in a number of therapeutic approaches, embryonic
stem cells. These are the cells that are naturally present in the early embryo that
can be maintained in culture. And under different conditions of factors, proteins that you sprinkle
onto these cells, these cells will develop into different kinds of tissues and organs.
And one of the ways in which these cells can develop is into neurons, and you can actually
take a dish of embryonic stem cells, treat them in a certain way, and they will become
neurons, and the neurons will actually form connections with each other, and you'll end
up with a network of signaling going on, although you have no idea what this pseudo-mind
is thinking, if it is thinking. The other way in which the brain is being researched,
the human brain specifically, is by building animals that have human neurons inside of
a brain. In particular, scientists can engineer mouse embryos or fetuses together with human
stem cells, such that the human stem cells develop along with the mouse cells, go into
the brain of the mouse, you can see them because they're tagged with a fluorescence probe,
and you can see that they function along with the mouse neurons. The reason you want to
do this is to have a way of looking at some horrible diseases like Parkinson's disease
or Alzheimer's disease, and by taking cells that are from patients or cells that have
been mutated to have a Parkinson's phenotype, putting them into a mouse brain, you can see
how these human cells with the Parkinson's phenotype behave, and you can also try out
therapies and see how they affect the human cells in the mouse brain. So these are the
various ways in which we're able to study the brain today. There's still a lot we don't
know, and today we looked in a general sense at the human brain relative to the brains
of other animals, how the whole brain functions together, and one of the most important components
of brain function that I described today is synaptic transmission, how synapses work and
how signals are transmitted across the synapse with neurotransmitter molecules. And in the
next lecture we're going to focus on the synapses, and we're going to focus on the individual
genetic differences that distinguish one person from another, and how those genetic differences
cause synapses to work a little bit differently with very large effects sometimes on our personality
and the behavioral choices we make.
