Hello, and welcome back.
In the last lecture, we examined the brain as a whole organ.
We looked at the various model systems that scientists used to study brain function.
We considered how the human brain had evolved from less neurologically complex brains, and
we just touched upon the important role played by synapses, the connections between two neurons.
In this lecture, we're going to focus entirely on the synapse, the synapse as an entity.
And as is part of this course, the most important part of this course, we're going to look at
the genetic variation that exists between individual people, that affects how synapses
are used or how effective or ineffective they might be used in certain systems of the brain.
Now, to begin, we need to review the process of neurotransmission that occurs at every
synapse between neurons in the brain.
And what happens is the presynaptic neuron has an electrical pulse that comes down its
axon, if it fires, the pulse comes down and it triggers vesicles that are close to the
end membrane that contain a particular neurotransmitter.
It triggers those vesicles to open up, to release the neurotransmitter into the synapse,
and then there are receptor proteins in the membrane of the postsynaptic cell.
And those receptor proteins will bind to the neurotransmitter, and that changes the
shape of the protein, such that it causes a new signal to go from the membrane back
into the cell body, and then the cell body will integrate all of the signals coming in
from all of its synapses and decide whether and how to fire its own response down its
own axon.
Now what's happening at the synapse as the neurotransmitter is released, it immediately
gets taken back up into the original presynaptic cell by reuptake receptors.
And the point here is that you want your signal to be fast, quick, and over.
You don't want the neurotransmitters lying around in the synapses because that would
cause our brain to function very slowly.
So the neurotransmitters are released, and they're either received by the downstream
cell, or if they're not received, they're immediately swept away, brought back into
the original cell, so that original cell can once again have a signal that fires the
neurotransmitters into the synapse.
Now each synapse uses one neurotransmitter type.
And 90% of the synapses in our brain use the neurotransmitter glutamate.
Glutamate is a simple molecule, and it is made actually in many parts of our bodies,
it's used by our bodies in a variety of different ways.
But 90% of the synapses use glutamate as a neurotransmitter, and the glutamate is released
into the synapse, and then there are specific proteins that act as receptors of glutamate
on the downstream cells.
And glutamate causes excitation, so it's used in synapses where the purpose of the synaptic
connection is to excite the downstream cell.
About 9% of our synapses use a second neurotransmitter called GABA.
And GABA is a molecule, it's about as small as glutamate, but a different structure.
And GABA has its own receptors called GABA receptors, and when GABA is transmitted across
the synapse at a particular dendrite, it causes inhibition of activity.
And so GABA is the neurotransmitter that functions to reduce neuronal activity, whereas glutamate
is the neurotransmitter which stimulates activity.
So 9% of our synapses are there to counteract the activity being stimulated by glutamate.
Now in both of these cases, there is a reuptake transporter protein on the presynaptic cell,
so the neurotransmitter gets released.
If it's glutamate, there's a glutamate reuptake transporter.
If it's GABA, there's a GABA reuptake transporter, brings the neurotransmitter molecules back
into the cell so that it can fire and have a very quick spike of release.
It turns out that many of the chemicals that cause down regulation of our brain that sedatives,
tranquilizers, alcohol, all of these chemicals which reduce our mental capacity to a certain
extent, operate through the GABA system, either by binding in place of GABA to receptors
or some other aspect of a GABA synapse that is used by these chemicals to reduce mental
activity.
So 99% of our synapses use either glutamate or GABA, and there's only 1% left, and they
use a variety of other molecules that are neurotransmitters, and I'm only going to talk
about 2 of them today, and that's dopamine and serotonin, because dopamine and serotonin
are both involved in mental traits that affect our personality in a very strong way.
We look at the dopamine and serotonin synapses, we see that they all are associated with cell
bodies, in other words the cells that have axons that go out and release dopamine or
serotonin, those cells are in the basal part of the brain and they have axons that go
all the way out to our cerebral cortex.
Dopamine has been known for a long time to trigger the reward and pleasure pathways in
our brain.
Our brain is hardwired so that it needs to have dopamine come and satisfy it.
It's in a metaphorical state, of course, it is more complicated than that, but there
are parts of our brain that require dopamine, otherwise those parts of our brain are not
satisfied, and then there are other parts of our brain which are carrying out functions
that are essential to either our lives or our reproduction, and these other systems,
if they're operating properly, the genes tell those systems to release dopamine to reward
us, and the dopamine release is the reward, we're happy, we're content.
Now sometimes the dopamine release doesn't take place the way it's supposed to, and
there's variation, in fact, among people in the action of the dopamine system.
If we look very carefully at the components of the system, we can see a number of places
where there could be variation that could affect how well dopamine satisfies us or doesn't
satisfy us.
One place where variation takes place actually variants in this particular, these particular
genes are pretty serious, this is actually in the construction and the synthesis of the
neurotransmitters themselves.
If you change the synthesis of the neurotransmitters you can reduce the amount of neurotransmitters
very often mutations in these genes have very serious consequences causing hyperaggression
or other extreme behaviors.
More subtle differences exist in genes that code for the reuptake transporter, that's
the protein on the presynaptic surface that is going to sweep out the neurotransmitter
in the synapse soon after it's released and there's also variation in the receptors on
the postsynaptic cell.
The variation in the receptors can be either in the regulatory region so that more or are
less receptors are being produced by the cell and there can also be variation directly
in the receptor protein itself so that the receptor binds to the neurotransmitter tighter
or not.
And all of these variations will determine how well or how much dopamine we are getting
to satisfy the dopamine craving that's natural to our bodies.
Now interesting thing about dopamine and serotonin because both of the systems are similar at
this level of analysis is that there isn't just one dopamine receptor, there are five
different receptors and different systems in our brain use different dopamine receptors
to receive the same dopamine molecule.
The serotonin has at least 12 receptors, we're not sure exactly how many there are.
And the reason that there are so many receptors when you would think you would only need one
to be able to handle the dopamine signal is it allows different systems in our brain that
all use dopamine to evolve independently of each other.
You can see that dopamine one and dopamine two receptors, one might become more activated
that will help people in a certain environment and it is involved with one subsystem in our
brain.
Dopamine two receptors is involved with a different subsystem and they may be evolving
separately, they may be under different selective pressure.
So it helps to have multiple dopamine receptors in the brain.
So the dopamine re-uptake transporter is variable and between different people and
there's only one dopamine re-uptake transporter, it is there are not multiple copies of it
just like there are multiple copies of the receptor protein and then the receptor protein
there's a variation among people in the strength of the protein that is very interesting
because it is so widespread and we know when this variation occurred.
So if we look at what I'll call the ancestral brain, the ancestral brain has dopamine signals
that bind to receptors and the receptors then transfer the signal to the cells and downstream
and it's easy to obtain satisfaction with this kind of system.
But there's a genetic variant in the receptor protein itself that causes the receptor to
bind the neurotransmitter, dopamine in this case, less efficiently.
That means that there's less signal coming from the membrane down to the signal processing
area and when this happens people are stimulated to crave more stimulation and this causes
novelty seeking behavior, it can cause people to undertake risk taking behavior and it's
really this dopamine craving that is generating and pushing us in these directions.
These are predispositions of course, we don't have to follow them but people who have lesser
ability to receive the dopamine signal are more likely to seek novelty, to seek risk
and are also more likely to have attention deficit disorder.
And if we consider humankind as species, as a population, it becomes clear that the most
optimal state is between the extremes.
So on one side of the dopamine signaling system is a person who's very likely to take risks,
on the other side is a person who avoids risks and both of those are dangerous.
If you take risks all the time then you're more likely to find yourself in a bad situation
and have yourself killed in the past.
If you never take risks then you never have a chance to progress in life and achieve great
things and so a person is optimized in terms of their survival and their ability to produce
offspring by balancing not too risk averse, not too risk taking, it's better to be in
between at a certain point and the same thing goes for novelty seeking and impulsivity and
all these various traits which are affected by the dopamine signaling system.
So if we look at the balance between these two, it comes back to a situation that we
talked about previously which is that the heterozygote and an individual who has two
alleles, not homozygous for one or homozygous for the other, but in the middle is more
likely in some environments to succeed but when the environment changes what can happen
is a new environment can drive the selection of alleles that increase risk taking or decrease
risk taking and an interesting finding with the dopamine receptor 4 called DRD4 is that
there was an original version of the receptor that existed in all people 50,000 years ago
and that original version has undergone mutation in two different directions. One direction
causes the protein to be larger, actually less efficient at binding dopamine which causes
more novelty seeking, more impulsive and risk taking behavior and the other direction mutations
have made the protein smaller which actually causes the receptor protein to be more efficient
which means you don't need as much dopamine signal to be satisfied. Now if you look around
the world at the pie charts of these different alleles, all of the alleles in this diagram
that cause a larger protein are in red and remember the larger protein is less efficient
so people carrying this allele are more likely to take risks and seek novelty and there's
a high frequency of these alleles in the Americas, there's some in Africa and Europe,
on the other hand the risk averse alleles are more prominent in East Asia and Japan.
Now of course this doesn't describe any particular individual who can have any combination of
alleles but it shows you the allele frequency in different populations actually can be different
and this can have population consequences. In addition to the receptor protein itself
being changed in one allele to another, there's another variant that occurs in the regulatory
region and so this variant will increase or decrease the amount of the receptor protein
and again that has an effect on how efficient the system is and in this case you look around
the world in Africa and Europe and the Americas and when we talk about the Americas we mean
the native people, not the people who invaded in the last 500 years, when you look around
the world at different populations you see evidence of balancing selection, you see a
allele frequency of two alleles which are very close, neither one is disappearing suggesting
that the heterozygous individuals for this regulatory region have an advantage in life.
Now another one of the dopamine receptors is D2 and it carries out a separate set of activities
in the brain and once again we can look at regulatory variants in this gene and we can
see that the both alleles of the regulatory unit are present, both alleles are present
in most populations around the world so one allele hasn't won out over the other in any
of the populations yet, again evidence of balancing selection trying to get towards the middle
although some populations will lean more or against a particular region.
Dopamine receptor 2 is interesting because of my personal alleles, if you look at the
brain, the dopamine receiving regions of the brain are all throughout the cerebral cortex
but you can identify a particular region of the cerebral cortex where dopamine receptor
2 is involved in receiving dopamine signals and some people have the high allele, some
people have the low allele, now if you have the low allele you're making less receptor
it's more difficult for you to get dopamine signals in this part of the brain and this
associates with risk taking again and novelty seeking and tension deficit behavior and when
I look at my own genome and look at this region of the genome I see that that in fact
is my predisposition which is not surprising to me.
I'm going to switch now from the dopamine system to the serotonin system, serotonin
balances mood and it balances the states of happiness with the states of stress and you
might ask yourself why should anybody ever want to be stressed and it comes back to the
same balance that I talked about with dopamine, sometimes stress is good as an incentivizer
it's going to if you're stressed out about something, you're stressed out about a job,
you're working at intense speed and so the stress can help you succeed and get to a higher
level in terms of the opportunities that you're afforded so having no stress ever means you
sit back and do nothing again and happiness is overrated if what you're trying to do is
succeed in the world as an individual but you don't want to be stressed all the time
because then you can't function as well so again there is this balance between happiness,
contentedness and stress and if you look inside our genomes you see there's a major variation
in the regulation of the serotonin transporter gene and some people have more transporter
and some people have fewer transporters and if you have the average amount of transporters
being made then the neurotransmitter, the serotonin is swept out at a reasonable rate
but it allows the signal to get through to the downstream states of happiness.
If you make too many serotonin transporters the neurotransmitter gets swept up too quickly
and what happens in this situation is there is a defect in the signal to noise ratio,
the signal is much much lower and this causes a mood imbalance, it causes greater predisposition
to stress under situations where other people would not be stressed and this is a virgin
of clinical depression and the way that you can overcome this problem is by blocking those
transmitter proteins and so that's what drugs that are called selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors or SSRIs do is they block the transporters, more neurotransmitter is available to be
received by the downstream cells and this results in a more balanced mood.
There are large numbers of people whose mood is not balanced as properly as they might
like because we have, our population of human beings has gone through many different environments
in a short period of time and it's not necessarily the case that we haven't heard of the gene
that are optimal for our environment today. I'd like to talk to you a bit about drug addiction
because drug addiction gives us some insight into this system as well and it also gives
us some insight into the variability in addictivity. Some people get addicted to a drug if they
take it, other people don't get addicted to the same drug and it comes down to genetic
differences which we are beginning to understand and the drug I'll talk about first is cocaine.
Cocaine operates by binding to and blocking the transporter proteins and cocaine is not selective.
It's going to block transporters of dopamine and serotonin and other neurotransmitters and
so what that's going to do if an individual takes cocaine, it blocks the transporters,
that means there's more neurotransmitter in the synapse for a longer period of time and
that increases the signal coming through in both the dopamine pathway and the serotonin
pathway which causes a feeling of euphoria, happy contentedness based on nothing except
for the fact that your dopamine craving and your serotonin needing portions of your brain
are being overstimulated and so this euphoria feeling will continue as long as you are taking
the drug but what happens then is that if you keep on taking the drug your body, some people's
bodies are going to compensate by turning the signal down, by turning the amount of receptor
they're making down so that they're not being overstimulated.
So in other words, in the postsynaptic cells here, the cells are being overstimulated because
of cocaine's action and this has an effect on the regulation of the receptor proteins in these
cells, less receptor proteins are made, which in fact increases the tolerance for cocaine
because now the same amount of cocaine even though it causes the same increase in neurotransmitter
density doesn't have the same effect on people.
The problem happens when the person stops taking cocaine because then you don't have the drug
blocking the transporter and you go back down to a normal level of the neurotransmitters
in the synapses but now your downstream cells don't have enough receptors and you're not
getting enough signal to satisfy your dopamine craving portions of your brain, you feel unsatisfied
and you crave cocaine and this is a model for a number of different drug addictivities
and what's interesting about this model is that it explains why some people are more likely
to be addicted than others, the people who are more likely to be addicted are the people
who are regulating the expression of this receptor protein better.
If you're not regulating the expression of this receptor protein then you're never going
to reduce the amount of the receptor protein and you're not going to become addicted.
So this variability, very important to understand, variability in these basic biological properties
like drug addiction and for different drugs there are different modes of genetic action
that cause some people to be addictable and other people to not be addictable.
So if we look at the dopamine and serotonin systems together, both of these systems regulate
behavior and they both have cell bodies in the basal part of the brain and they have axons
that spread out into all areas of the cerebral cortex and both of these systems are balanced.
There is a need sometimes to focus, sometimes more for some people than others and there's
a need to multitask and if you go too far in one direction you're going to be able to focus
all the time but that's going to prevent you perhaps from multitasking when multitasking
can provide benefits. If you multitask and take chances all the time that will prevent you
from being able to focus on a particular task and it doesn't do very much good for children
in school who are forced to sit at a desk and focus and do their homework.
The other aspects of balance that occur are between being happy, content on the one hand
versus anxious and bothered and again both extremes are less optimal than the middle
where you're happy sometimes and you are anxious some other times. Anxiety plays a positive role
in terms of optimizing your ability to survive and to reproduce.
Now another aspect and this is going to impinge upon what I talk about in the next lecture
is the balance between the parts of our brain that look at a situation and use cold cognition
and calculation to determine how to respond. Very computer like some people would say.
And then there's another part of our brain that is hardwired for morality, a sense of fairness.
It's an emotional response to stimuli or to situations. So we have the rational response
and we have an emotional response and sometimes they're in parallel with each other
but sometimes these two responses are in conflict with each other
and sometimes people are on the extreme where they have no emotion
and everything is done through rationality and other people are on the other extreme
where it is all emotionality to the point where they can't distinguish between reality and non-reality
and there are diseases including schizophrenia and autism that are models of both of these
that we're going to talk about in the next lecture.
