Hello, and welcome back.
In the last lecture, we looked at the variability that arises in the function of synapses in
members of the human population because of differences in the genes that code for receptors
to neurotransmitters or the transporters that clear neurotransmitters out of the synapse.
And we saw that different people can have different predispositions to be more or less
content more often, more or less risk-taking more often, and these are natural variations
that exist among people in all populations, and these variations are considered aspects
of personality.
Today we're going to focus on aberrant aspects of brain function that are clearly mental
disorders, and we're going to try to understand why they are so prevalent and how they cause
and how the mental disorder is caused by genetic defects.
If you look at the three major categories of mental disorder, autism, bipolar disorder,
schizophrenia, there's about one percent of the population conservatively that expresses
each of these disorders, so these are very prevalent.
Diseases like sickle cell anemia and cystic fibrosis in a country like the United States
only occur at a rate of about one in a thousand.
Each of these mental disorders is present at about one percent of the population, and
that's when the disorder is judged conservatively, and traditionally in medicine, psychiatric
medicine importantly, people were looked at as being normal or diseased.
There was thought to be a clear separation between the two.
There was variation in the normal range, but either you had the mental disorder or you
didn't, and doctors put forth a lot of efforts to try to define the mental disorder so that
they could objectively classify a person as being diseased or not diseased.
We have a much better understanding of these mental disorders now, and we realize that it's
not an either or situation, that there is a spectrum of deficits.
If you look at a disease like autism, there are people who have extreme forms of the autism
symptom chart, and there are other people who are less severe in their expression of
these phenotypes.
Doctors call these children who express a less severe version of autism as expressing
autism spectrum disorder.
The spectrum means that there's a big wide continuum between the most extreme and the
less extreme, which comes up against normality.
Bipolar disorder, the jumping between states of euphoria and states of depression can be
very variable as well.
People can jump very high and low, and some people will jump not so far and still have
a sort of a mild version of bipolar disorder.
A mild version of schizophrenia is called schizoid personality.
In each of these cases, there's no sharp line dividing normal from abnormal in these mental
diseases or disorders.
That has made it very difficult to study them.
To understand these disorders, it's worthwhile to think about the relationship between schizophrenia
and autism, two of the most prominent mental disorders.
At one level, they seem to be the opposite of each other.
If you think about the level of imagination, schizophrenics are almost always defined by
the fact that they have hallucinations.
They imagine things that are not real, but normal people imagine things that are not
real.
It's just that those imaginations are kept in check in some way.
Autistic people don't have an imagination.
They see the world as very hard and shut and they see reality and they don't have this
spark that occurs inside of their head.
And so you can see that these two mental disorders are the extremes of a continuum.
And again, you can see why it's useful to be in the middle.
It's useful to have occasional sparks of imagination that come out of nowhere.
This is what leads to great art and great music and brilliant science even by scientists
of the past.
So you don't want to just see things by rote and just see what reality is.
It's actually useful to have an occasional spark of non-reality in your mind.
And it's only when it goes to the extremes that it becomes detrimental to a person.
Another way to look at these, which is overlapping with this idea of imagination, is through
the theory of mind, which I'll come back to again later on today.
The theory of mind is another kind of way in which human beings are unique from other
species.
The theory of mind describes the idea that normal people know that other people have
minds and you can use that information to try to figure out what other people are thinking.
You can look at verbal and non-verbal cues.
You can look at that person, try to imagine what they are thinking because if you know
what they're thinking, you'll know what they're about to do, which might be beneficial or
not beneficial to you.
And so people are most optimized for survival when they have a good theory of mind, when
they can imagine what the mind is of another person.
But you also can see that this can easily go off track in one direction or another.
And schizophrenic people have a tendency towards paranoid delusions, which means they're imagining
that everybody around them is thinking about them and thinking about ways to harm them.
That's paranoid delusion.
And it's an extreme version of trying to imagine what a person's thinking.
It's a version of a theory of mind in where there's too much information.
Everybody is against you in the world.
Autism is on the other side of this extreme and the fundamental characteristic of autism
is that children who are autistic do not have a very sophisticated theory of mind.
Then in the most extreme cases of autism, children can't recognize human beings as
being different from other objects in their field of view.
So these are the aspects of schizophrenia and autism that define these mental states,
these mental disorders, and they can be seen as a continuum from normality.
And we can learn a lot about the causes of schizophrenia by doing a very simple study
by looking at people who are schizophrenic and then looking at people related to them
and what the probability is that a related person will also be schizophrenic.
When you look at identical twins with a very conservative definition of schizophrenia,
almost 50% of identical twins are schizophrenic if the other twin is schizophrenic.
In other words, you start with a schizophrenic child or person, you ask whether or not their
identical twin is schizophrenic and the answer 50% of the time is yes.
But actually with new brain scanning technology, with a looser definition of schizophrenia
which includes schizoid personality, you see that up to 90% of identical twin pairs share
in the schizophrenic or the near-schizophrenic phenotype, then this says that there's a
very strong genetic correlation between schizophrenia and the genome that you inherit.
But it's not a simple correlation.
If we go down to the first degree relatives of a person, so for example if your parent
or your sibling or fraternal twin, which is just a sibling, if any of those people
are schizophrenic, then there's a chance that you also will become schizophrenic, a chance
that is greater than in the general population, but it's still somewhere between 5% and 15%.
In the general population, as I said a moment ago, about 1% of people are schizophrenic.
So a first order relative increases that 5 to 10 fold, a second order relative which
is an uncle and aunt or a grandparent or a half sibling also increases, but not quite
as much relative to the general population.
So you see 2 to 5% of these second relatives being schizophrenic relative to the first person.
And then you go to the third order and by the third order of relation between people,
there's not much of an increase relative to the background population which is zero in
this scheme of drawing numbers.
Now I want to just take a tangent for a moment because I think it's very important to understand
what it means when we say that you and another person share half of your genes or you share
a quarter or an eighth or none of your genes.
This sounds like it's in contradiction to something that I told you previously in this
course which is that we're 99.95% similar or identical to everyone.
So how can we be 99.95% similar to every other person in the human population and share zero
genes?
That doesn't seem to make any sense.
And the answer is that we're really looking at different things when we talk about relatedness
among people who are relatives of each other versus relatedness among the general population,
people in the general population.
And really what you're talking about is you're talking about breaking down that 0.05% average
distance between people and you're saying that a first cousin is going to have one eighth
of similarity which is one eighth less difference than members of the general population and
then when you go down to first degree relatives like parents, siblings, and fraternal twins
then you're saying that well the difference between those people and you is half the amount
of the average distance between people.
So that's how you can get this oh I have half the same genes as my parent and also
you can say that you have 99.95% of the same genome as any other person in the world and
it's really what you're focusing on whether you're focusing on the whole genome or you're
focusing on just that part of the genome on average which is different between people.
Now when we look at the data on people who become schizophrenic it becomes very clear
that an old idea was false.
Schizophrenia only happens in people who are predisposed, genetically predisposed towards
the disease.
So if you don't have the genetic predisposition you're not going to become schizophrenic because
of something that happened in your environment.
There are genes that predispose you.
We also realize that there's a bit of noise involved because we look at identical twins
and only 50% share full-blown schizophrenia even though if you loosen the conditions,
if you are more tolerant you see up to 90% who have some kind of the phenotypes of schizophrenia
but there's still we can see the fact that identical twins have the same genome exactly
and they don't express schizophrenia to the same level means there's some noise.
There's some noise operating in the developmental system which we'll come back to in a second.
The environment seems to have absolutely no effect on the expression of schizophrenia.
It's genes that predispose and genes that cause the expression of the disease and noise
also that's involved in how severe the disease is being expressed.
So if we consider normal mental awareness it is based on a very tightly balanced feedback.
You have signals, the stimuli that come into your sensory organs and the sensory organs
will transmit those signals to the part of your brain that thinks in your cerebral cortex
and sometimes the signals are noisy.
You look around and you want to focus your attention on one thing and not another and
your brain does that unconsciously.
A normal brain will be able to pick out the important things in a sensory arena and this
is accomplished by a very tightly balanced feedback mechanism.
So information comes from the sensory organs to the executive function of your brain and
that information from your executive function then feeds back into the neurons, many of
them dopamine and serotonin neurons that are controlling what your executive brain sees
and you go around and around in order to balance the ability to see a signal, to see
something, reality, to see some reality in a background of a lot of noise.
So the best theory that people now have for explaining schizophrenia is the signal to
noise ratio theory of distinguishing reality.
I'm going to give you an example here and if you're looking in a general sense at this
signal that your brain is receiving from the senses, from visual senses, from auditory
senses you might see a signal that looks like this and it has its squiggly all along but
what happens is the little low level squiggliness is noise and in this particular signal you
can see here three points where the signal goes way up and then comes down.
So in a normal person's brain you would be able to, this is accomplished at the unconscious
level, you'd be able to distinguish those three peaks separately and you'd be able
to filter out the noise.
So that would be a normal person.
If you filter out the noise and distinguish noise from signals you can see the noise is
at a certain low level.
The noise is caused by neurons just firing randomly or spontaneously and then that random
firing can have a cascade of effects that go downstream and that's what the noise is.
It's like noise used to be on an old fashioned radio where it was hard to just listen to
something without hearing a crackling in the background.
Now the idea is that in schizophrenics the noise level is higher and so the random firing
of neurons, the misfiring, the signals going into the wrong places, all these contributions
to noise are at a much higher level and because they're at a much higher level it's much more
difficult to distinguish the signals in this higher background noise and the idea is that
you can't distinguish as readily between what's real and what's not real, what is the
outside world and what is something that has been created in your brain as a hallucination.
And there's evidence to support this theory in experiments that have used brain scans
to look at the brains of these living patients and so it's live brain scans and you can look
at the brains of the patients or schizophrenic, their siblings who are not schizophrenic and
the controls that are not related to the patients and you can measure the noise level, you can
measure the amount of variability in the background using brain scans at different frequencies
and when you look at three different frequencies and this is done in a large group of people
in each of these sets, when you look at the frequencies you see that in the patients the
red color represents a lot of noise and you can see that the patients have a lot of noise
in these three different realms of neuron brainwaves, if you look at the controls you
can see there's a background, the blue represents a background low level of noise and an interesting
finding here is that the siblings were chosen who were not supposed to be schizophrenic and yet
if you look at their brains especially at one wavelength you see clear evidence that there's
more noise in their brains than there is in the control and that is telling us that even people
who look or behave normal who think they are normal may actually have schizophrenic tendencies
or schizophrenic phenomena happening inside their brain. So another way in which you can look at
people's brains is to use a brain scan and find regions of the brain that are connected to each
other and in a healthy person you'll find all of these coherence lines, in other words in this
person whenever this point in the brain is activated that leads to this point being activated
and other points in the brain lead to known second positions that can be activated, in other words
the brain is following a pattern in response to particular stimuli or signals from the real
world. When you do this in schizophrenic patients you see much less coherence, you'll see that if
you stimulate a particular part of the brain then sometimes that'll cause a second part of the
brain to become active and other times it won't. There's very little coherence in patients with
schizophrenia and this comes back to the idea that there's higher noise in these patients and
that's why they're less able to recognize the wrong signals. Now if you look inside the brain
different regions of the brain are involved in different aspects of our mentality. There are
regions that are used to have long-term memory, there are other regions which provide memory of
particular episodes and other regions of the brain involved in emotion and mood and you can see that
in each of these brain regions they're overlapping, they're separate from each other, they communicate
with each other and you can look at the different brain regions that are involved in these different
aspects of mentality and then you can look at genes which are expressed just in these regions and
have a difference between patients and non-patients and what you'd find when you do this is you find
some of our old friends, the neurotransmitter receptor genes, a dopamine receptor, two gene,
a receptor for the glutamate neurotransmitter and each of these genes is expressed in a particular
region associated with a particular mental function that is distorted in people with
schizophrenic disease and the other genes that are associated with schizophrenia are genes that
control the synthesis of different neurotransmitters. So you see that neurotransmission synaptic function
is likely to be altered in patients with schizophrenia and it turns out that there's even
more evidence that synaptic function is involved because all anti-psychotic drugs block a particular
dopamine receptor which is the dopamine receptor 2 and the drugs all block this protein and it
suggests again this signal to noise ratio model where in the schizophrenic patient not taking the
drug the neurotransmitter dopamine causes signaling too fast so there's a low threshold and so the
noise is being received as signals in these patients cells and some of these patients can be
cured in terms of preventing their hallucinations by using a drug that blocks these receptors,
the dopamine 2 receptors and therefore raises the threshold that dopamine has to cross before
you recognize it as a signal. Now this drug doesn't work in everybody and this drug is
not even this specific, the drug actually interacts with a lot of other neurotransmitter
receptors as well so biomedical scientists are not exactly clear on how the drug works or why it
works in some people and not others yet but we're on the verge of getting more information and
learning much much more about this system. Now I want to come back to the idea of balancing
selection and noise. If you imagine a just a generalized locus, a generalized gene regulatory
region for example and there are two alleles let's say the allele and the geoleal such that if you
are homozygous for the allele you have a lot of noise that gets through and you have a hard time
distinguishing reality from non-reality and then on the other side you have an easy time
distinguishing reality from non-reality but you don't have much of an imagination. It actually is
useful it seems just based on the way that our brain is wired it actually is a benefit to have a
little noise come through to have these sparks that's what they are sparks of imagination sparks
of insight where are these sparks from well there's a possibility that they come from just random
firing of neurons occasionally that have a cascade leading to an idea or leading to an artistic
creation and this is just speculation at this point but again it's the idea that fits in with
balancing selection it would explain that explain why there are so many people who are
schizophrenic 1% as I said is a very high number and many more have a schizoid personality and
it also explains why sometimes a schizoid personality is associated with with creativity
and all of this comes into the rubric of balancing selection so we've made a lot of
progress as geneticists in finding a number of the genetic lesions that cause schizophrenia it's
very clear that schizophrenia is a heterogeneous disease and that means that its cause its genetic
cause is somewhat different in different people there are a large number of genes that can cause
schizophrenia in different combinations but by using the genome-wide association studies that I
talked about earlier in the course you can correlate particular genomic lesions with the
disease state and you can look at lots of schizophrenic patients and see if there is any
connection between particular SNPs or particular copy number variation meaning a gene is either
deleted or duplicated and there have been a number of regions of the genome that have been found
so far where there's a very high percentage of correlation between deletion in this region and
duplications in the region as well and the schizophrenic trait and scientists can go into
this region the genome look at the genes look at the different deletions that are associated with
schizophrenia there are a lot of genes in one of these important regions unfortunately which
means you have to sort through all these genes to figure out which one is giving rise to the
schizophrenic phenotype now bipolar disorder is not as nearly as well understood as schizophrenia
a normal person who can function normally in society is one who gets happy sometimes and sad
sometimes and you can go back and forth between a little happiness and a little sadness and that's
perfectly suitable for an optimal life when you're sad you do something about it to try to
make yourself happy it's only in the extreme this is why it's called bipolar disorder where you go
to the opposite poles of euphoria not just happiness and depression not just sadness and so
bipolar disorder is clearly a disease of mood balance people who have this disease are unable
to balance their moods and so they have these wild swings back and forth as I said that as I'm
giving this lecture scientists don't know quite as much about the genetic causes of bipolar
disorder but there's a lot of research going on in this area the third common mental disorder that
I mentioned and and we'll talk about now for a moment is is autism and autism just like
schizophrenia has been correlated with a number of places in the genome where there are deletions
and these deletions cover genes that function in normal brains and so autistic people are not
able to produce a particular brain protein that's essential for normal brain development and
normal brain function but we don't really know much more than that about autism and I want to
come back just for a moment to the idea of the theory of mind and how this is at the at the
foundation of the diseases of schizophrenia and autism it really is a question of is your mind
balanced well enough to be able to read somebody else's mind most effectively you don't want to
over estimate or over read what that person is thinking nor do you want to underestimate or
under read that person and so there's very fine balance that has to be struck between your
imagination of what that person is thinking or will do versus coming back into reality and not
overdoing it and autism and schizophrenia are diseases which seem to be off the edges of the
curve and they're probably so so prevalent in all human populations because of balancing
selection because it's advantageous to be a heterozygote to be in the middle to have this
balance in your imagination and unfortunately just like with sickle cell anemia that means that
people will be born on the edges of the curve which causes them to not be able to to lead a
normal life so in the next lecture I will build upon all of the things that we have learned about
in the course all of the tools of biotechnology and the ways of which it can be used and the
paradigm shift that it has caused in actually many different disciplines of science and also the
social sciences so I'll see you next time.
