All right, so hey there everybody. I am back in the microscopy suite in the
materials department at UCSB and I'm going to show you some atoms. So this
huge like car-sized box and these four monitors, the huge cylinder behind those
four monitors and some more equipment that's behind that back wall, together
constitute an instrument called a scanning transmission electron microscope or
stem. And today I'm going to show you exactly how this works. So my last
microscopy video was making a play button, which was kind of a joke, but
today I'm going to be doing some real research. I'm going to be looking for a
specific defect in a crystalline material called tin selenide, and I'm not
sure that I'm going to be able to find it, but either way I'll learn something. So
this is going to be like real research happening right before your eyes on
YouTube today.
Now in order to actually blast electrons all the way through a sample of
material in order to image its atoms, that sample needs to be really really
really thin. Imagine you know shining a piece of light through a piece of light
trying to shine a light through a piece of paper. You can see some light through
a piece of paper, but now imagine trying to shine a light through a piece of
plywood. It's just not going to work. So they're both the same thing, they're both
cellulose, but one is a lot thicker and a lot denser. So when you're trying to
make a transmission sample that you can shoot electrons all the way through, it
needs to more resemble a sheet of paper, except a bunch of orders of magnitude
thinner. I didn't actually film the sample preparation, but if you remember
the focused ion beam from one of my previous videos, that's the machine that
you use to create these unreasonably impossibly thin samples. For reference,
the sample I'm about to look at here is mounted on this tiny flake of copper, but
to see it, we're going to have to zoom in. On this flake of copper, there is
actually a crescent shape, and in the crescent shape there are a few metal
posts. If you zoom in on one of those posts, you can see a bump on the side.
That's my sample. Looking even closer, hopefully you can appreciate how this
entire sample is a vanishingly thin flag of material. It's about six
micrometers tall, 14 micrometers long, and between 50 and 100 nanometers thin at
the spot where I'll be imaging. Somewhere in the range of about 150 atoms
thick, and this is what we'll be shooting electrons through to cast our shadows.
Even though this copper crescent is like vaguely 100,000 times larger than the
dimension we care about on the sample it's holding, it's still small enough that
it's a pain to work with. So to help, we've got these fancy vacuum tweezers.
Basically a tiny hose that sucks up the sample like a piece of cardboard stuck to
a shop vac. This is more than a little finicky, and while trying to bend around
to give the camera a good view, I actually dropped it the first time.
Ah, crud. Something like this could only happen when I tried to film it.
Thankfully the sample itself was all right. It's also worth appreciating that
even this tiny sample stage is itself a miniature engineering marvel. It's
designed to tilt the sample in two directions without translating it in
X, Y, or Z by more than a couple microns. It's absurdly precise. This is actually
some microscope footage from a time that the holder actually broke. I swear I was
not pushing on the clip any harder than I should have been. But you can see that
the hinge here that broke isn't a normal ball bearing or something like that.
It's actually a ruby, like literally a polished gemstone that runs in a groove.
So now that the sample is mounted inside of this chuck, if you'll follow me around
the corner, in here we have the actual microscope. Like all electron microscopes,
the stem here is basically just a big multi-compartment vacuum chamber, which
means that this thing, when I load it into the chamber, needs to be able to
stop all of the air from rushing in behind it. When I put this in, it's
actually going to create a seal at this O-ring, and then I'm going to have to
wait for a few minutes while it pumps out the air lock before I can push it
all the way into the microscope.
There we go. That was the pump start. And don't worry, if I made trying to load that
sample look awfully tedious, just wait till I get to the part where I focus the
microscope for an hour. Just like that. Air pressure pushes it right on in. I don't
even have to do anything. A transmission electron microscope is basically casting
shadows with a beam of electrons. You're shooting a high-energy beam of
electrons all the way through a material, and you're projecting whatever gets
through out onto a screen and looking at that image. Now because it is so much
easier to visualize this when you don't use electrons, I'm going to be doing a
demonstration with photons. If I have a point source of light, like this flashlight
with a piece of poster board with a pinhole in it, any shape that I put in
front of the light casts a shadow on this screen. And critically, the shadow is
actually magnified based on the relative distances between the source, object, and
screen. Huge wrench. Small wrench. Big wrench. Small wrench. I need to get out more.
But if you notice, the edges of this shadow are a little bit fuzzy. If we try to look at
something really tiny, let's say these ball bearings are like atoms being
imaged in a microscope, this method doesn't really let us see anything. One of
the multiple problems here is that the pinhole isn't actually a very good point
source. It's almost the same size as the features that we're trying to image. So
light from one edge of the pinhole and light from the other edge of the pinhole
actually cast very slightly different overlapping shadows. And in order to
accurately image the atoms then, all our electrons would need to originate from a
point in space that's smaller than an atom. And we can't do that. If we're
slightly more clever, we can use lenses to project a sharp image, even with a
less-than-perfect source of light. Here I've set a lens so that as light exits
this pinhole, it's actually made into a nearly parallel beam. That parallel beam
passes through the ball bearings and a shadow is created. And then we can take
that beam and if everything is lined up just right, blow it up to project a
larger shadow on the screen. Once we send it through here, it gets smaller,
comes down to a point and then blows up and expands out here. So we have a
magnified image on the screen. Remarkably sharp. Much, much better than I thought
I'd get with this. Those are our atoms. Just imagine that instead of a flashlight
with a pinhole, we have an electron gun powered by a huge high-voltage power
supply and instead of glass lenses, we have really big electromagnets that
bend that beam of electrons as it's passing through the microscope. Now
compared to our flashlight model, the electron gun is at the top of this
system and it's focused by a series of magnetic lenses capable of bending the
electron beam onto the sample and then through the sample and then through more
lenses that expand that image into a camera. Now when we turn this whole
shebang on, we literally just get a shadow image of the copper crescent. Pretty
cool, right? Yeah, so here you can really see that the the place where there is
nothing like this, you know, you can just see bright because that's where the
electrons are hitting uninhibited. This thing is the big chunk of copper that
the electrons can't get through so it looks black and this is the sample which
is so thin that it's electron transparent and it actually sort of looks
gray because it'll let some electrons through which is kind of the point. You
can see huge bits of strain and bending in the sample as it's sort of warping
around. It's really interesting. Right now what we need to do is basically get
the beam pointed at the sample and get the sample pointed at the beam. Getting
the beam pointed at the sample sounds pretty straightforward but getting the
sample pointed at the beam, that's a weirder phrase. You need to remember that
we're dealing with a crystal, this perfect 3d grid of atoms in space. Now
earlier I used the ball bearings to emulate a single layer of atoms but what
if I had two layers or three layers or ten layers? It gets a lot harder to tilt
the sample so you can look straight down a column of atoms. This is another reason
that we like to keep the samples really super thin. The sample looks a lot
different now because we're actually focused on it which is you know the
first step. The next step is to get the sample tilted so that it's actually
pointed at us. The sample need not load in perfectly flat with respect to the
beam. The good news is that we can use the electrons passing through the sample
and making diffraction patterns to actually help us line this up. So you've
got this awesome starburst pattern called a kukuchi pattern and basically just
want to line this up so that we're looking at the center of this starburst
which is called the zone axis. Make it look real starbursty and not really. The
sample might be a little little thin for that. So I hope that explanation made
sense because I'm about to rip the rug out from underneath it. While it's
possible to image atomic scale features using this very technique where you're
basically casting shadows of atoms, all of these extra fringes and patterns
sometimes make it difficult to interpret what you're looking at which is why at
some point somebody added one extra letter. High resolution transmission electron
microscopy becoming high resolution scanning transmission electron
microscopy. Linguistically almost the same. Physically mechanistically
completely different things. So as soon as I push this button right here marked
stem the microscope is going to switch modes and all of my explanations so far
and a lot of this talk of projected shadows is going to have to change.
All right so now we've switched modes. Where TEM was pretty well represented by
a flashlight and some lenses to create big parallel beams, stem or S TEM is
probably best represented by a laser mounted on a gimbal and that is to say
it's a lot more fun. So what does it mean to scan an image? Basically instead of
taking the whole image at once you're rastering the beam back and forth
taking the image one pixel at a time and in order to do that the electron beam
isn't a parallel beam that covers the entire sample illuminating it at once.
You actually focus the beam down to a point that is smaller than an atom. So
that's basically what's happening here where the gimbal is guiding this laser
back and forth rastering across our field of ping-pong ball atoms.
Sometimes the laser hits an atom and causes light to scatter in all directions
and sometimes the laser doesn't hit an atom, goes straight through
and runs into the back plate. So now I'm playing part of the microscope
sensor. I know where the gimbal is pointed at all times
and I can tell whether or not the beam is going through because I can look for
the green dot on the piece of cardboard but I can't actually see the sample.
In reality this is because the sample is microscopic and therefore basically
invisible but this is the exact procedure that the
computer does when it's rastering the beam over the sample
trying to find atoms. You can tell that I'm making a couple
mistakes in counting here. Apparently my counting in my head is a
little bit faster than the gimbal actually does because I keep not
having enough room at the end of my rows but
as I fill this grid in we can start to see the shape of
the 16 ping-pong balls that are forming our atoms.
In a real microscope what I'm doing here would be known as a bright field
image. I've just inverted it. So after minutes of filling in grid spots
I now have my picture of atoms with some scattered effects because I can't
actually count. And if you imagine this happening really
fast where the computer guides a tiny beam of electrons across the sample
line by line over and over again you can imagine that images can get formed
pretty quickly. In fact that's what these scan lines are when you're
you know watching any image on the screen. It's going over and over and over
again continuously refreshing the image one line at a time.
It's actually scanning the electron beam back and forth
line by line to rebuild the picture. The real trick now is that the beam needs to
be focused to a small point as possible. If the beam can illuminate
multiple atoms at once then you just get a blurred out signal because you're
always hitting something with the beam and always letting some of the beam
through. If I were to replace this laser with
the flashlight from before you can see that no matter where the flashlight
points there's always some light getting to the
detector at the back which means that it can't really tell where the
atoms are. The flashlight light is just
too wide which is why when setting up a stem measurement
I take quite a long time here running through all of these different modes
sort of oscillating the focus of the beam and playing all sorts of tricks
in order to get it focused down to a tight as spot as possible.
The smaller that that beam gets the better the resolution of the images that
I'll be able to form. And there we go now when we focus we have
a nice even beam. It gets really small. Still a little bit
of stig. See. And go over here to stem. Now we're
scanning. It's exciting. Gotta zoom out a little bit
and hopefully we will see the sample. There we go. Spin the scan around a
little bit and get it flat. So while on location Brian struggles to
focus and zoom in let me tell you what this sample actually is.
If you've watched my previous video about evaporating metals and
making molecular beams you may remember that our lab specializes in
depositing extraordinarily thin layers of crystals,
crystalline materials in this big vacuum chamber.
That means that we end up with these multi-layer sandwich kind of structures.
If you slice a cross-section out of one of these stacks then you get to see
all of the layers and find out if your process work. In this case we started
with a wafer of a semiconductor called gallium arsenide.
Deposited an extremely thin layer of lead selenide
and then a reasonably thick layer of tin selenide.
These two layers on top are actually the weird carbon and platinum slurry that I
talked about in the fib video that basically just get welded to the top of
the stack to protect it while I get it ready for the microscope. So you can
mostly ignore those. But this substrate the gallium arsenide
that's the place with the highest structural quality
because we didn't make it. But that means that it's the easiest place to see
atoms. So now if we want to see atoms all we
got to do is zoom in and look at that.
Atoms.
Not very focused atoms. I'm moving diff shift. Oh wait a minute I got a line I
shoot I didn't reach help. Iterative. Lots of steps need to be done more than
once. It's getting bigger getting smaller getting smaller getting bigger
turning back. Man this is a bendy film piece of junk.
Who made this?
There we go look at that atoms. These are gallium and arsenic atoms to be
precise. If you're wondering how this grid of dots
actually corresponds to the gallium arsenide unit cell like the
crystalline pattern we're actually looking at it from a diagonal like
this. And then if all the atoms were a little
bit blurry there you go. So each of these fuzzy blobs is actually
two adjacent columns of atoms. One column of arsenics and one column of galliums.
So if you're not convinced by looking at all of these really fuzzy little blobs
here is a much better picture. This is probably my favorite stem picture that
I've ever taken and after a much longer exposure time a lot of
you know waiting for all the drift to go away and stuff like that and quite a
bit of processing in MATLAB after the fact. You can very clearly see the
double columns of atoms here. We call them dumbbells of gallium arsenide.
And in the top you'll notice that the pattern is actually different. It doesn't
have the dumbbells. This is lead selenide which forms a
completely different crystal structure. And what's happening in between
these two weird sort of fuzzy blobs that look like dislocations but aren't
really dislocations I think is really interesting.
But unfortunately it is outside the scope of this YouTube video.
So when I was filming this video I was actually looking at tin selenide which
is a different material. And tin selenide has layers. So I passed
through the gallium arsenide, the lead selenide, and now the tin
selenide. Let's try to find some some cool looking defects.
Although it appears we've lost our focus. This sample is not flat.
Holy mackerel. Oh I had it for a second. There we go.
Check it out. Atoms. In order to get a good picture of this what I actually
need to do is take a bunch of images and then stack them. So it's
microscopy. Looking at the smallest of things has a surprising overlap with
astrophotography where you're looking at the largest of
things. So right now I'm taking a sequence. So it's
going to take a whole bunch of pictures and you can notice that the whole frame
is shifting a little bit each time. So that's
the drift that you need to correct for. The same way that stars in the sky move
slowly and you need to correct for that. So tin selenide is this
layered structure. So you can see once we do a little bit of the
correction here this is two layers of atoms that are glued together and then
below it is two layers of atoms that are glued together and then below it are
two layers of atoms that are glued together. So you get this sort of
double layer structure going through the whole material. I'm looking for a
location where that layered thing gets screwed up in a very particular way
and that's a layer. Yeah this is not what I'm looking for. It's cool
it's atoms but it's not what I'm looking for.
Got a gap got a gap got a gap got a gap got a gap got a gap got a gap got a gap
got a gap all the way across. Okay no.
Possibly another hyper dislocation. I think those must be common
which itself would be interesting. So the actual defect I'm looking for is
basically a hiccup in the layered structure of the material.
Because each layer of tin cellonite is two atoms tall, and because of some weird stuff
happening at the interface, we expected that it was possible to get one region of the crystal
shifted with respect to the rest.
And in particular, we thought this shift might only be one atom tall, which would actually
be half of a layer, meaning that the top of one layer was bonded to the bottom of the
next layer and so on, creating this weird zipper structure at the boundary.
Unfortunately, even if the sample is chock-full of these, getting one lined up in a place
where I can photograph it requires quite a bit of luck and quite a bit of tedium.
God, it's an ugly picture.
That is absolutely what I'm looking for.
Okay, unless the tilt over here is so significant that it's making this not look like what it
should look like, which I guess is possible, I'm going to assume that I'm not tilted right,
and I'm going to pray that I can get back to this exact same spot later.
Okay, that big white dot.
It's next to that big white dot.
Oh, oh, oh, oh.
Yes!
Ah!
I got one.
Look at this.
That's between two layers, and then it's in the middle of a layer.
And then unfortunately, it's right next to another defect, which actually splits it apart again.
So this is like a two partial dislocations right here.
It breaks it and then it fixes it.
Oh, it's so cool.
Oh, this will be clean down here.
Neat.
I can't tell but I'm grinning.
This was annoying.
I think this is the first time that I've ever gone out looking for a particular defect.
Like, I want to see this thing and wasn't sure that it existed.
This was like three hours of tedious focusing on a really old, this is like a more than a year old
sample that came out of the fib.
And it's all like warped and stuff, which means it's really difficult to focus on
and it kept losing focus continuously.
But I did it.
So now I get to say, in a paper, that this defect exists in tinselinite because I have a picture of it.
That is science.
