impressed me. Of course the first thing that impressed me was the success of the
Bohr orbit theory. I went to Cambridge as a research student knowing nothing at
all of the Bohr orbit theory, considering atoms to be something very
mysterious and quite beyond the range of ordinary dynamical laws. And then it was
a revelation to me to hear about the atom of Rutherford and Bohr. Rutherford
has set up the basic model of the atom. The atom having a central
or the tip nucleus with an electron moving around it. And then Bohr had found
out laws governing the motions of the electrons. He set up his orbit theory
according to which an electron moving in an atom is subject to the ordinary
classical laws corresponding to its charge and the field that it is moving
through. The ordinary classical laws, except for that part of the force on the
electron, which is associated with the emission of radiation, that part of the
force, which is just a small part, has to be cut out. Then the remaining force
gives a stable orbit for the motion of the electron. That answered one of the
most mysterious questions which people had been bothering about previously. How
was it that an atom could have any stability? Why didn't the electrons all
fall into the central nucleus emitting their energy in the form of radiation?
Bohr said that this radiation process just didn't take place. You have to
neglect that part of the force in the motion of electrons. And then you had a
possibility of stable orbits. And further, the stable orbits have to be
subjected to certain quantum conditions, certain new conditions, quite foreign to
anything which we have in classical mechanics. These new conditions involve
Planck's constant. If we have an orbit satisfying these conditions, then the
electron in such an orbit can make a jump to another orbit. And when it makes this
jump, it emits or absorbs a quantum of radiation, according to whether the jump
is to a state of lower energy or higher energy. And the frequency of the
radiation is connected with the energy difference by that famous equation
difference in energy equals h times nu. These ideas of Bohr were completely
strange to anyone who had just been brought up on classical mechanics, but
one had to accept them because they were so successful in describing the
spectra of simple atoms. By simple atoms, I mean atoms in which there is just one
electron playing a major role in fixing the states of energy. So it applies to
the hydrogen atom, which has only one electron altogether, and also to the
alkali elements, where there is just a number of electronic fluid shells and one
outer electron, which is moving about and doing the interesting things. This
Bohr orbit theory was a complete revelation to me, and of course I proceeded
to work on it, and I accepted Bohr orbits just as something which was
fundamental in nature. That was all the mistake on my part, because it gave me
to narrow an outlook. I proceeded to study the Bohr orbits following the
theory which had been given by Sommerfeld. Sommerfeld had obtained more
general equations for quantizing the Bohr orbits and then the ones originally
given by Bohr, and Sommerfeld's conditions were expressed in terms of the
Hamiltonian variables, coordinates and momenta. Now you first learn Newton's
laws of motion in terms of positions and velocities of particles, and then you
learn about a more general formulations of the equations. There's a
grand gem formulation where you have quite a general dynamical coordinates,
coordinates which are any functions of the positions of the particles, and then
you have the velocities corresponding to those coordinates. Now Hamilton, a hundred
years previously, set up another form of dynamics in which the coordinates are
replaced by momentum variables. Now you might think that that's not an important
change, but it led to greater symmetry and beauty in the equations, and Hamilton
pursued this kind of investigation just because he was striving for mathematical
beauty. I believe it shows very strongly the genius of Hamilton that he was
able to follow through a line of work course. Importance was not made evident
until a hundred years later. I don't think there's any other such example in
the history of physics. Well I studied the Hamiltonian theory of dynamics because
it was found to be the most useful one for examining the Bohr orbits as the
Sommerfeld had shown. I studied this theory on my own, reading the book
Whitaker's Analytical Dynamics, which is a very good book on this subject, and I
learned about the transformations of the Hamiltonian variables and the
endearance of those transformations, and all the mathematical theory attached to
it. I learned this up without at the time realizing whether it would be
important or not, but simply that it was related to things that were important.
The real difficulties of the Bohr orbit theory occurred when one tried to
consider the interaction of two of these orbits, if you have the pattern of
helium for instance. Now the spectrum of helium was very peculiar. There seemed to
be two different spectra associated to two different energy levels, and the
transitions between those two energy levels were extremely rare. That was a
phenomenon which one just could not explain at all. We talked about two
kinds of helium, power helium and ortho helium, and one had no explanation for
them. This was the situation in which I first studied in Cambridge for two years,
puzzling over the difficulties and the limitations of the Bohr theory, and not
making any success. The real breakthrough was done by Heisenberg in 1925. Heisenberger came to
Cambridge in June of that year and gave a lecture there. The lecture was mainly on
the anomalous semen effect, but he did refer at the end of his lecture to the
new ideas associated with his matrix mechanics, which were just beginning to
form in his mind of the time. Now I feel I was too tired to follow just what
Heisenberg was saying at the time. It was very late in the evening and at the
end of a complicated lecture, and sorry I didn't pay the importance to those
ideas that I should have done. But that lecture of Heisenberg did not
affect me at all. It was just two months later that I received a copy of the
proofs of Heisenberg's first paper on quantum mechanics. People didn't have
a pre-prince in those days, but they did circulate a few copies of the proofs to
their friends, and Heisenberg sent a copy of the proofs to R.H. Fowler, who was my
supervisor at the time. Fowler passed it on to me and asked me what I thought of it.
This was Heisenberg's first paper on quantum mechanics. I looked through it and I didn't
think very much of it. I suppose I looked through it too hurriedly and I put it
aside and went back to it again after about two weeks, and suddenly it got
revealed to me and quite know how that this was really important work and that
it was really something new which could provide a solution to the whole of the
problems of quantum mechanics. The way Heisenberg had proceeded was like this.
He said that we had been working all this time in Bohr orbits, but the Bohr
orbits were really not very physical things. One could not observe the
variables that come into the description of the Bohr orbits. One couldn't
observe the electrons in the stationary states at all. The things that one
could observe are always associated with two states. The things that one could
observe are associated with the emission or absorption of a quantum of
radiation, and such radiative processes were always connected with two states
instead of one state, and Heisenberg genius enabled him to see that one ought
to concentrate one's attention on things which are closely connected with what
one can observe. The things which one can observe, being each related to two
states, are expressed naturally as a matrix or way of numbers. You set the
numbers like this, and that Heisenberg proposed that one should consider the
whole set of numbers to get. When Heisenberg first got this idea, he didn't
know anything about matrices at all. He never heard of them, but he was
led to construct these arrays of quantities simply from the physical idea
that one should work with quantities closely connected with observation. Then
Heisenberg thought of taking the whole matrix of quantities together and
handling these matrices as individual things. One would add matrices in a
trivial way, one would multiply them according to the law of matrix
multiplication, which was also suggested by the physics. One didn't need to have
much mathematical knowledge to think of that law, so Heisenberg was led to think
of these matrices as being able to replace the dynamical variables of
mechanics. And he set up in that way his matrix mechanics. The main feature of
this matrix mechanics is that if you have two matrices, u and v, and multiply them
in that order, the result is not the same as v times u multiplied in that order.
When Heisenberg first noticed this, I heard that he was extremely perturbed by
it. You see, it was so foreign to any idea which physicists had previously.
Positions and velocities were certainly ordinary numbers, and certainly
satisfied ordinary algebra. How could one replace them by things which did not
satisfy ordinary algebra? But still, there was no escaping from this at all.
Heisenberg just had to get used to the idea. When I read Heisenberg's paper
the second time, I picked on this non commutation as the important feature. It
seemed to me that this was really the prime difference between the new
mechanics and the old mechanics, and that what one had to do was to take the old
mechanics of Newton, or maybe in the Lagrangian or Hamiltonian form, and
modify it in some way so as to bring in the non commutation. You see, I wasn't
disturbed the non commutation in the way that Heisenberg was. The person who
originates a new idea is really not in the best position to follow it up,
because he's so scared that something would turn up which will knock the
whole idea on the head. And I would say that was really why Heisenberg was
worrying about his non commutation. He said that with his non commutation it
seems that I should have to abandon the whole idea. Now someone who does not
originate the new idea doesn't have that kind of disturbance, and is better
able to follow up the consequences of an innovation of this time. I proceeded to
think intensively about how one could modify the Lawson mechanics so as to
fit them in with this non commutation. At that time I was a research student in
Cambridge, and we're just concentrating all my efforts on solving these basic
problems. I used to spend most of my time on this work, but on Sundays I had the
habit of taking it as a day of relaxation and taking a long walk in the
country, and during those long walks I would just rather forget about my work
and maybe just keep it faintly in the back of my mind, and essentially have a
time of relaxation. It was doing one of these Sunday walks, either the end of
September or beginning of October, I'm not quite sure which Sunday it was in 1925,
that it occurred to me that there was really a great similarity between the
quantity uv minus vu, the commutator, and the press and bracket which I had been
reading about previously when I had been studying the Hamiltonian, the general
Hamiltonian theory in which Diffie's book. Would it be possible to say that this
quantity just has to take the place of the press and bracket? It was a very
exciting idea to me, and the difficulty was that I didn't remember very well what
the press and bracket was. At the time that I had been studying it, I didn't
know it would be very important. There was another kind of bracket expression also
occurring in the Whitaker's study of the general transformation theory of the
Hamiltonian equations in the Grange bracket, and there was rather confused
between the two. I wasn't sure just what the definition of a press and bracket was,
and that without having the precise definition available, I couldn't make
the detailed comparison between the press and bracket and this commutator. Of
course, I was very anxious to settle this question, so I rushed home, tried to look
up what a press and bracket was, but none of the books that I had at home was
sufficiently advanced to mention press and brackets at all, nor were the lecture
notes which I had. It was a Sunday, all the library were closed, so I had to wait
until the following Monday morning and spend a rather uncertain night, wondering
whether this theory would turn out to be right or not. I think before the end of
the night, I had acquired considerable confidence that it was all right, but it
was necessary for me to go to the library on the Monday morning, look up
Whitaker's book, see just what the definition of a press and bracket was,
and see that they really do correspond. The definition, as you probably know, is
press and bracket with u times v, with square brackets, is equal to the sum of
all the degrees of freedom, du by dqr, dv by dpr, minus du by dpr, dv by dqr.
The q's and the p's being the Hamiltonian coordinates and their corresponding
momenta. In Whitaker's book, he uses a different notation, round brackets, to the
press and brackets, and square brackets for the Lagrange brackets. Now the Lagrange
brackets is of no importance at all for quantum theory. We only want the
press and bracket, and I did not like to use round the brackets for something
which is antisymmetrical between the two quantities that I mentioned in it. That
is quite different from what we have in vector analysis, where we have the round
bracket for the scalar product, the square bracket for the vector product of
two vectors. So I changed Whitaker's notation and introduced the square
bracket, being more suitable for something which is antisymmetrical. And
since then everyone has followed that notation and used the square bracket for
the press and bracket. Well, I checked in that way that this quantity really does
have analogous properties to uv minus vu, and the fact the relationship between them
is so close that we can put press and bracket equal to uv minus vu with an
numerical coefficient i times cross the h, cross the h's, pang's constant over 2
pi. This is the start of my work on quantum mechanics. This turned out to be an
equation of general applicability, and it provides a way of passing from any
classical mechanics, from the classical mechanics of any dynamical system, when
expressed in the Hamiltonian form, to the corresponding theory in terms of the new
mechanics of Heisenberg. Heisenberg, of course, was continuing to work on this
theory, and he was assisted by this professor, Max Born, and by a fellow
student at Girdingen, Jordan, and they obtained equivalent results to mine, but
they didn't have the single general step of making the commutator correspond to
the press and bracket. They first worked out the complete theory for a system of
one degree of freedom, and then assumed that there it was associated with
different degrees of freedom, commutes with each other, the natural assumption to
make, and that leads then to this relationship.
On the basis of this connection, you know, one has equations of motion. For any
dynamical variable u, the classical theory in the Hamiltonian form says that
dU by dt equals the press and bracket of u with this capital H, this capital H
called the Hamiltonian, is the total energy expressed in the Hamiltonian
variables q and p, and this leads at once to the equation of motion in the new
mechanics i h dU by dt equals u h minus h nu. We had then a general equation of
motion applicable to any system in quantum mechanics. If we know the
corresponding theory in classical mechanics expressed in the Hamiltonian
form. I grew up this work and also guided to the hydrogen atom to work out the
energy levels there, and then I heard about another form of quantum mechanics
which has been undiscovered independently by Schrodinger. I saw about it in the
literature and Heisenberg wrote me a letter asking me what you think of this
theory of Schrodinger. At first I felt rather hostile to Schrodinger. The reason
for that was that I was very well satisfied with this theory of Heisenberg
developed in this way. It seemed to me that that would really provide the key
to the understanding of the whole of the mechanics of the atom. Now if we have a
basis, something which we can work on to develop quantum mechanics, why go back
to the pre-quantum mechanics stage and look for another solution to the problem?
That was what I felt at the time, and I just did not want to go back and
consider the possibility and you neglecting all this work with Heisenberg. I am trying to get
an alternative solution to the problem. However the Schrodinger theory was examined by other
people, and they soon found out that it was equivalent to the Heisenberg theory. It didn't
mean that we had to abandon any of the ideas of the Heisenberg theory. We just had to
supplement those ideas with some further ideas. The main new idea which is brought in is the
idea of the wave function which represents an atomic state. Here we are working with
the matrix elements. We are working with matrices composed of matrix elements,
each associated with two atomic states. The Schrodinger form of the theory provides us with a wave
function psi, the function of the coordinates of a particle, x1, x2, x3 and the time,
which is associated with a single state, something which is not directly connected to anything in
the Heisenberg picture. This psi is subject to a wave equation. They have a wave equation where
certain operators operating on psi produce zero. I might mention as a historical point,
which is perhaps not so well known. Heisenberg, Schrodinger, was led to his wave equation
from a study of some work published in 1924, let's just say before Heisenberg.
De Broglie had set up waves associated with three particles. He set up his wave equation
d2 over c2 dt2 minus d2 by dx1 squared minus d2 by dx2 squared minus d2 by dx3 squared
plus n squared c squared over h squared psi equals naught.
And he showed that the waves associated with the solutions of this equation
can be connected with a particle having momentum and momentum components and energy
given by these equations, pr times psi is the same as minus i h, psi by dxr and the energy
say, probably psi, of course, by h d psi by dt. This connection between the waves and the particle
is relativistic, it holds in all Lorentz's range of reference, and that's a very interesting
mathematically. I'd read about De Broglie's work, but it seemed to me to be purely an
interesting bit of mathematics without any application to physics. How could there be
any physical connection between waves and particles? However, Frödinger had taken
his work of De Broglie seriously, and he had set about trying to generalize this equation
to make it apply to a charged particle moving in an electromagnetic field,
and he succeeded in getting such an equation.
It's just this equation with some further terms coming in involving the electromagnetic
potentials. Now, having got such an equation which looked very beautiful, Frödinger proceeded to
apply it to the hydrogen atom, to the motion of an electron in the field of the proton,
and he worked out the energy levels for the hydrogen atom, and he got the wrong result.
The reason why he got the wrong result was as we now know that his equation did not take
into account the spin of the electron. The spin of the electron was something which
just about then experimented people were beginning to speculate about. It hadn't been
established at all, and Frödinger had probably never heard of the spin of the electron.
At any rate, Frödinger explained to me many years later how he was extremely dejected
when he found that this beautiful equation did not give the right answer.
He was so dejected that he thought the whole thing was wrong, useless, and he cast it aside.
It was only something like three months later that he had recovered from his depression
sufficiently to go back and look at the equations again, and then he saw that
in the non-relativistic approximation, his equations gave energy levels
in agreement with the observed spectrum of hydrogen, and he published then his first paper
on the new wave mechanics in a non-relativistic form.
So if you look up the published papers at that time, you will see that all the early papers of
Frödinger are in the non-relativistic form, and that was not because Frödinger was not
appreciative of the importance of relativity, but simply that he saw that
trying to take these relativistic corrections into account led him to energy levels which
were not in agreement with observation, and he did not have the necessary broadness to
publish papers giving results in disagreement with observation.
I think there's a moral to that story that if your theory is really a very beautiful one,
and it doesn't altogether agree with observation, you know, it's true to probably
shits because it may very well be that the disagreement with observation comes from some
actor which is not properly understood at the time and which will be explained later,
and you shouldn't be too depressed to abandon the whole thing because of such a disagreement.
Well, this wave equation involving d2 by dt squared, which was abandoned by Schödinger,
was resurrected about two years later by Klein and Gordon, and is now known as the
Time-Gordon equation, although it had been discovered by Schödinger quite a while previously,
and was discovered by him actually before, is a discovery of the non-relativistic form of the
equation. Well, that is how the Schrodinger form of quantum mechanics appeared. Schödinger was
working quite independently at Heisenberg. Heisenberg and Schödinger go to each of them
by himself to have discovered quantum mechanics if the other one had never existed.
There's been an accident of history that they were both led to their discoveries about the same time.
The use of the Schrodinger theory was to supplement the Heisenberg theory and give us
something appearing in the equations corresponding to a single state. The matrices of the Heisenberg
theory correspond in the Schrodinger form to operators, linear operators, which one can apply
to away from psi and get another way from sin from it. And the connection between the Schrodinger
theory and the Heisenberg theory comes from the fact that the momentum variables interpreted in
this way, we get commutation relations between the momentum variables and the coordinates
just the same as those of the Heisenberg theory. These relations are qr, qs and qs, qr equals 0,
pr, ps minus pspr equals 0, qr, ps minus psqr equals h, delta rs. This means 0 when r differs
from s, 1 when r equals s. Basic commutation relations, which we have in Heisenberg matrix
mechanics, when we connect the commutator with the Poisson bracket. And they are also the equations
which follow from the Schrodinger theory when the p's are understood as operators of differentiation
on the wave function in accordance with these equations here. And that is why the two theories
with Heisenberg and Schrodinger are really mathematically equivalent.
Well, we then had a general basis for quantum mechanics, and I was concentrating my attention on it,
and I found out that the quantum mechanics is in many respects more general than the
Tassica mechanics. The Tassica mechanics, as we deduce it from Newton's laws, is expressed in
terms of p's and q's, the basic variables of the Hamiltonian formulation. Now, we can set up a scheme
of equations in quantum mechanics in which our variables are not just p's and q's,
are not p's and q's satisfying these relations. We could start with any dynamical variables
satisfying definite commutation relations which are consistent with each other.
We have to have them consistent, that's all that we really need.
If we have any dynamical variables satisfying consistent commutation relations,
and then if we take any Hamiltonian, h, a function of these variables,
satisfying a certain condition of reality, we can use that h to give us equations of motion
of the Hamiltonian form there. Reasonable consistent equations of motion.
And in that way we can discuss canonical systems in quantum mechanics which do not have a classical
analog. There are several examples of that which I might mention. One of these is that we might
take as our basic variables the variables describing the spin of some particle.
If we take the three components of spin, s1, s2, s3,
then they satisfy commutation relations similar to the commutation relations
of an orbital angular momentum. That's just to say s1, s2, minus s2, s1, it puts ahead h, s3,
and two similar relations which we get by making cyclic permutation, the subject is 1, 2, and 3.
We can set up a theory where we have a particle with spin and represent the spin
by these variables here, satisfying these commutation relations, and put the spin variables
together with the coordinates and momentum variables of the particle into our Hamiltonian,
and get reasonable equations of motion which we can work with.
Now these s's
are perhaps not expressible in terms of quies and peas at all.
We have some basic variables here, not expressible in terms of quies and peas,
and thus we get a generalization of the original form.
Of course sometimes these s's can be expressed in terms of quies and peas, namely when they do
describe the orbital angular momentum of some particle, but it may be that these s's describe
the spin of a heart of quantum, and then it is quite impossible to express them in terms of quies and peas.
That is one way in which we can generalize
the original formalism, and that is rather similar to what the high energy physicists
are doing nowadays, when they introduce the variables associated with some group
to describe the interior degrees of freedom of the new particles, which they are continually
discovering. There may be some group, s2, s3, s6, which turns out to come into the classification
of the new particles, and then the elements of that group will be
things which we can treat like dynamical variables, and all that we need to know is the
commutation relations between those elements. They are provided if we know the group,
and then we can proceed to set up a Hamiltonian,
evolving those group elements, and get equations of motion.
That is one way in which this theory were developed. Another way
arises when we consider a dynamical system containing many similar particles,
for example a dynamical system containing many electrons. Then we have a wave function psi
using the fruiting the formalism, evolving variables x1, this one xr1, r stands for this
subject 1, 2, 3 for the three-directioned space, xr2, xr3 and so on for the various particles.
Now it's possible to consider a wave function which is symmetrical between those particles,
or alternatively a wave function which is anti-symmetrical.
Or more generally, more generally we can introduce permutation operators which apply to the various
particles, in the changing one and two with an example of permutation operator.
We may introduce such permutation operators into our dynamical theory, and there we have
some new dynamical variables quite foreign to any dynamical variables which occur in
elsofilm mechanics. This proved very fruitful for understanding
the relationships which arise for an atomic system containing several electrons,
and it provided a very explanation of the spooktumaphenium, the ortho helium and the
far helium are just associated with the different symmetry properties of psi,
with respect to the two electron variables.
Then another important development was concerned with the introduction of operators of absorption
and emission of particles. We don't have to suppose that the number of particles is conserved
in quantum mechanics. We may consider the operator of creation of a new particle into a certain state,
or the operator of destruction of a particle in a certain state. There again we have some new
dynamical variables quite foreign to anything which we're having faster than mechanics.
This development led to the possibility of setting up the quantum mechanics associated with fields.
Well the result of all this work was to set up a very powerful scheme of equations in which we
could make transformations of our dynamical variables a good deal more general than the
transformations of the classical Hamiltonian variables which are dealt with in Mittaker's book.
We had all these equations and the question arises how was one to interpret these equations?
That was an unusual situation in physics to have equations before you know how to interpret them.
People ingested the interpretation in certain simple cases and gradually generalised these guesses
until a general interpretation was found. One could set up fairly easily an expression for the
average value of any dynamical variable associated with a particular state. Now if you know the
average value of u and you also know the average value of any power of u, u squared, u cubed and so on,
you have enough information to be able to determine the probability of u having any value.
So that the interpretation of these equations led us to a formula
for the probability of a dynamic variable having a specified value.
This probability was expressed in terms of the square of the modulus of the wave function.
If we take mod psi squared psi is a function of x1, x2, x3 that will when it's suitably
normalized give you the probability of x1, x2, x3 having suitably having certain values.
And we could transform psi to other dynamical variables and calculate the probability of
those other dynamical variables having specified values. The interpretation thus combined with
a general transformation theory to enable us to work out probabilities of any dynamical variables
provided of course of those dynamical variables commute to each other.
You can't work out the probability of a certain p having a value and the corresponding q having
a value because they don't commute. You see that the interpretation involves probabilities
and it does not enable you to assert that a certain quantity has a certain value
when they are given initial conditions. That was a big departure from the ideas
of pricyclic mechanics where we always have determinism and given initial conditions we could
in a certainty work out the conditions that are there to attack.
This uncertainty associated with probabilities was something which
disturbed many physicists. I suppose it disturbed us all to begin with very much
and people lied hard to get away from it but without any success. And it is now
accepting that this kind of probability interpretation is the best that one can do
with the existing formalism of quantum mechanics.
There was a big discussion between Bohr and Einstein. Einstein did not accept
a physical theory which would only give probabilities. As he expressed it, a good lord does not play
with dice. Bohr was the champion of the probability interpretation of quantum mechanics
and they went on arguing for the best Einstein's lack on the subject.
With regard to this argument one must say that Bohr was correct
with regard to the existing quantum mechanics but I'm not sure that Bohr is
ultimately correct because the existing quantum mechanics should not be considered
as the final solution. The reason for that is that as I shall be talking about in some of the
nature lectures, it does lead to some fundamental difficulties. Difficulties which
seemed to me just as bad as the difficulties that one had when one was trying to discuss
the interaction of Bohr orbits. I think there are very few physicists alive at the present time
who remember the difficulties we had in trying to consider the interaction of Bohr orbits.
They rather forgotten that situation and they are perhaps too complacent about accepting the
present quantum mechanics. I feel pretty sure that the present quantum mechanics is not the final
answer. The reason being because of these very basic difficulties a final answer
we would very likely involve a change in our basic ways of thinking just about the drastic
as the change from Bohr orbits to the quantum mechanics at Heisenberg and Schrodinger.
And when we do make such a basic change well who can say what happened to determinism.
We might have returned to the classical determinism at the expense of giving up some
very fundamental and generally accepted idea which has never been challenged up to the present.
We cannot have a return simply a return to the previous classical theory.
Science physics doesn't advance backwards like that but we may have a return to determinism
at the expense of some very drastic new change and then people may feel that perhaps Einstein
was really basically right in his discussion with Bohr and let's stop there for today.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Also the Ractors.
Good morning.
Nothing.
When you think about the banished coffee book as Frank Storland's coffin kept scaring on the early days of.
I don't think I know the book well enough from the local banished roughman.
I think that he looks at things from the point of view that do a mathematician rather than the physicist.
I rather think that he would put the emphasis in a different way from the way I would put it
but I don't have to know that book. And I forgot that if I had medicine in the past how long ago did it
appear?
First of all you are in fact you don't thought of either non-submutation or something
like that.
I think the only answer to that is you know the young guy.
He called it Heisenberg because he was afraid that his verbal theory might collapse
and that is rather a terrible thing when you've got a wonderful idea.
You want to abandon that at all and at all costs.
Yeah.
What did I just tell you ineland library 28?
Giant library 28?
No I gave you the answer and that's okay
the quantum mechanics, that it is possible to answer this question until the new improved
quantum mechanics is discovered, a new improved theory which will differ from the present
theory as much as the present theory differs from the more theory.
That's correct.
To write down the amplitude of wear and the way it functions, it's charactered into probability.
It's beautifully stated that if this falls like an element of God's worth in the space,
it's the probability for finding something that's thick.
It's always a potential being, I would wish to comment on that, in the case that the unaware
side itself has a trivial pile of attention, wouldn't it be interpreted as a probability
free and tough?
Not a probability per unit time, but the probability of varying with the time.
You can look up probability as a certain density and that varies with the time.
That is so.
Yes.
There is no symmetry between space and time at this stage.
I don't know what you're talking about, but I'll put you on my brain, see, see, see.
You're like that, ah, and you're coming to the next team, okay, like to be like God.
Renormalization is a sensible physical idea.
If the renormalizing factor is small, or at any rate, if it is just a normal number, but
the renormalization factor that is infinitely great is just nonsense.
And any theory which leads to such a renormalization factor is wrong.
It's just as though you were trying to construct a theory of interacting ball orbits and got
some equations which looked all right in a certain sense and then led to an infinity
when you examined them a bit more closely.
This is the sort of thing you would expect to have, and the proper conclusion to draw
is that your basic ideas are wrong.
You may wonder, why is it that the renormalization has had such a considerable success?
I feel that the answer to that is a fluke, just like the Bohr theory had considerable
success when applied to one of the outcome problems, even though it was basically a wrong
theory.
That's just kind of a lack of several eruptions on that same thing, it's free, they get equal
of names.
