Today, we are with Alexander the Great and his army at the Hifassis River in northeast
India.
The Hifassis, whose modern name is the Bias, is one of the five rivers that gives the Punjab
its name.
Punjab itself means land of five waters.
It's three, two, six BCE.
Alexander has conquered the Persian Empire, the largest empire the world has ever known.
But that is not enough for him.
He wants more.
He wants to go on exploring.
His men are exhausted, they've given him seven years of blood, sweat and toil and they refuse
to go one step further.
Alexander has a will of iron, however.
He's never been beaten in argument or in battle.
So who do you think will win this battle of nerves?
Who'll outstare the other?
Alexander became king of Macedonia after the assassination of his father, Philip II, in
336 BCE.
He was twenty years old at the time.
Two years later, he and his army crossed over into Asia to conduct the war that his father
had envisaged.
We have varying accounts of the size of this force, but it wasn't particularly large, perhaps
around 40,000 men with 5,000 cavalry.
It is certainly small compared with the Persian army that he would do battle with, many times
smaller.
And yet, as a result, he changed the world.
Alexander's personality fascinates me, just as it fascinated Julius Caesar, the Emperor
Trajan and Napoleon.
Not that I'm comparing myself with them in terms of delusions of grandeur.
Alexander has unshakable self-confidence, which he communicates to his men who believe in
him completely.
As a general, he always leads from the front.
He also prepares carefully for each battle he fights.
He studies his enemy to discover weak spots.
He concerns himself with the morale of his men.
He never imposes on his soldiers what he isn't prepared to endure himself.
And Alexander can endure almost any amount of physical discomfort.
He must be highly intelligent.
We know that he has had a very good education, perhaps better than any man who ever lived,
because his tutor was the philosopher Aristotle.
He is a visionary.
One of his most brilliant ploys is to market his campaign against Persia as a rerun of
the Trojan War, the first recorded war between East and West.
He is immensely hardworking.
He is used to toil nonstop for days on end and then sleep for 48 hours at a stretch.
Indeed, his will to succeed is colossal.
He is relentless in the pursuit of his goals, a hard-bitten little man, as Michael Wood
once described him in his acclaimed television series called In the Footsteps of Alexander
the Great.
Alexander is also intensely religious, and he can be generous in victory.
His biographer, Plutarch, repeatedly refers to Alexander's philotimia, love of honor,
and his philonechia, love of rivalry.
There is, however, a much darker side to Alexander's personality.
He has a violent temper.
He is ruthless in the treatment of his enemies.
He has a drinking problem.
He may well be a functioning alcoholic, and he is mentally unbalanced, a paranoid megalomaniac.
He is, in other words, a bundle of contradictions, and those contradictions are all the more pronounced
because of the force of his will.
There can be no final verdict on Alexander, but I particularly like what the Greek historian
Arion, the author of Alexander's expedition, says of him.
Arion wrote in the 2nd century CE, half a millennium after Alexander the Great's lifetime,
and in the seven books covering Alexander's life from accession to death, Arion concluded,
I quote, this I think I can state, that he never did anything common or mean, and if
there had been no other competition, he would have competed against himself.
Yet, Arion also wrote, as for the exact thoughts that were in Alexander's head, I can neither
fathom them nor am concerned to fathom them.
We need to take this to heart, too.
Nothing written by Alexander himself has survived, no personal letters, no diary, nothing, and
although more than 20 contemporaries would write books on Alexander, not one of them
has survived, although some of the contents have come down to us in the form of quotations
by authors who lived much later.
It goes without saying that we know absolutely nothing about Alexander from the Persian side.
We'll probably never know what his goal in life was.
Scholars have variously claimed that he was eager to spread Greek culture throughout his
conquered territories, that he aimed to fuse the Greeks and the Persians into a single
race, that he craved world domination, or most improbably that he was inspired by the
dream of universal brotherhood.
Whether Alexander was a force for good or bad, too, is a matter of endless debate.
What is undeniable is that his legacy lives on, both in terms of the power of his personality
and in the spread of Greek culture, as far as India, which came about as a consequence
of his conquest.
But let's get back to the story.
As soon as Alexander comes to the throne, he eliminates rival claimants and puts down
an insurrection by Thebes, a city in central Greece which he destroys utterly.
Then, in the spring of 334, he leaves his army across the Hellespont, the stretch of
water that divides Europe from Asia, which King Xerxes crossed a century and a half earlier
when he invaded Greece, marching in the opposite direction.
As soon as Alexander sets foot in Asia, he performs a sacrifice outside Troy at what
is believed to be the tomb of the great Greek warrior Achilles.
He does this to underscore the epic nature of his undertaking.
Alexander then wins three major victories against the Persians.
To the second triumph at the River Isis in 333, the Persian king, Darius III, offers
to share his empire with him by ceding all of his territory west of the River Hallis,
roughly speaking about half of what is modern-day Turkey.
Alexander rejects the offer and presses on south into modern-day Syria, capturing the
city of Tyre after a seven-month siege.
Darius makes a new offer to give up the whole of his empire west of the Euphrates, the river
that rises in eastern Turkey and empties into the Persian Gulf.
He also offers Alexander his daughter's hand in marriage.
Once again, Alexander turns him down, captures Jerusalem before invading Egypt, which falls
to him without a struggle.
He is now viewed as a god in the eyes of the Egyptians, because the pharaoh, whom Alexander
supplants as the conqueror of Egypt, is regarded as the incarnation of Horus, the son of Ra,
and the beloved of Amon.
Launching an attack on Persia was an enormous gamble, with no certain outcome.
These Greeks would have thought such an undertaking reckless and ill-judged.
And it was his father's idea.
The late King Philip had been about to lead the expedition against Persia when he was
assassinated.
Furthermore, there was a big difference between the two men.
While Philip was a seasoned warrior, Alexander, by contrast, was relatively untested.
He had only just established himself as king, and he might prudently have decided that he
should play it safe, rather than take on a new challenge.
But as for prudence, he didn't know the meaning of the word.
In 331, Alexander wins his last great victory over Darius and the Persians at Gaugamila,
on the river Tigris, near Mosul, in modern-day Iraq.
He follows this up by burning down the great palace at Persepolis.
Or at least, his army burns it down.
We don't know whether Alexander authorized the conflagration.
Shortly afterwards, Darius is assassinated, and Alexander proclaims himself king of Persia.
Alexander could leave things right there.
He could turn his attention to integrating the Persians into his now vast empire.
But he doesn't.
He arrests the spirit.
He wants to see new places, conquer new lands.
So he undertakes two expeditions.
The first to Bactria, which, roughly speaking, is the modern-day equivalent of Tajikistan
and Uzbekistan.
He now demands what is called proscunesis from his Greek and Macedonian courtiers.
Proscunesis is technically the gesture of blowing a kiss to a sovereign.
It is sometimes accompanied by a bow, or even complete prostration.
In some people's eyes, this suggests that Alexander now thinks of himself as a god.
That's a possible interpretation, but we can't be sure.
His second expedition is to India, and it's the expedition to India, which he commenced
in 327, that we're going to concentrate on here.
Why head off to India?
It isn't part of the Persian Empire.
It had been once, but the Persians abandoned it long before Alexander appeared on the scene.
All that we can say of the expedition from a military point of view is that Alexander
is reaffirming the traditional Persian claim to the region around the Indus Valley.
Is there more to it than just conquest, however?
Quite possibly.
Perhaps he believes that the world is flat, and if you travel in a straight line for long
enough, you'll eventually get to the edge, and he wanted to do just that.
Get to the edge.
Or perhaps he has an insatiable desire for exploration, for novelty.
Certainly that is part of his motivation.
He's fascinated by the world.
He takes with him a number of scientists who gather specimens of plants and animals along
the way.
I can just see Alexander leaping down from his horse and ordering his army to halt when
he catches sight of a previously unknown fern or reptile.
Perhaps too, he wants to outdo both Heracles, the Greek name for Hercules, and Dionysus,
the god of wine and ecstasy.
It is the characteristic of a god to journey to the bounds of the earth, both Hercules
and Dionysus journeyed to India.
A Greek historian named Megasthanes, who wrote a history of India, claims that there was
an Indian tribe that worshipped Heracles.
Likewise, the people of Nissa, a town near the Indus River that Alexander visits, claim
that Nissa was founded by Dionysus.
Alexander clearly sees himself as more than mortal and is ready to challenge the gods.
That too may be part of his motivation.
But before setting out for India in 327 BCE, the young Alexander has to crush an uprising
in Sogdiana, a province of the former Persian Empire, in what today is Uzbekistan.
He does so ruthlessly, massacring and slaving and deporting the population.
He then marches towards the Hindu Kush, the great mountain range that runs northeast to
southwest from western Afghanistan into northeast Pakistan, some 500 miles in length and as
much as 150 miles in breadth.
When he reaches the Hindu Kush, Alexander divides his forces into two.
He places one half under the command of Hephaestian and Perdikas.
Hephaestian is his boyhood companion and closest friend.
Perdikas is one of his top commanders.
The contingent advances towards the Indus River.
Alexander takes command of the other half and marches to the Swat Valley in Pakistan.
It is at the Hidaspis River in the Punjab in northern India where Alexander wins his
final victory against a local king named Porus.
It is a spectacular victory, but it is also costly because Porus and his men fight so
valiantly.
Alexander later restores Porus' kingdom to him and even expands it as a mark of his
respect and admiration.
He remains in the region just long enough to found two cities, one of which he names
Bukephala after his beloved horse Bukephalus, which died of exhaustion after the battle.
This last victory might have been accomplishment enough, but not for Alexander.
He now continues eastwards for another 100 miles or so till he comes to the Hephaestis
River in northeast India.
And this is where we now catch sight of him, locked in a battle of wills with his men over
whether to go on or to go back.
Alexander's men have been with him ever since he set out from Macedonia.
They've done all that could be demanded of any army.
Against impossible odds, they've destroyed the Persian Empire.
They've never been beaten in battle.
They've been fighting and marching uninterruptedly in all seasons and in some of the most inhospitable
terrain in the world.
They've traipsed from Macedonia to the Punjab, making a big detour to Egypt, more than 12,000
miles in all.
And he's still demanding more of his men.
He wants to take them on one last march and this one will be the worst of all.
It's the monsoon season and it has been raining for days on end, some 70 days to be precise.
The storms are violent and many of his men, exposed to the elements, have been struck
by lightning.
Their clothing, which is in tatters, is perpetually sodden.
When they sleep at night, they have to deal with mosquitoes, rats and poisonous snakes.
They are foots or beyond imagination.
Their boots are ripped to shreds, their horses are lame.
Disease, particularly malaria and dysentery, is rife.
Incidentally, some strains of dysentery are so virulent that they result in a mortality
rate of 50%.
When Alexander's army arrives at the Hyphasis, the river is in full torrent because of the
rains and the men refuse to go a step further.
They've had enough.
It isn't just exhaustion and debilitation.
That's bad enough.
It's also the fear of what they might encounter on the other side of the river.
They have heard that two kings are waiting to oppose them with a combined force of 200,000
infantry, 80,000 cavalry, 8,000 war chariots and 6,000 elephants.
There's probably no truth to the rumor, but that doesn't matter.
They're spooked, and they've no wish to fight another full-scale battle.
At first, Alexander tries to bribe his men.
He lets them off the leash so that they can plunder and rape and murder in the neighboring
villages to their hearts' content.
He also promises them lots of bounty and attractive retirement packages, as we would call them today.
This placates them for a while, but it isn't a lasting solution.
The men remain disgruntled.
And let's remember, they are soldiers who otherwise would lay down their lives for Alexander,
but over time their discontent has grown.
Picture the situation as the army is encamped at the bank of the river.
Here is a man who has never successfully been defied since he was a child, and who has
never backed down, not even when he locked horns with his father the king.
As the tension builds, one man alone has the courage to come to Alexander's tent to express
the army's grievances.
He's a veteran officer named Koinus, who has served under Alexander for 12 years.
Koinus has commanded infantry as well as cavalry.
He's as experienced in siege craft as he is in naval warfare.
He's Alexander's right-hand man.
He's also greatly respected by the rank and file.
Alexander trusts him completely, and if anyone has the right to speak out at this moment,
it is Koinus.
Even so, Koinus has a lot to fear.
Alexander might fly into a rage in an instant and have Koinus killed, a fate that befell
several others who have gotten on his wrong side.
Created on this list is his official historian, a man named Calysphanes, whom Alexander falsely
accused of conspiring against him, and whom he slew in a murderous rage.
But Koinus doesn't lose heart.
He's a brave man.
He speaks passionately about the army's grievances, and warns Alexander that if he compels the
men to continue, they will become unreliable.
According to the Greek historian Arian, Koinus concludes his speech with these memorable
words.
So, if there is one thing primarily that a successful man should know, it is when to
stop.
Koinus dies a few weeks later.
We're told that he succumbs to illness, and that Alexander, I'm quoting, buried him as
magnificently as circumstances would allow.
Hardly surprisingly, some scholars suspect foul play and lay the blame for Koinus' death
on Alexander.
But not a single ancient source hints at this.
All of them attribute Koinus' death to disease.
Robin Lane Fox, author of Alexander's definitive modern biography, suggests that Koinus may
have been felled by dysentery, or by a snake bite.
In any event, Koinus fails to dissuade Alexander from going on.
But Koinus has sown doubt in Alexander's mind.
Shortly afterwards, Alexander calls an assembly and harangs his men about the fruits of further
conquest.
He tells them that every part of his body bears a wound except for his back.
He's never been wounded in the back because he's never turned his back on the enemy.
And he says that every kind of weapon has left its scar on him.
He has gashes from hand to hand fighting and from arrows and from spears and from rocks
and from clubs.
He tells his men that they have already outdone the hero Heracles and the god Dionysus, but
they must not now quit.
Hoping to shame them, Alexander says that he is prepared to go it alone if they desert
him, but that they are in sight of achieving their goal of reaching the ends of the earth.
This time, Alexander's rhetoric fails to inspire the men.
His arguments are greeted with stony silence, of a single voice is raised in support.
After what no doubt is a very tense pause lasting several minutes, Alexander asks, what
is wrong with them?
Why aren't they cheering?
Still silence.
The next morning, Alexander summons his officers and tells them, okay, he will go on alone
with anyone who will follow him and that those who won't go on can tell their friends that
they abandoned their king when he was surrounded by the enemy, but this doesn't do any good
either.
His officers stand their ground.
They don't give in.
So what does Alexander do next?
What could he do?
He does what any hero, any megalomaniac would do in the situation.
He retires to his tent and sultz.
That might not seem very heroic, but Alexander probably thinks otherwise.
Sulking is what the Greek hero Achilles does at the beginning of the Iliad when he feels
insulted.
This is after Agamemnon, commander-in-chief of the Greek army at Troy, takes away the
prize that he has been awarded for his exceptional valor, the captive girl Briseus.
Alexander always models himself closely on Achilles.
Remember he visited Achilles' tomb when he first arrived in Asia.
He refuses to talk even to any of his companions.
That's the official title of his trusted senior officers.
Simply sultz, expecting that the army will change its mind.
The Greek historian Arion tells us that a profound silence fell throughout the camp
and that the men were displeased by the king's anger.
In other words, they sult back.
It was a regular sulk fest.
It was a matter of who would blink first.
Well, for once, for the first time ever, it is Alexander.
His men surround his tent and somehow persuade him to give in.
Eventually, Alexander recognizes that the bubble has burst and that his great adventure is
over.
He has no alternative.
He has been defeated not by the enemy, but by his own men.
Of course, he doesn't admit this.
Alexander the Great could not be seen bowing to the will of mere mortals.
So he performs a sacrifice ostensibly to determine whether the omens are favorable for continuing
his journey.
And he discovers, unsurprisingly, that they are not.
And he announces to the army that he is going to turn back.
It is the gods who disapprove of the expedition.
The army, we are told, receives the news with tears of joy.
And just to make the point that this is not an ignominious retreat, Alexander proceeds
to erect twelve monumental altars on the far side of the Hifaces River, one for each of
the twelve Olympian gods.
This is both a thank offering for all of his victories and a memorial to what he and his
army have endured together.
And now Alexander and his men begin the long trek home.
They journey not by the route they have taken to get here, but instead head south to the
Indian Ocean.
Alexander's biographer, Plutarch, claims that three quarters of the men perish on the way
back.
Although this is an exaggeration, there is no doubt that the Indian adventure costs Alexander
thousands of lives and that is a major logistical blunder.
Alexander himself nearly dies, which makes us wonder, what was his private view of this
ill-fated trek across Asia?
We'll never know, of course, but what, if anything, has he achieved by it?
The mutiny in the making of the Hifaces River is not the final rebellion Alexander must face.
During year, he will again be opposed by his troops at a place called Opus and not far
from Babylon.
This time he will show no restraint.
He will execute some 13 ringleaders on the spot and threaten to discharge all his Macedonians
without rewarding them for their services when they ask to be allowed to return to Macedonia.
He will also threaten to rely exclusively on Persians in the future.
That's the ultimate insult.
That is in 324, the year before his death and by this point Alexander is a very sick man.
In the last years of his life, he behaves very erratically and indeed violently.
In particular, he carries out many executions.
But certainly his health is ruined and all of this is exacerbated by his heavy drinking.
I focus on the episode of the Hifaces River because it is the moment at which Alexander
has to face a very unpalatable truth.
It is the moment when he comes face to face with the fact that he is not a god.
He is subject to the will of others.
He cannot invariably get his own way.
In other words, he is like you or me.
When he is asked to whom he is leaving his throne, he replies according to Arian to the
strongest.
Plutarch tells us that shortly before his death, Alexander drinks nine pints of undiluted
wine.
He is then struck by a fever that rages for ten days and lapses into a coma.
Alexander dies in Babylon on June 10, 323 after suffering ten days of fever provoked
by a long bout of drinking.
The cause of his death remains a subject of lively controversy.
Four candidates are poison, meningitis, bacterial infection and malaria.
He is just 32 years old and his reign has lasted for only 13 years and yet he is one
of the greatest forces for change in the whole of human history.
Alexander leaves behind an empire that stretches from the Adriatic Sea in the west to the Punjab
in the east and from southern Russia in the north to Ethiopia in the south.
That is no mean achievement but it is probably a great deal less than what he had hoped for.
And the legacy of Alexander the Great is not confined to his phenomenal military achievements.
He set a personal standard for leadership against which aspiring individuals, kings
and generals measure themselves virtually to this day.
Lectures do not permit footnotes, those learned little notes either at the bottom of the page
or buried at the back of a book that may suggest an alternative interpretation to the one proposed.
But for once I would like you to indulge another possible interpretation concerning the end
of Alexander's adventure.
This view is that Alexander never intended to cross the Hifasis River and that the suggestion
he did was just an elaborate charade.
This interpretation is stated by a distinguished scholar, Waldemar Heckel, in his book Alexander
the Great A New History.
Heckel claims that it defies credulity to believe Alexander wanted to go on.
I don't agree, Alexander's career defies credulity.
We're also left with a fascinating what if.
What if Alexander had pressed on?
According to Plutarch, the local peoples might have welcomed him as a liberator and joined
his banner.
If that happened, Alexander might have gotten as far as China.
That's pure speculation.
But what a thought.
