It's the afternoon of September the 2nd, 31 BCE.
We're at Actium, a sandy promontory in the Ambration Gulf in northwest Greece.
The wind is rising from the north.
A naval battle is about to be fought that will determine the future of the Roman Empire.
On one side is Mark Antony in command of the eastern half of the Empire and allied to Cleopatra.
She is the Queen of Egypt and a former mistress of Julius Caesar.
On the other side is Octavian, a short, sickly man with a spotted belly and bad teeth
who commands the Empire's western half.
How is it that the fate of Rome is about to be determined off the coast of Greece?
To answer that question, we have to go back 13 years to the Ides of March in 44 BCE.
After the assassins slew Julius Caesar, they expected an outpouring of gratitude from the Roman people
and thought that they would be hailed as liberators who had rid the Republic of a hated dictator.
Their idea was the Republic would now function as it had before Caesar came to control all the organs of government.
That's to say, magistrates would be voted into office and generals would go off to fight battles in distant parts of the Empire
without Caesar micromanaging and rigging all elections.
Business as usual.
How wrong they were.
Instead of an outpouring of gratitude, Caesar's murder produced an outpouring of grief and that soon turned to anger.
In the immediate aftermath, Mark Antony, who was Caesar's consular colleague and therefore powerful,
became politically ascendant after delivering an emotional eulogy at Caesar's funeral that stoked public hatred of the assassins.
As a result, the assassins found themselves on the defensive.
Within days, they were on the run.
A few weeks later, however, a more complex reality had evolved.
Caesar had left an adopted son and heir, Gaius Octavius, whom he'd adopted seven months before his death.
Octavian, as historians call him, was the grandson of Caesar's sister Julia.
He was a callous, sickly, 18-year-old with absolutely no appetite for war.
What he did have, however, in spades was a ruthless instinct for self-preservation and an insatiable lust for power.
Octavian was destined to become the future Emperor Augustus, but no one could possibly have predicted that in 44 BCE.
Mark Antony was himself an astute, tested warrior and politician, and still, like everyone else, he completely underestimated Octavian.
Caesar's grand-nevue capitalized on his adoption by assuming the title of Diophilius, meaning son of the god,
and initially struck a deal to join forces with Antony in taking revenge on the assassins.
Together, they defeated the leading conspirators, Brutus and Cassius, at the Battle of Philippi in Macedonia in 42 BCE.
I say together, but Octavian wasn't feeling too well that day, and he probably spent most of it in his tent.
Later, as relations between the two cooled, they sought to strengthen their bond by formalizing their amikittia,
their political friendship by having Mark Antony marry Octavian sister Octavia.
But the arrangement collapsed because Antony became infatuated with Cleopatra.
He moved to Alexandria, the capital of Egypt, and began a very public relationship with the Egyptian Queen.
Octavian interpreted Antony's choice as a humiliation, both of himself and of his sister.
So, here we are off the ambration gulf of northwestern Greece in 31 BCE.
Octavian is moving into position to block Mark Antony from gaining access to Italy and thereby taking control of the entire empire.
Although Octavian has little skill in generalship, he has the services of a talented commander named Marcus Agrippa.
As Octavian reinforces his seaward flanks to keep the enemy from racing around him on either side,
Antony suddenly attacks the middle and breaks through.
He has succeeded, followed by Cleopatra's ships, bearing the treasury.
But at this moment, Cleopatra, whether through cunning or panic, signals for her ships to flee.
If you were Mark Antony, what would you do as you watch your lover and naval ally speed out of sight?
Would you put your political ambitions and the interests of your men first?
Or would it be your love for this Egyptian Queen that takes priority?
Antony's decision, made as Octavian is bearing down on him, will determine Rome's future.
Details sometimes determine the course of history.
Blaise Pascal, a 17th century French scientist and philosopher, famously commented,
had Cleopatra's nose been shorter, the whole face of the world might be different.
This incidentally has nothing to do with her reputed beauty.
What Pascal means is that with a shorter nose, Cleopatra might have lacked the strength of character
to achieve what she does achieve.
People with long noses were thought to be masterful.
Historians call this the contingency theory of history.
If any small detail in the complex structure of world events is changed,
then the outcome might take a different turn, with unpredictable consequences into the future.
Popular belief to the contrary, Cleopatra is not drop dead gorgeous.
We have only one 1st century BCE bust of the Queen, and ironically, the nose is missing.
But the coins that she mints in the latter half of her 21 year reign depict a woman with a hooked nose,
jutting chin, rolls of neck fat, and deep set eyes.
No sex goddess, in other words, or at least not one whom we would recognize as such today.
I suspect that she captivates more by her charm and her intelligence than she does by her looks.
This is what Plutarch actually suggests in his biography of Mark Antony.
He writes,
Her beauty, we're told, wasn't incomparable, and it didn't take your breath away,
but conversing with her was quite something, and the delight of being in her presence was irresistible.
Cleopatra the 7th is the last of the Ptolemaic ruling house,
named for its founder Ptolemy, who ruled Egypt after the death of Alexander the Great in 323 BCE.
The Ptolemy's are Macedonian Greeks, and Ptolemy himself was one of Alexander's generals.
The Greeks didn't intermarry with the Egyptians, so it's highly likely that Cleopatra is 100% Greek.
Some 20 years earlier, in 51 BCE at the age of 18,
Cleopatra had become joint ruler of Egypt with her younger brother Ptolemy the 13th.
Ptolemy the 13th was also her husband in accordance with the Egyptian practice of brother-sister marriage among royalty.
When the pair fell out and declared war against each other,
Cleopatra secured a powerful sponsor and lover in Julius Caesar.
With Caesar's military assistance, she defeated her brother-husband,
who was drowned in the Nile apparently while fleeing.
Shortly afterwards, Cleopatra gave birth to a son, Ptolemy Caesar, whom she nicknamed Caesarean,
meaning Little Caesar,
thereby proclaiming her liaison with the most powerful man in the world.
Accompanied by this son, Cleopatra was in Rome in 44 BCE when Julius Caesar was murdered.
In other words, she was creating a scandal by enjoying Caesar's hospitality at the time.
When the news of the assassination reached her, she probably feared for her life.
She made it back to Egypt without mishap and before long sought to ally herself with power once again.
Three years later, in 41 BCE,
Mark Antony summoned Cleopatra to Tarsus in modern-day southern Turkey
to account for why she had provided only lukewarm support in his war against Caesar's assassins.
Cleopatra seized the opportunity.
Instead of craving forgiveness, she upstaged Antony by mobilizing the pomp and ceremony of the Egyptian court to her own advantage.
There's a wonderful description of this in Plutarch's Life of Antony, which Shakespeare later borrowed from.
I'll quote a few lines from Shakespeare's play, Antony and Cleopatra.
Shakespeare puts these words into the mouth of Antony's friend in Ababa's.
And while the words are based on the author's imagination,
they perfectly capture how Cleopatra stage-managed the moment to captivate Antony.
The barge, she sat in, like a burnished throne burned on the water.
The poop was beaten gold, purple the sails, and so perfumed that the winds were love-sick with them.
For her own person, it beggared all description.
Of course, there is more to the meeting between Antony and Cleopatra than just a photo op, so to speak.
The political gains for the queen are enormous.
She succeeds in extricating herself from a dangerous situation
by persuading Antony that her own henchman, Serapion, had acted contrary to her interests
in aiding one of Caesar's assassins, Cassius, and in arguing that she herself is entirely innocent.
Antony seems to have swallowed her excuse, hook, line, and sinker.
I wrote a book a few years ago called Celebrity and Antiquity from Media Tarts to Tabloid Queens.
And in it, I argue that Cleopatra's command of the public stage
enables her to achieve unprecedented influence for a woman in the ancient world.
What intrigues me is her theatrical ability to promote her personal interests
and political ambitions amid earthquake shifts in the ages, dynastic rulers, and aims.
Cleopatra is nothing if not opportunistic.
Still, that does not diminish the fact that there must be a very special chemistry between her and Antony.
Antony may well be in love with her.
Even so, the liaison is to have fatal consequences
as not only does it alienate Antony from Octavian,
but it also provides Caesar's air with powerful ammunition for his propaganda machine.
Octavian depicts Antony as Cleopatra's puppet, an aging gigolo who has abandoned his duty to the Roman state
and who has become, in Plutarch's haunting phrase, a mere prosthetic of the Queen.
It doesn't help Antony's case that he identifies himself with Bacchus, the god of wine and ecstasy,
whereas Octavian equates himself with Apollo, the god of light and truth.
Cleopatra, for her part, is depicted in Rome as an oriental sorceress who has used dark powers to seduce Antony.
She thus becomes the exact antithesis of the ideal Roman wife who embodies the virtue of Pudichitia or modesty.
Octavian's objective is to make Romans fear and detest the pair, and he succeeds brilliantly.
For you, a Roman, subjected to this unrelenting smear campaign,
you would likely believe that there is a conspiracy afoot, masterminded by Cleopatra,
to undermine all the virtues that Rome stands for, and to steal by guile the empire that hardworking Romans like yourself
have acquired over centuries of self-sacrifice.
So here we are at the Battle of Actium, and I'm asking the question again.
What would you do as you watched the love of your life flee from battle?
Would you sacrifice your ambitions, your career, your reputation?
Antony, either because he genuinely thinks his cause is lost,
or because he can't bear to be separated from Cleopatra,
finds a gap in the enemy fleet ranged against him and races after her.
In the split second, it takes him to make up his mind.
History turns on a dime.
The Roman world passes from his hands into Octavians.
His fleet will be destroyed, and soon afterwards, his army will be forced to surrender.
I sometimes like to imagine what might have happened had one small marker on the ancient game board
where life was played being placed differently.
It's what we call counterfactual history, and it's connected to Pascal's Cleopatra's nose theory that I mentioned a moment ago.
What if Mark Antony had not been besotted with Cleopatra?
What if he had not followed the queen when she ordered her ships to quit the battle?
It's very likely that he could have won, and if so, Octavian would have lost the Civil War and had his throat cut or the equivalent.
Antony and Cleopatra would have triumphantly returned to Rome,
or perhaps a more intriguing possibility back to Alexandria,
which might have become the jointly ruled empire's capital.
But Antony does not stand fast.
Even as he and Cleopatra escaped to Egypt,
the die, as Caesar famously said when he was about to cross the Rubican River and initiate the Civil War against Pompey, is cast.
Antony turns his back on public business after the escape at Actium
and indulges in a life of endless partying enthralled to his Harlot Queen according to the Greek historian Plutarch.
Cleopatra, for her part, becomes interested in poisons with which she experiments on men who have been condemned to death
in order to analyze the effects of the toxins, or at least that is the legend.
Nearly a year passes before Octavian's war fleet arrives in Alexandria.
By now he has succeeded in undermining Antony and Cleopatra's support, even in Egypt, their safe haven.
Nevertheless, Antony is determined to fight.
He is not as enfeebled as Octavian depicts him.
He even goes so far as to challenge Octavian to hand-to-hand combat,
but Octavian, who would certainly be no match for Antony, refuses.
He scornfully declares that there are many ways for Antony to kill himself.
So Antony prepares for one last military engagement.
On the evening of July the 31st, 30 BCE, Antony and Cleopatra host their final banquet,
which takes place to the unearthly strains of music produced by worshipers of Bacchus.
Ancient writers endow the couples last evening with an eerie, almost unearthly quality.
We're told that the pair describe themselves as the soon apothumani,
those who die together in the full knowledge that their doom is at hand.
The next morning Antony bids Cleopatra goodbye and departs to review his forces.
He probably senses that his men are uneasy and lacking in confidence,
his efforts to rally them fall on deaf ears.
And once he engages Octavian, most of his fleet and cavalry desert to the enemy,
calculating that the day is lost even before hostilities begin.
Only his infantry attempts a half-hearted resistance before melting away.
We can scarcely imagine the depth of humiliation and shame he must feel.
Learning of Antony's defeat, Cleopatra walls herself inside the family Mausoleum near the temple of Isis.
Isis is an Egyptian goddess who was revered both as the ideal mother and wife.
When she receives a false report that Antony has been killed in battle,
the queen prepares to take her own life.
This is a version that Shakespeare gives us in his play.
But some historians believe Cleopatra spreads the rumor of her suicide
to persuade Antony to take his own life.
According to an account delivered by Cleopatra's personal physician Olympus,
the defeated Antony returns to his palace and searches desperately for Cleopatra
only to be informed that she has retired to the family Mausoleum to commit suicide.
Antony now asks his slave, Eros, to run a sword through him,
but Eros takes his own life instead.
Well done, Eros, Antony says.
You've shown your master the way to do what he didn't have the courage to do himself.
Antony then drives his sword into his own stomach and botches the attempt
whereupon he learns that Cleopatra is still alive.
In great agony, Antony orders that he be conveyed to the Mausoleum to join her.
His body is raised up to the Mausoleum by means of ropes and pulleys.
And once inside, Antony does his best to console his grief-stricken lover,
ordering wine to be brought from the pile of funerary gifts
so that they can toast each other one last time.
Antony asks Cleopatra to remember their happy times together
and then he dies in her arms.
All very dramatic, or rather, all very melodramatic.
Octavian, who is now the uncontested leader of Rome,
hopes to transport Cleopatra back home in order to parade her in triumph
just as Julius Caesar paraded Cleopatra's sister, Arsinoe,
at his African triumph back in 46 BCE.
A triumph is a celebration awarded to a victorious Roman general
in which his prisoners are led through the streets of Rome in chains.
Cleopatra was in Rome at the time of Caesar's triumph
and whether or not she saw her sister being led in chains,
she would have received a very graphic account of it
and so she would be horrified at the prospect of undergoing the same humiliation
of the hands of Octavian.
Meanwhile, Octavian's officer Proculeus arrives in Alexandria
in advance of the Roman army and races to the Mausoleum
where the Egyptian queen is hiding.
As his men burst into the tomb,
Cleopatra attempts to stab herself with a dagger
but the weapon is rested from her hands.
The queen, appearing to be chastened and compliant,
then requests permission to embarm Antony's body
before burying it in the Mausoleum.
Embarming is an ancient Egyptian practice
that was a complex and lengthy procedure
taking as many as 90 days to complete.
The Romans generally cremated their dead
but it suits Octavian's purposes to grant Cleopatra's request
since the embalming further demonstrates
that Antony has succumbed to the queen's influence
by adopting Egyptian customs
in something so personal as his manner of burial
and in the meantime, Cleopatra is placed under house arrest.
Octavian himself now enters Alexandria
taking care to surround himself with an impressive bodyguard
because he is wary of the local population
but he announces that he will spare the city and its people.
This is an act of exceptional magnanimity
as it is customary in antiquity for a victorious general
to enslave the women and children and massacre the males.
Cleopatra spends her final days in the Mausoleum
and went over the body of Mark Antony
according to her physician Olympus.
She is so distraught that she inflamed and lacerated her breasts
by beating them, unquote.
She falls into a fever that lasts for days
and refuses to take either food or drink.
On August the 8th, a week after Antony's defeat,
Cleopatra at last receives a visit from Octavian.
When he enters the Mausoleum,
she prostrates herself before him
and according to the report, even tries to seduce him.
Highly improbable though it is that Cleopatra
would summon her seductive wiles one last time,
it is not unlikely that the deposed queen
and the future First Emperor do meet briefly
before Octavian leaves Egypt for Syria three days later.
Cleopatra learns from one of her spies
that Octavian plans to send her and her children to Rome
as soon as he departs from Egypt.
That gives her three days in which to act,
three days as she sees it in which to take her life.
The most celebrated account we have
is of Cleopatra dying of a snake bite.
This is the version that Octavian promulgates in a tableau
that he will display in his triumphal procession
three years later in 27 BCE.
And this is the version too that Shakespeare favors as well.
A later account suggests that the snaking question is an asp,
a generic term for any snake that puffs out its neck.
An asp bite, however, would be an extremely painful way to die.
A more plausible candidate is the cobra
whose bite leads to paralysis and a loss of consciousness.
The problem with any snake bite theory, however,
is that it's highly unlikely that a snake would have enough venom
to kill Cleopatra and her two female servants
and we're told that all three die together.
The historian Dio hypothesizes that a needle is used to administer the poison
and that the marks on her body come from pinpricks, not bites.
Cleopatra dies on August the 10th, 30 BCE.
She is 39 years old and had ruled Egypt for more than two decades.
She lived life to the full.
Titular authority as ruler of Egypt now passes to Caesarean,
Cleopatra's 17-year-old son who becomes, in theory, Ptolemy the 15th.
He is never crowned, however, and his reign, if we call it that,
lasted for only 18 days.
While attempting to escape to Nubia in Upper Egypt,
along with a sizable chunk of his mother's treasure,
Caesarean is betrayed by his tutor who persuades him to return to Alexandria
ostensibly to be crowned king.
Instead, he is murdered.
It's sometimes claimed that Octavian did not order Caesarean's assassination
but only learned of it afterwards from the philosopher Arius Didimus
who notes quite correctly that it is dangerous to have
too many Caesars in the world.
But with the deaths of Mark Antony and Cleopatra,
Octavian now becomes the undisputed ruler of the Roman world
or, as we might equally put it, the most powerful man on the planet.
Three years later, in 27 BCE, he restores the Republic
which had been suspended under a system of government
known as the Second Triumvirate, or ruled by three men.
The three men being Octavian, Mark Antony, and a lightweight named Marcus Lepidus
who died previously.
The new system of government Octavian establishes
becomes known as the Prinkipot, effectively ruled by one man
and he takes the title of Prinkips, meaning chief of first man.
The Prinkipate will endure for over 400 years.
Octavian further burnishes his image as head of state
by taking the name Augustus, meaning something akin to Venerable One.
However, he is careful not to fall into the same trap that Julius Caesar did.
He scrupulously avoids any suggestion that he aspires to kingship.
He also describes himself as primus inter pares, first among equals.
Egypt becomes a Roman province and a source of great enrichment to Augustus
and his imperial successors who treat it as their private property.
It's a major producer of wheat and brings in considerable tax revenue.
Had the battle of Actium with which we began this story turned out differently?
Had Cleopatra not ordered her fleet to turn tail?
Had Antony not given orders to follow?
Antony might well have tilted the Roman world to the east,
making western civilization become subservient to the Orient.
The Roman historian Livy tells us that when Octavian encountered Cleopatra in the Moors Leum
she said to him,
that is Greek for I will not be led in triumph.
What we can say for sure is that if she did take her own life
she performed a really big favor for her hated enemy.
There's yet another possibility about Cleopatra's end
in which she doesn't commit suicide but is murdered instead.
This is the hypothesis of criminal profiler, Pat Brown,
who wrote the book The Murder of Cleopatra History's Greatest Cold Case.
Brown employs the techniques of criminal profiling to point the finger at Octavian
as the author of Cleopatra's death.
It's certainly true that Octavian would have much to fear had she survived.
He might have derived great satisfaction from leading her in chains through Rome
but what would he have done with her afterwards?
He could hardly have her garrotted, strangled slowly in other words
which is what usually happened to hated enemies of Rome after a triumph.
The Roman public would surely have been revolted.
Despised and reviled though Cleopatra was
bringing her back to Rome would have represented a grave risk for Octavian
particularly in view of her close association with Julius Caesar.
Indeed some might have seen it as an insult aimed at Caesar's memory
and what if Cleopatra the arch exponent of theatricality
somehow upstaged Octavian by eliciting the pity of the crowd
just as she upstaged Mark Antony at Tarsus a few years earlier.
What would be the consequences then?
Nor could Octavian spare her because if he did
she might well become a focus of resistance
or the more so because she claims to be the mother of Caesar's biological son Caesarean
whereas Octavian was adopted.
So perhaps Octavian fabricated the story of Cleopatra's suicide
for his own purposes after ordering her execution.
One last point to note.
Cleopatra's three children by Antony end up being spared.
These are the twins Alexander Helius meaning the son
and Cleopatra Selene meaning the moon both 11 years old
and Ptolemy Philadelphus age six.
Ptolemy Philadelphus dies soon afterwards.
However the twins appear in the triumph that Octavian celebrates in 29 BCE
since there is no one left in the family to do duty as Concord General.
Interestingly the twins grow up in the household of Octavian sister Octavia
that is in the household of Mark Antony's former wife.
What a run old world it is.
