Nothing was ever certain in the ancient world.
Athens is at the height of its power and prosperity, but that's about to end, and that's what
makes this moment so poignant.
The year is 431 BCE and Athens heads a maritime confederacy that is a source of enormous enrichment
because its allies are taxed in return for protection against the Persians.
The confederacy was formed in 478 nearly half a century ago after the Greeks succeeded
in driving Xerxes's invasion force out of Greece.
Its purpose was to prevent any similar event from taking place ever again, except that
in 431 the Persians are no longer anywhere to be found.
The Athenians have seen them off long ago, and still the allies in quotes, nearly 200
of them, are paying an annual tribute which is swelling Athens' coffers.
Because Persia is no longer a threat to the Greeks, some of the tribute can now be poured
into one of the most ambitious building projects the world has ever seen, the refurbishment
of the Acropolis whose temples were burned down by the Persians in 480.
The centerpiece of the project is the Parthenon, the great temple of Athena Parthenos, Athena
the Maiden, dominating the Acropolis, one of the most aesthetically refined buildings
ever constructed, not a single line is straight.
There's a subtle upward curve extending from the substructure to the architrave to correct
the optical illusion of sagging that would otherwise be the case.
Its fluted columns and architrave glisten in the sunshine.
On the frieze that runs outside the temple, the horse's bridles and other details are
made of the finest gold, all the sculptures are brightly painted.
Inside the temple, the monumental statue of the goddess Athena resides, carved by Phidias,
the greatest sculptor of his day.
The core is wooden, but ivory is used for her flesh, her armor including her massive
shield is resplendent in gold.
The Parthenon is a powerful visual statement about what Athens has achieved.
The new buildings close by are almost complete, but not quite.
In fact, they never will be fully finished.
You can still see parts left undone in the great gateway known as the Propylia through
which you must pass to enter the Acropolis.
These unfulfilled ambitions signify the moment when history, overnight so to speak, takes
an entirely new direction.
The Greek world in 431 is divided into two opposing camps, very like Europe on the eve
of the First World War.
Virtually, no state is outside the orbit of one or the other of two opposing powers.
Sparta is the leader of the Peloponnesian League, an offensive and defensive alliance,
and Athens is the head of a maritime empire.
The Peloponnes is the southern peninsula of Greece.
Athens and Sparta have been at loggerheads for decades.
They signed a 30 years peace treaty in 448, but it is apparent to anyone with half a brain
that a showdown is inevitable and could occur at any moment.
Any minor conflict could ignite a full scale war, and it does.
Thucydides, who is our only source for this moment, identifies two main events that lead
inexplicably to war, although he ascribes the ultimate cause to Sparta's fear of Athens's
increasing power.
Neither event directly involves either Athens or Sparta, but they both involve their allies,
and that's how the war begins.
Thucydides is the author of what we call the history of the Peloponnesian War.
He was born around 460 and died sometime after 411.
He served as a general, or strategos, and was exiled for incompetence in 423.
In effect, he was court-martialed.
This turned out to be a blessing in disguise, however, because his removal enabled him to
travel around Greece and gather information for his history.
Most important, it enabled him to interview the enemy.
But he is in Athens in the spring of 431, and he witnesses the events we are about to describe.
It's either March or April, although war is imminent, there is, for now, a kind of phony
peace.
Imagine you're a sculptor.
You've been working on the Acropolis for years, perhaps since the project began 16 or 17 years
ago.
You carved some of the horses on the Great Freeze that runs around all four sides of
the exterior wall of the Parthenon inside the colonnade.
And now, as you're getting on in years, you've been assigned supervisor to the Propailea,
the monumental gateway that leads up to the Acropolis.
One morning, just as you and your fellows are assembling for work, as usual, the man
in charge of the whole building program calls a meeting.
He tells you that construction on the Propailea is being suspended until further notice, and
that you're going to have to start clearing the sites of the scaffolding and everything
else.
Your services are no longer required.
You know why, of course?
Athens is preparing for war.
You've seen this coming for months, if not years.
We can imagine the conversation you and your fellow craftsmen have as you descend from
the Acropolis this day.
Finally, the Spartans will get what they've been asking for.
They'll soon learn what the Athenians are made of.
They'll never bring us to our knees.
They'll just go on beating their brainless heads at a stone wall, stupid Spartans, thick
as two short planks.
And in a few weeks' time, once we've taught them a lesson, they won't forget, in a hurry,
we'll be back up on the Acropolis to put the finishing touches to the Propailea.
It is perhaps a few days later that Pericles, the leading politician of the day, lays out
his strategy to the Athenian people when he addresses them in the assembly.
Pericles has dominated Athenian politics for at least 17 years, so much so that we call
the period from 448 to 431 the age of Pericles.
It was on Pericles' specific recommendation that the tribute money from the Allies should
be used to finance the rebuilding of the Acropolis.
Pericles is an aristocrat.
He comes from a very wealthy and powerful family known as the Alchmionids.
He has a reputation for looking down on his fellow Athenians.
He has even acquired the nickname Olympian, meaning he's aloof as Olympians use.
Not all Athenians are thoroughgoing Democrats, and he's one of them.
Thucydides says of Pericles that he led the people rather than being led by them.
But Thucydides doesn't have much respect for the common man either, any more than Socrates
or Plato did.
It's curious what a bad rap that Athenian democracy gets from some of its greatest sons.
And paraphrasing Pericles now when he addresses the assembly on the eve of war, he says,
I'll be the first to acknowledge that the Spartans and their Peloponnesian allies are
unbeatable on land.
That is incontestable, and we all know how fierce the Spartans are when fighting on land.
But what we need to remember is that we, with our vast navy and all the tribute that our
allies brings us, are unbeatable at sea.
I tell you that the war is going to end in a stalemate.
And if it ends in a stalemate, that means we've won, since we will have proven to the
Spartans and their allies that we can't be contained or controlled by anyone.
There is a downside, however, because the Peloponnesians are unbeatable on land.
We're going to let them have free reign in Attica, the territory surrounding Athens,
which means in turn that all of you who live in the countryside are going to have to evacuate
and move to the city.
Soon as Pericles says this, there's an uproar, especially from the country folk.
But the city dwellers realize it's not going to be plain sailing for them either, because
the influx of people will be huge, and they'll be camping everywhere.
Pericles rides out to the uproar, and eventually the assembly quietens down.
Yes, yes, I know it's unfortunate, he continues, because the Peloponnesians are going to do
a lot of damage.
They're going to burn our fields, cut down our precious olive trees, which incidentally
take about 10 to 20 years to mature, and destroy our homes.
But in the end, it's a small price to pay for maintaining our empire and the fruits
that it bestows on us.
And besides, how much damage can the Peloponnesians do in the space of a few short weeks?
So the first thing that needs to happen is that everyone living in the countryside moves
into the urban area within the safety of our city walls.
Don't worry though, it's all going to be in a good cause.
You'll see, and within a year at most.
OK, well, maybe it'll take two years.
The Spartans are awfully so learners, ha ha ha.
They'll have given up, and they'll leave us alone.
Just hang tough, in other words.
This is the gist of what Pericles tells the Assembly.
And so, a proposal to evacuate is now put forward, and the Assembly votes.
As a participatory democracy, every one of Athens's citizens, some 30,000 at least, have
the right to vote.
In practice, however, the Assembly is dominated by those who live inside of Athens and thereabouts.
So it is probably mainly the town dwellers who vote on the proposal that the country
dwellers should uproot themselves.
We don't have any record of the debate.
We don't know whether the motion is a hard sell, or whether it passes easily.
But I think it is safe to assume that it must have been pretty controversial in the end.
However, it passes.
This isn't the first time the Athenians evacuate their city at a moment's notice, by the way.
They are still a few elderly citizens, very elderly citizens, I might say, who can remember
back to the time, 50 years earlier, when they had evacuated in advance of a Persian invasion
led by King Xerxes, that had destroyed everything in its path, including temples and tombs.
On that occasion, both country dwellers and city dwellers alike evacuated, because they
didn't have secure walls around their city.
After the Persians departed, the Athenians hastily threw up a circuit wall around the
city, using everything they had at hand.
And to this day, you can still see the broken bits of funerary monuments in a section that
lies beside the main burial ground on the west side of the city, known as the Kerimachus.
The elderly Athenians, who remember the scene, know full well what it means to return home
to find everything destroyed.
It's one thing to hear Pericles speak, he's got to be one of the most forceful and compelling
speakers ever to address a public gathering, and another to go through the painful process
of acting upon the decision to abandon your home, knowing that when you return, the equivalent
of a tornado will have passed through your village.
Cucinides tells us that the country dwellers are dispirited at the prospect, and do not
bear the change easily.
That's surely an understatement.
Once the decision to vacate the countryside is made, the disruption in people's lives
is enormous.
Since more than half the total number of Athenians live in the countryside at the time the Peloponnesian
war breaks out, the population of the city virtually doubles overnight.
This means it increases by somewhere between 50,000 and 100,000 people.
And how wrong Pericles will prove to be in envisaging that the war will be over in a
few months.
And how wrong he will be in forecasting that the refugees will be able to return to their
homes permanently at the end of the first year's fighting season.
Instead, the refugees will de-camp to Athens year after year, six times at least, at the
beginning of the annual fighting season, and be cooped up during the summer months in the
most insanitary conditions imaginable.
Recidities provide few details about the evacuation.
Evacuations took place all the time in ancient Greece.
They were not considered worth describing.
Everybody knew what was involved, and there was nothing special about this evacuation.
All we hear is that the refugees remove from their homes not only their furniture, but
also whatever else is made of wood, including doors, frames, shutters, and the like.
That's an interesting detail, one that adds a certain vividness to the image of the hasty
departures.
The point is that wood is in very short supply in the Greek world, and therefore valuable.
Recidities goes on to tell us that the Athenians convey, I quote, their flocks and beasts of
burden to Euboea and other neighboring islands.
Euboea lies a short distance off the northeast coast of Attica.
We don't know what happens to the pigs, goats, chickens, and household pets, but they are
presumably conveyed to Athens.
Recidities doesn't tell us what the refugees do with their valuables, either their jewellery,
their precious pottery, and so on.
But we may surmise.
They bury them in the ground.
They just wouldn't be safe in Athens.
Most of the evacuees have to travel by foot, though some ride on donkeys or perhaps in
carts, and a handful of wealthy people have horses.
Pregnant women, small children, and the elderly move at a snail's pace.
Though the majority of slaves accompany their masters and mistresses to the city, a number
of them take to their heels.
It's an opportunity to escape.
After in the war, the Peloponnesians will occupy a fortified base inside Attica at a
place called Dessalier and encourage Athenian slaves to desert there.
Some 20,000 slaves will take advantage of the opportunity.
Athens has 140 deems, or townships, of which about a hundred are in the countryside.
The evacuation is probably organized by the officers in charge of the deems, the demarks,
and local mayors, in other words.
The operation will take days to implement.
Families living in the outlying deems will have to spend at least two nights on the road.
In some cases longer, since several villages are 30 miles or more from Athens.
Bear in mind, too, that there are no proper roads, only dirt paths.
Not all country dwellers will obey the summons to evacuate Harafor.
Inevitably, some are too sick or too frail to make the journey, while others decide
that their farms are so remote that they will be safe against depredation from the enemy.
The evacuation is probably still going on in late May or early June for 431, when the
Peloponnesians begin their march north.
The word of their approach sends a scare through the population.
Evacuation speeds up as country dwellers rush to the safety of the city walls before
the Peloponnesians enter Attica.
By the time they reach the outskirts of the city, many of them are foot sore, exhausted,
and dehydrated.
There is a long queue outside the city gates, assuming that the evacuees know how to queue,
and there's a fair number of scuffles, too, as people try to jump the line.
Let's hope there's plentiful water available for them upon their arrival.
And once they get inside the city, they have to be fed, which means that officials must
have been appointed to take responsibility for their welfare.
Evacuees can hardly fend for themselves.
They also have to find a place to bed down.
A handful of wealthy Athenians own a second home in the city, according to Thucydides,
and some, too, probably have relatives they can stay with.
However, the vast majority of evacuees are forced to settle down either where they happen
upon a vacant space or where the authorities direct them.
Some of them camp in the many sanctuaries and hero shrines dotted about the city.
In land that lies under a curse has to be settled.
That is to say, land that an oracle has declared should be left unoccupied with the threat
of divine punishment before those who disobey.
This includes an unidentified plot below the Acropolis called the Pelargican.
The only sanctuaries that are strictly out of bounds are those that can be locked up.
They include the sanctuaries on the Acropolis and the Temple of Eleusinian Demeter, a short
distance from the Acropolis.
City dwellers are under intense pressure to open their doors to the evacuees.
The citizen body is divided into ten tribes, and it's likely that a tribesman who has
fought previously alongside a member of the same tribe will offer accommodation to a comrade
and his family.
As part of a face-to-face society, many Athenians have direct personal connections with one
another, so it's likely that there is a welcoming spirit of camaraderie that considerably eases
the discomfort of the refugees, though it may not last very long.
At first, all evacuees are crammed inside the city.
As the pressure on space increases, however, they are permitted to settle along the unoccupied
strips within the outlying long walls.
The walls, that is, that join Athens to the Pyraeus, the port town, situated about four
or five miles to the southwest.
The long walls run parallel to one another, about 200 yards apart, so they can provide
accommodation for several thousand refugees.
The Pyraeus, too, which is also fortified, will become densely occupied.
It is this dense concentration of evacuees that will be responsible for the outbreak
of a deadly plague, since the port city is largely dependent for drinking water on sistens
that catch rainwater.
These sistens quickly become polluted due to the huge population increase.
The urban mass, islanded within the encircling walls, now becomes the ancient equivalent
of a modern-day refugee camp.
Perhaps the Athenians derive some small crumb of comfort from an inspirational speech that
Pericles gives in late September, or perhaps early October, when the evacuees have returned
to their farms for the winter.
A speech over those who have fallen in the first year of the war.
This is what we call the funeral speech.
In it, Pericles sings the praises of Athens as a daring political experiment, the world's
first and only radical democracy, as a cultural mecca, and as an economic powerhouse.
It's one of the most thrilling speeches ever written.
Our democratic institutions are an inspiration to others.
We enjoy the produce of the world.
Our city is open to anyone who wants to come here.
We don't prevent foreigners from coming and observing.
We cultivate refinement without extravagance.
And we pursue wisdom without allowing the pursuit to enthebel us.
We expect our citizens to participate in public life.
Anyone who doesn't participate is useless.
We make friends by bestowing favours, not by receiving them.
Athens is the school of Greece.
Our citizens are extremely versatile and prepared for any contingency.
We have made the sea and land a highway for our enterprise, and everywhere we have left
behind imperishable monuments, both of our good deeds and of our bad.
Pericles is chosen to give this speech because of his reputation.
He is immensely powerful at this point, and the Athenian people have total faith in him.
The very next year, however, when the evacuees return, Athens is afflicted with a terrible
plague.
Athens are breaking out all the time in the ancient world, but its occurrence on this
occasion is more deadly and more devastating than most.
One moment, Athens is being lured into the skies by its greatest orator.
The next moment, it is in the throes of a debilitating sickness that will reduce its
population by a quarter or perhaps even a third.
It will take it the better part of a generation to recover.
Thucydides places his description of the pandemic immediately after Pericles' speech.
It seems he does this because he wants us to see the contrast between Athens' claims
to greatness and the terrible reality that is awaiting just around the corner.
Though in fact these two things happened in quick succession, history turns on a dime.
And once the plague hits Athens, nothing will ever be the same again.
Pericles could not have made the same speech the next year.
It would have rung hollow in everyone's ears.
And now, among our esteemed fellow Athenian citizens, the plague is producing boils, ulcerations,
burning sensations all over the body, discharges of bile, violent spasms, and unquenchable
thirst, according to Thucydides' account.
The historian will actually fall victim himself, though he will be among the lucky few who
recover.
In spite of his excruciating, clinical description, medical scholars still debate what the sickness
was.
A typhoid and smallpox are the two leading contenders.
Athenians suspect that the Peloponnesians have poisoned their wells.
In other words, they accuse their enemy of engaging in chemical warfare.
But in all probability, the plague is simply the direct result of the overcrowding of Athens.
Athens' waste disposal system is nowhere near adequate to dealing with the huge influx of
people and animals.
Its water supply quickly becomes contaminated, particularly in the Piraeus, which as I mentioned
is wholly dependent on reservoirs.
Piles of stinking effluents build up at every street corner, rats run everywhere, it is
scarcely possible to bury all the dead.
The plague takes a huge toll on family life, even though some people show immense compassion
to their relatives and are unsparing in their efforts to tend their sick.
That is always the case throughout history.
Others, however, abandon all sense of responsibility and simply devote themselves to their own survival.
Infant mortality, which commonly runs at least as high as 25% in the ancient world, probably
doubles during this period.
Number two, that the Athenians aren't dealing just with the plague, they are also dealing
with the fact that Sparta and its allies, some 30,000 enemy warriors in all, are devastating
the countryside.
Inevitably, disaffection runs high among some segments of the population.
This is particularly true in the case of the outlying deem of Akkarni, whose inhabitants
were among the first to see their farms being ravaged and who also constituted a sizable
percentage of the Athenian army.
While war is easy on no one, it is particularly demoralizing to observe the smoke rising from
your own burning crops and have the Peloponnesian cavalry ride up to the city walls where they
taunt you for not going out to face them in battle.
We gain some insight into this state of mind from a play by the comic dramatist Aristophanes
called the Akkarnians.
Dikaiopolis, the protagonist, his name means the justice of the city or just city, is one
of tens of thousands of rural Athenians still cooped up inside the city walls.
We see him at the beginning of the play in the assembly awaiting the arrival of the presidents
who will declare the meeting open.
He says mournfully, I'm looking away in the direction of my farm longing for peace, hating
the city and yearning for my village.
Pericles delivers his funeral speech in the fall of 431.
The plague first attacks Athens in the summer of 430.
Athenians become so demoralized that they send envoys to Sparta seeking peace, the Spartans
reject them.
By now, the Athenians are losing faith in Pericles, so probably in the late summer of
the same year, Pericles stands up in the assembly to defend himself and his policy.
As usual, he's not in the least interested in currying favor.
In fact, he's quite belligerent.
I'm the same man, he says, I don't alter, it's you who change.
And then he tells the Athenians again to hang tough.
He reminds them that they are unbeatable by sea and that the loss of their farms is trivial.
It's the price Athens has to pay for being an imperial power.
He keeps banging on about glory and about empire.
What you own, he famously says, is a tyranny.
It may have been wrong to acquire it, but it would be plain folly to let it go.
What we call Real Politique, acknowledging that international relations are based on
power and power alone and that ethical or moral considerations count for nothing.
Soon afterwards, the exasperated, weakened and demoralized Athenian citizen body takes
vengeance for their sufferings on Pericles by ousting him from the board of ten generals
and by finding him, though it later relents and reinstates him.
Such is the fickleness of the multitude, as Thucydides himself points out.
Ironically, Pericles falls victim to the plague.
Does he ever put two and two together and come to the realization that the illness that
kills him is a direct consequence of the policy he has foisted upon the Athenian people?
Overconfident as he was, that the Spartans would quickly tire of trying to reduce Athens
by siege.
I wonder.
It isn't until the year 425, the same year that Aristophanes produced the Acanians, that
the Athenians managed to capture nearly 300 Spartans and pressure the Spartan government
to halt its invasions, which means that the evacuees no longer have to remain cooped up
in Athens in the summer months.
And it isn't until 421 that they finally make peace, although the two sides will be
at war again eight years later.
I'm reminded of something my father once said that I'd like to share with you.
He told me that one night, in August 1939, after lying in bed, he'd got up to look at
the moon shining in through the window and to smoke a cigarette.
His wife, my mother, lay there sleeping as he said to himself, this is so wonderful,
it can't last.
And it didn't.
As my father told me, two months later, the Second World War broke out, and when I came
back afterwards, it just wasn't the same again.
Athens will survive the plague and ten years of war and be able in 421 to make peace with
the Spartans on terms that are quite favorable, but it will never be the same again.
