The Muslim invaders have come a very long way from their native homes on the Arabian
peninsula. Most recently, they've pressed north from Spain, hacking and pillaging as
they go. Among their ranks are Berber tribesmen from North Africa, who are recent converts
to Islam. Some Christian mercenaries also fight with the Muslims. That's because there aren't
enough Arabs to serve in the army, which has grown so large because of their conquests.
The Arabs have been able to make it thus far because they haven't faced much serious opposition.
Now their army is camped between Tour and Poitiers in western central France, in the
beautiful Loire Valley, 200 miles from Paris. It's October the 25th, in the year 732 or
perhaps 733.
There's a slight chill in the air, possibly a light drizzle, and a battle is about to
take place between the Arab-led Muslims and the Christian Franks. The Franks inhabit
modern-day France, Holland and the northern bank of the River Rhine in Germany. Although
the Franks refer to themselves as a kingdom, the Regnum Francorum, they're more like a
confederation of tribes. They're the descendant of Germanic peoples who infiltrated the Roman
Empire during the 4th and 5th centuries, and who were Christianized in the 6th century.
They are under the leadership of a formidable and accomplished general named Charles Martel,
Charles the Hammer.
The Muslims are under the command of a man named Abdul Rahman al-Kafiki, the Wali or
governor of Al-Andalus, the region that comprises Spain, Portugal and southern France. The two
sides have been eyeing each other up and down their encampments for seven full days.
So, how have the Muslims gotten to France?
The answer goes like this. After the conquest of Mecca, a century earlier in the year 630,
Prophet Muhammad began waging war against the adjacent tribes that lived on the Arabian
peninsula. By the time of his death in 632, Muhammad had begun to unite the Arabs into a
single state with a collective sense of identity and a centralized government system for the
first time in their history. An important consequence of unification is that a considerable
number of Arabs who previously had been nomads and succeeded in part by raiding one another
were now induced to adopt a settled way of life. This was an immense achievement and it was made
possible by the specific nature of Islam itself. Islam demanded total obedience and submission,
which is the literal meaning of the word Islam. Now, for the first time, the tribes were united by
a vision of conquest outside their heartland. In addition, their armies came to be organized
in a way that undermined the tribal loyalties that had previously existed and that had caused
irreconcilable discord. As much as anything, the early Muslims fought to build a community,
the Arabic word is Umar, based on Islamic principles and thereby preserve unity among the faithful.
Another important objective of their conquests is quite simply plunder. The Oxford University
historian Adam Silverstein points out that once the Arabs converted to Islam, they could no longer
go on raiding one another because they were now a single community. So instead, they carry out
raids on their neighbors in Syria, Egypt, North Africa, Iraq and Iran. To understand how the Muslims
then expand into Western Europe, we need to briefly review the amazing advance of Islam
in the century after the Prophet's death. The Muslims twice fail to take Constantinople,
the capital of the Byzantine Empire, but Kabul, the capital of present day Afghanistan, does fall
to their forces. So does Samarkand and Bukhara in Uzbekistan and the Muslims conquer Syria,
Palestine and Egypt. Jerusalem itself is in Muslim hands by 637 and becomes the third
holiest city in the Islamic world after Mecca and Medina. That's because it is where Mohammed
is said to have been taken up to heaven. As a result of the Muslim conquest of Jerusalem,
the Jews are permitted to return to the city for the first time since their expulsion by the Romans
nearly 500 years earlier. As the Muslims move west, they take Carthage, Crippoly and Tangier.
Then they cross into Europe via the Straits of Gibraltar in 712 or 713. The Muslim general,
Tariq ibn Ziyad, is the first Umayyad military leader who crosses from Africa into Spain.
The name Gibraltar derives from Jebel al-Tariq, meaning the Rock of Tariq. Umayyad, by the way,
is the name of the caliphate. The caliphate is a Islamic state ruled by a caliph or successor to
Mohammed. The caliph is considered to be the state's supreme religious and political leader.
The Muslims come to gain control of most of the Iberian Peninsula, which previously had been a
Christian kingdom established by the Visigoths. And some of the Arab conquerors settle permanently
in what comes to be known as Al-Andalus, roughly corresponding to modern Andalusia, Galicia,
Castile and Leon, Aragon and Portugal. The collapse of the Visigoths under pressure from
the Muslims is difficult to explain. The Visigoths were a Germanic people who invaded Italy under
their first king and who sacked Rome in 410. They settled in southern Gaul before finally
establishing themselves in Spain and Portugal. Their kingdom survived until about 711 when the
invading forces of Umayyad Muslims killed their last king, Roderick, in the battle of Guadalete.
By 720, the army of believers has breached the Pyrenees Mountains that separate Spain from France,
and it is pressing northwards into the kingdom of the Franks. Along the way, the Muslims plunder
churches and monasteries and take many prisoners. They appear to be unstoppable.
At Toulouse in 721, however, the Muslims suffer a massive defeat at the hands of Duke Odo of
Aquitaine, Odo the Great, when they invade his duchy. Christian sources claim that 375,000 of
the invaders die, but people weren t any better at counting large numbers in the middle ages than
they were in antiquity. Let s just say that this battle is a total disaster for the Muslims.
Afterwards, the Pope declares Odo to be the champion of Christianity, thereby signalling
that he sees the two religions in mortal conflict. Aquitaine, by the way, was a region of France that
extended from the Pyrenees in the south to the River Loire in the north. Its capital was at Toulouse.
This is the first major reversal the Arabs have suffered since they began moving north
into the Iberian Peninsula. Up until now, the Muslim advance has taken our breath away.
The British-Polish historian Norman Davis observes in his book History of Europe that Islam progressed
as far in one century as Christianity in seven. The eighth century, when the events of this story
take place, is often described as part of the dark age of history. It certainly isn t dark for the
Islamic world, which, quite aside from these many conquests, enjoys a period of economic
development and cultural creativity. Arabic replaces Aramaic in Syria and Palestine and
Coptic in Egypt as the most widely spoken language. There is tolerance towards both
Christians and Jews who are incorporated into society without prejudice.
For non-Muslim Westerners, thoughts about the advance of Islam in the century after Muhammad s
death are nonetheless deeply problematic. Karen Armstrong, a British historian of comparative
religion, points out that the Muslim conquests lend support to the idea that, I quote,
Islam is a violent militaristic faith which imposed itself on its subject peoples at sword point.
In reality, as Armstrong goes on to argue, the Quran does not sanctify warfare. It develops the
notion of a just war of self-defense to protect decent values, but condemns killing and aggression.
So how is it that a small and militarily insignificant people from an obscure corner
of the Arabian Peninsula has made such giant strides since the Prophet Muhammad
first proclaimed the faith? There are, I believe, three main reasons.
The first is that the Arabs have adapted their arms, armor and military organization
from the Byzantines who were very advanced in military affairs. The Arabs become their star
pupils, and so although the Arabs have failed to take Constantinople, they apply themselves
diligently to understanding why they failed. Secondly, the empires, the Muslims attack or
conquer, have largely exhausted themselves. The Persian Sassanids and the Visigoths who
won control of southern France and Spain after the demise of the western half of the Roman Empire in
476 are simply no match for the Muslims, nor is the Byzantine Empire, even though Constantinople
doesn't fall, the Byzantines lose a considerable amount of territory to the Arabs.
Third, the Arabs are fired up with profound religious fervour and zeal. Indeed, some scholars
are of the opinion that the Muslim conquests are achieved largely by the religious fervour of the
conquerors, but that's clearly an oversimplification. Even so, I'm prepared to concede that had you
been a soldier serving in the Muslim army, you might well believe that you are fulfilling the
bidding of the Prophet. The American military historian Victor Davis Hansen, author of Culture
and Carnage, writes, provocatively, I have to say, that a killing and pillaging were now in the
proper context acts of piety. Likewise, you might well interpret your success as a reward from Allah
for having performed his will. It would be wrong, however, to infer that conquest was necessarily
the Muslims' primary objective at this time, or that these wars were fought solely to spread Islam
throughout the world. Nor should we be thinking in terms of a simple model of violent conquest.
There is very little evidence of cities being burnt and destroyed by the Muslim army of believers.
What happens in most places is the imposition of a political hegemony with the requirement of
subjected peoples to pay taxes. But the Muslims don't insist that all peoples they subjugate
convert to Islam, although many no doubt do so voluntarily. Many of them are monotheists already,
whether Christians or Jews or Zoroastrians, and so they are probably content to leave the local
belief systems mostly intact so long as they make a commitment to live righteously.
The defeat at Toulouse is only a temporary setback for the Muslims, but it is enough
to give Charles Martel, King of the Franks, time to prepare for the invasion that is bound to come.
Nine years later, the Caliph Hisham dismisses the region's unpopular governor and sends an
emissary to consult the Muslim army in Al-Andalus about who his replacement should be. According
to the historian Alexander Mikhaberidze, the troops favor a certain Abdul Rahman Al-Ghafiki
on the grounds that he is pious, honest, generous, and brave. Abdul Rahman is from one of the clans
that is contributing a unit to the invasion. Mikhaberidze says he is considered one of the
tabion, the disciples who form a religious aristocracy within early Islam, so the religious
establishment also supports him. Abdul Rahman first appears in written sources
with regard to the failed siege of Toulouse. He is credited with getting the defeated army back
to Narbonne to regroup. By 720, Abdul Rahman's army is back on the offensive. It acquires cities
along the Mediterranean coast and throughout southern France. Finally, it arrives close to Tours
in the Loire Valley, 11 years after the first battle of Toulouse.
Having burnt down the church of Saint-Hilaire in Poitiers, Abdul Rahman's men are now poised
to plunder the church of Saint Martin in Tours, and it is here that the Muslim invaders
find their way barred. Charles Martel's name comes from the Latin word Martelas,
meaning hammer, and a massive Frankish hammer under Martel's command blocks Abdul Rahman's advance.
A medieval chronicle explains how Martel came by this formidable nickname. It tells us that
as a Martel, hammer, breaks and crushes iron, steel, and other metals,
so did Charles, break and crush his enemies.
Charles Martel is sometimes seen as the dominant figure of Western Europe during the first half
of the 8th century and with justification. He helps to unify the Franks and establish their
authority in Francia by waging war against the Germanic peoples seeking to invade his kingdoms,
the Alemani, the Frisians, and the Saxons. This is all the more remarkable in light of the fact that
Charles was by no means obviously destined for greatness, being the illegitimate son of a courtesan
in the Franks Palace. So he has had to win his way to power by political entry.
He does this in part by establishing a professional army, which he finances largely by seizing church
property. He then requires all his subjects to do military service up to a maximum of three months
per year. Many conscripts buy themselves out, but this means that Charles has more money to pay others
who are volunteers and who thus in effect become professionals.
Charles isn't a king. He is officially Mayor of the Palace or Major Domo. This is during a period
when the Frankish King is little more than a figurehead. The Mayor takes all the important decisions.
In fact, the Mayor of the Palace dials himself as Prinkhebs, our word Prince, which is the title
that the Roman Emperor Augustus chose to describe his own position. Two decades hence in the last
four years of his life, Charles will actually suspend the monarchy, introduce an interregnum,
and rule without reference to any king. And now in 732, the Muslims are on their way again.
They have inflicted serious revenge on Duke Odo of Aquitaine, near Bordeaux, the same Duke who
thrashed them so heavily a decade or so ago. And that defeat has sent Odo fleeing to Charles for
help. Charles agrees on the condition that Odo submits to his authority and incorporates the
remnant of his force into his army. The imminent battle, fought about halfway between Poitiers
and Tour, it's sometimes also called the Battle of Poitiers in fact, is one of the defining military
contests in world history. But before we talk about the battle itself, a word of caution about
our sources. There's no contemporary description of the battle. The most detailed account is found
in a work of unknown authorship, composed a generation later in 754, in a part of Spain that
is ruled by the Arabs. Hence, the title of this account sometimes goes by is the Mozarabic Chronicle,
or the Chronicle of 754. Mozarabic is the term applied to Christians who live under Islamic rule
in Al-Andalus. Another source is the continuation of a work called the Chronicle of Fredegar,
which was written much later in Latin and deals with the battle very cursorily.
What we do know is that the Frankish force consists mainly of infantrymen, whereas the Muslims depend
chiefly on cavalry. The Franks have some cavalry too, but so far as we can tell, they dismount once
they get to the battlefield and fight as infantry. Logic might suggest that the cavalry would get
the better of the infantry, but that is not what happens. Charles selects a wooded plane on a rise
thereby forcing the Muslims to charge uphill. His men are armed with thrusting spears and
short swords. They wear chainmail shirts and leather jerkins. They carry large round wooden
shields at some three feet in diameter. One inch thick, covered with leather. They wear small
conical helmets. They've been likened to heavily armed Greek hoplites, so named because of the
round shield or hoplon that the Greek infantry carried from the 7th to the 4th centuries BCE.
The chronicle of 754 tells us that the Franks present a immovable sea,
a wall, a mass of ice to the Arabs and the Berbers and the Christian mercenaries.
The Franks don't yield an inch. We can imagine the Muslim cavalry galloping uphill to the
Frankish lines, attempting to slash at them with their swords and fire arrows at them,
and then wheeling about a few seconds later, having achieved very little.
Try as they might. They are incapable of piercing the Christian ranks. At the same time,
the Muslim force presents an easy target to the enemy whenever it gets close enough,
or when the invaders turn their backs in retreat. And when the two sides engage at close combat,
it is easier for the Frank infantryman on the ground to strike at the Muslim cavalry rider
or at his horse than it is for the horseman to strike at the infantryman. And once the horseman
is down, he stands very little chance of defending himself. In the end, what probably determines
the outcome is the death of Abdul Rahman al-Kafiki, the pious, honest, generous and brave Arab general.
We are still in a period of history when military generals are expected to lead their men into battle.
So when a general dies, it often has a catastrophic impact on morale. It may also be the case that a
large part of the Muslim cavalry gives up the assault at a critical moment in the belief that
the Franks are sneaking around them to raid their camp and steal their plunder.
One report puts the number of dead on the Frankish side at less than 1000, compared with tens of
thousands of Arabs, even 300,000, according to one exaggerated account. That's absurd, of course.
A more realistic estimate is 10,000 dead in a Muslim army of between 20,000 and 30,000 men.
The day after the battle, Charles Martel draws up his men in battle line, expecting to face
a renewed attack. Though he has not sustained heavy losses, he is anxiously awaiting reinforcements.
The fact the Arabs have lost their leader might mean that they will fight all the more fiercely.
But he and the Franks await the Arab enemy in vain. Eventually, Charles orders his men to
stand down and inspect the enemy encampment. When they do so, they find it is completely deserted.
The Muslims have slunk off into the night, leaving behind all their plunder. Even their
dead are unburied at the place where they have fallen.
J.M. Wallace-Hadrill translates the relevant passage in the fourth book of the Chronicle of
Fredaigar as follows. With Christ's help, Charles overran their tents, following hard after them
in the battle to grind them small in their overthrow. And when Abdul Rahman perished in the
battle, he, Charles, utterly destroyed their armies, scattering them like stubble before the
fury of his onslaught. We might want to take this with a pinch of salt. Barry Strauss of Cornell
University says the fact the Franks were a day after their victory, still expecting the
Muslims to fight, indicates that they had not secured an overwhelming victory.
Charles Martel is commonly regarded as the man who saves Western Europe from becoming Muslim.
And this takes us to the what if question of counterfactual history. What if Charles Martel
had not stopped the Muslims? What if he had been slain instead of Abdul Rahman?
What if the Arab army had pressed further north?
The great 18th century English historian Edward Gibbon, who wrote Decline and Fall of the Roman
Empire, pondered deeply upon the possibility of an alternative outcome and came up with the
following answer. He wrote, perhaps the interpretation of the Quran would now be
taught in the schools of Oxford and her pupils might demonstrate to a circumcised people the
sanctity and truth of the revelation of Muhammad. Modern historians also envisage the possibility
of a Muslim victory at the Battle of Taur. Barry Strauss argues that, I quote, Christianity would
have survived but as a protected and ever shrinking enclave, not as the ruling faith. With the result
that the vast majority of Europeans would have become Muslims as the vast majority of North
Africans and Middle Easterners eventually did. But while in the past scholars have tended to
regard Charles's victory at the Battle of Taur as the salvation of the Western world by saving
Europe from becoming an outcrop of Islam, they're less inclined to do so today. There's greater
recognition that the Arabs would not have had the military strength to press on further into
Normandy and then cross the English Channel into Britain and that even had they won the
Battle of Taur, they wouldn't have been able to consolidate their conquest of Northern France.
Today's historians are also more inclined to recognize that the Muslim aim may have been
quite modest. That all they really wanted to do was seize as much plunder as they could.
For instance, the monasteries of Saint Martin and Saint Hilaire which were both famed for their
wealth and then returned to their base in Spain. Plunder, after all, was an important
objective of their early conquests. Few topics today are more contentious than
Islam's relationship to war. I strongly believe, however, that we should resist the conclusion
that Islam's advance in the first centuries of its existence proves that it is bent on world
domination. It was under special pressures in the eighth century and its aims were almost certainly
more modest. Does Charles deserve the moniker, the hammer? Just to even the scorecard, I would
note that all of the towns that Charles Martel takes from the Arabs in southern France have
entirely Christian populations, apart from their Arab or Berber garrisons, and that the methods
Charles the Hammer applies in suppressing them are just as ruthless as the Muslim's methods.
I'm somewhat skeptical of the hammer moniker. The repulse of the Arabs is not entirely due
to the excellence of Charles Martel's army, nor to the tactics he employs, nor even to the superiority
of mass infantry over horsemen. There are other factors in play. First, Martel's men were fighting
for their homeland, for their farms, and for their families. They had everything to lose and
everything to fight for. Second, Abdul Rahman had overextended his men from their base in Spain,
and was separated from reinforcements and supplies. Third, the Muslims accumulated a great deal of
plunder on their way north, and this greatly hampered their movement. Charles, by contrast,
was not interested in plunder. He had a very clearly defined political goal, which was to
establish and reinforce the Regnum Francorum, the Kingdom of the Franks. In so doing, he laid the
foundation for the Carolingian Empire that would come into being in the ninth century. His victory
helps significantly towards this aim. Nor does the Muslims' defeat mean that they withdraw from
France for good. On the contrary, they remain active in the country for another generation.
Still, the Battle of Tours is, by any reckoning, decisive. Never again will an Arab army threaten
to overrun France. Another consequence is that the Franks become more united. Previously, they'd
been deeply divided, indulging in internecine warfare. But as a result of their victory,
they now acquire a much clearer sense of national identity. Five years later,
Charles will defeat the Arab invaders again at Avignon, and the next year at Corbière,
though the Muslims will maintain control of Narbonne, their principal fortress in southwest
France, for 27 years after the Battle of Tours, stonewalling Charles when he tried to take it.
And by that point, the Arab dream of a united caliphate has disintegrated in civil war.
In 750, a new caliphate emerges, the Abbasid dynasty, which establishes itself in Baghdad.
Members of the previous Umayyad dynasty, which ruled from Damascus, are hunted down,
though one survives to rule from Cordoba in Spain. It is left to Charles' son,
Pippin the Short, eventually to recover Narbonne in 759 and drive the Arabs back
across the Pyrenees once and for all. And when the Arabs eventually leave,
Aquitaine and southwest France come permanently under Frankish control, paving the way for
another great leader of the France, Charles Martel's grandson, Charlemagne.
