Charlemagne, the King of the Franks, has arrived in Rome, and Pope Leo III is wining
and dining him inside the Lateran Palace, the principal residence of the Holy See.
It's November the 23rd in the year 800.
Charlemagne has only recently swashbuckled his way across the Alps, the head of a powerful
army with a number of Frankish bishops in train.
He is demonstrating that he is not only a warrior, but also a man of God.
There's a heightened sense of expectancy in the streets of Rome.
The people know that the King of the Franks is in town to lead an important diplomatic
mission, but they have no notion of exactly what is about to transpire.
In the more intimate quarters of the Lateran Palace, Pope Leo is going out of his way
to do all that he can to charm and ingratiate himself with Charlemagne.
He's been building a large extension to the palace.
It has a considerable smidgen of what we might call funny de grandeur, or delusion
of grandeur.
But the Pope is in a more precarious position than the opulent grounds and elaborate furnishings
of his palace might indicate.
Leo is in danger of losing the papal crown, and there's no doubt he will do absolutely
whatever it takes to persuade the King to stand by what may have been a private deal
that the two very likely made in secret a year earlier.
Now the hour is nigh, and on Christmas Day history will take a new turn.
Charlemagne is the most powerful man in the Western world.
His name means Charles the Great, and he comes from distinguished stock.
His grandfather, Charles Martel, won the epic Battle of Tours 70 years earlier, thereby
stemming the tide of a Muslim advance from the Iberian Peninsula into Northern Europe.
Charlemagne sees himself as the defender of Christianity in the West.
He came to the throne in 768 and has been King of the Franks for more than 30 years.
Charlemagne oversees a vast realm that includes most of modern-day France, most of Germany,
Northern Italy and Austria.
It also comprises a hodgepodge of semi-independent kingdoms that emerged amid the withering
of the Roman Empire in the 5th century when Germanic tribes came invading.
It isn't all sweetness and light for Charlemagne, however.
The Franks don't hold undisputed sway in Francia, and this means Charlemagne must constantly
be on his guard.
Now Germanic tribes are pressing forward from the north and the east, and the Vikings are
seeking to settle in Normandy on the north coast of France.
And though the Muslims have been driven back across the Pyrenees into Spain, they're still
a force to be reckoned with.
Still, Charlemagne commands most of what we know of as Western Europe, apart from Southern
Italy and Sicily and the British Isles.
And this is the first time since the fall of Rome that the continent has been under unified
rule.
Furthermore, unlike the former Roman Empire, the Carolingian Empire is centered in Northern
Europe rather than on the Mediterranean.
The King of the Franks has been able to accomplish all of this because he has an iron will and
boundless energy, and because he's utterly fearless.
He's a warrior king, but he's a remarkable figure in other ways, too.
He has overseen a revival of learning after a period of steady decline that followed the
decay of the Roman Empire half a millennium before.
This rebirth includes the setting up of schools, the copying of codices or books, the promotion
of the Latin language, and the rise of a much more educated and competent clergy, which
can both preach Christianity and serve his administration.
He fosters education in monasteries and cathedrals, and he attracts to his court men of learning,
such as Alcuin, a scholar from Northumbria in the north of England.
Even though, paradoxically, Charlemagne himself never learns how to write.
In so doing, he brings political and cultural unity to Europe.
Roman scholars rightly speak of Charlemagne's reign as the Carolingian Renaissance.
At the same time, he is almost constantly engaged in warfare, and when he wins, which he generally
does, he forces the people whom he conquers, notably the Saxons, to convert to Christianity.
If any refuse to convert, he executes them.
So the Frankish King is a force to be reckoned with, not just politically and militarily,
but also intellectually.
He's someone you want on your side if you've got problems to sort out.
And as I've said, Pope Leo has problems to sort out.
A best source for Charlemagne is the Vita Caroli Magni, or Life of Charlemagne, written
by a learned monk named Einhard in 814, two or three years after Charlemagne's death.
Einhard served Charlemagne in an administrative capacity.
He was a kind of minister of public works, in charge of the upkeep of a number of abbeys.
His biography is not without its shortcomings, however.
It's a court biography, and therefore flattering to its subject.
But Einhard seems to have been in a position to observe his subject quite closely, because
he provides a fairly intimate portrait of him.
We should bear in mind that at this time there is no tradition in Europe of writing
biography, other than the lives of saints.
So for his model, Einhard leans heavily on the Roman biographer Suetonius, who wrote
The Lives of the Twelve Caesars.
In particular, he draws upon his life of the Emperor Augustus.
Other sources for Charlemagne's reign include the Annales Regni Francorum, the Royal Annals
of the Frankish Kings.
These are a form of official history, written by several authors which depict the Frankish
Kings in glowing terms.
We also have the anonymous so-called Poeta Saxo, or Saxon poet, who writes a laudatory
epic poem about Charlemagne, which depicts him as an apostle who converts the heathens.
And who is Pope Leo?
Leo is the former cardinal priest of Santa Susanna in Rome.
He is a Roman of common birth and modest family who has tenaciously and somewhat unexpectedly
risen through the church hierarchy until ascending to the papal throne on December 26, 795.
Leo succeeds the late Pope Adrium, a Roman of noble descent, who led the church for 23
years, and of whom it is written that, notwithstanding the rudeness of the time, he was endowed
with a merit which enhanced the effect of the beauty of his person.
Adrium's successor, Leo, represents something of a contrast to the gentle aristocrat, but
not necessarily for the better, but that is getting ahead of our story.
Leo, as soon as he is elected, sends the keys of the tomb of Saint Peter to Charlemagne
and requests that the king send a legate, or ambassador, to the Holy See.
Charlemagne complies, saying it is his duty to defend the pope, adding that it is the pope's
duty, in turn, to pray for the king's victory and war.
Since that date, five years earlier, Leo has had a pretty rough ride.
His claim to the papal throne has been repeatedly challenged, in particular by some of the late
Pope Adrium's family.
And to complicate matters, Leo has been charged with perjury and fornication.
This is a period during which open feuding frequently erupts between supporters of rival
claimants to the Holy See.
Eighteen months earlier, a mob of armed men laid violent hands on Leo during a procession
that was taking place in Rome in honour of San Lorenzo or Saint Lawrence.
They knocked him down and attempted to cut off his tongue and gouge out his eyes.
Somehow, Leo manages to escape and flees across the Alps.
Being the widely opportunist that he is, Leo heads for Paderborn, a river town near natural
springs in the modern-day state of North Rhine, Westphalia, in Germany, where Charlemagne
is establishing a new bishopric, or district under a bishop's control.
Arriving in Paderborn, Leo throws himself at Charlemagne's mercy, proclaiming that his
enemies succeeded at maiming his eyes and tongue, but that a miracle occurred.
His eyesight has been restored, and his marvellous tongue, so essential for tasting, licking,
and swallowing, has grown back.
Hallelujah!
Praise be to God!
It all sounds rather comical, were it not for the fact that so much is at stake, nothing
less than the spiritual leadership of the Western world.
So here is Pope Leo, practically on bended knee, asking Charlemagne to support his efforts
to recover the papal throne.
History does not record whether Charlemagne believes Leo's claim of miracle cures.
I suspect he recognizes Leo as something of a scoundrel.
But as Western civilizations self-proclaimed defender of Christianity, the king of the
Franks feels obligated to come to the aid of this disenfranchised pope.
Charlemagne sees himself as bound by a document known today as the Simichean forgeries.
The forgeries take their name from Simacus, an early 6th century pope.
In order to bolster Simacus' claim to the throne, at a time when there were two rival
claimants, the Roman curia, or senate, forged documents that he claimed had been produced
long before.
The curia, which is the administrative arm of the Holy See, asserted that a pope, as
the successor of Saint Peter, could not be brought to judgment in a court of law.
Lord Prima Sades, known Eudicator, our quokwan, because the occupant of the Holy See cannot
be judged by anyone.
The forgeries provided authoritative justification for the papal equivalent of what we call today
executive privilege.
Charlemagne accepts the legitimacy of these forged documents and agrees, very likely with
some reluctance, to come to Rome to give judgment.
He also provides Leo with a military escort back to Rome, though he doesn't accompany
the pope himself.
Instead, he spends the next 18 months visiting various parts of his kingdom, yet he knows
that his presence at Leo's side will ultimately be required.
When Leo returns to Rome, the populace apparently receives him with great joy.
Charlemagne's envoys put his enemies on trial, and when they are unable to establish the
pope's guilt or innocence, they imprison him.
The long delay now gives the pope time to plan for Charlemagne's visit.
He knows he's still in jeopardy, and he doesn't do things by halves.
He commissions a spectacular mosaic that depicts St. Peter handing a papal vestment
to Leo and a military standard to Charlemagne to adorn the audience chamber of the Lateran
Palace.
It signals that in God's eyes, the king of the Franks is on an equal footing with the
pope.
When Leo learns that Charlemagne is at last on his way to Rome, he journeys to the 12th
milestone outside of the city, accompanied by a large and impressive entourage.
This is to signal his immense gratitude to Charlemagne, and no less important, his expectation
that his patron will clear him of criminal charges.
The declared purpose of Charlemagne's visit is that he will preside over the Vatican Council
proceedings that will examine whether there is any substance to the charges brought against
the pope.
The Council consists of bishops from all over Western Europe, particularly France and Italy.
Charlemagne may have no doubts about Leo's culpability, much less about his rascality,
but he is concerned to uphold the authority of the papacy.
As things turn out, the trial is something of a mockery.
Charlemagne, invoking the Symmetian forgeries, pronounces that the Vatican Council has no
authority to stand in judgment of a pope.
All the Holy Father is required to do to be acquitted is to swear an oath on the Gospels
that he is completely innocent, which Leo dutifully does.
Charlemagne then condemns his accusers to death, although at Leo's request he later commutes
their sentence to excommunication.
The Frankish King is no saint either, incidentally.
Nearly 20 years earlier, he is said to have ordered the beheading of 4,500 Saxons in a
single day at a place in modern-day Germany called Verden in lower Saxony.
As the Saxons are a pagan people, Charlemagne evidently believes it is okay to murder them
for encourager les autres, as the French say.
After first believing that he has pacified the pagans, Charlemagne carries out this massacre
in reprisals for their rebelling against him.
On the personal side, he has sired 14 illegitimate children to go along with four illegitimate
ones, and he has at least 10 wives or concubines.
So perhaps Charlemagne is disposed to be indulgent towards Leo's failings.
Leo has gotten from Charlemagne what he wanted.
He has been officially absolved of guilt, and the word on the street is that he is going
to demonstrate his gratitude in some very palpable, papal way.
And now it's Christmas morning in the year of our Lord, 800.
So let's look in at Old St. Peter's Basilica, where the nativity mass is just now being
observed.
Old St. Peter's Basilica stands on the spot where the current day St. Peter's Basilica
are built during the Renaissance and designed by Bramante, Michelangelo, Moderna and Benini
stands.
The older church is nowhere near so large, however, but it is an impressive building
nonetheless, and it is the principal church in the West.
It was begun by the Emperor Constantine in the 4th century, and will stand till 1505,
when Pope Julius II takes the momentous decision to demolish the structure.
As you might expect on this Christmas morning, the wide nave and two aisles are packed, leaving
standing room only.
Actually there's always only standing room, as churches in the Middle Ages don't have
pews.
So, one good thing about the church being packed is that the body heat of the overflowing
congregation warms us up on this cold December morning.
Leo is conducting the mass.
As a Roman, or even as a visitor, you've heard the rumours that he's a bit of a scoundrel,
but he's also into hanky-panky, and he does shady business deals.
But still, he's the Holy Father, and you've come not only for the ceremony but also because
you're eager to catch a glimpse of Charlemagne.
The king is a most imposing figure.
He's extremely tall for the age in which he lives.
Bone analysis suggests that he was exactly six feet tall.
As you strain forward to see him, you can probably pick out the back of his head without
too much difficulty.
Einhardt tells us he has a round head, white hair, a rather large nose, and a short, fat
neck.
In honor of the pope, Charlemagne is dressed in Roman attire.
Normally, he wears breeches and sandals, like all Franks, but today he wears a flowing tunic
and elegant boots.
At a certain point in the service, something extraordinary happens.
Charlemagne has been kneeling, or perhaps prostrating himself as is common for Christians
back in the day when prayers are being recited.
When he rises to his feet, however, Leo steps forward and places a circlet of gold on his
head and anoints him with the chrism, the holy oil.
Charlemagne is being crowned emperor of the Romans, the congregation, or at least a sizable
section of it, since it would include the entire Vatican clergy, simultaneously belts
out in Latin, carolopissimo augusto, adeo coronato, magno et pacifico imperatore, vita
et victoria.
That means that Charles, the most pious Augustus, crowned by God, O great and peaceable emperor,
living life and victory.
Augustus is, of course, the title of the first Roman emperor, so what the congregation is
doing by referring to Charlemagne as Augustus is suggesting a continuity with Rome's glorious
imperial past.
Charlemagne has just been crowned successor to the Roman emperors who presided for hundreds
of years.
Charlemagne has been acclaimed emperor in the same way that a Roman general was acclaimed
imperator by his army in earlier times, after he won a particularly spectacular victory.
It is as if the Roman empire has been resurrected in one fell swoop, and quite illegally, of
course.
I find it difficult to believe that such an elaborate event as an imperial coronation
could have occurred without considerable planning.
The clergy surely knew what was coming and had learned its lines in advance, even if
the non-clergy laity were taken by surprise.
In any event, after the crown is placed on Charlemagne's head, everyone, including Pope
Leo, bows before him.
It is at this point that we are left with a host of speculations.
What is passing through Charlemagne's head when this occurs?
Is he overjoyed?
Was he expecting to be crowned?
Or is he taken completely by surprise?
Does the king of the Franks feel uncomfortable, embarrassed, irritated, or does he feel humbled
but immensely proud and gratified?
We just don't know.
Einhardt tells us that Charlemagne is completely taken aback by the coronation, and that he
later declares that he would never have set foot in the church, even though it is the
great feast day, had he known beforehand what Leo was planning.
And this suggests that Charlemagne was not only unprepared but also angry at being crowned.
But of course, we must bear in mind that Einhardt, being a staunch Charlemagne supporter, would
hardly depict his patron as having overreaching eagerness for the imperial crown.
Many scholars suspect that Charlemagne and Leo hatched the coronation plan when Leo came
to Paderborn in the summer of 799.
I have to say, I agree, it was a fitting quid pro quo for services rendered.
At the same time, it does not give Charlemagne any entitlement to march to Constantinople
and assert his authority over the eastern half of the historical Roman Empire, or over
the eastern church, which is very different from the church in the west.
The Empress Irene rules the Byzantine Empire in Constantinople, and she is not to be trifled
with.
Irene, so the story goes, blinded and murdered her own son.
In a broader sense, however, the coronation is absolutely decisive.
It solidifies the existence of two distinct churches, one in the Latin West and the other
in the Greek East.
Both as positive affirmation, the coronation, and as negative affirmation, setting them up
as counterpoints and future rivals.
Furthermore, the coronation reinforces the recognition that cultural unity underscores
the Latin West just as it does the Greek East.
Henceforth, the eastern and western emperors will vie with one another and make competing
claims both to imperial authority and as to which of their Christian traditions is genuine.
In essence, the seeds of this struggle are taking root at the very moment of Charlemagne's
crowning, a brilliantly staged and dramatic event.
In actuality, this struggle begins just before the coronation, when Charlemagne receives the
keys to the Church of the Holy Sepulchre from the Patriarch of Jerusalem.
The Church of the Holy Sepulchre is where the body of Christ is said to be buried.
So giving the keys of this church to Charlemagne would be of great symbolic importance, because
Jerusalem at this time is nominally under the control of Byzantium.
It is as if the Patriarch of Jerusalem is transferring symbolic rights and powers from
Byzantium to Charlemagne.
Does the coronation of Charlemagne amount to anything much else?
The answer, irritatingly, is both yes and no.
Indeed, one possible reason for Leo to have initiated the coronation was as if he were
seeking to establish his own authority in the East, as well as the West.
He may have regarded the throne of the Byzantine Empire to be vacant specifically because it
was occupied by a woman.
The coronation has little other practical consequence beyond spectacle.
It is, I quote, one of the most momentous non-events in history, according to the English
commentator Derek Wilson, and not least because Charlemagne's empire will survive his death
by only one generation.
Not only, however, is Charlemagne's personal prestige increased as a result of the Christmas
Day coronation, the rascally Pope Leo is also every bit as much the beneficiary.
It's true that Leo groveled and abased himself before the king in order to secure his acquittal
from rank relegation in the Catholic Church, and worse, on the streets of Rome.
But all that occurred in private.
At the most public moment in this story, the crowning itself, Leo, crafty old fox that
he is, makes it known that it is he alone, the Pope, who has the power to raise a mere
monarch to the level of emperor.
In so doing, he demonstrates, at least outwardly, the supremacy of papal authority over temporal
authority.
Leo has now bound Charlemagne to him, to quote from Shakespeare, with hoops of steel.
The destinies of both men are forever joined and inseparable.
The Pope can expect the Frankish king's unqualified support in defense of papal crown and papal
state.
So, the moment when the crown descends on Charlemagne's head does indeed change history.
It not only shores up the papacy, but as the Carolingian Empire includes most of Western
Europe, it gives birth to the notion of Europe.
Charlemagne will spend much of his last years warding off incursions by the Vikings and
crushing rebellions, particularly among the Saxons, although he resorts to diplomacy
as much as possible to resolve tensions with his neighbors.
Two years after the coronation, he orders everyone living in his realm to swear an oath
of loyalty to him.
Since the oath entails fidelity to God as well as fidelity to the emperor, the two are
now conflated.
Royal power and obedience to Christ are presented as one and the same.
It is now Charlemagne's aim to make ecclesiastical and secular concerns not only intertwined,
but also interdependent.
Charlemagne dies at the age of 71 in January 814, 13 years after the coronation.
He is interred in the capital of the Carolingian Empire, the spa town of Aachen in Germany,
and succeeded by his only surviving legitimate son, Louis the Pius, whom he crowned the year
before his death.
As for Leo, some sources claim that he becomes the first pope to conduct a canonization,
the process by which a deceased person is declared to be a saint.
He is also remembered for supporting the doctrine that the Holy Spirit proceeds from both the
son and the father, and not just from the father alone, a doctrine that is anathema
to the Eastern Orthodox Church.
Leo remains securely on the papal throne until the death of Charlemagne, when his enemies
again begin to conspire against him, but Leo lives only two more years.
The anonymous Poeta Saxo, the Saxon poet, writing in 799, hails Charlemagne as the king and
father of Europe.
Cambridge University historian Rosamond McKitterick, the author of Charlemagne, the
formation of a European identity, agrees.
She writes, Charlemagne has come to symbolize the common roots of European political and
legal culture with an impact on ideology and imagination that can be traced across the
1200 years since he died.
He is a remarkable man by any definition and is deeply mourned by his people, rightly
so in my view.
