The King of the Volga Bulgars, his name is Almis, likes to think of himself as a man
of great power and importance.
The King Almis is a recent convert to Islam and he is trying to establish his authority
over a number of unruly tribes in an untamed expanse of Central Asia within modern-day
Russia.
He also wants to secure his independence from a neighbouring people called the Khazars,
a semi-nomadic Turkic tribe that constantly encroaches upon his affairs.
In other words, Almis has got a lot to deal with at home and abroad.
It's May 922, we're at the Volga Bulgars Royal Court and a visiting delegation which
is known as an embassy has come to visit Almis from Baghdad, the seat of the Abbasid Caliphate.
The Abbasid Caliphate is the second of two great Muslim dynasties.
It is named for Al Abbas, an uncle of the Prophet Muhammad, whose clan overthrew the
first Muslim dynasty, the Umayyad Caliphate, in 750.
Speaking for the Caliphate is Ibn Fadlan, a middle-level administrator and expert in
law, particularly in that tricky branch of law where the Quran impinges upon jurisprudence.
Ibn Fadlan is about to read a letter to King Almis from the Caliph of Baghdad, al-Muqtadir.
The Bulga King is seeking financial aid so that he can build a fort to defend his kingdom
against the Khazars.
And here is the embassy to give him the reply he's been waiting for.
It's a decisive moment in the history of diplomatic relations.
Let's hope it goes well.
We can imagine the curiosity of both parties as they find themselves in the same room together.
They represent two cultures that are worlds apart.
The Volga Bulgas have recently converted to Islam, so at least the two have that much
in common.
But the Bulgas don't know much about Islamic observance or Islamic law.
They are warriors foremost, they're little familiar with the niceties of civilized existence
and care less about them.
They are probably dressed in animal skins, their shoulder-length hair, unkempt and greasy.
We can be sure that their personal hygiene leaves much to be desired.
By contrast, the Arab ambassadors are wearing exquisite silk gowns, their hair carefully
tended, their nails manicured, they're out of their element to put it mildly.
Having set off a year earlier, they've covered a distance of 2,500 miles across the Khazar
steppe.
And most of them want to get home to the mothership as soon as possible.
But they're also determined to make a good impression, and they're certainly not going
to be cowed by the big fat Bulga King.
Iban Fadlan, who will write an account of this journey, takes a calculated gamble before
beginning to recite from the letter.
He orders the entire Bulga court, including the King, to stand.
He does so to indicate that the Caliph is a greater man in the eyes of the world than
is Al-Mis.
Iban Fadlan doesn't tell us how the order is received, but Al-Mis apparently obeys.
And since the Bulga King has a big fat paunch, as Iban Fadlan carefully notes, this probably
puts his host under a bit of a strain.
One of the delightful things about Iban Fadlan is his sense of humour.
He clearly relishes this moment, sees himself as the representative of a much more sophisticated
and powerful culture, which it is.
But he's fascinated by the world he has entered, and he's determined not to be intimidated.
Iban Fadlan has the eye of a trained anthropologist for observing cultural differences.
And there's more to him than that.
He has a finely tuned legalistic mind, and he's a stickler for adhering to the letter
of the law in religious observance.
At one point, he compares those who do not practice Islam correctly to asses who have
gone astray.
I don't know whether he says that in the presence of the Vulgar Bulgars, but he does criticise
some for incorrectly repeating one of the Islamic prayers.
Baghdad in 922, the year of the Embassy, is one of the largest, most sophisticated and
civilised, wealthiest cities in the world.
It's in the same league as its Christian counterpart, Constantinople, the capital of
the Byzantine Empire.
Its cultural prestige is second to none.
Baghdad was founded in 762 as the capital of the Abbasid Caliphate, known as the Round
City because of its shape.
It stands on the River Tigris and was chosen because of its plentiful supply of water.
Under the Abbasid's predecessor, the Umayyad Caliphate, had been based in Damascus.
Science, especially medicine, advances under the Abbasids.
Mathematics flourished during this period, too.
The word algebra is a Latinised form of the Arabic word algebra, which is the title of
a book by an Arab mathematician, written in Baghdad in 825.
It was the Arabs who invented the numerals that we use, and it was they, too, who in
the ninth century invented the very concept of zero.
The works of many classical authors would otherwise have been lost had they not been
translated into Arabic in Baghdad.
The Arabs play a key part in preserving Greek culture and transmitting it to the West.
We should always remember that.
Aside from the high achievements of Islamic culture, Baghdad during the 10th century has
many of the creature comforts and facilities that we today would consider essential to
life in a bustling city.
They include bazaars, where you can buy exotic products from abroad, libraries, and ornamental
gardens.
A distinctive architectural feature of the city is the prevalence of Arab tiles with
intricate mathematical patterns, an indication of the pride that the people take in their
mathematical knowledge.
By comparison, the Volga Bulgars live, let us say, in rather basic conditions on the
East Bank of the River Volga.
They migrated north to this territory sometime between the fourth and eighth centuries.
We don't know the date or the motivation behind the move because of the lack of literary
or archaeological sources.
Some of the most important linguistic clues, as to the language they speak, come from Volga
Bulga, tomb inscriptions, dating from the 13th and 14th centuries, which are written
in Arabic, but contain some Turkic words and sentences.
Another group of Bulgars has moved out of the region a while back and taken possession
of the territory that is known today as Bulgaria.
Those Bulgars become Christians, whereas the ones we're talking about, the Volga Bulgars,
converted to Islam to gain independence from the regional power, the Khazars.
The Khazars are a Turkic people who flourish from the fifth to the 13th centuries.
They're also multi-confessional, that's to say, some are Christians, some Jewish, and
some Muslims.
The three Abrahamic religions, so-named because all three trace their roots back to the Patriarch
Abraham, are at this moment all in stiff competition with one another.
The Khazars hold sway over southern Russia, eastern Ukraine, northwestern Uzbekistan,
and Kazakhstan, to which they later give their name.
Despite their tolerance of Islam, they have fought frequent battles against the caliphate,
and in so doing, they actually halt the advance of Islam northwards.
Learning of the antagonism between the caliphate and the Khazars, the Volga Bulgars have seized
the opportunity to advance their interests by aligning themselves with the caliphate.
In his letter to the Arab caliph, King Almas has asked for three things.
His first request is for money to build a fort so that his people can resist the Khazars.
He also wants advice about how to educate his people in the Islamic faith, and third,
he needs instructions on how to build a mosque.
Maybe the money is the most important, but we don't know that for certain.
In Baghdad, Al-Muqtadir decides to agree to all of his requests.
This isn't a purely goodwill gesture, however, international relations are rarely based on
goodwill.
Al-Muqtadir has his own political agenda, he's looking for allies to strengthen his
own grip on power.
Islam is riven by feuding between the two rival groups as they are today, the Sunnis
who believe that the line of dissent from the Prophet Muhammad has passed through a
close companion, and the first convert, Abu Bakra, and the Shias who believe that the
line of dissent passes through Muhammad's son-in-law, Ali.
The Abbasids at this time are trying to placate both.
There are other reasons why Al-Muqtadir is tempted to look outside his borders for any
support he can find.
He's deeply unpopular with his own people.
They've accused him of being more interested in slave girls and musicians than in the welfare
of his subjects.
In addition, the Islamic Empire, though still extremely powerful and wealthy, is at something
of a low ebb, having lost control of Northern Africa.
It's no longer expanding across the globe as it had been 200 years earlier when it was
knocking on the doors of France.
The Caliph's delegation with Ibn Fadlan chronicling its progress departs from Baghdad on June
the 21st in the year 921 and continues on its way partly by camel and partly on water
through what today are Iran, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, and Kazakhstan before entering
Russia.
This isn't the most direct route, which would have been due north between the Black Sea
and the Caspian Sea, but the ambassadors have taken care to avoid the Northern Caucasus
where the Khazars hold sway.
This makes their journey almost twice as long as it would be otherwise.
The delegation consists of five ambassadors plus an assortment of jurists and teachers.
It is headed by a eunuch and high-flying bureaucrat in the Caliph's court named Sosan al-Rasi.
Ahmad Ibn Fadlan himself was probably born in Baghdad.
We don't know his ethnicity for sure.
He is thought to be an Arab, but that is a supposition.
The Caliph has chosen him for his legal expertise because one of the main purposes of the embassy
is to provide an account of Islamic law to the recent converts.
This embassy is not mentioned in any other contemporaneous account other than Ibn Fadlan's
and the longest extant part of Ibn Fadlan's description survives in a single manuscript,
MS 5229, which resurfaces in 1923 in a museum in Mashhad in Iran.
This manuscript is thought to have been written about a century or two after Ibn Fadlan's
trip.
Previous to its discovery, our only other knowledge of the delegation was limited to
a geographical dictionary compiled by an Islamic biographer called Yakut al-Hamawi,
who lived in the late 12th or early 13th century.
His dictionary has a number of entries that cite sections of Ibn Fadlan's account.
As it is unsafe to travel in small groups, the delegation often makes lengthy stops along
the way, if for no other reason, than to wait for a caravan going in their direction.
They also need to get permission to pass through certain regions, and we should note that much
of the trip is undertaken in intense cold.
The delegation is forced to spend three winter months at a place called Qwaisem, an oasis
region to the south of the Aral Sea.
The stopover is partly due to the fact that the Salmanid governor tries to persuade the
Caliph's emissaries to break off with their journey.
The Salmanids are a Persian dynasty that has converted to Islam from Zoroastrianism.
Zoroastrianism is an ancient monotheistic religion that taught that the forces of good
are at perpetual war with the forces of evil.
The Salmanid sphere of influence, empire isn't quite the right word, incorporates a large
chunk of Afghanistan, including the modern-day Afghan capital Kabul.
The Salmanid governor is offended by the fact that the proper protocol hasn't been followed.
He believes that the Caliph of Baghdad should have notified him in advance that the embassy
would pass through his territory.
He's also suspicious of one of the ambassadors, a Turk named Tikin, whom he accuses of selling
arms to his enemies.
All but a handful of ambassadors decide to abandon the journey at the oasis of Qwaisem.
It's just too darn cold, among other considerations.
And so this appendage of jurists and teachers now heads back to Baghdad.
The rest head north by boat to Jajania in modern-day Turkmenistan near the Caspian Sea.
By the time the delegation arrives, however, the river is frozen and the ambassadors are
forced to remain there for three months.
The borders of modern-day Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan converge here.
They set off on the last leg of their journey on the 22nd of March, 922, and arrive near
present-day Kazan in present-day Russia two months later.
Just reciting the outline of their journey gives us a sense of what they have had to
put up with, and of the courage and determination they show to get to their destination.
So, here we are again at the court of the Bulgar King, and Ibn Fadlan is ordering the
fat man to stand up as he reads him the Caliph's letter.
Three days later, once all the formalities have been dispensed with, King Almis holds
a private audience with Ibn Fadlan and demands the money he has been promised in the letter,
4,000 dinars, to build the Bulgar Fort, and it is here that things get a little bit tricky.
Ibn Fadlan explains that some Christians along the way have stolen the money, and when the
King hears this he is understandably upper-plectic with rage, and accuses Ibn Fadlan of stealing
the money himself. Again, it is all rather comic. The scene is made morbid by Ibn Fadlan's
description of the King's voice, which he recounts gave the impression that he was speaking
from inside a large barrel.
To compensate for the loss of money, Ibn Fadlan produces a number of gifts, including an elaborately
decorated saddle, banners, and silk robes. But these do nothing to diffuse the tension.
Almis is not impressed, and just to emphasize how angry he is, the King has Ibn Fadlan
hauled off into a dark wood to view the remains of a particularly ugly giant, so ugly, we're
told, that the very sight of him has caused pregnant women to miscarry.
I'm not quite sure what the point of the exercise is. What we do know is that the erudite and
civilized Ibn Fadlan now feels frightened and distressed to quote him directly, and
put properly in his place. What happens as a result of the meeting isn't recorded.
We don't know whether Almis eventually gets the money he so desperately wants, or whether
any benefit from the embassy accrues to Al Muktadir. All we do know is that the King
releases Ibn Fadlan and lets him go on his way unimpeded. The delegation does not immediately
head back to Baghdad, however.
Ibn Fadlan is fascinated by the customs of different peoples, even though he is not a
verse to passing judgment upon them, and even though he sees his culture as vastly superior.
So, he takes time out to visit what today is the city of Kazan, alongside the river
Volga. He calls his people the Rusya, or Rus, a name that is cognate with Russia, and this
is where we reach the high point of our story.
The Rus sparked Ibn Fadlan's curiosity, and his description of their customs occupies
a major part of his journey. Some scholars think they were Scandinavians, possibly even
Vikings. The term Viking is thought to derive from an old Norse word, vik, which means inlet
or waterway, and Kazan rests on the Volga River.
However, the customs of the people whom Ibn Fadlan describes are not consistent with what
we know of Viking practices in their native Sweden, although it is very possible the Vikings
adapted to their environment abroad.
So we just don't know who the Rus are, ethnically speaking. It's a fascinating conundrum because
it raises questions about the birth and formation of the modern Russian state, which is generally
put in the 10th century, and also about whether the Vikings played a role in this event.
But I'm less interested here in determining the ethnic identity of the Rus than I am in
the encounter between the Rus, a semi-nomadic culture with limited material resources, and
a representative of the urbanized and advanced culture of Islam.
At the beginning of his count, Ibn Fadlan says, I've never seen a people with more perfect
physiques than theirs. He then compares the Rus to palm trees, fair and reddish.
But it soon becomes clear that Ibn Fadlan finds the Rus pretty revolting. In fact, he
describes them as the filthiest of all of Allah's people. They are covered in tattoos
from the tips of their toes to the neck, he writes. They live communally, 10 or 20 in
a single dwelling. They don't wash their hands after eating. They don't clean themselves
after urinating or defecating. They don't refresh themselves when they are in a state
of ritual impurity following sexual intercourse, all of which is contrary to how devout Muslims,
who put considerable emphasis upon ritual purity, are instructed to conduct themselves.
There's worse to follow. Each morning, a slave girl fetches a large bucket filled with water,
which she gives to her master. He then washes his hands, his face, and his hair in the bucket.
His ablutions completed. He combs his hair over the bucket. Next, he blows his nose and
spits into the bucket so that every impurity ends up in the water as Ibn Fadlan graphically
relates. The slave girl then carries the bucket to the next man in line, who goes through
the same disgusting ritual as has his predecessor, and so on and so forth. Everyone in the house
washing his face and hair and blowing his nose and spitting into the same filthy water.
Ibn Fadlan's description is intentionally designed to make his readers wince. I don't
for a minute believe the roots made a point of blowing their noses and spitting into a
communal basin just for the sake of it. What I can believe is that they had limited access
to water, and being semi-nomadic could not enjoy the amenities that come with a settled
existence. Ibn Fadlan is doing what ethnographers from
the time of the Greeks onwards have done. He is defining his own culture in terms of
its opposite. He is evoking his reader's awareness that they, unlike the roots, enjoy the benefit
of pumped water and privacy when they perform their ablutions. Ibn Fadlan provides still
more interesting ethnographic detail. He tells his readers that when one of the roots
falls sick, he is put in a tent and left to himself. He is given bread and water, but
that's all. No one looks after him, no one even goes near him. If he survives, well and
good. If he doesn't, he is cremated. Here again, what the author is doing is reminding
his readers about a distinctive feature of their culture, namely the importance of medical
science. Ibn Fadlan also tells us about the worship
of idols, how the roots thank their idols for contributing to their success in making
a good sale, and how they put out the heads of cows and sheep for the idols to eat, and
that at night these heads are devoured by scavenging dogs, even though the roots, when they discover
the food has gone, say, my Lord is pleased with the food I put out.
The most striking feature of Ibn Fadlan's account is his description of the burial of
a roots chieftain. It's a terrible account, and there's nothing else like it, so I must
warn you in advance. He tells us that when a chieftain dies, the
slave boys and girls are asked who will die with him, and that usually a slave girl volunteers
for the honour of being slaughtered, so that she can accompany her master to paradise.
The dead chief is set on a couch which is placed inside a ship that has been hauled up
onto dry land. An old woman called the Angel of Death, whom Ibn Fadlan describes as fat
and ugly, spreads draperies over the couch. A banquet is held, during which the slave
girl is made to get drunk. Two horses, two cows, a cock, and a hen are slaughtered for
the feast. Next, the victim goes from one house to another
being constantly raped, and on each occasion the man who rapes her says, tell your master,
I have done this purely out of my love for him. Later, the Angel of Death drags the sacrificial
victim onto the ship and into the chamber where the dead man lies, and six men are said
to go inside and gang rape her. A cry is drowned out by men striking their shields with their
staves. After this, the Angel of Death places a noose
around the girl's neck, and two men strangle her, while the old woman repeatedly knife
her through her rib cage. It is a gruesome and horrific death, as the author makes clear.
The dead girl is then laid out beside her master, and the ship is set on fire.
What about the roos? What do they make of Ibn Fadlan? Well, they're illiterate, and so
they haven't left us any written report. Even so, Ibn Fadlan ends his account by reporting
a conversation that he has through an interpreter. According to the roos speaker interviewed,
the Muslim practice of inhumation, that is burial, is stupid. That's the word the interpreter
uses. Burial is stupid, since it means that one's loved ones are devoured by worms.
By contrast, the roos' dead are immediately disposed of, so they enter paradise instantly.
Although Ibn Fadlan obviously deplores certain roos' practices and believes in the superiority
of Islamic culture and religion, he sees estimable qualities in his odd hosts as well.
We can safely assume that Ibn Fadlan gets back to Baghdad because his journal has survived.
But we don't know how he is received by the caliph, or what the caliph thinks about his
diplomatic initiative, whether he is satisfied with what comes of it or not. In the event
the Abbasid caliphate continues to decline over the next 300 years until Baghdad is taken
by the grandson of Genghis Khan in 1258. The Mongol victory sounds the death knell to
a single unified Islamic state in the Middle East.
So, is Ibn Fadlan's encounter first with the Volga Bulgars and later with the roos of any
real importance? Does it change the course of world history? It's possible that a line
of communication is now opened up between the Middle East and Central Asia, but like
many things in the story of the Bulgars and the roos, we don't know much for certain.
Encounters between peoples of different cultures have occurred throughout history and often
define the boundaries we record, read and discuss. While I was getting ready for this
lecture and thinking about this, Ibn Fadlan, the report came in that the Voyager 1 spacecraft
launched in 1977 had become the first man-made object to leave the solar system and was now
12 billion miles from home. The American scientist Ed Stone, who headed this mission,
compared Voyager's path to one of those journeys like circumnavigating the globe for the first
time or having a footprint on the moon for the first time. Or I would add, like traveling
from Baghdad to the Volga Bulgars and then on to the roos during the 10th century. It
was a moment when two very different worlds came into contact with one another. As they
gazed at their counterparts, they must have thought they were looking at aliens from outer
space.
