It's August the 2nd, 218 BCE, and a horseman riding at night has just arrived in Rome bearing
news of the most disastrous military defeat that the city has suffered in its 500-year
history.
We don't know the exact number of casualties, estimates vary between 50,000 to 70,000, but
it's been nothing less than a bloodbath.
The dead include 80 senators, a much larger number of men of equestrian rank, all of them
extremely wealthy, and 24 out of the 48 military tribunes, senior ranking officers.
The battle has taken place in Apulia in southeast Italy, about 300 miles south of Rome, that's
just outside a town called Cannae.
The initial report is that there are no survivors, later that report will prove to be false.
The victorious Carthaginian general Hannibal now offers from afar to ransom 8,000 prisoners
on the condition that the Romans agree to peace terms.
To increase the pressure on the Roman Senate, which will decide this proposal, Hannibal
sends 10 highly distinguished Roman prisoners to make a personal appeal.
The prisoners are under solemn oath to return to him after making this presentation.
The crisis for the Senate is whether to make peace with the enemy and save the lives of
hundreds, perhaps thousands of Romans, and the rest from slavery or whether to hold firm.
It is the most important decision the Roman Senate has ever had to make.
No one at this point knows the identity of the dead, but there is hardly a family that
does not have a member who fought at Cannae and who might therefore be a prisoner.
Outside the Senate House, thousands of Romans are gathered, knowing that if someone they
love is being held in Hannibal's prison camp, their fate is about to be determined.
The Romans hate Hannibal.
He is their worst nightmare.
The Roman historian Livy charges Hannibal with a formidable list of crimes, including
inhuman cruelty, perfidy worse than that of an ordinary Carthaginian, disregard for truth
and sanctity, lack of fear for the gods, contempt for the sanctity of an oath, and the absence
of any religious scruples.
Even so, Livy by no means lacks in admiration for Hannibal.
He describes him as energetic, able to withstand extremes of temperature and moderate in his
consumption of food and drink.
Hannibal is said to ensure the same privations as his men are subjected to.
Livy also writes memorably, I'm inclined to believe that Hannibal was more wonderful
when facing adversity than he was when enjoying success.
It's an extraordinary tribute to Rome's most deadly enemy, particularly as it comes from
the quill of Rome's most patriotic chronicler.
Hannibal is one of the most remarkable military leaders of all time.
His name means, Baal is my grace, or he who finds favor with Baal.
Baal is a god worshipped at the time in many ancient Middle Eastern lands.
Until now, Hannibal's life has been characterized by unreleaved harshness, deprivation and discomfort
to a degree most of us are incapable of imagining.
He is a lateral thinker with a natural aptitude to think outside the box as his application
of unconventional military tactics reveals time and again.
He is also a keen student of human nature who consistently seeks to familiarize himself
with the personalities of his opponents and then exploit their weaknesses to bring about
their ruin.
When I is the moment he has waited for all his life ever since his father, Hamilcar Barker,
made him take a solemn oath that he, Hannibal, would never be a friend of the Romans.
These words have come down to us from Nepos, Hannibal's Roman biographer.
Hamilcar allegedly made his son take the oath before he took him on a military campaign
to Spain.
Hannibal was just nine years old at the time.
He was about to become an army brat, in other words.
And he would never know anything else but army life until his later years.
The Roman historian Varro reports that Hannibal's father said of his three sons, including Hannibal,
I am rearing these three lion cubs for the destruction of Rome.
The Roman historian Cassius Dio says of Hannibal that hardship hardened him and lack of sleep
strengthened him.
And I think that pretty much sums a man up.
We don't have any testimony from the Carthaginian side because the Carthaginians haven't left
us any writings.
But it's not improbable that Hannibal disseminated frightening reports of himself to create an
image that would strike fear in the hearts of Romans.
The Carthaginians are Phoenicians, a Semitic people whose ancestral homeland was in modern
day Lebanon.
And the Phoenicians were merchant venturers who established settlements around the shores
of the Mediterranean.
Carthage was by far the greatest of their settlements.
It was situated on a peninsula in the Bay of Tunis, a thriving port, arguably the most
important trading community in the Mediterranean.
It derived great wealth, not only from its excellent harbour facilities, but also from
its fertile hinterland.
At the time of this story, the Carthaginians and the Romans had been enemies for half a
century.
The First Punic War, a war fought between the Romans and the Pony, our word Punic,
meaning Phoenician, broke out in 264 BCE and lasted an entire generation.
When it finally ended in 241, the Romans ordered the Carthaginians to evacuate Sicily, where
they had numerous settlements, and to pay an indemnity of 3,200 talents over 10 years.
That is a huge sum equivalent to billions of dollars in today's money.
A few years later, the Romans annexed Sardinia, which the Carthaginians also controlled, and
imposed a further indemnity.
Hannibal was five or six when the First Punic War ended, and he was no doubt deeply affected
by the humiliating terms of the peace.
This is why Hannibal's father was so full of hatred towards Rome and why he fuelled
his sons with such hatred.
Despite access to Sicily, Hamilcar made it his objective to gain control of the Iberian
peninsula.
And it was here, following in his father's footsteps, that Hannibal learnt his military
craft.
The Second Punic War began two years before the Battle of Cannae.
Hannibal was appointed commander-in-chief of the Carthaginian forces in Spain following
the assassination of his predecessor.
He was 26.
He laid siege to Saguntum, a city on the northeast coast of Spain that was allied to Rome, which
he captured after eight months.
Spain was a bone of contention between Rome and Carthage, not least because of its rich
silver mines.
Hannibal rejected a Roman ultimatum to return Saguntum, and thus initiated the Second Punic
War.
Now, returning to our present story, sometime between late April and mid-June of 218, Hannibal
departs from Carthago Nova in Spain, modern-day Cartagena, which is the main Carthaginian
city in Spain.
He is heading towards modern-day Italy, determined to take the fight to the enemy.
Hannibal heads a mozzi band of Africans, Spanish, Ligurians, Celts, Venetians, Italians, and
Greeks, a mixture scraped together from all the nations of the earth in Livy's memorable
phrase.
A later inscription states that Hannibal's army consists of 90,000 infantry and 12,000
cavalry.
That is undoubtedly exaggerated, but probably not wildly.
Hannibal commands the largest and most experienced army in the Mediterranean.
His plan is to destroy Rome, not by raising it to the ground, but by isolating it from
its allies in the Italian peninsula, on whom Rome is dependent, since the allies contribute
soldiers for the capital's war effort.
Hannibal crosses the Pyrenees, which separate modern-day Spain from France in July or August,
2018.
He now has only 50,000 infantry and 9,000 cavalry left, rather more than half his original
total.
The rest, many of the mercenaries, have abandoned him.
The worst is yet to come, however.
He makes rapid progress along the French coast, facing little opposition from the local tribes.
He crosses the River Rhône in September and reaches the foothills of the Alps, probably
in late October.
And finally, he is about to undertake the most amazing part of his journey, not least
of course, because he is crossing the Alps with 37 elephants.
But first, his army is attacked by a hostile people called the aloborghers.
Its plight is so wretched that one of his lieutenants recommended cannibalism, which
he rejects.
The descent is as difficult as the ascent.
At one point, a landslide obliterates the path ahead for hundreds of yards.
Hannibal's army is now reduced further to 12,000 African infantry, 8,000 Iberian infantry,
and 6,000 cavalry, less than half the number he'd had after crossing the Pyrenees.
Despite his losses, Hannibal still has a highly effective fighting force.
He proceeds to defeat the Romans at the River Tichinus in late November, at the River Trebia
in late December, both in northern Italy.
Then on June the 21st, 217, after losing the sight in one eye due to an infection, he ambushes
a Roman army at Lake Trasimene and defeats it crushingly.
Under this latest debacle, the Roman senate appoints Quintus Fabius Maximus as dictator
and Fabius makes it his policy to avoid a head-on confrontation.
Earning the unflattering nickname cuntato, which means the delayer, Fabius has his army
dog Hannibal's heels instead of inviting an engagement.
Fabius' term of office as dictator lapses in December of 217, six months is the full
term of a dictatorship during this period.
And the military command of the Roman army is given to two consuls with equal authority.
Their names are Gaius Terentius Varro and Lucius Aemilius Paulus, and they do not exactly
see eye to eye as we shall see.
The two consuls join forces at the end of July 216 and pursue the Carthaginian general
south intent on forcing a final showdown.
Hannibal is actually luring the Romans to Cannae, a name forever engraved in the minds
of military historians.
Located on the south bank of the Alphidius River, modern-day Ophanto, and situated on
a hill, Cannae is of considerable significance to the Romans.
The Alphidius is the only major river in central Italy.
The town controls access to the rich grain fields in the south, so it's an important
supply base for the Romans.
It also happens to be situated in flat, open country, so it provides an excellent opportunity
for Hannibal's cavalry to perform to best advantage.
Hannibal's forces are outnumbered by more than two to one, as he knows from his spy's
accounts of the Republic's forces gathered along the banks of the river.
Over the past six months, Rome has been making a supreme effort to increase its fighting
strength.
In fact, it has doubled the size of its army from four to eight legions.
A legion consists of up to 5,000 men, so that makes 40,000.
And the total number of Rome's army is twice that, as an equal number of soldiers have
been conscripted from other cities on the Italian peninsula that are allied to Rome
and required to furnish troops.
But Hannibal knows that half of these troops are completely untested in battle and capable
of only limited military maneuvers.
He strongly suspects that the Romans expect to rely on sheer weight to crush him.
In turn, Hannibal intends to win through superior tactics.
He also studies carefully the temperaments of the two enemy Roman consuls, Varro and
Paulus, who, according to traditional military procedure, command the joint army on alternate
days when two consular armies join forces.
Varro is much more eager to engage the invading enemy than Paulus is, and he is likely to
be more reckless.
For this reason, Hannibal decides to lure the Romans into battle on a day when Varro
is in command, barring an ambush it is virtually impossible to force a general to engage against
his will in the ancient world.
And already, the day before the battle takes place, Paulus had declined Hannibal's offer
to fight.
On August 2, Varro leads his men out of camp with the intention of offering battle.
He probably draws his force up on the southwest bank of the Alphidius River.
Over a mile in length, his battle line extends as far as the hillside on which the town of
Cannae is set to the left and as far as the Alphidius River to the right.
Varro's Roman and Allied infantry stand in the center, 50 to 70 men deep.
His Roman cavalry is on the right wing and his Allied cavalry is on the left.
So long as the line holds firm, Varro is secure against attack either from the sides or from
behind.
His intention is simple.
By presenting an impenetrable wall, he is going to confront the enemy line head on, moving
forward and crushing everyone in his path.
It may be the only option available to him.
With half of his army devoid of experience, the most he can hope for is that his men stand
and fight.
Hannibal extends his own line as far as the Romans have.
That's to say, about a mile in length, to give the appearance of an equal-sized force
even though it is nowhere near as deep.
The infantry's front ranks comprise the Spanish and Gallic troops.
They are armed with heavy wooden shields and swords that are rather blunt by now since they
become rusty and his men haven't been able to sharpen them very effectively while on the
march.
Unlike the Romans, they wear hardly any armour, still they're frightful to look at with their
greasy beards and unkempt hair.
Hannibal keeps his Libyan infantry, his hardened professionals, in the rear so that if the
line begins to fall back, the Libyans will prevent it from caving in altogether.
To boost troop morale, he takes up position alongside his brother, Meigo, in the front
or very close to it.
As soon as battle commences, Hannibal orders his men to advance in the shape of an outward
bulging arc.
It is his expectation that the arc will cave inwards under pressure but not give way.
This is a high-risk strategy characteristic of Hannibal because if the human shield collapses,
the Romans will sweep forward en masse and the battle will be lost.
Everything depends on the general's knife-edge calculation.
Meanwhile, Hannibal's cavalry fans out on the wings, Spanish and Gallic on the left,
Numidian on the right.
While his infantry is outnumbered by the Romans, his cavalry greatly outnumbers the enemy,
some 10,000 to Rome's 6,000, and it's far superior in discipline and expertise.
Another strategy is to entice the Romans forward and then encircle them with the horsemen.
And that is exactly what happens.
As the Romans push forward, Hannibal's Libyan infantry moves rapidly up from behind on the
flank, his cavalry swiftly routes its Roman counterpart and swings around to attack the
Roman infantry from the rear.
Liby's description of the battle is you're it, and indeed moving.
He reports that some injured Romans bury their heads in the ground in a pathetic effort to
choke themselves to death.
The military historian John Lasenby writes,
The Roman army perhaps suffered higher casualties in a single day's fighting than any other
Western army before or since.
Nearly 20,000 men are taken prisoner, only 14,500 escaped death or captivity.
The moment is all the more delicious for Hannibal because it represents payback for his father,
himself and for Carthage's defeat in the First Punic War.
The Roman consul, Emilius Paulus, who a day before argued with his consular colleague
Varro against confronting Hannibal in battle, is among the fallen.
Hannibal gives him an honorable burial while leaving the rest of the enemy dead on the
field to rot.
He orders his men to strip the gold rings from the corpses of the dead senators and soldiers.
Later he sends the horde back to Carthage with a request for reinforcements.
Hannibal hopes that the number of rings will convince the Carthaginian senate of the magnitude
of his victory and persuade them to commit more troops to his enterprise, which up till
now they have been reluctant to do.
Hannibal has won an outstanding victory, one of the greatest of all time, and it will be
an inspiration for military strategists up to the present day.
Opinions are divided, however, as to whether he prevails by tactical genius or by accident.
Some put Hannibal's success down to Roman stupidity for having drawn a line so deep
that it was completely unwieldy, incapable of performing military maneuvers and easily
pierced and smashed from behind.
Despite the victory against great odds, Cannae comes at considerable cost to the winner.
Hannibal's losses amount to 6,000 men, 15% of his forces, of whom 2,000 followed him
all the way from Spain.
The rest are recruits, acquired along the way, most of them Gauls, who attached themselves
to Hannibal's banner in the hope of acquiring rich rewards.
The Greek historian Appian, writing three and a half centuries later, claims that when Hannibal
sees many of his own friends among the dead, he bursts into tears and says he didn't want
another such victory.
That remark is almost certainly apocryphal, but it's not improbable that Hannibal's elation
is tempered by a sober sense of reality.
Immediately after the battle, the surviving consul Varro dispatches a messenger on horseback
to Rome.
The messenger has to change horses several times along the way, travelling at breakneck
speed, he reaches the capital in under 12 hours.
And now the emergency meeting of the senate is called, the city is in turmoil.
The words that Livy uses to describe the mood are pavor and tumultus, meaning dread and
uproar.
Everyone is on tenterhooks, the shrieks and cries of women are deafening.
There is a sense of overwhelming despair.
It is now that the ten prisoners sent by Hannibal arrive under the command of a Carthaginian
cavalry officer named Carthalo.
They bring the offer to ransom 8,000 captives and negotiate peace terms.
As soon as the senate learns that Carthalo is outside Rome, it orders him to depart,
but it allows the Roman prisoners to deliver Hannibal's message.
This is the ransom demand.
Imagine now that you're a Roman senator.
On the recommendations of Quintus Fabius Maximus, the former dictator known as the Delea, you
pass a motion ordering all women inside their homes and forbid anyone to leave Rome.
As a result of these actions, discipline is restored.
So vote to send an envoy to the Delphic Oracle in Greece to seek the advice of the God Apollo.
Delphi is the preeminent, oracular seat in the ancient world, the sanctuary that both
Greeks and Romans visit for advice in times of crisis.
In addition, you vote to consult the so-called Books of Fate, and on their advice you vote,
take note of this, to bury alive a Gallic man and woman, and a Greek man and woman,
and inter them in the Forum Boarium, or cattle market, in Rome's centre.
You are making them scapegoats in the hope that their deaths, their sacrifice, will
appease the gods.
And finally, you must make a decision that will have bearing on potentially every Roman
family your own included.
That is, whether to ransom the 8,000 Romans.
It's a decision that must be made quickly.
The Carthaginian army will no doubt arrive in a few days.
On the advice of a senator named Titus Manlius Torquatus, you vote not to ransom a single
Roman prisoner.
Instead, you send the ten prisoners who came with Hannibal's offer back to Hannibal and
to possible death.
This is a truly momentous and courageous decision, for as Livy says, most of the senators had
relatives among the captives.
One of the ten envoys is said to attempt to escape, but he is apprehended and returned
by the Senate to Hannibal.
And now, with every minute that passes, you hold your breath, expecting to see Hannibal
on the horizon and fearing the worse.
The consul, Varro, soon returns to Rome to make his own report to the Senate.
Livy tells us that a large crowd greets him and congratulates him, quote, for not having
disbared of the Republic.
That is to say, for having the courage to face the music rather than go into voluntary
exile.
Were he a Carthaginian general, Livy notes, Varro would be executed.
Hannibal impatiently awaits the response of the Romans, who in turn are holding their
breath, quaking in their military boots, fearfully awaiting his next move.
This is, without doubt, Hannibal's finest hour.
Rome is on the ropes, and thanks to his great victory, Carthage will soon reclaim its rightful
position as master of the Mediterranean.
Or so Hannibal believes.
There are moments when destiny hangs in the balance, and this is one such moment with
implications that still resonate today.
When Carthalo returns to the Carthaginian camp with the news that the Romans aren't
prepared to negotiate, Hannibal is no doubt taken completely by surprise.
How could any people make such an inhuman sacrifice?
Hannibal wastes no time in executing a number of prisoners, presumably the most eminent,
and he sells the rest into slavery.
You can only imagine what impact the Roman refusal to sue for peace has upon him.
First scorn, next bewilderment, then some measure of admiration, and finally, I suspect,
frustration, perhaps even despondency.
Though he does not know it, Hannibal's finest hour is fast receding.
Notwithstanding the fact, his victory will make Carthage for a few brief years the most
powerful state in the Mediterranean.
Hannibal's cavalry commander, Mahabal, is reported to tell him that if he marches to
Rome, he will dine on the Capitoline Hill in the heart of Rome in just five days.
If Mahabal does say that, he knows nothing about the topography of Italy, despite having
campaigned there for over a year.
Rome is 300 miles from Cannae, it would take Hannibal at least 15 days to complete the
march through mountainous terrain.
But it's a good story, and some in Hannibal's army must urge him to take Rome.
When Hannibal declines, Mahabal allegedly observes you know how to win a battle, but
you don't know how to make use of it.
Olivia says this delay is generally thought to have been the salvation of Rome and of
her empire, Urbi et Imperio.
Still, Rome holds its breath, and the question as to why Hannibal fails to consolidate the
victory in Cannae by launching an immediate attack on Rome has exercised military pundits,
as well as armchair historians, ever since.
There are a number of reasons why he might have decided it wasn't a particularly brilliant
idea.
One is that he lacks the forces to conduct a protracted siege.
A siege warfare in the ancient world is long and painstaking, sometimes taking years, there
is the likelihood too that his army will become restive.
Most of his men have joined up for easy profits and aren't the least bit interested in Rome's
fate.
They'd rather pillage the countryside than besiege a city.
Hannibal is eventually driven out of Italy and defeated on home ground by Publius Schipio
at Zama in 202.
Schipio is later accorded the honorific title Africanus.
The Romans, due to their decision not to come to terms with Hannibal, were later proclaimed
themselves to be a people who never give in.
I have to confess my immense admiration for Hannibal, even if he had done nothing more
with his life than to bring his army and most memorably his elephants across the highest
mountain range in Europe, and from there down into Italy, that achievement alone would
guarantee him a unique place in history.
He stands as a stark warning for anyone who dreams big and is in love with the impossible.
I give anything to have met him.
