About two centuries after the time of the Buddha and two millennia before Mahatma Gandhi,
the Indian subcontinent gave the world a man known as Ashoka the Great.
He unified almost the entire subcontinent and his rule extended as far as Afghanistan
in the West to Bengal in the East.
He advocated Buddhist ideals and he left behind a legacy of peaceful coexistence that has
hardly been matched in world history.
Yet Ashoka is today a nearly forgotten emperor who spent the second half of his life atoning
for the harm he caused during the first half.
The late Belgian priest and Buddhist scholar Etienne Lamotte has called Ashoka the greatest
political and spiritual figure of ancient India.
Let's step back to the year 261 BCE to meet him.
At the time Ashoka has been on the throne for seven or eight years.
He is the son of the Maurian emperor Bindusara and the grandson of the founder of the Maurian
dynasty Chandragupta Maurer.
During his reign Ashoka has not yet fought any foreign wars but he is eager to expand
his realm.
So he sends a blunt message to a kingdom called Kalinga, situated in central eastern India
on the Bay of Bengal.
History is about to move in a very surprising direction.
Although Kalinga is ruled by a king it has a democratic government.
Ashoka demands that its people submit to his authority.
Ashoka's grandfather Chandragupta tried previously to annex Kalinga and failed.
But Ashoka will not be denied and when the kingdom chooses to defend itself rather than
to submit he unleashes a vast army that goes on a killing spree and turns the Daya river
which runs next to the battleground blood red.
Unlike virtually every other conquering warlord who gloats over his victory Ashoka is unexpectedly
shattered by the destruction he wreaks.
His personal journey the one that recommends him to us today is one not of conquest but
of redemption.
Even so his legacy will come close to extinction in the millennia that follow his death almost
up until the present day.
And we might say that it remains perpetually at risk in the interim because the only
record we have of his accomplishments survives in inscriptions mostly carved in a writing
system that became unreadable centuries ago.
That writing system is the Brahmi script possibly the earliest such system to emerge in the Indian
subcontinent.
It records the ancient language of prakrit which is the official language of Ashoka's
court.
The inscriptions in question of which there are 33 are known as the edicts of Ashoka.
Some of these edicts are inscribed in caves while others are found on pillars and boulders
that are subject to the eroding forces of earth, wind, rain and freezing cold.
All but lost to history for a thousand years Ashoka will claw his way back into modern historical
consciousness primarily via these inscriptions.
Ashoka's grandfather Chandragupta was born about the year 340 BCE.
Chandragupta who established the Mauryan dynasty that unified most of modern-day India.
According to legend the origins of Ashoka's grandfather were extremely inauspicious.
An account has him orphaned early in life growing up in a poor family and working as
a cowherd.
As a young man Chandragupta attracted the attention of an influential philosopher named
Chanakaya who educated him in military tactics.
A Chandragupta studied in Taxila a city in the Punjab province of present day Pakistan
about 20 miles west of Islamabad.
His mentor groomed him to become a leader, one who would eventually destroy the Nanda
empire that held sway over modern-day northern India.
Chandragupta must have had extraordinary talents to catch the eye of such an influential sponsor
as Chanakaya.
We don't know exactly how he did that but the confidence placed in him as a young man
would prove to be well founded.
In 322 Chandragupta fulfilled his mentor's vision in defeating the Nanda dynasty and
seizing the throne.
He then succeeded in liberating the region to the west of the Indus river in modern-day
Pakistan which had been conquered by Alexander and which today we call Balukistan.
By about 316 Chandragupta had taken control of the lands of the retreating occupiers and
was extending his empire to the edge of Central Asia.
At the head of a vast army he conquered almost the whole of the Indian subcontinent.
In 305 he concluded an alliance with Seleucus I, one of the successors of Alexander the
Great and the founder of the Seleucid Empire and in so doing brought to an end the attempts
by the Greeks to control the region.
Late in life he sought refuge in the ascetic beliefs of Jainism which teaches a path to
spiritual purity through discipline.
The term comes from the Sanskrit verb to conquer in the sense of overcoming one's temptations.
Then in 298 at a time of great famine Chandragupta finally handed over power to his son Bindusara
and withdrew to a cave where he is said to have meditated for five weeks without food
or drink until he died of starvation.
Chandragupta's successor Bindusara ruled for 25 years and was known as the slayer of
enemies owing to the fact that he brutally enforced his authority over the lands he consolidated
into the Maurian Empire.
But in the test of time Bindusara is thought of today primarily as forming a generational
bridge between grandfather and grandson.
Ashoka was not particularly well placed to ascend to the throne.
The Maurian dynasty was polygamous and Ashoka had numerous brothers, perhaps dozens of them
added to which his mother was low in the pecking order of royal wives.
However, even before Bindusara's death in 273 or 272 his council of ministers seems
to have lost confidence in the ability of the king's eldest and most favored son Sushima
to succeed him.
Matters came to a head during an uprising in Taxila which threatened to cause the break-up
of the Maurian Empire.
Sushima was first sent to quell the revolt and failed.
Ashoka replaced him and was welcomed by the people.
The uprising came to an end.
Whether or not Ashoka now became the choice to succeed his enfeebled father, Sushima's
authority was fatally undermined and he was bypassed by the council that appointed the
king.
According to one account Sushima was killed while seeking to defend his claim to the throne.
According to another he was tricked by Ashoka who is said to have pushed him into a pit
filled with burning coals.
The Greco-Roman historians to whom we owe so much of our knowledge about the ancient
world almost completely ignore Ashoka are only other source for his reign.
In addition to the ancient inscribed edicts in Brahmi's script are Buddhist texts that
were almost consigned to oblivion with the rise of Hinduism in India in the centuries
after Ashoka.
Sushima did not favor the Buddhist principles that Ashoka embodied.
The ancient Buddhist texts especially from Sri Lanka and published considerably later
focus on the impact that Buddhism had on Ashoka's life and rule.
They portray him as a monster of depravity before his conversion in quotes to Buddhist
precepts and beliefs and the embodiment of piety and enlightenment afterwards.
We might say that they are laden with a heavy religious agenda.
So the problem is that all we know about Ashoka comes principally from these two sources
neither of which is entirely reliable.
Growing on the limited evidence of Buddhist stone reliefs the British historian Charles
Allen describes Ashoka as short, punchy and with a grossly pumpkin like face.
It takes Ashoka two years to establish himself securely on the throne.
To consolidate his power he may have killed at least one of his brothers as we've seen.
One Buddhist account actually has him slaying 99 of his alleged 100 brothers.
He's also said to subject his leading ministers to a test of loyalty to see if they are trustworthy.
500 of them fail the test and are executed.
He keeps a harem of 500 concubines or so it is claimed and he becomes so incensed by the
treatment that he receives from the harem that on one occasion he has the entire lot
burned to death.
Ashoka supposedly also erects a torture chamber that he names hellish paradise or the paradise
of hell because it looks so beautiful from the outside although indescribable acts are
said to be perpetrated within.
All of these claims derive from the Buddhist records of Ashoka's transformation from monster
to redeemer and yet the portrait of degeneracy is to some extent matched by at least one
contemporaneous inscription that is etched in stone after the battle of Kalinga, a document
whose promulgation Ashoka himself authorizes.
It's eight years after coming to power that Ashoka finally feels sufficiently secure within
his realm to undertake this foreign venture, an attack on Kalinga in central eastern India.
It is the only part of the Indian subcontinent that remains independent.
Kalinga is not only fertile but also of great strategic importance since it controls coastal
trade routes connecting modern day India to Sri Lanka, Bangladesh and Burma and further
east to Thailand, Malaysia and Indonesia.
So gaining control of Kalinga has political, commercial and dynastic significance for Ashoka
and it would give the young king the satisfaction of achieving one of his grandfather's unfulfilled
ambitions.
We have no account of the war that ensues other than that it is preceded by a demand
from Ashoka that the Kalingans submit, the Kalingans refuse and Ashoka attacks.
A very bloody battle unfolds when it ends some two hundred thousand lie dead and another
one hundred and fifty thousand are transported from there as one of the inscriptions tells
us, although whether they are prisoners or deportees is unclear.
Even though the number of casualties and captives is no doubt inflated, the motivation and scale
of the atrocity would likely today be characterized as genocide.
And then something extraordinary happens.
During his victory Ashoka is wandering in one of the cities of Kalinga observing the
effects of the war when he is overcome with guilt because of the terrible carnage he has
caused.
He asks of himself, what have I done?
If this is a victory what does a defeat look like?
Is it courageous to kill innocent babes and women?
I want to focus on this moment of Ashoka's transformation because as he describes it
it takes place in the space of a moment.
How do we explain this?
Everything he has believed in till this point of his life gaining the throne, strengthening
his grip on power, extending his empire, suddenly none of it makes any sense to him
any longer.
All of his certainties and assumptions have gone out the window.
Siddhartha Gautama born in 563 BCE and known to us as Buddha, the enlightened or awakened
one, underwent a similar spiritual transformation from a sheltered privileged existence during
the first 29 years of his life to an acute awareness afterward of human suffering.
As the story is told Buddha left his wife and infant son and embarked on a long often
frustrating but ultimately transcendent journey of self-discovery.
And though he spent years experimenting with fasting and undergoing trances, he eventually
chose to concentrate on controlling his mental state rather than on subjecting himself to
bodily punishment.
Ashoka's grandfather similarly pursued the Jain vision of resisting temptation, ultimately
dying in a cave after fasting as we saw.
So there is a family tradition that Ashoka is following here whether consciously or not.
The late American mythologist Joseph Campbell, a writing of the initiatory experience of
a shaman, a person who is in contact with the spirit world, describes the experience
as a kind of schizophrenic crack-up.
He goes on to say, the whole unconscious opens up and the shaman falls in.
I believe this is similar to what happens to Ashoka at Kalinga, suddenly realizes that
he has been living a lie and everything changes from this moment onwards.
The most famous example of this phenomenon in the Christian tradition has to do with
Saul, who is a virulent critic of the Jesus movement as early Christianity was called
before undergoing conversion on the road to Damascus.
According to the Acts of the Apostles, Saul sees a blinding flash of light and falls to
the ground.
A voice addresses him saying, Saul, Saul, why do you persecute me?
Three days later, he recovers his sight, is baptized, the ritual whereby he declares
his allegiance to the Jesus movement and becomes Christianity's most eloquent advocate
now as Paul.
Another more homely example involves John Wesley, the 18th century founder of the English
Methodist movement.
Ashoka has a similar revelation, though it's important to note that he already identified
himself as a Buddhist two years prior to the battle for Kalinga, at least nominally, and
so it would not be fully accurate to say that he converted.
It is rather that he now embraces Buddhism more fervently, and over time Ashoka will
reflect upon the war and promulgate his reflections on inscriptions throughout his kingdom, along
busy trade routes and in commercial centres.
The emperor's commentary on his own epiphany has been described by British historian Kenneth
Roy Norman as unique among royal inscriptions of any age or culture, in that it includes
a royal statement of repentance.
In the 13th major rock edict Ashoka states, the beloved of the gods has remorse for his
conquest of the inhabitants of Kalinga.
Thinking deeply not only about the slaughter, but also about its effects on the survivors,
Ashoka continues, those lucky enough to have escaped whose affection is undiminished grieve
when their friends, acquaintances, companions, and relatives come to disaster.
Then he discusses his own personal dilemma, today if one hundredth or one thousandth part
of all the people who were killed or died or deported when Kalinga was taken were to
suffer, it would grieve the beloved of the gods.
Finally, Ashoka drafts a prescription that he intends to follow and that he desires his
people to adopt, it reads as follows.
The beloved of the gods forgives the people of his empire, but he warns them that even
when he is remorseful he has power and he asks them to repent so that he does not kill
them.
But the beloved of the gods wishes that all creatures should enjoy freedom from injury
and exercise self-restraint and be calm and gentle.
And he concludes, the beloved of the gods thinks that the greatest victory is by dharma.
I'll talk about that word in a moment.
It means adherence to the highest ethical principles.
The Australian Buddhist monk, Shravasti Damika writes, there is little doubt that Ashoka's
edicts were written in his own words rather than in the stylistic language in which royal
edicts or proclamations in the ancient world were usually written.
It's important to emphasize, however, that Ashoka isn't interested in converting his
people to Buddhism.
He seems to be equally tolerant of all religions.
Instead, his purpose is to have his people practice their religion in accordance with
the values that he espouses.
Can you imagine Alexander the Great promoting similar values?
For 18 months after his life-altering experience at Kalinga, Ashoka becomes what we might call
a zealot.
He sets out on a tour of his kingdom lasting 256 days, during which he addresses audiences
and distributes his wealth, particularly to monks and the elderly.
He sees it as his responsibility to travel extensively so that he will be accessible
to his people.
He also finances public works and he sends missionaries to neighboring kingdoms, notably
to Burma and Sri Lanka, as a result of which Buddhism spreads to these regions.
The Buddhist literature tells us that he is fired up with the ambition to build 84,000
stupas on the same day and at the very same hour.
Stupa is a Sanskrit word, meaning heap or mound.
It's a place where Buddhists meditate and where relics are stored, mainly of esteemed
Buddhist monks.
The most important stupa that Ashoka erects is the so-called Great Stupa of Sanchi, situated
in a tiny village in the Indian state of Madhya Pradesh, about 30 miles northwest of
Bhopal.
The Great Stupa is thought to be the oldest existing stone structure in India.
It allegedly contains the relics of the Buddha, as well as those of prominent Buddhist monks.
Its construction was put under the charge of Ashoka's wife Devi, who was born in Sanchi,
which is where she and Ashoka were married.
Consistent with his Buddhist faith, Ashoka adopts the principle of dharma as his moral
code and promotes its practice among his people.
Dharma is a word that is almost impossible to translate.
It refers to duty, law, piety and righteousness.
It requires from those who practice it a commitment to non-violence, social responsibility
and toleration.
Buddhist scholar John Strong, the author of The Legend of King Ashoka, writes that
the Ashokan state was to be governed according to the principles of dharma.
Wars of aggression were to be replaced by peaceful coexistence.
Animals as well as humans were to be respected.
Ashoka would in fact ban animal sacrifice.
He charges his ministers with disseminating this ethical code.
Summing up, Strong writes that dharma was a moral policy of active social concern, religious
intolerance, ecological awareness, the observance of common ethical precepts and the renunciation
of war.
The late Belgian priest Etienne Lamotte elaborates that Ashoka's dharma is superimposed on various
beliefs without any claim to absorb them, acceptable to all the lay and the religious,
Indians or foreigners, but compulsory to all.
Romila Thapa, a preeminent postcolonial Indian historian, states that Ashoka definitely navigated
the differences among his empire's diverse population and beliefs to sow the social fabric
of his people into a universal code of behavior that was concordant with this vision.
She importantly adds Ashoka's dharma did not derive from divine inspiration, even if its
observance promised heaven.
In his final edict, the seventh pillar edict, Ashoka admits that he has had difficulty promoting
the idea of dharma among his people and that he will instruct them in that ideal through
public lectures he will make.
He says he has also benefited his people by planting trees, digging wells and building
rest houses in order to make them more amenable to dharma.
The end of Ashoka's life is shrouded in mystery.
The Buddhist literature suggests that he has to deal with intrigue by his courtiers
and that revolts develop throughout his kingdom.
It tells us that when he realizes he is dying, he becomes depressed, and when his chief minister
asks him why his cheeks are stained with tears, Ashoka replies, I do not mourn the loss of
wealth, the end of sovereignty, or the body that I am leaving, but I do lament the fact
that I shall be separated from the Aryas, that is, from the community of Buddhists.
I am borrowing from John Strong's translation.
I cannot help being reminded of the story of the Persian king Xerxes reviewing his army
at the Hellespont, contemplating the brevity of human existence, and by extension the transience
of all we possess, no matter if you happen to be the greatest king on earth.
According to Buddhist tradition, Ashoka at the end of his life gives away everything
he possesses until all he has left is half a mango, which he offers to the monks who
are looking after him.
The story has Ashoka's life conformed to a Buddhist convention, that he began life
as an immoral and downright wicked man, that he later embraced Buddhism and became pious,
and that at the end, having given away all his possessions and divested himself of all
his power, his life terminated as a failure in his own eyes.
Ashoka died in his early seventies in the year 232 BCE, after a reign that had lasted
for nearly forty years.
The Maurian Empire survived Ashoka's death for only half a century.
It became little more than a rump of its former self, mainly confined to the Ganges
Valley, though the memory of Ashoka's achievement at forging an Indian identity is very much
alive in India today.
His other great achievement, that of establishing a state based on Buddhist principles, was
equally short-lived.
One reason for this is because the kings who succeeded Ashoka were extremely weak.
Another is that Hinduism was on the rise and Buddhism fell out of favor.
In time, Ashoka's name disappeared from the historical memory.
Buddhism was replaced by Hinduism after the fifth century CE, and although the Hindus
did not seek to obliterate all traces of Ashoka, they were opposed to Buddhist teachings
generally.
Meanwhile, Ashoka's pillars and rocks had attained a state identity and authority that
was useful to his successors, who carved their own political messages alongside, or in some
cases over, the older edicts.
In time, the old prakrit script could no longer be read or understood, and even the
name of Ashoka began to disappear from the public record.
Then, in the late 18th century, European scholars began piecing together a historical interpretation
of early India, based in part on written myths and legends that they believed to have been
grounded in fact.
It was a scanty record in comparison to Arabic and biblical writings, or the Chinese chronicles
and Greco-Roman texts.
However, in time, the myths and legends came to be supplemented by archaeological data
that presented new clues.
British colonial officials were among the first to identify broken artifacts and to
piece them together and learn from them.
The edicts of Ashoka were unearthed during the early 19th and 20th centuries.
Their recovery spots extended in an arc from Afghanistan in the northwest to Sri Lanka
in the southeast.
And although the edicts were defaced by the rulers who succeeded Ashoka and who found
them to be threatening, these inscriptions nevertheless reveal the flawed leader who
exercised restraint just at the moment when he was mightiest and who subsequently, like
Mahatma Gandhi, used persuasion rather than force to impose his will.
In 1837, under the company Raj, that is to say during the period when the British East
India Company controlled India, a colonial administrator and scholar named James Prinsep
finally deciphered the Brahmi script.
And it was Prinsep II who first established that the individual referred to as Piyadashi,
or Piyadashi, beloved of the gods, was, in fact, Ashoka.
