It is October in the year CE66.
Desperate bandits roam the countryside, famine is rife, and there is deep political unrest
in the land.
Judea has been descending into anarchy for years, and the situation is about to reach
rock bottom.
In the long annals of atrocities and tragedies suffered by the Jewish people, the great Jewish
revolt, which breaks out this year, is among the most terrible.
We know a great deal about it, because the details are narrated by a Jewish writer named
Yosef Ben Matityahu, better known to us by his Greek name, Yosefus, Latinized as Josephus.
Later known as Flavius Josephus, he is the author of an historical account of the revolt
known as the Jewish Wars.
Josephus is a priest, one of the Koanim, the descendants of Aaron, is of wealthy aristocratic
background, born and raised in Jerusalem in CE37.
He has been educated by the conservative sect, known as the Pharisees, who insist upon following
the strict letter of the law, the Torah, and whom Jesus, with his revolutionary views about
healing the sick on the Sabbath, fell foul of.
Josephus has a front row seat when the revolt breaks out, initially as a commander of Jewish
rebel forces, and later from the Roman side as a collaborator.
Josephus is an extraordinary figure, he's one of the greatest turncoats of all time.
Early in the conflict at Jotapata, a modern day Yodfat in the north of Galilee, Josephus
and 40 other Jewish resistance fighters are very nearly slaughtered after a Roman siege
that lasts for 47 days.
The cornered fighters agree to a suicide pact, or at least this is the story he has
handed down to us, but either by luck or by mathematical genius, Josephus manages consistently
to avoid drawing the short straw.
Eventually, only two of the original 40 remain, whereupon Josephus persuades his companion
to surrender with him.
He then proceeds to ingratiate himself with the commander-in-chief of the Roman forces,
a man named Titus Flavius Vespasianus.
He does so by informing Titus that he will one day become emperor, thereby fulfilling
a prophecy in the biblical book of Numbers, and Titus Flavius does one day become the
emperor Vespasian, as soon as we shall see.
And from this moment on, Josephus sides with the Romans against his own people, believing
or so he claims that God is angry with the Jewish people and has decided that they deserve
to be subjugated by the Romans.
Relations between the Jews and the Romans have steadily worsened in the years leading
up to the outbreak of the revolt.
We hear of one extremist group known as the Sicarii, meaning daggermen, and another known
as the zealots who preach rebellion and insist that the Jews should refuse to pay tribute
to Rome and no longer acknowledge the emperor as their master.
They believe that any means are justified in getting shot of the Romans.
The Romans have just about managed to keep a lid on things, but their relationship with
the Jewish aristocracy, with whom they traditionally cooperated, is deteriorating as well.
Judea is a tinderbox waiting to catch fire and catch fire it does.
Josephus tells us that the seeds of the great Jewish revolt were sown 60 years beforehand
when the Romans carried out a census under the authority of the governor of Syria.
Jews regarded this census as tantamount to slavery.
They now had to take an oath of allegiance to the emperor, endure military occupation,
undergo taxation, and submit to the Roman governor of Judea, a junior ranking official
in matters of public order.
However, as a concession to their religious beliefs, they were exempted from taxation
every sabbatical year, that is one year in seven, and they are not required to recognize
the divinity of the emperor as all other peoples in the empire have to do.
This is because their religion forbids them from doing so.
They merely have to offer prayers and sacrifices for the emperor's well-being.
The Roman Empire is essentially non-divisive and quiescent.
The Romans don't go around looking for trouble.
In general, they've had good relations with the Jews.
This is indicated by the fact that at the end of the first century BCE, the Jewish population
of Rome numbers some 50,000 out of a total of about one million, so the Romans have plenty
of contact with Jews.
At the same time, the Romans are deeply suspicious of Judaism as a religious system.
There are at least three principal reasons for this.
Judaism teaches monotheism, the belief in a single God, whereas the Romans are polytheists,
which is a belief in more than one God.
The difference in views means that the Jews cannot take posts in the Roman governmental
system since doing so would require them to participate in religious observances.
Second, Judaism forbids the worship of images.
This means that Roman legionary standards are an offence to Jewish religious sentiment
because they depict images, most notably images of eagles.
And third, the Hebrew Bible incorporates a sense of Jewish history as well as rules of
life.
All of this makes conflict between Roman imperialism and Judaism inevitable, no matter how diplomatically
the Romans behave towards the Jews or the Jews towards the Romans.
The ultimate cause of the great Jewish revolt, however, is the fact that the Jews feel a
deep and crushing sense of resentment, insult, and degradation.
They see themselves being treated as second-class citizens, rather not as citizens at all, compared
with the large Greek population living in Judea.
Elite Jews, such as Josephus, are deeply influenced by the Greek culture.
But whenever there is a disagreement between the Greeks and the Jews, the Romans invariably
side with the Greeks.
As a result, there is bad blood between Jews and the Greeks.
Aside from this, the Jews have to deal with many insults at the hands of the Romans.
In the year 39 or 40, the Emperor Gaius Caligula tried to have his statue set up in the sacred
temple in Jerusalem.
This led to riots.
Caligula abandoned the plan, but the damage was done.
Now the tinderbox in Judea is finally about to ignite.
The immediate cause is Jewish dissatisfaction with the imposition of taxes.
Roman citizens are attacked.
The Romans respond by plundering the temple and executing up to 6,000 Jews.
A full-scale revolt results.
In mid-October, the governor of Syria, Gaius Kestius Gallus, leads an army of 30,000 troops
from his capital in Antioch, near Antikir in modern-day Turkey, to Jerusalem.
Gallus expects to quash the revolt in a matter of weeks.
But he fails dismally, and during his retreat is caught in an ambush.
About 6,000 Romans are killed.
The rebels are ecstatic.
It is one of the most humiliating defeats the Romans have ever sustained.
Even so, it turns out to be the rebels' last victory.
In one of many ironies of history, the Jews would have been far better off had they lost.
One of the main problems the insurgents face is the sharp division between the extremists
and the moderates.
The extremists believe that they can defeat the might of Rome, and they are not prepared
to make any concessions or to sue for peace.
Whereas the moderates realize complete victory is impossible, and that the best they can
hope for is to win some concessions from the Romans.
What gives the extremists the upper hand is their early victory over Gallus.
It turns their heads and makes them believe that victory is within their grasp.
A few months later, in the spring of 1967, the Romans returned to Judea, this time with
some 60,000 troops.
Their commander is Titus, Flavius, Vespasianus, or Vespasian, as we call him, the future Roman
emperor, and he now begins the siege at Jotaparta.
And it is Vespasian's son, Titus, who eventually breaks through.
According to Josephus, 40,000 Jews are slaughtered as a result, Galilee and other parts of the
province are now subjugated and come under Vespasian's control.
All of those who can flee from Jotaparta to Jerusalem do so.
A Jerusalem at this time can stand comparison with any city of its size in the ancient world.
It has been remodeled by Herod the Great, the king who ruled Judea under Roman supervision
from 37 BCE to 4 BCE.
Herod remodeled Jerusalem on Greek lines because he was more Greek than Jewish in his cultural
orientation.
As a result, Jerusalem is truly spectacular.
It has a hippodrome, an amphitheater, a theater, a palace with three massive towers, and a
near impregnable fortress.
Its crowning glory is the magnificent temple, constructed in white stone and furnished with
abundant gold coping.
Work on the temple began in 20 BCE during Herod's reign.
The building took many, many years to complete, and it was probably finished only a few years
before the outbreak of the revolt.
It stands on the spot where Abraham was poised to sacrifice Isaac before the angel of the
Lord came down and ordered him to desist.
At the time of the revolt, the temple is transformed into a fortress which the insurgents promise
to defend to the death.
However, the ability of freedom fighters inside of Jerusalem to resist the Romans is constantly
undermined by internal divisions.
In effect, a civil war rages inside the city.
The extremists begin killing the moderates.
This is not the end of matters.
After at last, disposing of the moderate faction, the extremists begin fighting among themselves.
For as long as the Jews kill one another, the Spasian is content to leave them to it.
He knows that Jerusalem is virtually impregnable, and he is not ready to tie his troops down
to a protracted siege.
Asages take a heavy toll on the assaulting army, in part because of the resulting unsanitary
conditions that frequently produce outbreaks of disease.
But then, an unexpected twist of events occurs.
In June, CE68, news reaches Spasian that the Emperor Nero has committed suicide.
This means that Spasian has to suspend all military operation in Judea.
Roman law requires it.
Like all other Roman military commanders, Spasian will have to wait to be reappointed
and receive orders from Nero's successor before he can take any further action.
It's at this point that Rome goes into free form.
This is the famous year of the four emperors.
After Nero's first successor, Galba has been assassinated, and his second successor, Otho,
has committed suicide, and his third successor, Vitalius, has been tortured and beheaded in
December 69.
Spasian becomes emperor, establishing a new dynasty known as the Flavian dynasty, so called
because of the family name Flavius.
Spasian will rule this empire for ten years.
In part, Spasian succeeds to the throne because the Roman legions out in the east in Egypt,
Syria and Judea, declare for him.
And as they are very powerful, their support carries enormous weight.
But Spasian also needs to consolidate his rule because his position as emperor is by
no means secure, and he knows that there is no better way to do this than by achieving
a spectacular military victory.
We now come to the last six months of the four year revolt.
This is the period from about March to August of CE70, when Jerusalem itself is under siege.
What makes the pending military resolution of this revolt so unutterably tragic is that
it inflicts great suffering on the civilian population, as well as on Jerusalem, one of
the greatest cities in antiquity.
Spasian gives orders to his son Titus to launch an all out attack.
And while up till now he has been reluctant to commit troops to a siege, he has decided
he needs a victory, and he needs it fast.
In other words, Spasian wants to make an example of the Jews in order to strengthen his claim
to the imperial purple.
The fear that the empire could otherwise experience a prolonged bout of civil war stiffens his
determination and makes him all the more eager to achieve a crushing victory.
He cannot conduct the attack himself, however.
That is too risky.
He needs to be in Rome, keeping an eye on things, so he places his son Titus in charge
of the operation.
Credit for victory can go to no one else.
Titus begins the assault early in the spring of CE70.
He has approximately one quarter of Rome's total fighting strength under his command,
the fifth, the tenth, the twelfth, and the fifteenth legions, as well as twenty units
of ancillary forces.
While the Jews have taken great steps to make the city impregnable, which they believe
it virtually is, they forecast that Jewish supplies of food and water will last for years,
and that the Romans will not be able to feed their large army.
The city's defenders have not reckoned with the Romans' will and ruthlessness.
Titus builds battering rams, catapults, and towers.
The largest of the battering rams is named Victor.
Victor smashes through the city's first wall and then through the second as well.
Once the second wall is breached, it becomes apparent that the besieged city is bound to
fall.
Even so, the Jewish extremists insist on fighting.
It is a heroic decision, but it is also a terrible and tragic one, because it means that
many thousands of civilians will die as well.
To make matters worse, the extremists incinerate a large supply of food that could have fed
the city for many years.
They do so to bring home to the besieged population the message that there is no other option
available to them, and that they will die fighting for the cause.
In the end, Titus starves the defenders into submission by encircling Jerusalem with a
wall nearly five miles in circumference.
Josephus, our primary source for the campaign, observes the siege from the safety of the Roman
encampment outside the city walls.
He tells us that before Titus makes his final assault, he debates with his officers about
what to do with the glorious temple.
Should it be destroyed or should it be left standing?
You can imagine the arguments on both sides.
If it is left standing, it could be a center for future Jewish resistance.
If it is destroyed, it will be a permanent monument to Roman barbarity.
In the end, Titus decides to save the temple.
But once his soldiers break in, however, chaos ensues.
Romans begin butchering Jews indiscriminately, making no distinction between civilian and
Roman soldier.
Then tragically, a Roman soldier seizes a firebrand and tosses it into the temple, causing
the building to catch fire.
Titus orders the fire to be extinguished, but no one obeys him, and the temple burns
to the ground.
Six thousand unarmed civilians perish in the conflagration.
They had taken refuge inside the temple in the belief that a miracle would occur, because
God would not allow the temple to be destroyed.
Once the fire is extinguished, the Romans set up their legionary standards on its foundations
and perform a sacrifice, hailing Titus as Imperator.
That is the title the Romans give to a general after a great victory.
The siege is not quite over yet, however.
There are still some defenders in the upper city who offer to enter into negotiations
with the Romans.
Titus is furious.
On several occasions, he's offered the insurgents peace terms, and each time they have refused.
Josephus puts the following, contemptuous, rip-tort into the mouth of Titus, a man whom
he describes as extremely kind.
Now quote from Josephus,
You have been incited against the Romans by Roman kindness.
We gave you this land with your own kings to rule over you.
We maintained your ancestral laws, and we permitted you to live as you wished.
Most important of all, we allowed you to exact tribute and collect offerings for your God,
and now, like untamed reptiles, you spit your venom on those who have nourished you.
It's amazing that Josephus should write those words.
He is completely exonerating the Romans.
Neither here nor elsewhere in his writing is there a hint of any sympathy for the besieged.
As far as he is concerned, the Jews have gotten their just desserts, and in his own eyes he
is no turncoat.
Josephus believes he is a loyal Jew to the end.
After hearing Titus' words, the city's defenders request permission to leave Jerusalem, in
effect to go and live in the desert.
This makes Titus even more furious.
What right do they have to suggest terms?
If the defenders acknowledged that there was nothing left to fight for, Jerusalem might
have been spared, but they don't.
They prefer to fight to the death.
So, Titus, who had previously been inclined to be lenient, now gives the order to raise
the entire city to the ground, leaving only its three towers standing as a monument to
his own good fortune, again in the words of Josephus, and to demonstrate to posterity
how mighty the city once was that Roman Valor has captured.
Once the Romans break into the upper city, they show no mercy.
As Josephus reports, the soldiers ran through everyone they found in their path, choked
the narrow streets with corpses, and drenched the whole city in gore so that many of the
fires were extinguished by the bloody stream.
Just the kind of hyperbole Josephus sometimes indulges in, but we need hardly doubt that
the Romans take terrible reprisals.
As Josephus says later, no destruction that was carried out by God or by human beings
approached the wholesale carnage of this war.
When it is all over, Titus gives orders that 500 Jewish prisoners are to be crucified each
day.
He rescins the directive only when the Romans run out of wood to make crosses.
Josephus puts the total number of Jews killed at 1.1 million, and though that number is
no doubt vastly inflated, there is no way to count the dead.
Josephus says that the majority of the slaughtered are not Jews from Jerusalem, but rather from
elsewhere in Judea.
Many were visiting Jerusalem at the time of Passover, and were caught up in the siege
by accident.
It is scarcely possible to imagine what it must be like for the Jews who survive to
witness their city destroyed, and their temple a heap of rubble, hosting a pagan sacrifice,
and with legionary standards atop of what remained.
The year after the revolt is put down, Josephus is awarded Roman citizenship, and he takes
the name of Flavius Josephus after his patron.
He retires in style on a big fat pension that derives from lands confiscated from Jews in
Rome.
And it is in his apartment at the Imperial Palace that he writes his most important work
called the Jewish Wars, which is our primary source for the siege and destruction of Jerusalem
that I've quoted here.
The Jewish Wars is written first in Aramaic, an ancient Semitic language that was widely
spoken in Judea and Syria, and then translated into Greek, the language of the educated elite
in Judea.
Josephus makes it clear that from his perspective the Jews have no one but themselves to blame
for the tragedy.
He writes, if you reflect upon these things you will discover that God cares for humankind,
and by all manner of means gives signs to his chosen people about how to achieve their
salvation and that it is through their own folly and self-inflicted wounds that they
perished.
He adds, here you may perceive the power of God over the unrighteous and the good fortune
of the Romans.
A very great Ukrainian historian named Mikhail Rostovsev takes a rather different perspective.
In writing about the Roman system of government in his magisterial 1926 study called The Social
and Economic History of the Roman Empire, Rostovsev observes, it was unquestionably in
its main features, a colonial system based on the idea of the predominance of the conquerors
over the conquered, of one race over another.
Such a government may be sometimes just and efficient, but it is always arrogant, arbitrary,
selfish, and often ruthless and cruel.
The destruction of Jerusalem in CE 70 doesn't mean the end of Jewish resistance.
There are a number of other fortresses still under Jewish control at the time.
The toughest nut to crack proves to be the rocky fortress, known as Masada, overlooking
the Dead Sea on the edge of the Judean Desert, formerly the site of one of Herod the Great's
palaces.
It is here that Eleazar Ben-Yair, the leader of the Sikarii or Knife Men, holds out for
three more years.
The Romans eventually built a massive ramp to enable them to gain access to the platform
on the top of Masada, only to discover that the 960 defenders inside have all committed
suicide.
Josephus, who is again with the Romans at the time, describes how the imperial troops
hear nothing but a fearful solitude when they break into the fortress and see no one alive.
Enormous wealth enters Rome's imperial coffers as a result of the sack of Jerusalem, partly
from the sale of Jewish slaves.
Tens of thousands of Jews are sold into slavery, 97,000 according to Josephus.
Titus personally selects the tallest and most handsome of the youths to grace his triumphal
procession.
Some prisoners are put in shackles and dispatched to Egypt, probably to do hard labour inquiries,
others reserved for the amphitheaters.
It will be their fate to die fighting each other or be mauled to death by wild beasts.
In celebration of their victory, the Romans also mint bronze, silver and gold coins with
the legend Judea Capta and circulate them throughout the Roman Empire, including in
Judea, for a quarter of a century after the siege.
The Romans are intensely proud of their achievement and they want everyone living within the borders
of the Empire to know it and to take note.
Following the siege of Jerusalem, Titus is hailed imperator by his troops and Vespasian
gets the victory he so desperately needs to consolidate his claim to the imperial throne.
Then, in the year CE71, son and father celebrate a glorious joint triumph in Rome.
Soldiers hold aloft pictures of Jerusalem in flames.
There is a parade of prisoners and all the precious objects that had been filched from
the city are put on display for the Roman plebs to ogle at.
Vespasian dies in CE79 and Titus, who succeeds him as emperor, dies two years later.
The following year, Titus' younger brother, the emperor Domitian, erects a triumphal arch
in his honor.
This is the so-called Arch of Titus, just to the southeast of the Roman Forum, along
the Wea Sacra or Sacred Way.
It will be the inspiration incidentally for the arch de Triomphe in Paris over 1700 years
later.
Titus' destruction of Jerusalem is among victories commemorated on the arch named for
him.
The most famous panel is on the arch's south side, which depicts Roman soldiers bearing
away loot from the temple.
The rider place is given to those objects that have special significance in Jewish
religion, including trumpets and tables, bejeweled garments, cups, basins, and other objects that
the Romans managed to rescue or rather steal before the temple burned down.
One of the most prominent is a giant Menorah, or seven-branched candlestick, carved in deep
relief and originally painted gold.
Another is an ancient scroll of Jewish law known as the Torah.
The Siege of Jerusalem might have cut the heart out of Judaism, but of course it didn't.
Indeed, the Jews revolt again 60 years later when the emperor Hadrian decides to re-found
Jerusalem as a pagan city named Eilea capitalina and erect in its center a temple to the god
Jupiter capitalinas after whom the city is to be named.
This revolt, known as the Bar Kosh Bar Revolt after its charismatic leader Simon Bar Kosh
Bar, takes three years to suppress and causes the deaths of an estimated half a million
Jews more.
All that remains today of the once spectacular temple is the great platform upon which it
once stood, which we call today the Temple Mount.
On the western side is the wailing wall, arguably the most sacred spot in the world for Jews
who regard it as a place of pilgrimage and prayer and who to this day lament the destruction
of their temple.
