The Romans run the Mediterranean and most of its literal.
All around the inland sea, which the Romans call Mare Nostrum, or our sea, and even further,
Roman provinces dot the landscape. Some of them are pacified, some turbulent. A governor,
his staff, and an army of varying size run each province.
The Romans are content to interfere as little as possible with existing administrations in
the areas they control. They aren't looking for trouble.
However, the appointed governor and his army and staff are, they do their best to work with the local powers that be.
The year is CE 30, or thereabouts. The Roman emperor at this time is Tiberius, the immediate successor to Augustus.
And I am bringing you to the province of Judea. It's a hilly region, much of it desert, and considerably smaller than the
modern nation state of Israel. But although it is small, this territory is seething with descent, political and religious.
One problem is that a lot of troublemakers here claim to be the Messiah, or the anointed one. This is the Hebrew term for the Greek Christos, our word Christ.
To make matters worse, some self-styled messiahs claim to be descended from King David, the first Jewish king.
That's disturbing to the Romans because anyone who sees himself as a king represents a challenge to the authority of the emperor.
One such anointed one has just arrived in Jerusalem. He is named Jesus of Nazareth, and he is accompanied by a large band of followers.
He is probably harmless, or the same, it may be worth keeping an eye on him.
Pompey the Great had imposed indirect rule on Judea when he conquered it in 63 BCE, establishing it as a client kingdom.
That is, as a kingdom that was nominally independent, but which in reality was taking its orders from Rome.
In CE6, the emperor Augustus formally annexed Judea.
But because it is only a minor province, its governor is not a high-ranking senator.
Instead, he is a member of the equities or knights, a lower-ranking order.
A knight has considerably less authority than a senator, and that is one bone of contention the Jews have with Rome.
Junior official governs them.
Another is that Judea's provincial governor bears the title Prifectus, our word prefect, signifying that the Romans consider Judea to be unruly.
Prifecti are military governors.
No Roman legions are stationed in Judea at this time.
There are only auxiliaries.
This means that they are soldiers from outside Italy who have been recruited to serve.
They are less well trained than the Romans and receive a lower rate of pay, another humiliation.
So all of these arrangements rankle and are seen as an insult to the Jewish population.
They imply or rather they indicate that as a people the Jews aren't that important and secondly they have to be strictly controlled.
In Judea we are visiting the holy city of Jerusalem.
Jerusalem is tense at this time because it happens to be Passover or Pesach,
the festival that celebrates the liberation of the Jewish people from captivity in Egypt more than a thousand years earlier,
which we read about in the book of Exodus.
The Passover isn't only a religious observance of high solemnity.
It also functions as an expression of Jewish identity and self-determination.
Given underlying discontent in the region, the festival could easily develop into a focus of resistance to Roman rule.
The Romans are always ready for trouble at Passover.
The prefect, whose name is Pontius Pilate, has canceled leave for his men and requested extra troops from the neighboring province of Syria.
Along with tens of thousands of other Jewish worshipers, we are in Jerusalem to attend services at the great temple, the chief synagogue,
an architectural wonder that has only recently been completed.
The holy city is filled to bursting as it always is at this time of year.
Many of those in attendance have come from the diaspora, Jews that is, living outside of Judea.
Some have even journeyed hundreds of miles to be here.
As a result, the population of Jerusalem has swollen to several times its normal size.
Some visitors are lodging with householders in the city. Others are staying in nearby villages.
Still others have set up tents outside the city walls.
And there is tension in the air.
The Romans are on high alert. Their guards are patrolling the roof of the temple for signs of disorder or worse insurrection.
As I mentioned, one potential troublemaker whom the Romans have their eye on is a carpenter's son from Nazareth named Jesus.
Jesus has been stirring things up in Galilee, an unruly region in the north.
It's a breeding ground for people calling themselves the Messiah, charismatic religious leaders,
some with large followings who might for their own purposes try to incite a rebellion.
You can't ever separate religion from politics in Judea because Jewish religion is an expression of Jewish identity.
But what's unusual about Jesus of Nazareth is that he's antagonized a lot of his own people and provoked some powerful enemies.
One influential group he's antagonized are the Pharisees.
The Pharisees closely interpret what the Torah means in terms of how one should live.
The word Torah refers to the first five books of the Bible ascribed to Moses.
It's a Hebrew term that translated literally means the law of God.
The Torah contains over 600 rules covering the whole of life.
These rules are intended to enable the Jewish people to live under God's law,
and the Pharisees insist on following them to the letter.
The principal reason why the Pharisees have gotten on Jesus' case is because of his failure to observe the Sabbath.
The fourth commandment admonishes, remember to keep the Sabbath day holy.
The Pharisees interpret that as meaning that no Jew should work on the Sabbath.
Jesus, however, who appears to be among other things a kind of faith healer, is going around curing people 24-7.
He's also claiming to possess some sort of divine authority to forgive sins.
It goes without saying that this is sacrilege in the Pharisees' eyes and indeed in the eyes of all law-abiding Jews.
Jesus has attracted a large number of devotees who follow him about wherever he goes and who hang on his every word.
Many of them are women, which is highly suspicious, and it's hard to know what his objective is.
He has managed to avoid incriminating himself by saying anything that would suggest he poses as a threat to Roman rule.
But the Pharisees view him as presenting a serious challenge not only to their orthodox view of Judaism,
but also to their right to interpret the Torah.
It's a lethal combination. No wonder their blood is up.
And that's not all. The moment Jesus arrives in Jerusalem just a day or two ago,
it was as if he went out of his way to get himself arrested by the Jewish high priesthood.
The first thing he did was to march into the temple precinct and head for the money changers.
Without warning, he overturned their tables and threw them out of the precinct.
He also knocked over the stools where the people who sell doves were sitting.
The money changers exchange pagan coins, Roman denarii and Greek drachmae,
the two main currencies that are used in Judea, for shekels, Jewish coinage.
That is so that the pilgrims who are visiting Jerusalem can pay the temple tax that supports worship in the temple.
The money changers and the sellers of doves are permitted to be in the temple precinct by rabbinic law.
They perform a useful, no, an invaluable service.
Jews are not permitted to use denarii or drachmae to pay the temple tax
because these currencies are decorated with images, heads and so forth,
and so they're banned throughout the holy city.
Images are in violation of the second commandment.
Thou shalt not make graven images of anything in heaven or earth or in the water.
As for the people selling doves, well, doves are inexpensive sacrificial victims that are offered at Passover,
typically by the poor who can't afford to offer anything else such as a chicken.
So Jesus is not only disrupting the way that temple taxes are collected,
but also interfering with the traditional means of sacrifice among the poor.
And that's how the Sadducees view the matter.
They're another influential Jewish sect, one that has responsibility in the running of the temple.
They are up in arms about Jesus, too.
And the upshot is that Jesus is making a lot of Jews upset,
all the way up from the poor to those who exercise authority.
If that isn't bad enough, he's also going around saying that the temple is going to be destroyed.
The Romans aren't interested in getting involved in disputes among the Jews,
and they're not particularly concerned about Jesus.
Unless he does something to challenge Rome's authority, they don't see him as a serious threat.
And as I mentioned, he's avoided saying anything that might be construed as treasonable
or questioning of the authority of the emperor.
Anyway, the policing of the temple comes under the responsibility of the officers of the temple.
That is the Jewish police and not the Romans.
So he's their problem, really.
Paula Friedrichsen, a leading historian of early Christianity,
suggests that Jesus' prophecy that the temple is going to be destroyed
may well have been written after the temple was brought down in CE 70,
after the failure of the great Jewish revolt.
I agree.
But that does not mean we should reject the gospel picture of Jesus as a troublemaker
and a rather violent one at that when he comes to Jerusalem at Passover.
It's precisely because this picture of Jesus as a troublemaker
does not conform to the conventional image of him as a nonviolent, peaceful spiritual leader
that it is likely to reflect the truth.
It is these precipitating incidents at the temple that lead to Jesus' arrest.
The move against him is made at night because Jesus' enemies and detractors
fear how his disciples might respond when they are gathered around him during the daytime.
On the orders of the Jewish high priest, a man named Caiaphas,
who has been in office for well over 10 years,
the lower-ranking priests and elders and officers of the temple
make Jesus down to a hill outside the walls of Jerusalem known as the Mount of Olives.
They're not in any doubt about which man to arrest.
They know exactly who Jesus is, but they have suborned one of his disciples,
a man named Judas Iscariot, to isolate him from his disciples
and so make it easier for the officers of the temple to arrest him.
However, when the officers move in to make the arrest, violence erupts.
One of Jesus' disciples attacks the servant of the chief priest and slices off his ear.
The other disciples quickly realize that they can't put up an effective resistance
and they disappear into the night.
The officers of the temple seize Jesus and deliver him to the high priest's house.
What follows next is the most famous trial in history.
Or is it?
The eminent English historian, Michael Grant,
author of Jesus and Historian's Review of the Gospels,
thinks it is better described as a series of hurried, unofficial examinations
rather than a full-blown trial.
The proceedings that follow consist of two parts.
First, Jewish and then Roman.
Jesus is first brought before the Jewish council, known as the Sanhedrin.
This term for council comes from the Greek word sun hedrion,
which means sitting down with one another.
The Sanhedrin possesses more power than is generally permitted to Roman provincial local courts.
The Romans aren't insensitive to Jewish custom
so they permit the Sanhedrin to act independently of imperial authority up to a point.
They don't allow the council to authorize an execution, however.
Capital punishment could be recommended but not authorized.
The author of Saint John's Gospel tells us that the Roman prefect, the governor,
reserves this power for himself.
Some scholars disagree with this interpretation but I think it's likely to be true.
In any event, the Sanhedrin doesn't charge Jesus with any specific crime.
It simply asks him some leading questions.
St. Luke's Gospel gives the fullest account of the investigation.
The first question asked is, are you Christos, Christ, the Anointed One?
Jesus, as ever, is careful not to incriminate himself.
He replies, if I tell you, you won't believe me.
But then Jesus says something that really stirs things up.
From now onward, he declares, the Son of Man is going to be seated at the right hand of the power of God.
The phrase Son of Man is one that Jesus has used to describe himself whenever anyone asks him, who are you?
It clearly means he thinks he's someone special.
And when he says it in the presence of the Sanhedrin, it causes uproar.
People cry out, are you the Son of God?
That, by the way, is how the Emperor Augustus refers to himself as the Dewey Thelios,
because he is the grand-nevue of Julius Caesar, who himself had been declared a god, a dewas.
So it's a very loaded question.
Once again, Jesus avoids giving a straightforward answer.
He merely shoves the question back at his interrogators by stating, you say that I am.
That's rather like taking the Fifth Amendment.
In St. Mark's Gospel, Jesus is additionally charged with threatening to destroy the temple,
and may have been inserted into the historical account after the fact to credit Jesus with the prophecy.
The temple is destroyed a generation later, after the collapse of the Great Jewish Revolt,
and the author of Mark might have wanted to invest Jesus with the ability to predict this terrible event.
Everybody now agrees, the elders, the chief priests, and the scribes, that the prisoner has convicted himself.
We have heard it ourselves from his own lips, is there verdict?
It's important to point out that he hasn't actually been convicted of anything, but the Sanhedrin has got what it wants.
Under interrogation, Jesus has revealed himself as a dangerous malcontent with a cult following
who represents a challenge to traditional Jewish thinking and practice,
and quite possibly thinks of himself as the Messiah.
And it is at this point that Caiaphas, the high priest, rins or tears his garment,
a symbolic act to indicate that he finds Jesus guilty.
The Sanhedrin, assisted by some guards and accompanied by a noisy and irate crowd,
now haul Jesus off to the residence of the Roman prefect, Pontius Pilate.
He became prefect in CE 26 and will remain in office till 36.
So when the trial of Jesus takes place, he's a seasoned administrator who knows the province and all its problems pretty well,
even though he's been through a few rough patches and made a few blunders.
And the last thing he's looking for is trouble.
Once the unruly and no doubt belligerent group arrives at Pilate's residence,
the members of the Sanhedrin get an immediate audience with Pilate.
They don't bother talking about Jesus' unorthodox religious beliefs.
They know that won't interest Pilate in the least.
Instead, they accuse Jesus of perverting the Jewish nation.
That's the word they use, of urging the Jews not to pay taxes and of being a dangerous insurgent who claims to be the king of the Jews.
They rightly calculate that this last charge will particularly rile Pilate because the Romans hate kings.
They spell their last king, Tarquinius Superbus, Tarquin the Proud, half a millennium earlier in 509 BCE.
And whenever you say the word Rex king to a Roman, it makes his blood boil because it implies subjection to absolute rule.
Pilate asks Jesus just one question.
Are you the king of the Jews?
And again, Jesus equivocates.
You say that I am, he replies.
Pilate isn't convinced of his guilt or of the risk that he poses.
Jesus is much like any other self-professed Messiah to him.
We don't know for certain, but at this point it's likely that the high priest Caiaphas, with whom Pilate has collaborated over many years, works on the Roman prefect to make him anxious.
Perhaps he points out that when Jesus entered Jerusalem just before Passover, he did so riding on the back of a donkey.
It was very much like a Roman triumphal procession or rather a mockery of it.
His disciples prepared the way for him just as if Jesus were their triumphato or conquering general.
And Jesus has been claiming to have a kingdom that he is going to apportion out among his disciples.
That may well be the sum of the proceedings.
Reza Aslan, a professor at the University of California Riverside and the author of The Zealot, The Life and Times of Jesus of Nazareth, argues that Pontius Pilate would hardly have devoted much time to interrogating Jesus.
He writes, Pilate would have logged the crime and he would have sent Jesus on his way to join the countless dying or already dead up on Golgotha.
Pilate is still reluctant to punish Jesus, however, according to the author of Luke, and makes one last effort to pass the buck.
He learns that Jesus is a Galilean, which means that technically his crime, if he has committed any, falls under the jurisdiction of Herod Antipas, the tetrarch of Galilee.
Herod Antipas is one of Herod the Great's many sons, Herod the Great ruled Judea before his death in 4 BCE.
Tetrarch literally means ruler of a quarter.
It's an honorific title which indicates that Herod Antipas has some authority in Galilee, independent of Rome, though not so much as a king would have.
It probably includes the authority to order and execution.
So the chief priests and the Sanhedrin and the scribes and the mob now head off with the prisoner to the house in Jerusalem where Herod is staying for Passover.
Herod has heard of Jesus and when he's brought before him, he's hoping that Jesus will produce a sign.
We don't know what kind of sign, perhaps some kind of magical trick.
But whatever mumbo jumbo Herod is hoping for, he's disappointed.
Jesus doesn't perform any tricks and though Herod questions him at length, Jesus remains silent.
In the end, Herod Antipas and his soldiers content themselves with ridiculing Jesus before sending him back to Pilate.
Pilate now summons the high priests and the people and says words to the following effect.
He brought me this man accused of perverting the people and I've cross examined him and I can't find any substance to any of the charges you have brought against him.
Nor has Herod found any substance in any of the charges. He's done nothing deserving of execution.
So I'm going to teach him a lesson and then I'll release him.
The word I've translated as teach him a lesson is paeduo in the Greek. It gives us our word pedagogy.
The root is the word pice, meaning a child, but it also comes to mean to discipline, chastise or punish.
And that incidentally tells us a lot about education in the ancient world.
At this point, the crowd becomes ugly.
Crucify him and release Barabbas, the mob chouts.
A Barabbas we learn has been put in prison for causing stasis. Stasis means civil unrest, insurrection, revolution and for committing murder.
Barabbas is the lowest kind of pond life. In other words, he's both a criminal and a fomenta of political unrest.
Allegedly, there was a custom at Passover in accordance with which the Roman governor released one Jewish prisoner.
Though I might point out that this so-called tradition may have been invented later to emphasize the pressure that Pilate was under from the Jews.
A Pilate proposes to release Barabbas, but the crowd will have none of it.
The more he indicates his unease, the more the crowd bays for Jesus' crucifixion.
That is what the author of St. Matthew's Gospel tells us.
Picture for a moment the thoughts that are running through Pilate's head.
He considers Jesus to be innocent of anything that he would recognize as a crime, and if he had his way, he would simply release him.
But he also sees which way the wind is blowing, and he senses that he has a potential riot on his hands,
and that given the fact that this is Passover, a riot might easily turn into a full-scale insurrection.
So Pilate opts for the safer course, goes along with the crowd, and releases Barabbas while having Jesus flogged before handing him back to the Jews.
I've now taken us as close as I can to the events leading up to Jesus' arrest and interrogation.
But as I've indicated, there are difficulties with the evidence in several places, and at the end, we're left with a lot of questions.
We see the importance of many historical events only in hindsight.
Pilate could not have imagined that he was making such a momentous decision when he called for a bowl of water
in which to wash his hands after he handed the prisoner over for crucifixion, as St. Matthew's Gospel tells us.
Reading himself of Jesus was, in Pilate's view, an entirely pragmatic decision.
Quite likely he forgot all about it soon afterwards, a point I'll return to in a moment.
But why did Jesus' journey to Jerusalem at Passover?
And once there, did he deliberately set out to be arrested?
Or did he think that by leading his followers to Jerusalem on one of the holiest days of the year when the city was jam-packed with pilgrims,
there was a chance, if only a slender one, that his message would triumph and that he would sway the hearts and minds of a sufficient number of Jews
to create a really significant breakaway religious movement.
I'd love to know.
There's a wonderful short story by the French poet and Nobel Prize-winning novelist, Anatole France, called The Procurator of Judaire,
which features Pilate many years later taking the waters at a seaside resort on the Bay of Naples, called Bayeye.
He has long since retired and is in his 70s.
He's in conversation with an old friend named Lilius Lamea, whom he had entertained in Judaire.
At the end of their conversation, Lilius idly asks Pilate about a certain Jesus of Nazareth, a magician from Galilee,
who was crucified for some crime. Lilius can't remember what crime he was accused of.
Jesus, Pilate repeats after some seconds, searching his memory to no avail. Jesus of Nazareth? I can't recall him to mind.
There the story ends.
The only roughly contemporary reference to Jesus that we have in Roman literature comes from the historian Tacitus,
who was born several decades after Jesus' death.
In his historical work, The Annals, which covers the period from the accession of the Emperor Tiberius to the death of the Emperor Nero
in covering the years CE 14-68, Tacitus refers to Jesus in a brief aside as the founder of a group that is hated for its abominations.
That group and its abominations are a reference to the early Christians.
As far as the Romans were concerned, Jesus, for several decades after his death, was a person of no consequence,
a person they might easily have forgotten.
It is one of history's greatest ironies that had they not crucified him, Jesus might indeed have been forgotten.
