It is the morning of September 11th in the year 490 BCE, and a large Persian invasion
force has just landed in the Bay of Marathon on the east coast of modern-day Greece.
Nearby Athens, the Greek military is under the command of a board of ten elected generals
called Stratagoi, presided over by a senior magistrate called the Polemarcos.
The generals are debating whether to stay put and protect Athens against a Persian onslaught,
or to march north into the Attic Peninsula and face the Persians head on at Marathon.
Marathon, as everyone knows, is 26 miles from Athens.
Although most of the Greek deliberating body urges maintaining the defense of Athens and
awaiting the arrival of the Persians, one man, Miltiades, is adamant that they should
march to Marathon.
It is his view that carries the day.
And so the Greek, or rather Athenian, army will march from Athens to do battle with the
Persians.
This defending army is small when compared with the invading Persian force.
But the Athenians also send a runner to Sparta to request help.
The Spartans have the most powerful army in Greece.
They train endlessly and are disciplined fighters.
It is said that the only time the Spartans get any respite from training is when they
go to war.
If anyone can help the Athenians, see the Persians off.
It is them.
The stakes are very high.
Athenians know that if the Persians defeat them in battle, their city-state will be destroyed.
That is the fate the Persians have already meted out to Eretria, a small city-state
on the southern shores of the island of Euboea, just off the Attic coast.
However, Sparta is about 150 miles from Athens, and even if the Spartans send an army to assist,
several days will pass before it arrives.
The Greeks are like frogs around a pond, as Plato memorably stated.
Their cities lie as far west as Spain, and as far north as the shores of the Black Sea.
However, the Persians rule the largest empire the world has ever seen.
It extends from Pakistan in the east to Turkey in the west and to Egypt in the south.
It will remain the world's largest until the year 330, when it will be conquered by Alexander
the Great.
What makes the Persian Empire all the more remarkable is that it has come from almost
nothing.
The Persians originally were cattle herders who migrated from Central Asia into the modern-day
Iranian province called Fars.
Their phenomenal rise to power took place in less than half a century, under Cyrus the
Great who reigned from 559 to 530 BCE.
While Rome may not have been built in a day, the Persian Empire came close to it.
ethnic Persians constitute only a small fraction of this sprawling empire's highly mixed multi-ethnic
population.
This means that the Persian army mainly consists of subject peoples rather than ethnic Persians.
But the head of the empire is the Great King, or King of Kings.
He has the power of life and death over his subjects.
In other words, he is an autocrat.
The Athenians, by comparison, belong to what we call a polis.
About a thousand such Greek city-states dot mainland Greece and ring the shores of the
Mediterranean.
Every citizen has the right to vote in the assembly, and every citizen has the obligation
or rather the right, as they say it, to serve in the military.
A polis consists of an urban center surrounded by countryside.
Athens' surrounding territory, by way of perspective, is only slightly more than half
the size of America's smallest state, Rhode Island.
It may be one of the largest city-states of the time, but it's tiny by comparison with
Persia, 700 square miles compared to one million.
In 490 BCE, Athens' population probably amounts to about 120,000 people, compared with 25-70
million inhabitants of the Persian Empire.
Our principal source for the Battle of Marathon is the historian Herodotus, often referred
to as the father of history, a title that Cicero first accorded him.
We don't know exactly when Herodotus was born.
One ancient source says six years after the Battle of Marathon, but he certainly spoke
to, or we might say interviewed, Athenians who fought there.
The Athenians have known for some time that the Persians were going to attack them.
The Persians are seeking revenge for the fact that Athens aided the Ionian Greeks in their
doomed uprising against Persia a few years earlier.
The Ionians are Greeks who live on the west coast of Anatolia in modern-day Turkey.
When the Ionians revolted, they sent heralds around Greece, requesting aid.
But only the Athenians and the Eretrians delivered.
The Athenians sent 20 ships across the Aegean, and the Eretrians sent five.
What particularly angers the Persians is the fact that the Greek forces burned down the
Temple of the Mother Goddess in Sardis, a very important city in a region called Lydia.
That was regarded as an act of desecration.
The Ionian revolt, which broke out in 499, was finally crushed mercilessly by the Persians
in 494, and now it is time for the Persians to teach the Greeks a lesson in turn.
It is the Persian king Darius who dispatches an expedition to punish those who had the
temerity to meddle in his affairs.
The Persian fleet lands on the island of Rhodes and besieges the city of Lindos.
Next, it heads north to the island of Samos, crosses the Aegean, and lands on Naxos, burning
down temples and enslaving some of the population.
After stopping at the island of Delos, the sacred, because it is believed to be the birthplace
of the god Apollo, the Persians head to Eretria, a city-state on the island of Euboea.
After about six days, the Persians take Eretria.
Women and children are enslaved, men killed, and temples burned.
Slaving the men and enslaving the women and children is normal practice in the ancient
world when a city is taken by siege, so there's nothing unusual about the Persian response.
It isn't barbaric by Greek standards because the Greeks do the same to other Greeks when
they get a chance.
At last, leaving a smoldering ruin behind, the Persians sail the short distance south
across the strip of water that separates Euboea from the Greek mainland towards Attica.
An Athenian exile named Hippias, he formally ruled the city-state as a tyrant and was expelled
about 20 years before, is accompanying the Persians, hoping to be reinstated in the event
of a Persian victory.
And it is he who suggests that the Persians land in the Bay of Marathon since it is an
ideal place for their cavalry to operate.
As things turned out, however, the Persian cavalry doesn't play any part in the battle.
Hippias is an old man, and when he disembarks, he begins sneezing and coughing so violently
that one of his teeth falls into the sand.
Search as he might, he can't find it.
I'm not sure what he would have done had he recovered the lost tooth, give it to the
Persian tooth fairy, but he takes this to be a bad omen.
The Greeks are always seeing omens in accidental occurrences.
An ill-timed sneeze is a warning.
The Greek word is interpenetrated by signs sent by the gods.
Phylipides, the runner whom the Athenians dispatched to Sparta, now has an important
part to play in our story.
While Sparta is about 150 miles from Athens, Phylipides, being a true Olympic athlete,
accomplishes the run within hours.
I don't need to point out that there is no highway or even a footpath joining Athens
to Sparta.
Much of the terrain is trackless.
Herodotus tells us that Phylipides arrives the very next day.
An amazing feat, pun intended, particularly since he has to cross a towering mountain
range to get there.
This means the Athenians could probably now expect an answer from Sparta within two to
three days.
They are on tenterhooks as they face down the Persian army camped opposite them, neither
side stirring.
When Phylipides arrives back at Marathon after delivering his request, he says, or rather
gasps, to the Athenian generals,
Okay, do you want the good news or the bad news first?
We'll have the bad news first, the generals reply.
The bad news Phylipides tells them is the Spartans, or though sympathetic to our dilemma,
are in the midst of a festival held in honor of the god Apollo Carnias called the Carnia.
It's a very important festival that celebrates their migration to the Peloponnes and they
can't leave Sparta and come to our rescue until it's over, five days from now.
So what's the good news, the generals ask, crestfallen, Phylipides brightens.
The good news is that the god Pan is going to be fighting on our side.
What do you mean, the generals ask?
Well, it just so happens that as I was on my way back when I was crossing Mount Parthenion,
above the town of Tejea, the goat-footed god appeared to me and actually addressed me by
name, Phylipides, he said, I've got a question for you.
How come the Athenians don't worship me when I'm a good friend to them and I have done
them favors in the past and we'll do so again in the future?
So in other words, Pan is going to fight on our side.
Now, I've obviously made up some of the dialogue, especially the bit about the good news and
the bad news, but the line from Pan, that comes straight out of Herodotus, who records
the whole incident with a perfectly straight face.
Herodotus may not have entirely believed Phylipides' account, but he indicates to us that the Athenians
did believe Phylipides, and that's what counts.
And more importantly, these hopeful words may end up making all the difference.
So, let's now return to the battlefield.
The size of the Persian army is probably around 20,000 to 25,000, meaning that the Athenians
are outnumbered by a factor of about two to one.
The only non-Athenians fighting alongside them are the Plataeans.
Plataea is a small city-state situated to the north of Athens in a region called Biosia.
It has been allied to Athens for about 30 years because it doesn't want to come under the control
of the Thebans who dominate the region.
The Plataeans have contributed 1,000 men to the Athenian forces, and that is a highly significant
contribution the Athenians will never forget.
Athenian slaves will also fight at the battle. We tend to forget that, but it is a fact.
The Athenians have encamped in the plain of Marathon in a sanctuary of Heracles, the Greek
version of the Roman Hercules, a short distance from shore.
Before the battle takes place, Dartis, the Persian commander, first requests that the
Athenians submit to Persian rule. If they do, he will treat them leniently.
If they don't, he will do what he did to the Eretrians, burn their city to the ground.
The Board of Ten Generals votes on whether to accept Dartis' offer.
Five Generals want to surrender to Dartis. Five reject the offer. Pension fills the air.
Miltiades, the Athenian I mentioned earlier, who urged the Greeks to march to Marathon, then
delivers a rousing speech. He addresses his words to a man named Calimacus, who is the
polymark. This is a title given to a senior military figure in a Greek city-state who
has the deciding vote. It all rests with you, Calimacus.
If you add your vote to my side, Athens will be free and become the foremost city-state
in Greece. But if you give it to the other side, the opposite will follow.
With this, Calimacus sides with Miltiades and votes to reject the Persian offer.
This tells us a lot about how the Athenians do things. They are a mini-democracy, even on the
battlefield. Everything has to be debated, thrashed out, and voted upon.
All the Athenian Generals are now committed to do battle, according to Herodotus.
It is the Athenian practice that the command of the army passes from one general to another
each day. This may not be true. We don't hear of it elsewhere, and it's certainly not the
best way to run a campaign. But each general, according to Herodotus, now defers to the valiant
Miltiades. Unaccountably, Miltiades himself chooses to wait to do battle. The two armies
probably stare at each other for about five days. Eventually, however, the battle lines
are drawn up, adjacent to the shore. We don't know what finally persuades the two sides to
engage. It may be that the Athenians take the initiative by choosing the moment when the
Persian cavalry is absent. Or it may be that the Persians finally give the sign that they
are marching on Athens. The British historian Nick Secunda, who has studied the battle in
detail, believes the Persian front line consists of 1,400 men and is 10 ranks deep. The ethnic
Persians occupy the center flanked by wings of subject peoples on either side. The Athenians
replicate this arrangement, except their army is much smaller. Their center is probably
four ranks deep, and their flanks eight deep. The two sides take their stand about 1,500
meters apart, and battle is about to be joined. Just beforehand, the Athenians perform a
sacrifice to determine whether the Omens are favorable. It turns out the Omens are favorable,
though I don't know what the alternative would be at this point. The two sides now approach
each other. Herodotus tells us that the Athenians are the first Greeks who don't cringe when they
see the Persians in their fearful Persian battle gear. Previously, Persians needed only to have
their names said aloud to reduce Greeks to a state of terror. And when these brave Athenians
get to within 200 meters of the Persian enemy, they do something unexpected. They charge at
a run. This is a tactic commonly performed by Greek armies, but quite possibly unknown to the
Persians. And it takes them completely by surprise. In fact, such a charge has been fashioned into
a competitive event at the Olympic Games and of other local sporting events, including the
Panathenae games in Athens. It is called the hoplite odromos, which means a run, dromos,
while dressed as a hoplite. The word hoplitees means one who carries a hoplon, that is a large
round shield. Hoplites are heavily armed soldiers who wear greaves or pieces of armor to cover
their shins, a breastplate and a helmet. They're armed with swords and spears. In the hoplite odromos
competitions, however, participants have no breastplate. And this is probably the case at
Marathon as well. The soldiers may have left their breastplates in camp. So the Athenians are
well trained at making a lightning dash in armor. They do so moreover while remaining in strict
battle formation. Hoplite warfare depends on standing close to the man beside you, because
your shield partly protects the man on your left. If you're watching the battle, and I imagine
there are a lot of bystanders, including old men, women, even children, it's a thrilling
spectacle. And not so if you happen to be a Persian on the receiving end. Herodotus tells us that the
immediate Persian reaction is that the Athenians are mad. He uses that exact term more than once. The
Athenians, greatly outnumbered, lacking any support from any cavalry and having no archers, are tearing
across the battlefield and no doubt screaming their heads off. So what do the Persians do? Well, don't
forget who's fighting on the Athenian side. Our friend Pan. Pan, the god of panic. Yes, the word panic
derives from him. And that's what the Persians do. They panic. The Athenians charge doesn't end the
battle. The Persians go on fighting and the battle rages for several hours. But taking the initiative
probably gives the Athenians the edge. Eventually, the Athenians and the Plataeans break through the
Persian flanks, driving the enemy into the marshes close to the shore where they have difficulty
defending themselves. Then the center gives way, whereupon the Persians flee to their ships, hotly pursued by the
Greeks. It is here that the Polymark Calimarchus falls. The Greek biographer Plutarch tells us that
Calimarchus is pierced by so many spheres that his corpse stands upright, a chilling picture. It is here, too,
that a man named Kinygairos, the brother of the great dramatist Iskulus, is slain. He's grabbing hold of the deck of a
Persian ship to prevent the ship from sailing off when his hand is sliced off. In a later version of this story, we're told
that Kinygairos first loses his right hand and then as he attempts to hold himself up with his left, it, too, is cut off.
At the end, he grasps the ship with his teeth. Whatever body parts he lost, he surely bleeds to death.
But the day is not over yet. Once the remnant of the Persian army has boarded its ships, the Persian commander,
Datus, decides to make for Athens and sees the city while it is unguarded. So the Persian fleet sails around the Attic
peninsula to its southern tip and then heads towards Thaleron Bay where it intends to beach, a total distance of about 60 miles.
From there, it is about three miles to Athens. It will take the Persians at least ten hours to reach Thaleron across the water,
although it's possible that some ships have detached themselves previously and are already in the vicinity awaiting the arrival of the main
fleet. Whatever the fact, it is Miltiades who now tells his exhausted compatriots that they can't bask in the fruits of victory,
but have to march back to Athens double quick to defend it against Persian attack and so fight another battle the next day.
And this is precisely what they do, leaving all the wounded and dead, we may assume, amounting to several hundreds, if not thousands.
It is surely one of the most strenuous marches that any army ever undertook.
As I mentioned, the Greek hoplites wear a breastplate, helmet and grieves and carry a shield and two spears. All of this weighs at least 40 pounds.
It probably takes the Athenians about eight hours to make the march by land, which is faster than the Persian fleet will arrive,
since the Greeks are taking a more direct route.
They probably have to accomplish the last part of the journey in the dark. It gets dark in Greece around 8 p.m. in September.
However, the moon is only just beginning to wane on September the 11th of 490 BCE, so it won't be pitch black.
They probably get back to Athens around midnight.
Upon arrival, tired but exhilarated, they encamp outside the city and are drawn up in battle formation way before dawn the next morning.
When the Persians arrive and realize that Athens is defended, they haven't got the stomach for another fight, and so they decide to sail away.
I can't begin to imagine what the invaders must feel like. The Persians have been completely humiliated by an Athenian army vastly inferior in numbers to their own.
Why did the Athenians win?
I think in part because the Persian invasion force has consisted of a motley band of which only the core is truly Persian,
whereas the majority are Persian subjects fighting only reluctantly and under constraint.
By comparison, the Athenians are ethnically homogeneous and fighting for all they possess and hold dear.
Families, livelihoods, homes, and the very idea of Athens itself. They are citizens, all equals.
Athens at this time is what anthropologists refer to as a face-to-face society.
The Athenians have trained together and they are bonded and they know full well what would happen in the event of a defeat.
Added to which, well, I can't quite dismiss Pan. I think it's entirely possible that phylipides did have an epiphany or something close to it on Mount Parthenion.
He'd run 150 miles to Sparta, been told the Spartans couldn't set out for five days and, scarcely drawing his breath, there he was running back home.
It's more than likely that when he got to the top of Mount Parthenion he was hyperventilating. Who knows?
Or perhaps he just couldn't bring back only bad news and invented the encounter with Pan.
Whatever the truth, it's clear that the Athenian High Command took the story seriously and I very much suspect that they sold the idea of the charge to the Athenian soldier by telling them that Pan would be alongside them as they ran.
After their victory, the Athenians introduce a cult of Pan into Athens and give the goat god a cave on the north side of the Acropolis.
Pan is a modest, rustic little fellow. He doesn't need a great big temple like the Olympian Guards. He just needs a cave to visit and he wants recognition for his services after the battle he gets it. Good for him.
Incidentally, one of the Athenian fighters, Kinogyrus' famous brother Iskulus, author of the Greek tragedy Orestia, who later writes his own epitaph, will make no mention of the fact that he was a great playwright.
He records only the fact that he fought at Marathon. It's a wonderful epitaph. It reads as follows, Iskulus the Athenian, the son of Euphorion, is dead. The sacred fields of Marathon can speak of his glorious valour and the long-haired Persians know something of it.
A nice understatement, Iskulus articulates the pride of those who fought at Marathon. The casualties are said to number 6,400 Persians dead and 192 Athenians. These figures are likely to be accurate because after the Persians abandoned the battlefield, the Athenians out of pride will have made an exact count of the fallen.
There's something strange and mysterious about the battle of Marathon. We hear of other incidents involving supernatural beings that come to the aid of the Athenians as reported by soldiers afterward.
We're told that Theseus, Athens' most important hero, is here, fighting in the front rank and that a farmer fights with his plough and then mysteriously disappears. Perhaps these are ways of saying, after the battle was decided, that there is something so remarkable about it, how it was waged, that it could not be explained by human agency alone.
Immediately after the battle, the Greek generals send a runner from Marathon to Athens, bearing the news of their victory. When the runner arrives at the Prithinian, or town hall, where the magistrates are gathered, he gasps out,
We are victorious and then dies on the spot. It is in honor of this man's run that the Marathon race is celebrated, even today.
Later, when the Spartans finally arrive at Marathon after they've finished celebrating their festival, they actually did set out as they promised they would, they inspect the dead as they've never seen Persians before.
The 192 Athenians who have died fighting the Persians are regarded as heroes in the technical, that is to say, religious sense of the word.
A hero is someone who has powers above those of an ordinary human, who is worshipped after his death and who is invoked in times of need.
For this reason, the state buries the Marathonian dead in a communal grave known as the Soros, at the exact spot where most of them have fallen, and heap a mound on top of them.
This is an exceptional honor. Normally the dead are cremated on the battlefield and buried in Athens. That burial mound is still visible to this day. It is a very sacred spot.
Porcenius, a traveler who visits the battlefield many centuries later, tells us that he sees the tomb of the Athenians as well as another tomb containing the remains of the Pateans and the slaves.
He also records a monument that has been set up to Miltiades and a trophy of white marble.
The word trophy comes from the Greek trope, which means turning point. That is the place where the battle turned and where the victors began to get the better of their opponents.
I indicated at the beginning of this lecture that the reason the Persian king Darius sent his army to Greece was to punish Athens and Eretria.
But he may have had another objective too. He may have intended to get a toehold in Greece from which to begin a conquest of the entire mainland.
There is also evidence to indicate that Darius would have preferred to settle the matter diplomatically before the battle. The Persians made a peace offer to the Athenians.
And that was generally how the Persians like to do things. But the Athenians chose to stand their ground. It was a high-stakes decision and the rest is history.
I don't want to over-romanticize the battle of Marathon, but had the Athenians lost, they would themselves, in a manner of speaking, have been history.
It's certainly true that the great accomplishments of the classical era would not have taken place as we know them.
We wouldn't have the Parthenon for a start, nor would we have Greek tragedy, or Greek philosophy, or Greek historiography, or Greek science.
So it's hardly an exaggeration to state that September the 11th, 490 BCE, changed the course of history.
The victory certainly gave the Athenians a sense of enormous pride. It was this pride that enabled them to invest in their belief in the common man and to continue their extraordinary experiment with democracy.
