The
year is 622. We're in Mecca in Saudi Arabia. And our interest is in a prosperous businessman
named Muhammad. Muhammad has just received a death threat that will change his life and
in time shape the future of humankind. Muhammad is the son of a widow who was raised by nomadic
Bedouins in the desert. Life was extremely tough for him because he started from nothing.
He acquired wealth by leading caravans across the blistering desert and by marrying a businesswoman
named Hadeja, with whom he has had five daughters and a son who has died by the time we encounter
Muhammad. Muhammad has acquired a reputation as someone who is extremely trustworthy, who
is capable of dispensing justice and who has a strong social conscience. He also has
a small but devoted group of followers. Twelve years ago he had a vision that he is the messenger
of God. This belief has been growing inside him and among his followers. But like Jesus
of Nazareth, more than half a millennium earlier, Muhammad has become the subject of
rumor and suspicion and fear, so much so that a conspiracy is now forming in Mecca. Mecca
is ruled by a number of tribes and the most powerful of these is the Quraysh, a word we
translate into English as the association. Like other tribes it's a cooperative of clans,
sometimes collaborating, sometimes competing. The association has come round to the opinion
that Muhammad represents a serious threat to its business interests and that he must
be dealt with immediately. A few months earlier some of Muhammad's followers fled from Mecca
seeking safe haven in a remote agricultural town. But Muhammad resolved to stay. He sees
his place in Mecca with his followers, but now he realizes that his life is in danger.
Go quickly, we can imagine his followers telling him. One of Muhammad's closest followers is
a man named Abu Bakr, this is Muhammad's father-in-law, who offers to disguise himself
and lie down in Muhammad's bed this very night so that when the agents of the Quraysh
come to kill him, they will discover only his aid, not the leader. With this threadbare
plan, Muhammad takes to the desert, relying on his intimate knowledge of the barren countryside
that he has safely traversed so many times, escorting so many caravans, and placing his
faith in Allah who has called him to service. Accompanied by a band of loyal followers,
he heads towards his mother's birthplace, the oasis town of Yathrib, to which other
followers have already fled. Muslims refer to this episode in Muhammad's
life as the Hejra or Hejira, a word best translated as flight, departure, or emigration.
But it is a very difficult term to translate because it has several connotations. A Fred
Donner, a professor of Near Eastern history at the University of Chicago, defines Hejira
as followers in his work, Muhammad and the Believers. I'm quoting.
It means abandoning a nomadic for a settled life. It means seeking refuge in order to
escape oppression. And it means finding escape from sinfulness and directing oneself along
the path that leads towards God. Muhammad's Hejira is such a fundamental
moment in Islamic history that it is used to mark the beginning of the Muslim era. Mecca
where Muhammad was born in 570 is situated in a region known as the Hejaz or barrier,
the coastal stretch of Saudi Arabia bordering on the Red Sea. It's at the crossroads of
trade between the Arabian Peninsula, the Mediterranean, East Africa, and South Asia.
Hejira gets its name from the nomads who inherited it. Arab translates as nomad.
Most people living in the Arabian Peninsula at the time are polytheists. However, a number
of Jews who are monotheists have settled in the region as well.
We don't know how or when the Jews arrived. One theory is that they had fled here after
the Romans put down the Bar-Kosh Bar revolt in Judea in CE 135. Another is that they were
Arabs who converted to Judaism. Muhammad's father, Abdullah, died shortly
before he was born. His mother, Amina, entrusted her infant son to a Bedouin wetness, but she
too died by the time he was six. Muhammad was then given over to the care of his grandfather
the chief of the Banu Hashim clan. A Banu Hashim means sons of Hashim. The Banu Hashim
was one of three clans who comprised the tribe of Quraish.
We can imagine Muhammad sitting beside his grandfather as he settles disputes and makes
deals. And in this way, he learns both what it means to be a leader and how to be a negotiator,
to very important attributes that will stand him in good stead in the future.
A few years later, his grandfather dies and he passes into the hands of his paternal uncle,
Ali Talib, who now becomes the leader of his clan. We don't know what formal education
Muhammad receives, if any. We don't even know if he can read and write. His uncle takes him
on business trips and that would have provided him with a basic education.
When he is about 25, Muhammad meets a distant cousin of his named Hadija. Hadija is the
wealthiest businesswoman in Mecca. She engages his services to lead her camels to Syria where
she sells her merchandise. Muhammad makes a lot of money for her and, defying all convention,
Hadija proposes marriage to him. This is not something a woman would do likely in a traditional
society. Hadija, by the way, is twice divorced. She's already born three children and she's
15 years older than he is. He's a nobody at this point. He's totally insignificant.
Muhammad accepts her offer and the marriage scandalizes the community, but it is a success.
What more can we say with certainty about the life of Muhammad? We are a lot worse off than we
are when attempting to piece together the circumstances of Jesus' arrest and trial 600
years earlier. Jesus, at least, lived in a culture that had a tradition of documenting
historical events. Muhammad does not. Rather, Muhammad lives in a culture whose history
is preserved primarily through poetry that is transmitted orally. To make matters worse,
the Sunnis and Shiites, the two principal religious belief systems that dominate Islam
today, will tell different versions of his life. What we know of Muhammad's life is
preserved through oral tradition passed down from generation to generation and not written
down until several centuries after his death. Some of it derives from the Qur'an, the central
religious text of Islam. The word Qur'an itself alludes to this oral tradition as
a word means recitation. Oral accounts known as ahbar written down centuries after the
event are not, of course, particularly reliable from the perspective of a Western historian,
particularly when we are dealing with a religious figure, but they're all that we've got.
The Arab historian Iban Ishak will write the first biography of Muhammad more than a hundred
years after the Prophet's death. He collects testimonies from a variety of sources, choosing
what he thinks is most reliable or perhaps most useful for his purposes. He is not interested
in establishing an account of Muhammad's life in the way that a contemporary historian
would do. His primary focus is on Muhammad's spiritual journey. This is reflected by the
Arabic term for a biography, namely Sirah, which literally means journey. A Sirah is
very different from a modern biography. It doesn't reveal anything intimate about Muhammad.
It doesn't tell us about the inner turmoil that he must have to go through when he is
receiving the revelations. It presents its subject as manifesting a spiritual life, but
not an inner life. The portrait that emerges is strongly influenced by the author's religious
viewpoint. These are not the only limitations we are laboring under. We don't have a surviving
copy of Iban Ishak's Sirah, apart from a few fragments. What we have instead is an edited
version by an Egyptian scholar named Iban Hisham, who lives a century later yet. Iban
Hisham's addition of Iban Ishak's Sirah is the most influential biography that has come
down to us, and yet it remains highly controversial. Iban Hisham sees Muhammad through an even
narrower lens. In particular, he omits a section that has come to be known as the Satanic
verses. These verses relate to a moment when Muhammad supposedly has a false revelation
and temporarily affirms the truth of polytheistic belief. Only later does he realize his error
and recant, claiming that the verses were recited to him by Satan. The Satanic verses
became notorious when the contemporary British novelist, Salman Rushdie, wrote a controversial
1988 novel of the same name. The novel provoked enormous protests among Muslims, and culminated
in the Ayatollah hominy of Iran issuing a fatwa or legal ruling against the author,
amounting to a death sentence in absentia that has never been enforced.
No less controversial are the passages that Iban Ishak includes, notably the narratives
that closely parallel stories that turn up in the Gospels. All of this is part of a larger
liturgical and philosophical debate that is reflected in the two major branches of Islamic
belief, Sunni and Shiite, right down to the present day. And yet, despite all this, in
an odd way, I feel I know the man, or at least parts of him. That's because so much information
about his domestic circumstances has survived, information that reveals tensions within his
own family. And not all of Muhammad's relatives will accept that he is a prophet for one thing.
Another reason I feel I know him is that he is so deeply involved in the social, political,
economic, military and cultural life of his time. Despite his intense spirituality, he
is a very worldly figure, a man of his time, which means he connects to all the major movements
conflicts and issues of his age. We know about his family, his friends, his business dealings,
his wives, he's much married, his disappointments, his at times confusion, his sense of estrangement
from his own people. In short, though the Sirar concentrates upon his life as a prophet,
it also tells us a great deal about his life that has nothing to do with his identity as
a prophet. As I mentioned, in time Muhammad becomes quite wealthy, leading caravans across
the Arabian desert, adding to which his job gives him the opportunity to meditate a great deal.
The desert, particularly under the night sky, is a great place to commune with nature and with
the power that is greater than oneself. And so in 610 in a cave near Mecca on Mount Hira,
Muhammad has a vision of the angel Gabriel. The angel Gabriel is mentioned in both the Old
Testament or Hebrew Bible and the New Testament. In the Hebrew Bible, he appears to the prophet
Daniel and in the New Testament to the Virgin Mary for telling the birth of John the Baptist
and Jesus. Now, however, the angel tells Muhammad that he is to be the messenger or prophet of God,
and he is about 40 years old at the time. Sunni and Shia Muslim interpretations of this event
vary. The traditional Sunni version holds that Muhammad is surprised and taken aback by Gabriel's
appearance, and that he later goes home to Hadesha, shivering with cold and asking to be covered by a
blanket. He shares the story of what has happened to him. He even contemplates taking his own life
because he believes he's insane or possessed by demons. The Shias, by contrast, hold that Muhammad
is expecting Gabriel when the visit takes place and that he welcomes him in rapture. These two
different versions reflect the differing accounts of Muhammad's life that have come down to us through
Iban Ishak and Iban Isham. Iban Isham omits the story of Muhammad contemplating suicide after this
revelation because it does not fit with his image of the prophet, and so he concludes it could not
possibly be true. As the months go by, Gabriel visits Muhammad again, commanding him to present
himself as God's messenger. You have been selected, Gabriel tells him, to establish a community of
believers that will transform human society all over the earth. Human society must turn away
from idolatry and worship the one true God. Whether or not Muhammad is initially plagued with
self-doubt, he now embraces his role as prophet. He invites members of his tribe, the Banu Hashim,
to his house and explains what has happened. The religious belief he is promoting is to be based
on submission, that is the meaning of the word Islam. Hadija believes Muhammad,
that the only other family member who takes him seriously is his 10-year-old cousin Ali.
Soon, however, the revelation from the angel to the prophet will take root in the hearts of a
small band of men and women and dispose them to abandon their sinful ways.
Let's go back to the experience that Muhammad has in the cave and try to analyze it more closely,
if indeed one can analyze a spiritual experience. Of course, we can't understand the experience in
any detail, and it's complicated by the fact that we don't know whether Muhammad initially rejects
Muhammad's experience or embraces it. The 20th century American scholar of mythology, Joseph
Campbell, talks about revelation as a kind of schizophrenic crack-up. That takes us some way
to understanding what Muhammad's experience is, but it doesn't fully explain it because
a schizophrenic crack-up is simply a psychological occurrence and there is a great deal more to
what happens to Muhammad in the cave than that. I don't think we can put a label on it, and we
can't fully account for it. Not the least mysterious part about what happens to Muhammad is that it
happens in the absence of an established religious system. A decade passes and Muhammad struggles
to establish the teachings of the Quran in Mecca. However, he has gained a number of followers,
and Islam is making significant headway when he happens to fall in with six pilgrims from
his mother's birthplace of Yathrib, later known as Medina. Yathrib is an agricultural settlement,
an oasis that consists of several villages consisting of mud brick houses situated about
215 miles north of Mecca. Arabs and Jews live here. Yathrib is the name given to it by the Jews.
The Jews, by the way, speak Aramaic, which incidentally is the language that Jesus and
his disciples are thought to speak. Dates, barley, and other crops rise from the desert.
Several gold mines operate along the mountainous spine known as the Hijaz,
and a number of skilled artisans live here. Arabs and Jews live peaceably together for the most
part, but the Arabs are divided into several clans, and these are riven by tribal discord that
leads to civil war. The six pilgrims who meet Muhammad see him as a unifying figure,
and are eager to enlist him as their leader. So they agree to meet again in a year's time,
and when they do, they convert to Muhammad's new belief system. They do so, no doubt, for
practical reasons, as well as for its spiritual quality. They view Islam with its emphasis on
building a just society as a political solution for what we would call today a failed state,
albeit a very small state. So Muhammad sends one of his followers to Yathrib to recite the Quran.
It is clear that one of the great appeals of the Quran back then, and in the modern age,
is its breathtaking beauty. Within a short period of time, the new faith is flourishing in the
desert town. It helps that many of the inhabitants of Yathrib are familiar with Jewish monotheism,
because that creates a conceptual bridge. Muhammad, by the way, makes a conscious effort
to tie Muslim practices to Jewish customs. For instance, he institutes a day of fasting
to coincide with Yom Kippur, the Jewish day of atonement. Incidentally, conversion has a specific
meaning in the context of the age. In the early days of the Islamic movement, you aren't required to
renounce your identity as Jew or Christian. It is enough that you are pious and accept the basic
tenets of Islam. This is a politically shrewd move on Muhammad's part. It enables Islam to
spread all the more easily, because it doesn't put converts in conflict with their existing faith.
It thus appeals to people who might otherwise be inclined to set their face against it.
And now we're back in the year 622 where we began. Muhammad and his followers face persecution
in Mecca from the ruling tribe, the Quraysh. A major gripe the Quraysh have with Muhammad is that
he is undermining their economy. One source of profit to them is that they provide services to
the pilgrims who journey to Mecca from all across the Arabian Peninsula. We don't know what
significance the Hajj had in the pre-Islamic polytheistic period, but one possibility is that
the pilgrimage was intended to ensure the coming of rain in the fall. It was during the Hajj that
Muhammad and the six pilgrims had met. By the time Abu Bakr's ruse of sleeping in Muhammad's bed is
discovered, the Prophet has escaped. Abu Bakr himself disappears and later joins Muhammad,
who has been hiding in a cave for three days while a massive search unfolds.
One search party passes right by where they are hiding, but doesn't bother to look inside the
cave because a giant spider's web covers the entrance we're told. Muhammad and his supporters
reach Yathrib on September the 20th. When they do so, villagers flood out of the town to greet them.
Muhammad requests that a mosque be built at the very place where his camel first kneels down
to rest. And it is here that his followers establish the first place of worship for Muslims
on day one, year one, in the Muslim calendar, the official birthday of Islam.
In Mecca, his followers had worshiped in private homes, mainly in secret.
Eventually, Muhammad takes control of Yathrib, which becomes the first Muslim town.
He names his followers the Umar, the unifying term for all those who join in the worship of Allah.
Henceforth, Yathrib comes to be known as Medina, meaning the city of the Prophet.
Muhammad's first task is to build a community. He clearly believes in consensus, albeit under
one man rule. If there is a disagreement, the matter is to be referred to Allah and Muhammad,
his messenger. It's a monumental undertaking, as Muhammad is also creating a new belief system,
or rather a radical monotheistic reform movement. I say reform movement because,
as I've indicated, monotheism was already present in the Middle East.
Among the tenets of Muhammad's movement are an outright rejection of polytheism,
as well as the promotion of social values, charity for the poor and so on,
and the eradication of unbelief, if necessary, by military means.
Over the next ten years, the Umar grows in numbers and strength. Muhammad continues to
experience revelations, many of them related to the practical organization of society.
This doesn't mean Islam is firmly established, however, far from it. To begin with, there are
internal divisions among the Umar. There are the Muhayyarun, literally those who have undertaken
the hijra, otherwise known as the companions. And there are the Ansar, literally the helpers,
Medinan believers who offered hospitality to the companions.
And though the majority of Medinans embrace the new faith, not all do. Why would Jews and
polytheists placidly accept the suspension of their own traditions? On the contrary,
they regard Muhammad's teachings with suspicion, and a suspicion that is aggravated by the fact
that they are also being asked to transfer political and legal authority to an outsider and upstart.
This raises two interesting questions, which we are in no position to answer. What percentage
of the Medinan population becomes part of the Umar? And what coercive methods
do the Prophet and his supporters employ to maintain order and discipline amid dissent?
The accounts we have indicate that within a year, Muhammad manages to strike a deal with at least
some of the Jewish tribes to accept his authority. But it probably takes several years for him to
gain ascendancy over all his rivals. This does not happen entirely peaceably.
His relations with the Jews actually worsen over time. Many are expelled from Medinan,
others massacred. And while all this is going on, Muhammad is still conducting negotiations,
striking deals, overseeing property transfers, utilizing his business skills, and advancing
his agenda. His rise to power, in other words, is due to a whole raft of personal qualities,
his charisma, his faith in the religious system he is introducing, his trustworthiness,
his integrity, his powers of diplomacy, his political shrewdness, and at times his ruthlessness.
For instance, he announces that poets who insult him are to be executed. It means that
worldly as well as spiritual qualities played their part in his rise.
I've quoted the University of Chicago's Fred Donner before, and I want to do so once again.
Donner describes the early believers as not merely a pietist movement with an emphasis on
ethics and devotion, but a movement of militant piety, bent on aggressively searching out and
destroying what they considered practices odious to God, especially polytheism, and intent on
spreading rigorous observance of God's injunctions. We pass finally to a period of armed conflict
characterized at first by attempts from the Meccans to eradicate the new community that
formed in Medina. This culminates in the siege of Medina by the Meccans in 627.
The Meccans fail and lose considerable power and prestige as a result.
The following year, Muhammad rides unopposed into Mecca at the head of an army of 10,000.
Upon his arrival, he orders his followers to destroy the pagan idols housed in the shrine
known as Zakaba, the cube-shaped building that was the sanctuary of the pagan god Hubal.
Similarly, Christianity often established itself on the site of pagan temples,
a refashioning them for its own purposes to facilitate and ease the transfer of spiritual
belief. What was holy before becomes holy in a new way, while at the same time preserving some
continuity. The Kaaba becomes the holiest shrine in Islam. And today, when Muslims perform the
Hajj to Mecca, which all Muslim men are required to do at least once in their life,
they walk around the Kaaba seven times. By 630, Muhammad has gained control of all Arabia.
Two years later, he undertakes his last pilgrimage and delivers his last message
in the valley of Arafat, beneath a granite hill east of Mecca. When he returns to Medina,
we are told that the angel of death comes to visit him. Recognizing the apparition, Muhammad says,
Death, carry out your orders. He dies on the 7th of June, 632. He was 62.
The life of Muhammad leaves many unanswered questions. How did the prophet acquire such
authority, such power? It's never suggested in the Quran that he received assistance from Allah
in the form of divine intervention. However, the Hijra can hardly be overestimated as a
unifying factor in the emergence of Islam. It gave Muhammad's followers a sense of urgency
and identity that they might not otherwise have possessed. In abandoning Mecca, they committed
themselves to Muhammad's vision of God's revelations. To this day, the Hijra functions
as a reminder that Islam had to fight for its survival from the beginning, and that the faithful
are an army in service to the prophet. That is a complicated and fraught legacy.
