The
year is 458 BCE. We're sitting in the theatre of Dionysus in Athens on the south slope of
the Acropolis. It's an open air auditorium and there's a spectacular view looking in
the direction of the Gulf of Corinth and the Peloponnesian Peninsula. It's late March,
but this is Greece and so the temperature is very pleasant in the sixties at least.
We're attending a festival known as the City Dionysia sponsored by Athens in honour of Dionysus.
Dionysus is the god who can enable people to achieve ecstasy. Ecstasy comes from two
Greek words, ek, and stasis, which together mean standing outside yourself. You can stand
outside yourself in a variety of ways by imbibing alcohol, by being caught up in the emotions of
the crowd, or by playing a part on stage. Dionysus is going to help the actors to take on their
various roles. That's why the theatre is his domain. For solid days of attending the theatre
stretch ahead of us. Three devoted to tragedy and one to comedy. We're here today to watch tragedy,
a set of tragedies, a trilogy in fact followed by a kind of farce in which satyrs are wild men
with bestial features who lust after nymphs get up to all sorts of mischief. Three different
playwrights will have their works performed on three successive days. They are in fierce competition
with one another. At the conclusion of these performances, a jury will vote and one of the
dramatist's offerings will be awarded the festival's highly prestigious first prize.
Drama is a really big deal in Athens. A Plutarch, a Greek historian who will be born over half a millennium
later, tells us that the Athenians spend more money on dramatic productions than they do on
fighting the Persians or acquiring their empire. It's been estimated that about 1500 individuals
participated in staging the plays performed at the city Dionysia each year. So there's a great
deal at stake, not only for the playwrights but also for everyone involved in each of the three
productions. Athens completed a democratic revolution four years ago. Up until then,
a great deal of power resided in an aristocratic council known as the Areopagus, which means
the Hill of Aries. The Areopagus took its name from the rocky outcrop where the counselors sat
just a short distance northwest of the Acropolis. At one time, judicial authority was vested in
the Areopagus and that enabled it to exercise considerable political influence as well.
In 462 or 461, however, it was stripped of this power except for jurisdiction in murder trials.
This was a radical step and a lot of people are still uneasy about the transition,
and that's one issue that Iskulus, the aspiring playwright, is going to address in the trilogy
we're going to see today, whether it was right to strip the Areopagus of its powers.
Athenian democracy is a unique experiment. The world has never known anything like it before,
and I doubt it will ever see anything like it again. I'm not talking about representative
democracy as we know it in the West today. I'm talking about participatory or direct democracy.
Athenian democracy is based on the right of every citizen to address and vote in the assembly,
and secondly, on the right of every citizen to serve as a juror in the courts of law.
Here in the theatre of Dionysus, we're going to see the Orestia by Iskulus. It's the only
surviving trilogy in the canon of 32 Greek tragedies that has come down to us.
All the others are single plays. The central character is Orestes, the son of Agamemnon,
the Greek commander in the Trojan War who is married to Clytemnestra. The culminating event
will be the establishment of trial by jury in the court of the Areopagus, just above where we are
sitting. So the trilogy has a very contemporary ring and a very local resonance too. As Athenians,
we have some sense of what we're going to witness. We have a shrewd suspicion that it's
connected with notions of democracy and we know that it's connected with the Trojan War, but
that's about all we know. The rest is a closely guarded secret. We got up early today because
the performance will begin at dawn and we have a long day ahead of us. We're going to be seated for
seven or eight hours. There'll be short intervals between the plays so that we can get up and stretch
and have a bathroom break behind the bushes, but it's going to be a long haul nonetheless.
The theatre holds about 20,000 spectators. That means it's capable of accommodating about
two-thirds of Athenians' 30,000 citizens. The front rows are reserved for priests, magistrates,
and other VIPs. Bang in the centre of the front row sits the priest of Dionysus Elythoraus, Dionysus
the Liberator. Incidentally, it is at this point in the year that Athens' so-called allies are
required to pay their annual tribute. Athens in 458 is the leader of a maritime empire that
dominates the Aegean and the coastal cities around it. The tribute is displayed in the theatre
to cheers and clapping from the audience, an interesting mixture of religiosity,
imperialism, and capitalism. Athenian democracy means empowering the common man,
but only if he happens to be Athenian. There are lots of ways in which watching a theatrical
production in 458 BC is very different from going to a Broadway play today. First, you can't go just
any time you want. There are only two Athenian festivals in honour of Dionysus at which plays
are performed, the Lenire in late January or February, and the City Dinosaur in late March.
That means a total of eight days in the year.
And this is the one opportunity to see the Orestia. It will never be performed again.
There isn't such a thing as a run on Broadway or in London's West End. So if you aren't sitting
in the theatre today, you've missed it. Well, that's not true, of course. The Orestia is still
being performed all over the world, but in the year 458, you'd never dream that Ischulus would be
still alive, theatrically speaking, two and a half thousand years later. The second obvious way in
which attending the theatre is a very different experience in the age of the Orestia than it is
in the modern theatre is that the theatre of Dionysus, you are spectating in broad daylight.
You might think this would diminish the intensity of the experience, but I suspect the opposite is
the case. The shape of the theatre, a truncated cone, actually causes the sound to resonate far
more effectively than it does on a modern stage, at least without microphones. And Athenian audiences
are capable of intense concentration. They have to be. The plays are all written in verse, very
obscure verse in some places. So there is no point in going to the theatre if you are going to be
texting or the equivalent munching pistachios, let's say. The third difference between attending
the theatre in the ancient world is that there are a lot of fixed conventions. All the actors
and the chorus wear masks. Number two, once the chorus enters the orchestra, it stays on stage
till the end of the play. Number three, no violence can be depicted on stage. It is described after
the event, usually in the form of a messenger speech. And fourthly, there are only two speaking
actors on stage at any one time. In fact, it is Isculus who takes the radical step of introducing
a second speaking actor. Before today, there has been only one speaking actor and a chorus.
The fourth difference is that you can't sit wherever you like. You have to sit with members of your
tribe. This is another way in which theatre going is a civic experience. The Athenian citizen body
is divided into ten tribes. And the theatron, a Greek word which gives us the term theatre,
meaning literally the seeing space, duplicates that division by being divided into ten tribes.
By being divided into ten wedges. So we're not randomly arranged. We are the Athenian
Deimos, or people sitting as the Deimos. We are democracy in other words. And we're having a
civic as well as a religious experience. And what we're going to see today has profound civic
application. Even though the story of the Oristiah is set in the dim and distant past,
at the time of the Trojan War, it's a reflection on a very recent chapter in Athenian history.
And it's going to say something very important about democracy. It's going to explain how trial
by jury came to be instituted. Now for the backstory. When the Oristiah begins, the Trojan War has been
going on for ten years. But before the war commenced, as we all know as Greeks, Agamemnon,
the commander-in-chief of Greek forces, sacrificed his virgin daughter Iphigenia to the goddess
Artemis to secure a favourable wind to carry his feet to Troy. And in Agamemnon's absence,
his wife, Glytemnestra, has been plotting revenge for this terrible deed. She's also taken a lover
named Aegisthus, who has his own reasons for wanting Agamemnon dead. Agamemnon's father,
Atreus, served up Aegisthus' half-brothers in a casserole that he then presented to the boy's
father Fiestes, concealing the hands and heads. Terrible things happen in Greek mythology.
At the instant the first play in the trilogy, known as the Agamemnon, begins,
Troy falls. Agamemnon is on his way back home. He is accompanied by a captive woman named Cassandra,
who can see into the future. Let me just say here that there is nothing likable about either
Agamemnon or his wife, Glytemnestra. They deserve each other. Glytemnestra, in her welcome home
speech, goes on and on about how glad she is to have her husband back, to which Agamemnon
replies curtly, your speech, like my absence, was too long. Glytemnestra then urges him to
step onto a purple tapestry, which she rolls out and which leads into the palace.
Agamemnon is reluctant to do so. He's fearful that the gods will punish him for hubris,
excessive pride. It's never a good thing to invite the enmity of the gods.
Eventually, however, he yields, steps on the carpet and enters the palace. Cassandra is led
into the palace shortly afterwards, but not before she has a vision about what is going to happen.
Her murder and Agamemnons, as well as revelations about other murders that have taken place in the
house, including the infants who were served up in a casserole for their father to eat.
Meanwhile, the chorus of elders who have been on stage, witnessing the action all along,
can do nothing. They're old and physically decrepit. They were old before the war began,
and that's why they stayed at home. But they know a lot, and they have little respect for
Glytemnestra. All they can do is mutter in their anxiety and rancor, and so the tension builds.
Finally, we hear Agamemnon scream out in pain from inside the palace. It's a blood-curdling
scream, and you're not expecting it. It makes you jump out of your skin. Then, a few moments later,
the doors of the palace open to reveal a tableau of the murdered Agamemnon and Cassandra.
Glytemnestra comes forth and gloats over her crime. She describes how she dropped a net
over Agamemnon while he was in the bath, and then stabbed him the way a fisherman stabs fish,
not once, but twice. It was a cool and calculated deed. Then shortly afterwards, her lover Igistus
crots out and gloats as well. He's barely on stage for more than a minute. This emphasizes that
Glytemnestra is the real killer, and that's the end of the first play. Now, Arestes is faced with
a terrible dilemma. It's a son's sacred duty to avenge his father's death. This is the old law.
He must avenge his father, but he has to do it by killing his mother. What a ghastly thought,
and it's a typically Aesculian dilemma. There's no good outcome. Evil is competing with evil,
good with good. In the second play, known as the Libation Bearers, Arestes, who is now grown up,
returns from abroad to find his sister, Elektra, pouring libation into the palace.
It was believed that the dead benefited in some way from drink offerings. The play takes its name
from the female Trojan prisoners who are performing this task at the request of Glytemnestra.
She's had a bad dream, and is seeking to appease the spirit of her murdered husband.
Together, brother and sister now plot the murder of their mother and her lover.
Once again, the doors of the palace open to reveal two dead bodies,
just like at the end of the first play. History is repeating itself, we might say, blood for blood.
And this is where Aesculus takes the plot in a wholly new direction. Up to now, the story would
be entirely familiar to the audience, although they would certainly have been intrigued by
certain twists and devices that Aesculus employs. We'll talk about those in a moment.
But as soon as Arestes kills his mother, he starts to lose his mind. He sees monstrous creatures
called the furies who are pursuing him because of his crimes. And that's how the second play ends,
with Arestes rushing offstage, demented. The third play will take us into
near contemporary times, and this is where Aesculus' genius is truly unleashed. It's called
the Humanities, which means the Kindly Ones, and you'll see why in a minute.
The Kindly Ones are really the furies. They're in pursuit of Arestes because of his terrible
crime, and they become Kindly Ones only at the very end of the play. At the beginning of this
third play, the furies have pursued Arestes to Delphi, where Arestes is seeking to purify himself
of his blood guilt with the help of Apollo. We see the furies. They are the Chorus, and they
are truly repulsive. I'm sure the makeup artists have done a terrific job. After the purification
ritual, Arestes goes to Athens as a supplient to seek the protection of Athena.
The furies pursue him again, and once they arrive, Athena institutes a court on the
Areopicus to determine whether Arestes is guilty or innocent. It's an amazing and very moving scene,
as much for a modern audience as for the Athenian, because this is the first trial that
ever took place that is being enacted on stage. After Apollo speaks on behalf of the defense
and the furies for the prosecution, the Athenian jury, probably 12 men, vote just as Athenian
jurors voted in the law courts each day. And just as the three playwrights are about to be evaluated
to determine which is worthy of the first prize. So here we are, on the edge of our seats,
as we often would have been when the ballots were being counted in a law court, waiting for the verdict
in the trial of Arestes, which turns out to be a tie. At this point, Athena steps in and casts
the deciding vote. She votes to acquit Arestes, not because she is convinced of his innocence,
but because, as she says, she is Zeus's daughter and favors a male. So Arestes is acquitted on what
we might call a technicality, and that is what justice often is. Iskullus is not making any
special claims for trial by jury. He's noting that it's a human and fallible institution,
but it's the best we have. According to the old way of doing things, if someone killed a relative
of yours, then you as the son or the father or the husband of the victim were duty bound to
carry out a revenge killing or alternatively to extract a blood price from the killer.
Under the new system, a murderer must stand trial and be judged by a jury of his peers.
Arestes is one of the most innovative and revolutionary dramas ever performed. All kinds
of unexpected things occur that would have caused the audience virtually to gasp aloud.
To begin with, Greek tragedy is conventionally opened with a prologue. Usually, the prologue
is delivered by a god or a king or some such important person, but not here. Instead, the
prologue is delivered by a commoner, by a servant who has been put on watch for the fire beacon
that the Greeks will light as soon as they take trial. This is so that Chaitanestra will know
exactly when her husband is on his way home. The watchman, as he is called, is standing, or perhaps
reclining. I like to think of him as reclining. On the top of the skeiné, the Greek term skeiné gives
us our word seen. In this case, a building painted to look like a palace. The watchman doesn't deliver
a typical prologue. He moans and groans about his job, how long he's been doing it, how uncomfortable
it is. And instead of explaining the plot, which is what prologues are usually about,
he indulges in innuendo. He hints that Chaitanestra is up to no good, but he doesn't say so outright.
It's all rather vague and unsettling. And when he's about to spill all the beans, he says,
an ox has sat on my tongue. A most evocative image. The watchman is not the only commoner we encounter.
In the second play, Libation Bearers, there's a brief appearance by a resty as his nurse,
a woman named Kylissa. And what does she talk about? She talks about changing diapers. She tells us
that it's a guessing game. You have to guess the moment when to do the changing. And she got that
wrong many times, she tells us. So just think of it. Iskula's his great tragedy, and we're talking
about diapers. Iskula isn't doing this just to be idle, by the way. He's making a serious point.
He's telling the audience that Chaitanestra was not a very hands-on mother of a resty. That job
fell to Kylissa. In the Libation Bearers, another theatrical convention is broken.
Iskula breaks the two speaking actor rule. A character named Pilades, the companion of
a resty, has been on stage, not saying a word for hundreds of lines. Nothing strange in that.
Playwrights could have any number of non-speaking actors on stage. But then, suddenly, Pilades
speaks. And he speaks at the most dramatic moment of the play, the moment when a resty's
about to plunge the blade of his sword into his mother, draws back. How can he kill his mother,
even to avenge his father? He is in a quandary. Killing his mother is a terrible thing, but
avenging his father's death is the most solemn of all obligations. Meanwhile, his mother is
pleading with him desperately. And that's the moment when Pilades speaks. He delivers only
three lines. He tells a resty's to remember Apollo and to keep his oath. And that does it.
A resty's gathers himself together, and the next moment, he plunges in the knife off stage,
of course, because we never see violence on stage in Greek tragedy. What a moment.
The last thing you're expecting is for Pilades to speak. And when he does, it's as if Apollo
himself has spoken, no doubt, in a big, booming voice. In the humanities, the chorus consists
of terrifying and disgusting-looking female creatures with vipers in their hair and
rasping breath. His killers wanted to shock and horrify his audience. Now that a resty's has
killed his mother, he's wracked by whatever passes for a guilty conscience in the pagan world.
And how better to express that than by the ugliness that he sees all around him that he can't escape.
And that's in him. The ugly, disgusting furies whose job is to punish those guilty of terrible crimes
now haunt a resty's. All murderers become polluted and needed to be purified before they can be
admitted back into the community. And so a resty's is in Delphi seeking purification.
But this isn't just about ritual. It's about being unable to live with yourself after committing
a terrible crime. The fury's ugliness symbolizes the agonizing torment a resty's is going through.
A story is later told us that when the first audience saw the furies, it was so horrified
that pregnant women had miscarriages on the spot. That may be apocryphal, but it's a wonderful
invention if it is. Iskulus introduces his last innovation, a second chorus at the end of this,
the third play in the trilogy. It's a chorus of Athenian maidens who now welcome the furies
into the Athenian state. Iskulus's point is that we need the furies. They're essential for the
maintenance of law and order. They will be incorporated into the Athenian pantheon alongside
all the other gods and worship. And this is where they become the kindly ones because now
they will protect Athens and not punish it for acquitting a resty's.
Let's return to the theater of Dionysus. The trilogy we have just watched is deeply personal
to us Athenians. It's a statement about what is unique about this Greek city-state, the first
trial ever to take place in a court which our own very own goddess Athena established on the
Areopagus just above where we're sitting. But it's not quite time to go home yet.
Now the three productions are to be judged. The idea may seem shocking, how can one possibly
judge a play by Iskulus against a play by Sophocles or a play by Euripides. The fact is
that the Athenians, like all Greeks, are intensely competitive. Competitiveness
is in the Greek bloodstream. Everything we do as Greeks is about winning.
There are 10 judges or kritai, our word critic. They have no particular expertise in the theater.
They certainly haven't served on the National Arts Council or its equivalent. It's enough that they
are citizens in accordance with the principle called isonomia, meaning literally equality under
the law. Everybody has an equal opportunity. The 10 critics are selected by lot. So far as we know,
they aren't required to account for their judgment. They just vote. But what are they actually voting
for? Are they voting for the actors or for the production or for the scripts? And what happens
if they love the plays but load the production or if the actors in the trilogy they like best
get fluffing their lines? And before they vote, do they confer among themselves or are they sworn
to secrecy? On the whole, I think it's unlikely they confer because Athenian jurors judging criminal
trials did not. They voted cold, as we might say. The kritai bear a very heavy responsibility. They
are fully aware that the reputations of the playwrights, the actors and the producers are
wholly in their hands. And as we in the audience watch the plays, we have the added thrill of
knowing that a great deal is at stake for everyone involved, including the rich Athenians who paid
for the productions because it is the duty of rich Athenians to stump up all the expenses
pertaining to each production. And these could be considerable. It's the way they pay their super
tax. Finally, the 10 judges place their balance in an earn. And as the voting is secret, we don't
know how each of them votes. Following this, an archon or elected magistrate draws out five
of the 10 ballots. The purpose in drawing out only five is the same principle as that behind
selecting the kritai by lot. The belief is that a part of the decision is left to the gods.
So here's a moment when theater history turns on a dime. And the winner in the year 458 BCE
is the Orestaia. And as a result, it has come down to us. We don't have the other two sets of
plays that Aeschylus was competing against, but I think it's fair to say that on this occasion,
at least, the verdict of the judges and the gods is spot on. But here's another oddity.
Technically speaking, it isn't the playwright who receives surprise. Instead, it is the Corregos,
the wealthy Athenian I mentioned a moment ago, who has paid all expenses of the production,
including food and drink for the chorus, the masks, the costumes, and so on. And all he receives,
so far as we know, is an olive wreath, poultry, perhaps, but highly charged with symbolic value.
As for the playwright, it's very likely that he gets nothing at all. But what he attains, too,
cannot be measured in material terms, namely prestige. Nothing in the Greek world is more
important than prestige or glory, as we should perhaps call it. This, remember, is a face-to-face
society in which everybody knows everybody. So if you are the victorious Corregos or the
victorious playwright or victorious caste, you will bask in the renown of your triumph.
Besides, there are ways in which you can materially self-promote. We know it was common practice for
the Corregos to erect a monument in his own honor in a public place. It's a miracle the
Orestia has survived. It's a miracle that any Greek play survived the live performance medium
across 25 centuries. But the Orestia has come down to us by a cat's whisker. Today, Greek tragedy is
one of the most popular ways by which a mass of people encounter the ancient Greek world.
Goethe, the German poet, playwright, and statesman describe the Orestia as
a primeval giant figure shaped like a monster, and the English poet, playwright, and critic
Algernon Swinburne described it as the greatest spiritual work of man. I go along with that.
So we depart from the theater, slightly inebriated, no doubt. After all, this is a festival in honor
of Dionysus, sometimes known as the God of Wine. Having devoted four long days to theater going,
including the final day, devoted to comedy, we are intellectually sated to a degree that is
scarcely imaginable. Let's hope it will see us through till the festival of the Lenire in late
January or February, because we won't have a chance to see a theatrical performance again. Till then.
