King Pyrrhus of Epirus has sailed from northwest Greece to confront an emerging power by the
name of Rome. Rome is situated far to the north, nearly 250 miles. But it is meddling
in the affairs of the Greek city-states of southern Italy. King Pyrrhus is here to put
a stop to that. He rules a Greek, or at least semi-Greek, people called the Molossians,
and he has a sizable force under his command. It consists of 25,000 infantry, 3,000 cavalry,
and 20 elephants. The Romans have never seen elephants before, and Pyrrhus is confident
that when they do, they'll turn tail and flee. It's an important moment in world history.
It's the moment when the Greek settlements in southern Italy decide whether to defend
their independence against the rising power of Rome. The year is 280 BCE, and we're outside
of a Greek settlement called Heraclea. Pyrrhus sees himself as the Greek's saviour,
which is to say he's on a mission. But that's not all. Pyrrhus is very much interested in
himself. He has a very big dream. He believes he could be every bit as great as or even greater
than Alexander the Great. He plans to pick up where Alexander left off half a century
earlier. But whereas Alexander went east to conquer the Persian Empire and got as far
as India, Pyrrhus is heading west to Italy. Before we talk further about Pyrrhus, I need
to say something about Rome of this age. Since the time of its foundation 500 years
before, traditionally placed in the year 753 BCE, Rome has been growing in power, first
in the immediate surrounding region, and namely, Laceum, from which the word Latin drives,
and later throughout peninsula Italy. So by the opening decades of the third century,
when our story begins, Rome is the dominant force in Italy. The Roman historian Livy, who
wrote during the reign of the Emperor Augustus, some two and a half centuries after the events
I describe here, says in the preface to his history of Rome, the foundation of so great
a city and the beginning of the most powerful empire, second only to that of the gods, was,
in my opinion, owed to the fates. In other words, Rome's rise in power and influence
is, according to him, unstoppable. But it depends what you mean by unstoppable and how
much credit you give to the fates, because if you read Livy's own account of the early
history of Rome, get a very different picture. He depicts a state that is riven with internal
discord and that is constantly having to fight off its neighbors, the Etruscans, the Aegean,
the Volski, the Samnites, as well as invaders from outside of Italy, most notably the Gauls.
The Gauls previously dominated the Po Valley and the eastern coast of the Italian peninsula,
and they sacked Rome in 387, only to be bought off with a hefty bribe, and that is barely
a century before Pyrrhus decides to take Rome on. So when Livy says Rome's domination is
owed to the fates, he certainly doesn't mean it is a foregone conclusion that Rome is going
to rule the Mediterranean, because on a number of occasions Rome's fate will hang in the
balance. The showdown with Pyrrhus is one such occasion.
Rome originally was a monarchy, but in 509 B.C., the last of the king's Tarquinius superbus,
Tarquin the Proud, was expelled, and the republic, the raised publica, roughly translatable
as the Commonwealth, was established in its place. It was founded on an entrenched fear
of autocratic power. The very word Rex, meaning king, is synonymous with every Roman's worst
nightmare, and that is important for this narrative, because Pyrrhus, as we've seen,
is a king. The establishment of the republic didn't mean
that there was plain sailing from then on, however. Intense infighting ensued between
ordinary people known as the plebs and the patricians, broadly speaking, the aristocracy.
It wasn't until around 287, less than a decade before the events were focused on, that the
plebeian dictator, Quintus Hortensius, passed a law, the Rex Hortensia, whereby a resolution
known as a plebiscitum, our word plebiscite, became binding on the whole community. It
ended a troubled period of Roman history known as the struggle of the orders, the two orders
being the plebs and the patricians. I mention this to emphasize the fact that
in 280, Rome is still in what we might call a nascent state, even though it has come a
very long way. Livy is usually our primary literary source
for early Rome. It just so happens that his history breaks off in 290, a few years before
Pyrrhus appears on the scene, wouldn't you know it? And it resumes only in the last two
decades of the century, long after Pyrrhus is dead. So our major source for Pyrrhus's
career is the Greek biographer Plutarch, who lives in the late 1st to early 2nd century
CE, in other words, some 400 years after Pyrrhus's death. Plutarch is not very good at describing
battles, but he fully grasps Pyrrhus's importance, and he provides us with a convincing and compelling
portrait of a deeply flawed man. And that's going to be our focus here.
Pyrrhus was born in 319 BCE. He is a second cousin of Alexander the Great. The kingdom
he rules, called Epirus, is a region in northwest Greece controlled by a people called the Molossians.
The Molossians aren't formed into a polis or city-state like the Athenians and the Spartans
and so on. Instead, they constitute a number of tribes that formed a loose federation known
as a koinon, meaning that which is common or shared.
We don't know much about the Molossians. They are rather backward, culturally speaking,
compared with most other Greeks of the time. The only solid fact I can tell you about them
is that they are famous for breeding very fierce fighting dogs. The breed is now extinct,
but it is thought to have been the ancestor of the modern-day Mastiff.
Pyrrhus is a fascinating character. Plutarch says of him that he is endowed with features,
which were more likely to inspire fear in the beholder than to impress him or her with a sense
of majesty. Instead of having a row of upper teeth, we are told that he has a single continuous
bone with slight indentations. Another physical oddity is his big toe, which is supposedly
capable of curing diseases of the spleen when rubbed on the afflicted area. He seems to be
one of those people who is never satisfied, who is always looking for trouble, rather like
Alexander the Great, equally restless and energetic, but not half so talented. In the modern age,
we live in a world where the opportunities for a great man with combined political and military
ability are, fortunately, severely curtailed. In antiquity, however, there are virtually no
limits to what a person with ambition might achieve. Pyrrhus isn't a blowhard. He has a lot
of solid qualities. He is a highly gifted tactician, both on the field and off it. He knows how to
advance his ambitions by making political alliances, as well as by winning battles. He is as fearless
as he is unscrupulous. Of course, you need to be something of a dreamer to aspire to straddle
the world stage, and Pyrrhus is definitely a dreamer. He's in the grip of an idea. He sees
himself as the champion of the Greeks, and he wants to rid the predominantly Greek cities in
southern Italy of Rome's increasing dominance. He probably views the Romans as uncouth and
uneducated, upstarts who came from nowhere, unlike the Greeks, who are highly sophisticated with a
long cultural tradition. Of course, there's an irony in all of this. The Molossians themselves are
hardly very cultivated. Of Pyrrhus, Plutarch says, fortune gave him the opportunity to enjoy his
wealth without disturbance and to live in peace as king of his own people. But he thought it was
nauseating. That's the literal translation of the Greek, a very strong word, not to be inflicting
misery on others or suffering misery at the hands of others. And then Plutarch compares Pyrrhus to
Achilles, from whom the Molossian kings traced their ancestry. In the Iliad, Achilles states that
he had the choice of living to a ripe old age and being forgotten, or dying young, but leaving
an imperishable reputation behind. He chose the latter destiny and we remember him to this day.
Alexander the Great similarly made the choice to live a short life and he too will be remembered
forever. So here again, we have to reckon with Pyrrhus's obsession with Alexander the Great,
who demonstrated what a single individual could do if he put his mind to it. I see Pyrrhus at his
mother's knee, hearing tales of his cousin's exploits, and then going to bed at night dreaming
of achieving great things. He isn't the first person to wish to emulate Alexander. When Alexander
died, each of his generals tried to see as much of the former empire as he could, each thought to
assume his mantle, not least by issuing coins in his name. Eventually, three stable monarchies were
carved out of his conquests, Macedonia ruled by the Antigonids, Southern Turkey, Babylonia, Syria,
Iran, and Central Asia ruled by the Salutids, and Egypt ruled by the Ptolemy's. The kings of these
monarchies sought legitimacy over their people by claiming to be the heir of Alexander the Great.
One consequence of Alexander's achievement, therefore, is to inspire emulation in anyone
with military ambition. Pyrrhus is pushing 40 at the time when we meet him. He hasn't had an easy
life. His father was kicked off the throne of Pyrrhus due to dynastic squabbles. The result is that
Pyrrhus spent his childhood as a refugee in the court of the Illyrians, a people who lived to the
north of Pyrrhus. In his early teens, he returned to Pyrrhus and ruled as a miner, only to be driven
out a few years later, like his father before him. At the age of 24, he won back the kingdom with the
help of Ptolemy I, a king of Egypt, whose stepdaughter he married. The alliance enables Pyrrhus to
strengthen his power base in northwest Greece by annexing southern Illyria. Over time, Pyrrhus
succeeds in extending his kingdom both to the north and to the south by taking over Embracia,
Emphilochia and Achanania, which is pretty much the whole of the western half of northern central
Greece. He also tries to conquer Macedonia, the kingdom of Alexander the Great. He's initially
successful, but he's unable to secure his gains in Macedonia. Now, I need to step back for a moment
and talk about the Greek presence in southern Italy. Southern Italy has become so thickly settled
by the Greeks that it has acquired the name of Magna Graecia, Great Greece. The term is usually
used to describe all the Greek city-states, or polis, between Capua in the west and Tarentum in
the east. That is a considerable stretch of territory. Each polis is autonomous, and though
they share similar cultures and comparable political organization, they rarely cooperate
with one another and do not constitute anything remotely resembling a counterweight for the
growing power of Rome. Initially, when the Greek city is settled, they dominated the indigenous
non-Greek peoples living in southern Italy. By the end of the fourth century, however,
these non-Greeks, primarily the Lucanians and the Brutii, were beginning to rise up.
It was at this time too that Rome began to flex its muscles in southern Italy. A Roman
consul named Lucius Aemilius Barbula marched into Tarentine territory, situated in the
instep of Italy, and began ravaging it. Tarentum, modern Tarento, was the most powerful of the
Greek settlements in southern Italy. Rome evidently fixed its steely eyes on Tarentum,
and there was justifiable suspicion that it was seeking to establish a pro-Roman government in
the city. And it's now that Pyrrhus receives an appeal for help. At the time, he's still trying
to establish control over Macedonia, but this wasn't working out well. So, being the opportunist
he is, Pyrrhus abandons his claim on Macedonia and turns his attention west. Now, the opportunity
he has been looking for has come along, the opportunity to do something really big.
Pyrrhus accepts the offer to come to the aid of Tarentum. He presents his forthcoming campaign
to the Greek world at large as a grandiose pan-Hellenic or all-Greek enterprise whose objective
is to liberate the Greeks from oppression by a barbarian power, namely Rome. This gets him
the support of the Epirus League, an alliance of states that makes up Epirus, which includes
the Molossian heartland. He needs the League's consent in order to use its troops to wage war
in Italy. His appeal also gets him the support of several Greek states outside of Italy,
whose rulers are beginning to eye Rome with suspicion. In the spring of 280,
Pyrrhus sets sail from Epirus with great fanfare. Although the Molossians and their
neighbors form the core of his army, Pyrrhus also has a sizable contingent of mercenaries.
When his fleet crosses the Adriatic to the Italian mainland, however, a severe storm
causes the Armada to disperse. Pyrrhus seems to be one of those people for whom things never
quite turn out the way that they are hoping. As a result, he arrives in Tarentum with only a
part of his force. Even so, the Tarentines are overjoyed to see him, and they appoint him Commander
in Chief. He responds by putting the city on a war footing and introducing measures for its
protection. He drafts all able-bodied men and imposes a harsh system of discipline upon the new
recruits. When wind of Pyrrhus' arrival reaches the Romans, they become deeply concerned.
Life has not been easy for them of late. Less than a decade earlier, they finally saw
off another serious threat by delivering the Cudagras to the Samnites, a war-like Italian people
who inhabit the central southern part of the mountain range known as the Apennines.
And the Romans are still engaged in warfare with their Etruscan neighbors to the north.
So, the Romans are suffering from war fatigue, and now this Greek, or semi-Greek,
named Pyrrhus, has turned up, and he's stirring things up in the south.
Rome doesn't have enough conscripts to make war against Pyrrhus. Its practice at this early date
is to restrict military service to those who meet certain property qualifications.
Military service is a privilege, not a burden in the ancient world, but now the danger is so great
that Rome breaks the rules. It conscripts citizens who are not property owners, the proletarii,
as they are called. Our word is proletariat, meaning the poor.
The conscripts receive very little training, and it's unlikely they have any armor since there's
nothing equivalent to government-issue supplies in the ancient world. You bring your own body armor,
and the proletarii can't afford to equip themselves, but still they help to swell the ranks.
The two armies eventually face each other outside of Heraclea, a coastal city to the southwest of
Tarentum. We don't know many details of the battle, although Pyrrhus' troops are outnumbered,
they squarely beat the Romans. One deciding factor is his elephants. Pyrrhus stations them at his
forces' wings, and they strike terror into the Roman legionaries, as he'd been hoping.
Another deciding factor is Pyrrhus himself, who stirs his men by the unique example of his fearlessness.
At the end of the day, 7,000 Roman dead lies scattered across the battlefield,
and another 1,800 are taken prisoner. The problem is that the carnage on Pyrrhus'
side is hardly less devastating. He's lost 4,000 men, a heavy burden for any invading force,
which obviously has more difficulty in recouping its losses than does the home side.
A Pyrrhus must feel pretty demoralized. He's said to comment,
another victory of this kind, and will be lost. Hence our term, a Pyrrhus victory,
meaning a conquest that comes at great cost. Pyrrhus then gives the Roman dead
honorable burial. He is a true gent. I'll say that for him.
He's now master of southern Italy, and a number of Greek cities that previously
wavered come over to his side. So do the non-Greek peoples in the region, including the Brutee,
the Lucanians, and even the Samnites to the north. It seems like game set and match.
Now Pyrrhus marches north in the direction of Rome, but without it seems any clear purpose.
Here's where things start to fall apart. Pyrrhus fails to persuade any of Rome's allies in this
area to desert to his side. He is probably hoping to make common cause with the Etruscans,
but nothing comes of it. The Greek historian Appian tells us that the Roman senate will
deliberate for a long time over whether to accept the peace terms he offers. Finally, a senator
named Appius Claudius, who is so named Chicus, Chicus means blind, stands up and dismissively says,
I was saddened by the loss of my sight, and now I regret I didn't lose my hearing as well.
Do you dare to call what's on offer peace instead of servitude? That does it. The senate rejects
Pyrrhus's terms and accepts volunteers for two new legions. So Pyrrhus gives up and withdraws south.
Over the following winter, he manages to acquire more mercenaries whom he pays by imposing a levy
on the Greek cities he's protecting. His force now numbers about 40,000 men. And in the spring of
279, he marches to Auskulum about 100 miles north of Tarentum. Here he is confronted by a Roman army
and another bloody engagement takes place lasting for two days. Pyrrhus again leads from the front.
But this time he sustains a serious injury. Still he wins a battle. Roman losses are about 6,000.
On Pyrrhus's side, they amount to 3,500. In other words, it's another Pyrrhic victory.
The following year, Pyrrhus receives an appeal from Syracuse, a city on the east coast of Sicily.
The Syracuseans want help in a war they're waging against the Carthaginians. The Carthaginians,
whose home is in modern-day Tunisia, already control the western part of Sicily and they
are eager to gain mastery of the eastern part as well. At the time, the Carthaginians are allied
to the Romans, so Pyrrhus answers the Syracusean appeal. He achieves some success initially,
but by installing military garrisons and seeking to set himself up as a tyrant,
he angers the Sicilian Greeks, and they decide to make common cause with the Carthaginians against him.
It turns out to be another wasted exercise. In 276, Pyrrhus set sail for mainland Italy,
in response to an urgent summons from those Greek cities in the south he originally befriended.
Just as he's leaving Sicily, however, his fleet is surprised by the Carthaginians,
and many of his warships are destroyed. Another piece of bad luck.
He tries to take Regium, a Greek city on the toe of Italy that is controlled by the Romans,
but fails, and soon afterwards, his army is ambushed, resulting in more losses.
Pyrrhus now makes one last bid to drive the Romans out of the south of Italy. He marches into
Samnite territory, hoping again to press on to Rome. But when he reaches Malventum,
Malventum, modern Benevento in Campania, he finds his way barred by the Romans.
Heavily outnumbered, his army is no match for the enemy. This time, the Romans use Pyrrhus'
elephants against him by firing burning arrows so that the elephants turn around in terror
and stampede the invaders. Malventum means bad arrival. After the battle,
the Romans rename it Beneventum, or good arrival, in honour of their victory.
We don't know how many casualties Pyrrhus sustains on this occasion,
but it's enough to cause him to give up and head back to Epirus. And although Pyrrhus leaves
a small garrison at Tarentum, the dream is over. He has been seen off by the sheer numbers of men
that the Romans had been able to put in the field. Pyrrhus' restless energy is not entirely curbed,
however. He now turns his attention to trying to make himself master of mainland Greece, claiming
that it is his intention to free its people from the control of Antigonus Garnatus, the king of
Macedonia. Several towns ally with him, and he again begins to quote, hope for greater things,
as Plutarch puts it. That hope seems to be his nemesis. He succeeds in deposing Antigonus,
but shortly afterwards he inflames public opinion by raiding the royal tombs at Agai,
where Philip II and other members of the Macedonian royal house lie buried.
You might have thought that at this point he would decide to take early retirement,
but he can't. He isn't built for that. He has to keep pushing himself, no matter what.
So he marches south into the Peloponnese and makes an unsuccessful attempt to see Sparta
at the invitation of Cleonimus, a Spartan pretender to the throne.
Sparta at this time is nothing like the military power it was in the fifth century,
but it resists him anyway. Sorted, Pyrrhus marches on to Argos, a city in the northeast
Peloponnese, intending to seize it, and it is here that he meets his end. He is slain in a street fight
by a woman who throws a tile at him just as he is about to kill her son.
The tile strikes Pyrrhus and crushes his cervical vertebrae. He is 47 years old.
Incidentally, you remember his big toe, the one that could cure disorders of the spleen?
It's reported that when his body is cremated, it doesn't burn.
It is a sad and rather pathetic end to what, in essence, was a wasted career.
In the same year, as Pyrrhus dies, the former Greek colony of Tarentum falls to the Romans.
If Pyrrhus had realized his dream of establishing a Greek empire in Italy, well,
let's just say that a lot of things would have turned out very differently.
He did much to Hellenize Pyrrhus, that's to say, to introduce it to Greek culture,
rather as Alexander the Great Hellenized the East. He was also responsible as well for
important building projects in Pyrrhus, including a great theater attached to the sanctuary of Zeus
at Dodona. But in the final calculation, one has to say that the Greeks would probably have been
a lot better off had Pyrrhus never left Epirus to answer their appeal for help.
His career has the unfortunate, for him, consequence of strengthening Rome's control
over Greek-settled southern Italy. This is later made evident by the settlement of
Roman colonies in the region and by the loss of independence of a number of communities,
both Greek and non-Greek, that follow Pyrrhus' departure. Pyrrhus brings ruin upon himself
and many others, and is remembered for that phrase, a Pyrrhic victory.
Defeat, however, isn't always what it seems. On the positive side, the trousing of Pyrrhus
paves the way for much closer cultural and economic contact between the Greeks and the Romans.
The Romans previously had little exposure to Greek culture. Henceforth, they would be in constant
contact, and that would deeply influence their way of looking at the world. What would Rome be
without the imprint of the Greeks? And what would we know about the Greeks, were it not for the Romans?
Pyrrhus' legacy, although the opposite of what he intended, benefited history
in countless other ways. In the end, Pyrrhus is a victim of the legacy of Alexander the Great,
and a victim of his own dreams and ambitions. He is a romantic who has had the misfortune
to be on the wrong side of history. It's as if the tide of history were flowing in one direction,
while Pyrrhus was doing all he could to make it turn the other way. His significance lies
in the fact he embodies the moment when it becomes crystal clear that the Greeks,
who until then had been the dominant power in the Mediterranean, have no hope of resisting
the Roman advance. Greek independence in Italy is extinguished. Politically and militarily,
the Greeks are finished. And to think, as Plutart remarks, that Pyrrhus could have led a peaceful
and prosperous life, had he not yearned for something much greater.
