You
You
Your lecture is Dr. Robert Garland. Dr. Garland is the Roy D. and Margaret B. Wooster
Professor of the Classics at Colgate University. He obtained his MA in Classics from McMaster
University and his PhD in Ancient History from University College London. Dr. Garland's
research focuses on the social, religious, political and cultural history of Greece
and Rome. He has written 12 books including most recently Wandering Greeks, the Ancient
Greek Diaspora from the Age of Homer to the Death of Alexander the Great. Dr. Garland is
a former Fulbright scholar and his expertise has been featured in the History Channels,
The True Story of Troy.
Welcome. I'd like to take you to the year 480 B.C.E. and tell you an anecdote about
the Persian Wars fought between the Greeks and the Persians. The story is handed down
to us by the Greek historian Herodotus, sometimes called the father of history and at other times
the father of lies. In sharing this story, I hope to begin to explain what I have in
mind for a course on living history, what kind of history. In other words, we're going
to experience together. Experiencing is a strong word. Can we experience the past? I'm
going to argue that yes, we can by concentrating all of our attention on certain historical
moments when an individual has an illuminating revelation or whether tide of history changes
dramatically. Sometimes an occurrence in the space of a moment changes the world forever.
It's the spring of 480, according to Herodotus' account, and east and west are about to set
out on a fatal collision course that will permanently reshape the landscape of history.
The Persian king Xerxes, the king of the four corners of the world as he styles himself,
has assembled a massive army and fleet and is seated on his throne at the southern shore
of the Hellespont. This is the narrow strait between the Aegean Sea and the Sea of Mamara
that today we call the Dardanelles in northwestern Turkey. Xerxes is reviewing his army as it
is about to cross over from Asia into what we know as modern-day Europe to attack mainland
Greece. Xerxes' engineers have constructed a pontoon bridge made of ships tied together
and anchored parallel to the current. The king is flush with pride and ambition and
dreams of imperial conquest. He's at the top of the world. He's the ruler of the world's
largest empire to date. It extends from Pakistan in the east to Macedonia in the west, from
the Black Sea and Caucasus Mountains in the north to Egypt in the south.
The Persian empire of this time incorporates a multitude of different peoples which makes
it the world's first truly multinational polyglot empire. It covers about a million
square miles. The size of its population is impossible to gauge. Some scholars put it
at 25 million, others at closer to 70 million.
Herontesus tells us that Xerxes has an army of 2.5 million and a fleet of 1,207 triremes.
Xerxes is a warship powered by three banks of rowers with a top speed of about nine knots
and capable of executing a 180-degree turn in just one minute. We don't need to believe
Herontesus' figures. The ancients aren't much good at counting in large numbers and
besides the Greeks have good reason to exaggerate the size of the invasion force in order to
magnify their achievement in defeating it.
Herontesus claims the Persians drink rivers dry as they march from east to west. So let's
just say that Xerxes' army is very, very large. So much so that Xerxes can't see the waters
of the helispont as there are so many ships bobbing on its surface. All the land round
is about as far as the eye can see is dense with soldiers as well. Their weapons and armor
glitter in the sunlight. Xerxes thinks himself blessed. That's the word that Herontesus
uses. It's almost a spiritual feeling he's experiencing. He's thinking he's the luckiest
man alive. And then a second later, that's all it takes, Xerxes bursts into a flood
of tears. His uncle Artabanus, who happens to be his military advisor and who is standing
right beside him, says, what a difference there is between your mood now and your mood
of a moment ago. Then you counted yourself blessed and now you are weeping. The great
king responds, I was suddenly overcome by pity at the brevity of human life. I was reflecting
that not one of these men will be alive in one hundred years time. What an observation.
What a story. I'm not particularly interested in whether it's true or not. I'm sure it
isn't, in fact. How could Herontesus, a Greek, have access to such a private moment which
would be witnessed only by those who are in Xerxes's innermost circle? I would be the
first to acknowledge that the study of the ancient world has no God-given right to survive
as a central part of our educational system and culture, unless we who earn our bread
and butter from it can discover the urgency of its messages and signals. This was brought
home to me in a peculiarly vivid way while I was writing my PhD. I had lunch with a fellow
named Vic who worked for an electronics company and was polite enough to inquire about the
subject of my research. After having been treated to a detailed account of Greek burial
customs, he smiled with genial brutality and said, so what? I always recall this question
whenever I am about to deliver a lecture or begin a new research project, because at
bottom, scholarship cannot be an end in itself, at least not anything as potentially marginal
to life's chief concerns as classical scholarship. What I try to do, therefore, is to make the
study of antiquity central to one sense of being human by conveying a humanistic, non-judgmental
interest in how other people live. I believe the source of all wisdom is to see the world
as others see it, or in the case of history, as others have seen it. My career is the gift
of a number of outstanding individuals who put confidence in me at moments when they
might have turned their backs on me. My father dropped out of school to become an actor,
but that didn't work out, so he ran a newspaper and tobacconist shop. Then what we used to
call the war came along and he went off to fight the Japanese. He spent the entire war
as a prisoner, having never fired a shot in anger, because the British were forced to
surrender as soon as they landed on Java. When he returned, he was suffering from what
we would call today, post-traumatic stress injury. So the doctor suggested he should have
a child to distract him, as he put it. So here I am, born to be a distraction. My mother
wanted to become a nurse, but her mother wouldn't let her. She said it was a dirty job. Still
as a volunteer, she rose through the ranks of the British Red Cross and in her fifties
became a teacher of shorthand and typing, when that was one of the very few careers available
for girls. She could have run a battleship. She had so much energy. In this course, we
will meet some remarkable women. We'll be at the Battle of Actium, when Mark Antony
takes flight for Egypt with his lover, Cleopatra, and in so doing, leaves hanging the fate of
the Roman Empire. We'll see a common concubine become Empress of China, when China is one
of the most traditional societies on earth. We'll be in Constantinople, when the Byzantine
Empress Theodora, a truly remarkable woman, saves her husband, Justinian, from ending
his life in ignominy. We'll meet some extraordinary men, too. We'll be among Theodoras, who in
the space of a single afternoon will try and condemn Socrates to death, and perhaps live
to regret it as the worst stain on their democracy. We'll wait apprehensively for the arrival
of Hannibal outside the gates of Rome, after our army has suffered a catastrophic defeat
at the hands of the Carthaginians. Our casualties perhaps greater than suffered by any Western
army before or since in a single day. We'll be in Jerusalem for the trial of a seemingly
insignificant prophet from Galilee, who is interrogated for allegedly corrupting his
people. And we'll accompany the prophet Muhammad, when he escapes his assassins by a
hare's breath, and establishes, in the desert, a community of believers now accounting for
20% of the world's population. And these are just some of the stories. What interests me
about the anecdote of Xerxes at the Hallespont, and why I find it so memorable, is because
it gives us access to a precisely defined moment in history, even if I suppose Herodotus
is giving free reign to his imagination by saying, this is what I would have been thinking
at this moment. Herodotus is a historian of great insight. The anecdote he has chosen
enables us to hear what I'm going to call the heartbeat of history. The private memoir
puts us inside Xerxes' head, with the result that the two and a half thousand years that
separate him from us, suddenly evaporate. One moment, Xerxes is up. He's on the top
of the world. He's dreaming of world dominion. And the next he's down. He's struck with
a sense of his own and everyone else's mortality. Because when he says, not one of these men
will be alive, he's including himself. And he is right. And that, of course, is what
it means to be human, to be able to identify with other people. Human psychology could hardly
be better expressed than through this anecdote. The moment at the helispont is a turning point.
After Xerxes has mastered his emotions, he and Artabanus have a lengthy discussion during
which Artabanus confesses to his nephew, the king, that he has serious doubts about the
wisdom of invading Greece. Artabanus points out that there aren't enough harbours where
the Persian fleet can shelter and that it's going to be immensely difficult to feed such
a large army. In short, there are just too many imponderables. Xerxes listens patiently.
He respects his uncle. But in the end, he chooses to ignore these concerns. In reporting this,
Herodotus is saying that it is just possible that the expedition might have been called
off even at the eleventh hour. But it isn't called off. Instead, Xerxes crosses the helispont.
He will invade Greece and cause unimaginable slaughter both to the Greeks and to his own
people. And it could all have been avoided. That sometimes happens in history. A moment
can determine all. History turns on a dime.
Living history is, I admit, a rather ambitious undertaking for us in this course. To my mind,
the very words are something of a tautology in the sense that all history is alive, occurs
now, is actual, is present, is around us. I'm particularly committed to what is sometimes
called history from below, which I've explored in a previous course called the other side
of history. The present course is different. Living history, as I use the term here, means
two things to me. It identifies a particular type of story, a history that is truly alive
because of its intensity, indeed the urgency of the events that it explores. And it means
experiencing history in a special kind of way, not just studying it, not that there's
anything wrong with study, but entering into it imaginatively, trying to engage with the
personae of its actors, asking that most impertinent question that an historian can ask, namely,
what was it like to be X on a particular day facing a particular reality? What is going
through X's mind, and indeed, what is X feeling?
Feelings tend to be a no-go area for historians, especially ancient historians, although some
interesting work has been done of late on the emotions, particularly on the emotion that
Xerxes feels as he reviews his army, namely Pity, who the people who live in the ancient
world feel pity for the same reasons and in the same way and to the same extent that
we moderns feel pity. What I know for certain is that the individuals
who star in this course have talked to me. I know that sounds pretentious. Perhaps a
better way to put it is that I feel personally invested in their stories. Every story and
every historic figure we meet in this course is one of inspiration. Many, of course, serve
as terrible warnings, too. What has kept me going through the two years
or more that I researched their stories was the hope that I could one day make their lives
come alive for you as well. And living history means putting you also
to work. It means asking you to imagine what it would have been like either to witness
some earth-shattering event or to be a participant in that event. To sum up, I'm making two
large claims for this course. First, that the history we're going to encounter is indeed
alive, charged with poignancy, excitement and intensity. And secondly, that it can indeed
be lived or at least relived and entered into empathetically. As a historian of the classics,
I deal with ancient sources that for the most part tell me when I'm lucky that such and
such an event happened in such and such a year. When I'm really lucky, I can dig down
deeper and uncover not merely the tidal patterns of a particular year, but the tides of a particular
day. In this course, I'm going to attempt to break down events wherever I can into specific
days, hours and moments in an effort to let you hear the heartbeat of history. I want you
to experience a highly specific, finite moment of time, occasionally no longer than moments.
To put you in the mood, I will quote Niccolò Machiavelli, author of The Prince from an essay
called On the Coming of Evening. Machiavelli writes, I return to my house and enter my study,
and at the door, I take off my everyday clothes covered with mud and dust, and I put on garments
regal and courtly, and thus reclothed appropriately. I enter the ancient courts of ancient men,
where, being lovingly received by them, I feed on that food that alone is mine, and for which
I was born, where I am not ashamed to speak with them and to ask them the reason of their actions,
and they, out of their humanity, answer me. And for hours of time, I feel no boredom,
I forget every trouble, I do not fear poverty, death does not terrify me, I am completely
transferred into them. In the same way, I invite you to undertake a journey of the imagination,
like the one Machiavelli describes, and recloth yourselves, sometimes in garments regal and
courtly, but as often as not in everyday wear. And yes, to ask the ancients the reasons for their
actions, and to hear them express their emotions as they face some pretty momentous events.
I predict that, out of their humanity, they will answer us, and with any luck, you'll feel no boredom,
and forget every trouble over the course of our time together, and not be played by thoughts of
poverty or death. To quote the famous British historian Eric Hobbesbaum,
we need imagination, preferably in conjunction with information, in order to avoid the greatest
danger of the historian, anachronism. Well, that's certainly one reason why we need imagination
on this journey, but there's another, and that is because imagination can help us to stand where
our forebears once stood, and try to experience what they experienced without the benefit of hindsight.
In other words, to begin here, we need to try our best to forget what we know about the outcomes.
When the Greek historian Thucydides explains how he has come to write these speeches that he includes
in his history of the Peloponnesian War, he says that he has kept as close as possible
to what was actually said, but he notes also that he has added what he thought was necessary,
or as he puts it, what the situation required, and that's exactly what Herodotus does
in telling us the anecdote about Xerxes. He provides his readers with what the situation
requires. There will be a similar tension between fact and controlled imagination throughout this
course. I'm going to ask questions that don't often get asked, and sometimes supply answers that are
based on educated guesswork. I'm going to turn up the magnification as much as I can. We will visit
three continents, Europe, Africa, Asia, across the span of more than 3,000 years.
We will see how the passage of mere moments often shapes history, instance in time that
lasts a few days, in some cases, a few hours in hours, and sometimes even only a few minutes,
and how the world, our world, is transformed in consequence, because everything that has
happened in the past has brought us to where we are today. It is in this way that we will try to
catch the heartbeat of history. For reasons that are sometimes beyond our imagining, things can
change forever in that solitary instant. Often we cannot know precisely when or what will change
the course of our lives or change the course of history in the space of a moment. Sometimes
it is the result of what might seem to be haphazard and accidental, what philosophers often call
contingency. Would the Athenians have won the battle of Marathon if the runner,
Phylipides, who had been sent to request help from Sparta, returned only with the message that the
Spartans were celebrating a festival, that they would be delayed and so couldn't help?
Would Alexander have turned out to be the great leader, had he been a year or two younger,
when his father Philip ended up being murdered? Would the Jesus movement have become a worldwide
religion if Pilate had released Jesus, instead of bowing to the will of the Sanhedrin and having
him crucified? Would Europe have become an Islamic state if Charles the Hammer had lost the battle
of tour? Sometimes the direction that history takes is the result of factors that are more
deep-seated and that have been building up over time, as in the case of the impulse that led tens
of thousands of people to undertake the first crusade at the prompting of Pope Urban II in
the year 1095. If Pope Urban hadn't been such an effective and charismatic speaker as he proved
to be that day, it's just possible the crusades would never have gotten underway. History, like
life itself, is ruled in part by contingency. So let's begin our journey. I want to take you
first to Ancient Egypt in the year 1285 BCE. At this time, Egypt is the most prosperous and
perhaps the most advanced society in the world. It's between June and September of the year,
and the River Nile is in full flood, Egypt. Herodotus memorably remarks is the gift of the Nile.
Rameses II is the pharaoh. He's off fighting the Abominable Cater, the Hittites, a people whom
the Egyptians despise and loathe. Their empire lies to the north of Egypt in modern day Turkey.
They are a highly developed society, and like the Egyptians, they are literate. We have thousands
of clay tablets with writing in the cuneiform script from their archives, that is to say,
writing in the form of wedges. Egyptians and the Hittites are the two superpowers of the 13th
century BCE, and like all superpowers, they have been encroaching on each other's fears of interest.
Rameses is just about to engage the Hittite king, Mawatali, in battle outside a town called Kadesh,
in modern day Syria, a few miles south of the city of Hong's. There have been many
minor skirmishes between the Egyptians and the Hittites in recent years, but Rameses has decided
to go on the offensive and confront the enemy in all out combat. He's young, and he wants a great
victory to boost his image. So the Egyptian army sets out from a town called Hiramesi,
the Pharaoh's new capital in the eastern delta of the River Nile. It passes through modern day
Israel, crossing the Beka valley in what today is east Lebanon, and finally arrives at Kadesh
on the Arantees River in Syria. Kadesh marks the dividing line between Hittite and Egyptian
imperialist ambitions. Rameses has marched 300 miles, but when he arrives there's a surprise
in store for him. His rival, the Hittite king, Mawatali, is already waiting for him.
Rameses isn't expecting to have to face Mawatali at Kadesh. His spies have told him that the enemy
was in the far north, in Aleppo, in northern Syria, quaking in its sandals, too scared to
confront him in battle. Instead, here it is, as large as life, and twice as ugly. He's taken
completely off guard because he finds himself confronted by a huge army. Rameses has been
advancing so hastily that three of his four divisions are way behind. Mawatali, instead
of attacking the Pharaoh directly, however, unleashes his army on the trailing second division
before it can catch up with Rameses and cuts it to pieces. He then turns his forces on the first
division. Rameses is completely surrounded by the enemy, by 2,500 chariots to be precise, or
so he later claims when he authorizes inscriptions to be carved describing his victory.
Even Rameses' closest companions are about to abandon him, he would say, and then
something happens in a flash, in an instant. Rameses calls upon his father, who isn't immortal,
but the god Amun, the patron god of the pharaohs, traditionally depicted in the form of a ram,
or a human with a ram's head, to come to his rescue. And guess what? His father answers him.
Amun hears his prayer and addresses his son as follows, and what he says is very moving.
Go forward. I, your father, am with you. My hand is with you. I shall prevail over a hundred thousand.
I am he who masters victory. I am he who loves valor.
When Rameses hears these words, we're told he's imbued with superhuman strength and proceeds
to wreak havoc on the enemy. Well, do we believe that? Probably not. We not being ancient Egyptians
might suspect that it is perhaps the arrival of Rameses' auxiliary forces in the nick of time
that rescues him and his men by striking the Hittites from the rear. Even so, we should not
underestimate the power of faith to move mountains when faced with overwhelming odds.
So there we have it, a moment when the tables are turned just in time to avoid a total disaster.
As a result, Rameses is able to make a tactical withdrawal. And if the tables
weren't turned at this precise moment, it's perfectly possible that Rameses would have
suffered a catastrophic defeat. His army would have been massacred. The Hittites would have invaded
Egypt, and Egypt would have been brought to its knees, ushering in centuries of foreign domination.
Instead, Egypt will remain a powerful, secure and independent state for about 400 years,
till the coming to foreign aggression. Once home, Rameses is able to paint his campaign
as a glorious victory. This is being economical with the truth at best. At worst, it is a downright
lie. True, he has pulled off a remarkable recovery, and he is personally valorous.
But it isn't the case that he wins a glorious victory. The Egyptian army only just managed to
make that tactical retreat. Its losses were very heavy. They may well have been as heavy
as the losses inflicted on the Hittites. As a result, Rameses now lacks the manpower to make
a further assault or to conduct a siege of the city of Qadesh. The truth of the matter is that
the fight has ended in a stalemate. Yet the battle of Qadesh is destined to become one
of the most famous campaigns ever waged in the ancient world. Rameses and his spin doctors
will see to that. He's nothing if not the master of spin. You might even say that he invented it.
Rameses II is probably the most famous of all the pharaohs, and he is also arguably the greatest.
His reign will last for 67 years. He erects monuments of himself throughout Egypt,
and many tell the story of the Battle of Qadesh. It's recounted at Abidus, at Abu Simbel, at
Karnak, three times, and twice at Luxor. Several Egyptian papyri also record the battle.
We also have a Hittite version in the form of an inscription in the Hittite capital at Boaz Khoi.
That discovery has enabled scholars to make a more balanced assessment. But guess what?
The Egyptians couldn't read Hittite, and it's likely they would not have trusted anything
that the Abominable Cater had written, even if they could.
To conclude, it's easy to forget that history isn't just big chunks of time.
It's life experienced moment by moment. In this course, I'm going to try to recreate history
the way it takes place, in real time. I will invite you into the living room of history.
I want you to hear its heartbeat, and occasionally, even to sense the intake of its breath.
