It's June in the year 80 CE and the Roman Emperor Titus is about to throw open the newly
completed Colosseum.
It rises in a valley between hills, Titus is dedicating this very public landmark for
the enjoyment of the Roman people and with the calculated intent of winning their favour.
To prevent us from getting roasted by the sun beating down on us and to create a cool
breeze, a giant velarium or awning is drawn across the caviar, the seating area.
It is supported by ropes attached to short thick posts and it takes 1,000 sailors from
the naval headquarters at Mizanem near Pompeii to raise and lower the awning.
During the 100 days of gladiatorial combat to come, Titus will celebrate the consolidation
of his family dynasty, the long-lifthed Flavians who will rule over Rome for over a quarter
of a century.
Thus on the Roman people will also enjoy the return to shared glories of a prime piece
of real estate that the Colosseum sits on.
One of Titus' predecessors, the utterly corrupt greedy and self-indulgent Emperor Nero, formerly
had squandered this property on himself.
And Titus will be paying homage to his father Vespasian who ended the chaos left by Nero.
Nero nearly imploded 12 years ago, during the turbulent period we know of as the year
of the four emperors.
Nero and three short-lived successors Galba, Otho and Vitalius were each preoccupied by
their own self-interests at the expense of the rest of us.
And all fittingly met ugly ends.
After learning that the senate had passed a resolution that he should be beaten to death,
Nero prudently committed suicide.
Titus' father Vespasian came to par in CE69 after learning from his predecessors' mistakes.
He was a seasoned army officer who had distinguished himself in the Roman invasion of Britain,
CE43-47.
He also had a flair for government.
He was widely praised for his proconsulship of Africa in CE63.
Upon becoming emperor Vespasian oriented himself to the public good far more than Nero had.
As a member of the Genes or family known as Flavius, Vespasian is remembered as the founder
of the Flavian dynasty.
After taking power he appointed his eldest son Titus to succeed him as commander-in-chief
of the Roman forces in Judea.
And when Vespasian died of natural causes in the year 79, after a reign that lasted
ten years, the dynasty was secure.
Titus was well prepared to succeed him as emperor.
The Colosseum took twelve years to complete and will realize Vespasian's vision to rededicate
the land as a great public space.
It rises directly upon Nero's former personal estate which featured a palatial home, private
gardens and an artificial lake.
All Romans are welcome here now.
The Latin poet Marshall says, under your leadership Caesar, what were formerly the delights that
belonged to a master are now the delights of the people.
Rome, he also says, has been returned to herself.
Of course there's an irony in all of this.
By building the greatest building in the world to host a festival of death, Titus is not
promoting the public welfare in the way we would see it.
But as a historian I am trying to see things from a Roman perspective.
I won't judge the Romans because they live in such a different world from the modern
day one we do.
The Colosseum is many things to many people all throughout the ages.
It's not only a sporting venue.
The Latin word for gladiatorial games is munera which literally means gifts.
This helps us understand why Titus and Vespasian before him felt they performed a great public
service by constructing the Colosseum and by sponsoring the shows it would host.
Half a century earlier a previous emperor Augustus proudly included all of the munera
he hosted for the Roman people in an inscription promulgated throughout the empire known as
the Reyes Gestae or achievements.
The munera were a testimony to the emperor's benevolence and each emperor expected to be
remembered for them.
The Colosseum is also intended to be read by the citizenry as a statement of Roman power
specifically the power to crush anyone who might seek to resist Rome's authority.
Those who will fight and die here men and beasts alike do so to entertain the Roman
crowd.
But the gladiators also speak of Rome's dominion that is evident even in the source of funding
for the Colosseum's construction.
Much of the cost was borne by the sale of Jewish prisoners after Vespasian son Titus quelled
the great Jewish revolt in Judea CE 66 to 70.
The inscription found near the amphitheater states the emperor Vespasian ordered this
building to be erected from the spoils he received.
In their book the Colosseum Cambridge University historians Keith Hopkins and Mary Beard explain
it was in effect the temple of Jerusalem transformed by Roman culture rebuilt for popular pleasure
and the ostentatious display of imperial power.
The Colosseum also makes an eloquent statement about filial piety.
Begun by Vespasian and completed by Titus it is the perfection of a noble ideal that
of a son paying homage to his father through a publicly visible commemoration.
For the Colosseum's opening ceremony and for the immense killing carnival to unfold
in the days ahead Titus has purchased scores of gladiators.
These are captive slaves and imprisoned criminals plucked from the dregs of society along with
thousands of wild animals brought from distant Africa and Asia.
But there's no need for imagining as you and I are going to get into the Colosseum's
first gains.
As Titus appears before us we realize for the first time that the Colosseum is the one place
in Rome the one place in the empire where tens of thousands of people can see the emperor
all at once.
Here sends to the imperial box from which he will watch these gains.
The whole of Rome and honored foreign guests are on hand to share this moment with us.
The imposing auditorium swallows us up and dwarfs the great city below.
At a certain moment trumpets blast and an immediate hush falls upon the audience.
Then Titus declares at the top of his voice, let the games begin.
Gladiatorial contests have a long history.
They were first introduced into Rome in the third century BCE originating in Etruria modern-day
Tuscany where they were held at the funerals of dead soldiers.
It was believed that the dead took pleasure in these contests and also that they were
nourished by the blood that was shed.
The first politician to realize that gladiatorial contests could be used to secure the good will
of the plebs, the ordinary Roman people, was Julius Caesar.
In 46 BCE a Caesar sponsored a contest in memory of his father who had died 20 years earlier.
It proved to be enormously successful and he garnered much popularity as a result and
popularity in politics means support.
Caesar's games were held in the Roman Forum which became the regular venue for such entertainment.
The first permanent amphitheater was built in the campus Martius, the field of Mars outside
the city walls during the reign of Augustus.
Nero had built a much larger purpose-built structure in the campus Martius but it was
destroyed in the great fire that raged virtually unimpeded through the city for 6 days in CE64.
It is the blaze during which Nero famously fiddled while Rome burned.
The area occupied by the Colosseum which lies a short distance east of the Forum was also
devastated by the great fire.
Afterwards Nero appropriated the land for his own use and built on it the grandiose
palace known as the Domus Aurea, the Golden House.
An artificial lake fronted the estate surrounded by gardens with porticoes and pavilions.
At the entrance rose a huge bronze statue of Nero standing 30 meters high known as the
Colossus Nerones.
When Vespasian became emperor he tore down the Domus Aurea and used the 125 acres of
land there to provide the people of Rome with an amphitheater worthy of the great empire
they controlled.
Vespasian didn't destroy the Colossus Nerones, instead his sculptors transformed it into
a statue of Sol Invictus, the unconquerable son, thereby honoring the sun god of the empire
and the patron of Rome's military.
The auditorium that Vespasian built and Titus completed was not formerly known as the Colosseum
during their time, rather it is the amphitheaterum flavium named for the dynasty.
But the old Colossus will eventually give the Colosseum the name it acquired during
the Middle Ages.
Ridley Scott's film Gladiator which came out in 2000 provides us with a sense of what
the Colosseum and the games held within it might look like, although his recreation of
the amphitheater more closely reflects 19th century paintings than the existing archaeological
remains.
Scott built this own digitally enhanced Colosseum in Malta to depict something even bigger than
the actual structure in Rome.
Even so the original Colosseum would dominate the Roman skyline and be visible for miles
around.
It rises three stories high featuring half columns in the simple Doric order of Greek
architecture on the bottom tier, the fancier Ionic order on the second tier and the complex
Corinthian order on the third all held together by the signature of Roman architecture, the
arch.
Titus' brother Domitian who becomes emperor after Titus dies will later add a fourth tier
known as the Attic with Corinthian pilasters.
Standing more than 57 meters tall the Colosseum is the same height as the arch de Triomphe
in Paris erected over 1700 years later.
The Colosseum is an engineering wonder for its time and indeed for all time.
It's entirely freestanding, it doesn't have buttresses such as medieval cathedrals employ,
this outer wall is made of marble, 100,000 cubic meters of marble to be precise.
Originally held in place with 300 tons of metal clamps, although most of the clamps
have since been removed.
And while the outer wall of the building is today only partly intact, the inner wall remains
well preserved, massive slabs of travertine marble were used to erect the gigantic edifice
hauled by ox cart from Tivoli about 25 miles away.
It has been calculated that 200 ox carts working every day for five years would be needed to
haul the marble to the construction site.
All in shape the Colosseum extends 188 meters on its long axis and 156 meters on its short
axis.
An ellipse has two focus points spaced equally from the center on the long axis, this means
that the Colosseum was designed to have two foci of entertainment at either end.
80 entrances provide access to the building at ground level ensuring that spectators can
enter and leave the building quickly in case of an emergency.
Passageways known as vomitoria enable spectators to reach the upper tiers.
What lies underground beneath the wooden floor covered with sand and hidden from view is no
less astounding in terms of its complex engineering.
Made later by the emperor Domitian, the last of the Flavians who ruled from CE 81 to 96,
the underground Hippogaeon consists of a series of corridors and chambers designed to keep
separate the wild beasts that are going to be fighting one another.
It is equipped with winches, pulleys and counterweights to hoist stage scenery, crops and caged animals
to the surface of the amphitheater.
We don't know the precise seating capacity of the Colosseum, modern scholars generally
reckon it to have been about 50,000 people, though a late Roman source claims it could
accommodate 87,000.
Going to the Colosseum isn't like attending the Greek theatre of Dionysus where if you
fail to catch the first performance of the Orestia, you miss the only scheduled performance.
That's not how the Romans do things.
If we don't get to the Colosseum the first day, not to worry, there are, wait for it,
99 more to follow.
That's right, 100 days of war-to-war gladiatorial spectacle, 100 days of killing fest.
Might seem excessive.
I should point out that just over 20 years later, however, the Emperor Trajan will outdo
Titus by sponsoring no fewer than 123 days of celebrations to commemorate the success
of his campaign against the Dacians, a people who live in modern-day Romania.
Our major source for the inaugural games is the poet Marshall, who is a great fan of gladiatorial
combat and may be in attendance with us at the opening ceremony.
In Day Spectaculis, which means on spectacles, written in CE80 to commemorate the inauguration,
Marshall writes admiringly, all labour yields to Caesar's amphitheatre.
To him, the vast new stadium exceeds the seven wonders of the world, the great pyramid at
Caesar, the hanging gardens of Babylon, the Temple of Artemis, the Colossus of Rhodes,
the Statue of Zeus at Olympia, the Lighthouse at Alexandria, and the Mausoleum at Halicarnassus.
Putting on any major show, let alone one that will last for 100 days, requires a great deal
of organisation.
So if you live in Rome during this period, you'll have seen the feverish preparations
going on for months in advance of the opening ceremony.
Programs detailing the events, or at least the main attractions, known as libelli gladiatorum,
gladiatorial lists, will have been posted and painted on walls all over the city.
The gladiators are housed near the Colossium, where they train at the Ludus Magnus, the Great
School.
This is an opportunity for aficionados of the sport to place their bets on which gladiators
will win their bouts.
The evening before they fight, the gladiators are treated to a cana libera, literally a
free meal, which is a slap up banquet.
We don't know what they feast on, but no doubt it is scrumptious.
Oysters, sea urchins, and mussels are all popular fare among the Romans.
Perhaps ostrich ragout is on the menu, or roast wild boar, or roast dormice covered in
sesame seeds.
Where we sit in the amphitheatre is determined by our social status.
If we are commoners, we will be banished to the upper tier.
If we belong to the senatorial order, we will sit down below, almost at ground level, in
the best seats.
In short, elite below, rabble at the top.
There are also special boxes at the north and south ends, one for the emperor and his
family, and another for the Vestal Virgins, the priestesses who tend to roam sacred half
in the temple of Vesta and who are committed to a life of chastity.
It's a bit counter-indicated that these demure ladies have a ringside seat of all that messiness.
In addition, we are joined by guests and visitors from foreign lands.
It's Marshall again who writes, what people is so remote or so barbarous, Caesar, that
there is no spectator from it in your city.
He then goes on to list a number of them.
We don't have to pay to get in.
The gains are free, but we'll be given a shard of pottery with a number on it that will direct
us to our specific seat.
It's all very orderly.
It's at this point that I have to reveal to you that I can't provide a perfectly accurate
description of the day's events that follow.
That's because we don't have a continuous account of any gains that are held here.
We have only disconnected references in various texts.
So I'm just going to tell you the order of events that scholars tend to favour.
The day begins with a pompa, that's to say with a formal procession.
Slaves enter, holding placards, announcing the day's attractions, including the names
of the gladiators who will fight.
Then the gladiators file in.
They're not wearing their armour, so their physiques are on full display.
The crowd is cheering like crazy.
The wild beasts remain pinned outside of view.
They haven't been fed in days.
So be far too dangerous to display them in the arena.
Next, the emperor's lictors, junior officials enter, carrying rods and axes.
These fasques, as they are called, symbolise an emperor's ability to administer corporal
and capital punishment.
When Titus arrives, likely stepping down from a chariot, the cheers of the crowd become
deafening.
Contests involving wild beasts, the venationes, or hunts, as they are called, are held in
the morning.
These can take several forms.
The vast majority of the people who attend the games would never before have seen some
of the animals fighting in the arena.
It gives them a sense of just how expansive their empire is, and how exotic.
Animals armed with nets might seek to ensnare the beasts and kill them, or contests pitting
different species might be staged against a suitably colourful and exotic background.
So we might see a rhinoceros fighting a bear to the death, or a bull fighting an elephant.
The poet-martial is particularly impressed by a rhinoceros that gets the better of a
bull.
He also says that a woman is made to mate with a bull in order to re-enact the Greek
myth of pacifae, the wife of King Minus of Crete, who is said to give birth to the Minotaur.
The barbarism of such a spectacle is extreme.
The further entertainment, Christians and condemned criminals might be lined up in the
arena to be torn apart by the hungry animals.
This is the fate, meted out to those subject to damnatio ad bestias, or death by wild beasts.
However, we have no evidence of Christians being martyred in the Colosseum during the
inaugural games, or at any time afterwards, despite the widely held belief popularized
in books and films that they were.
During the lunch hour, there is a lull in the proceedings.
To keep the entertainment flowing, executions of condemned criminals might be staged.
Martial gives us this memorable phrase, the vast arena could not contain all the guilty.
After lunch, the main attraction, the gladiatorial contest, takes place, although our evidence
for this being the order is confined to a single letter written by the Roman philosopher
Seneca in CE50.
Nevertheless, it seems reasonable to believe that the gladiatorial contest would be the
climax to the day's entertainment.
Gladiatorial combat at the Colosseum's inaugural games is preceded by warm-up exercises, rather
like in a tennis match.
During the Pro Lucio, which translates literally as pre-game, the gladiators prepare with
armor lucioria, mock weapons made of wood, for the fights to the death that follow.
The conclusion of the Pro Lucio is signaled by a trumpet blast, and the combat arms are
now distributed.
Then, the emperor gives the signal for battle to begin, with several pairs of gladiators
squaring off at the same time.
Aue Taizar, morituri te salutant.
Hail Caesar, those who are about to die salute you, is the famous line the combatants deliver.
Or is it?
Unfortunately, there is no actual evidence that this line is ever delivered in the Colosseum
or elsewhere when gladiators are about to engage.
It occurs once in a quite different context that has nothing to do with gladiatorial combat.
It is customary for gladiators to fight one another wearing contrasting armor and with
different weapons.
For instance, a man armed with a net known as a retiarius may fight against another man
armed with a sword known as a secutor.
We also hear of women gladiators fighting against women, though we don't know whether
that is the case at the inaugural games.
It isn't a free-for-all.
Fighting rules known as the lex pugnandi govern the contests.
We know little about these, however.
Music also accompanies the human drama, punctuating the high points and helping to stimulate
audience emotions, rather like when silent films featured live music played by a pianist
before the talk is took over.
Not all fights conclude in death.
When a gladiator has been defeated, he can ask for a missio, a reprieve, by pointing
upwards with his left index finger.
It is then up to the emperor to decide his fate.
If the combatant has put up a good show and been entertaining, the likelihood is he will
be spared.
Much depends on the crowd's verdict.
If we and those around us scream, ure, burn, jugular, kill, and werbera beat, the chances
are that mercy is not on the cards.
The emperor will signal to the referee, known as the sumarudis, which means literally the
chief rod, to order the victorious gladiator to deliver the crudegrass.
Just in case a fallen gladiator attempts to fake death, a slave, addressed in the grab
of dis-patir, the god of the underworld, goes around with a hot iron to check for signs
of life.
It's a not-too-subtle procedure.
And if the hapless man is still alive, the slave smashes in his skull with a hammer.
An accomplished gladiator can hope for an extended, though not necessarily lengthy, career.
The Cambridge University historians Hopkins and Beard cite the example of a gladiator
named Glaucus, who dies at age 23 after eight fights, another who dies when he is 27 years
old after 11 fights, and a third who dies at 34 with 21 fights under his belt.
One question that remains about these inaugural games is whether the Colosseum is flooded
to stage a moxie battle.
The Greek historian Dio claims it is, but that raises the issue as to how the wooden floor
could be rendered watertight.
And it's difficult to fathom, pun intended, how the elaborate system of pulleys and cranes
and needed to hoist the animals into the arena could work under such conditions.
The crowds who attend these games interpret the bloodsport as lusty entertainment.
Still, the scale of slaughter is difficult to comprehend.
The Roman historian Suetonius, who writes a biography of the Emperor Titus, says that
on one day alone, 5,000 animals are slaughtered.
If that figure is extrapolated over 100 days, it would mean that as many as half a million
beasts are killed, surely this number is too high.
Dio more modestly puts the total at 9,000, 90 a day.
Whatever the death toll, nobody seems to complain at the time.
According to the records we have, Rome has an appetite for blood and gore that is unimaginable
in the modern age.
The Stoic philosopher Seneca does register a mild dissent.
In Ep. 7 he writes, it was murder, pure and simple.
All day the crowd cries, kill him, whip him, burn him.
In reference to the hapless gladiator who gets the worst of battle, Seneca quotes the
crowd as complaining, why does he receive the sword thrust like a coward?
Why is he so squeamish about dying?
And when there is an interruption, Seneca says, the idle crowd cries out, let's have
some throats cut in the meantime to keep things interesting.
In a word, the Colosseum is something of a symbol of everything that is most repugnant
about the Roman world.
It's barbarism, it's contempt for human life, it's taste for violence, it's gloating
upon human misery.
All of this puts my enormous respect for the ancient Romans at severe test.
Is there any way to justify the worst about a civilization?
I hate to say so, but I think there is.
In a restive empire where war is the normal state of things, the games are a diverting
means of channeling the people's propensity for violence.
But there is more to it than that.
As we've seen, the games generate tremendous goodwill towards the emperor and thus to the
empire.
And from a Roman perspective, the lives of a few thousand humans and beasts are well.
Tens of thousands, if you insist, is a small price to pay for such a big dividend.
Gladiatorial combat persists as ritual entertainment for 300 years after the Colosseum's opening
games.
It continues until a Greek monk named Telemachus from the eastern part of the empire travels
to Rome expressly to end this abominable practice.
Throwing himself into the arena to separate the competence, Telemachus is stoned to death
by an angry mob.
But not long afterwards, he is venerated as a martyr.
The later Christian emperor Honorius is so impressed by Telemachus's act that he issues
an immediate ban on gladiatorial contests throughout the empire.
The last known gladiatorial contest takes place on January the 1st, CE 404.
