You may think you know Socrates, and all too well.
He's that rather elderly, snub-nosed man, always hanging about in the agorah, telling
anybody who will give him the time of day that they're stupid and that they don't know
anything.
That's his mission in life, he believes.
He claims he's been attached to Athens by the God, like a fly that goads a lazy, thoroughbred
horse.
The horse is Athens, and it's his duty, he says, to rouse, persuade, and reprove the
Athenian people for not thinking clearly, for not devoting themselves to what goodness,
or the good, as he calls it, is all about.
The unexamined life, he tells us, is not worth living.
The agorah, which is where I brought you to now, is the civic, commercial, and political
heart of Athens.
It's where the Athenian council of 500 meets, it's where traders and bankers associate,
it's where people shop, and it's where people gossip and philosophize.
It's also where the courts meet, so there's a great deal of activity going on there.
And at the time when we catch up with Socrates, Athens has been through a lot.
The year is 399 BCE.
Just five years earlier, the Athenians and their allies were defeated by the Spartans
and their allies in the Peloponnesian War, a conflict that lasted for a whole generation
with a gap of about six years.
At the end, Athens' population was reduced to starvation, and the city-state was forced
to give up its maritime empire, which extended over the entire eastern Mediterranean, including
all of the cities that dotted the coast of modern-day Turkey, as well as the islands
in the Aegean Sea.
Athens' walls were torn down, and its fleet destroyed.
Sparta's allies called for the destruction of the city, but Sparta opposed that on the
grounds that Athens had done good service degrees in the past, meaning her service in
the Persian Wars.
So Athens survived total destruction, at least.
As soon as the war ended, Spartans backed a repressive oligarchical government in Athens
called the Thirty Tyrants.
Just eight months later, the Deimos, the citizen body, rose up to defeat the oligarchs and
restore democracy.
Socrates is a remarkable man.
When we meet him, he's 70 years old.
Although he's never written anything himself, his famous pupil, Plato, will use him as the
principal character in the so-called dialogues, that is to say, philosophical treatises in
the form of imaginary debates between Socrates and various interlocutors.
Without Plato, it has been said Socrates would be merely a footnote to Greek philosophy.
Instead, his extraordinary personality and method of teaching, by question and answer,
what we call the Socratic method, is enormously influential.
But for such a great and respected thinker, Socrates also has something of a tin ear.
Certainly, he lacks the common touch.
It's well known that he is no friend of democracy.
He is forever claiming that the man on the street hasn't got the smarts to decide matters
of state.
When you want someone to build a house, he declares, you go to a qualified architect.
But when you want someone to determine public policy, you let any common amateur have his
say.
Socrates is, in other words, a crypto oligarch.
He's always sneering at his fellow Athenians.
That at any rate is the opinion of many Athenians, perhaps the majority.
Broadly speaking, the Athenian democracy, which has been back in power since 403 BCE,
has acted with exemplary restraint.
It hasn't indulged in the bloodbaths common to the Greek world.
It hasn't initiated a witch hunt.
The only people who have been punished are the 30 themselves and their henchmen, through
all the rest who supported the tyranny, and amnesty has been extended.
Even so, someone has to carry the can.
Someone has to be the scapegoat.
Someone with a high profile whom everybody has heard of, who better than Athens' most
visible busy body, namely Socrates.
Socrates has had close dealings with many of the 30 and their supporters, so he can
be seen as the intellectual godfather of the tyranny.
He's an obvious target, and because he's a busy body, he's made a lot of enemies.
Punishing him will be a way of sending a strong signal that the restored democracy isn't
prepared to tolerate any challenge to its authority.
So today, what we would call a show trial is about to take place in the Agorah.
And because Socrates is so well known, there's hardly an Athenian around who isn't interested
in the outcome.
We can be sure that the trial attracts a great deal of public attention.
A business may well come to a standstill.
Let me fill you in on the backstory.
A few months ago, a man named Meletus and a couple of his cronies charged Socrates on
two counts.
The most trustworthy source for the wording of the charges they brought is preserved in
a compendium of biographies written by Diogenes Leartius, entitled Lives and Beliefs of Eminent
Philosophers.
It was written seven or eight centuries after Socrates' trial, but it's likely to be accurate.
The Athenians almost certainly keep their trial records in the Metroon, or Temple of
the Mother of the Gods, in the Agorah, which serves as a public archive.
Diogenes may well have seen the record, and this, after all, is the most famous trial ever
held in Athens.
The wording in the indictment reads as follows, Meletus, son of Meletus, of the Deem of Hithos,
has brought this charge and lodged this affidavit against Socrates, a son of Sophroniscus, of
the Deem of Allopeke.
Socrates has broken the law by not acknowledging the gods whom the state acknowledges, and
introducing new, demonic beings.
Dymonic beings were subsidiary deities.
The accusation goes on.
He has also broken the law by perverting the young.
The penalty should be death.
The big verb I'm translating as perverting is deathyro.
It's a verb that can mean a lot of different things.
You wouldn't get away with it in a modern court because it could cover a multitude of
offenses, making it impossible for the accused to refute the charge.
In fact, that is one of the problems about all the charges lodged against Socrates.
It isn't entirely clear what any of them mean.
They aren't crimes in our sense of the word.
Rather, they represent an ad hominem attack on Socrates as a person, as an educator, as
a thinker, and as a controversialist, as someone who was different and who didn't toe the line.
Meletus, by the way, is a forthright poet, a man of no consequence.
The actual instigator of these proceedings is Anetus, a moderate Democrat but a fanatical
opponent of the Sophists.
Sophists teach rhetoric for pay, and Socrates hates them.
But many people believe that he is a Sophist, so that's another problem Socrates faces.
People have a quite false view of the way he operates and the ideas he espouses.
As there is no public prosecutor in Athens, anyone who wishes, that's the technical phrase,
can bring a charge against anyone else.
It means that there is virtually no distinction between civil and criminal law.
Meletus has filed his suit before the Archon Basilius, the King Archon or Magistrate, in
the Stoia Basilius, the royal Stoia, a building on the east side of the Agorah.
He did so at a pre-trial hearing, similar to an arraignment, which is called an anacrisis.
The purpose of the hearing is to determine whether the prosecution's case merits sending
the accused to trial.
The Magistrate determines that there is a case to answer for and asks Socrates whether
he pleads guilty or not guilty.
Not guilty, Socrates replies.
The King Archon then takes written depositions from the witnesses for the prosecution because
his witnesses are not cross-examined in court.
The King fixes a date for the trial, which will take place in the Heliaia or law court
in the Agorah.
Meletus' accusation is then posted on a notice board in front of the statues of the ten eponymous
heroes of the ten Athenian tribes, the heroes who gave their names to the tribes, also in
the Agorah, just a few yards from the Stoia where the hearing has taken place.
Now it's the day of the trial, we're in the Heliaia, an outdoor space with wooden benches.
The jurors are assembled and the proceedings will be directed by a judge.
But the job of an Athenian judge is simply to keep order.
He doesn't intervene and he doesn't dictate the sentence.
There aren't any lawyers present either, cross-examining the witnesses and jumping up and down, saying
objection.
Instead, Meletus and Socrates will both speak on their own behalf.
A professional speech writer named Lysias has written a defence for Socrates.
This is quite common, if you can afford to do so, you will probably engage the services
of someone like Lysias with experience in laying out an argument.
The story goes that when Lysias finished his speech and handed it to Socrates, the latter
said, it's a great piece of oratory Lysias, but it won't serve me because it's the speech
of a lawyer, not of a philosopher.
Lysias inquires, why won't it serve you if it's a good speech?
Socrates replies, it'll no more serve me than nice clothes or beautiful shoes would.
The anecdote, whether or not literally true, helps to build a picture of Socrates as someone
who is plain spoken and who does not need artifice to defend himself.
Now, although there are no lawyers, no public prosecutor, no witnesses, no cross-examination
and no judge, in our sense of the word, there is a very large jury consisting of 500 or
501 Athenians.
And some Athenian juries are three times larger, why?
Because the Athenians want to make sure that nobody tries to bribe the jury.
You can't exactly bribe a jury that size.
The jurors are all men, of course, because only men are citizens of Athens.
Anyone over the age of 30 can serve, but in practice jurors tend to be elderly and rather
conservative.
At least that's the picture we get from Aristophanes, who wrote a comedy called The Wasps, in which
the chorus consists of crabby old jurors dressed as wasps, ready to sting the defendant.
It's doubtless an exaggeration, but there may well be a preponderance of elderly men
among the jurors, both because they have the time to serve and because they get paid.
They don't get paid much, just two or three obols a day, sort of the equivalent of minimum
wage, but it is enough to keep body and soul together.
And it means that the Athenians who sign up for jury duty feel they are performing a useful
service for the state, so there is job satisfaction as well.
An Athenian trial will always be wrapped up in the space of a single day or even half
a day.
That's because the defendant and the prosecutor are granted a limited amount of time to present
their case.
The prosecutor always speaks first, Meletus's speech hasn't survived, however, we do have
two versions of the speech that Socrates delivers in his defense.
One is written by Xenophon, a mercenary soldier, historian and pupil of Socrates, and the other
by Plato.
Scholars generally regard Plato's version as more authentic, but even so it is hardly
a verbatim account.
No transcripts are kept to the court proceedings, added to which Socrates will speak extemporary.
As Socrates is extremely prominent, it's likely that a lot of budding philosophers will try
to promote their image of the great man by writing their own versions of his defense.
Xenophon tells us that he writes his version as a corrective to previous versions.
We call the speech that Socrates delivers the Apology from the Greek word Apologia.
It does not mean the same thing as the English word Apology, anything but.
Socrates isn't about to apologize to anyone, as we shall see, Apologia merely means that
the speech that comes after or the speech in response.
Meletus's task is to justify the charges that he and his cronies are bringing against
Socrates, though all are very serious, all are based on hearsay, there's no hard evidence
for any of the accusations.
The first charge is that Socrates doesn't acknowledge the gods whom the state acknowledges.
What does acknowledge mean in this context?
The Greek word is nomidso.
It means that Socrates doesn't participate in any of the great state-sponsored festivals
that take place in Athens, such as the Dionysia in honor of Dionysus and the Panathenae in
honor of Athena.
He is, as we say, conspicuous by his absence.
Woody Allen once said that 80% of life is turning up.
In Athens, the requisite percentage is certainly higher because Athens is what we call a participatory
democracy.
In consequence, that means its citizens are expected and required to participate in all
state-run activities.
Next, Meletus accuses Socrates of introducing new demonic beings.
That's a reference to his personal demonion, an unidentified divine being that apparently
speaks to him and to him alone, warning him when he's about to do something that is wrong.
Why is this a problem for Athenians?
Couldn't they just accept that Socrates is, well, a bit cuckoo?
The answer is because religion comes under the control of the state.
You can't go around worshipping whatever God you like.
It has to be one that is officially recognized, one that has been admitted into the pantheon
of state-approved gods.
Lastly, Socrates is accused of perverting or subverting the young.
We learn from a Platonic dialogue called the Lucky's that Socrates is, I quote, always
spending his time wherever young men were engaged in any noble study or noble pursuit.
Several of Plato's dialogues take place in a palestra where athletic training and intellectual
discussion get mixed together.
I think it's highly unlikely, however, that Meletus is accusing Socrates of coming on
to young men.
It's much more likely that he is accusing him of encouraging them to despise democracy.
But the beauty of this charge, like the others, is that it is vague.
Socrates, by his sheer visibility, has gotten people's backs up.
He clearly has his own views about democracy, and he clearly has his own somewhat eccentric
views about religion.
So, the prosecution rests, and Socrates rises to deliver his defense.
First of all, he says that he's facing two sets of accusers, Meletus and the others who
have brought the current charges against him, that's one set, but there's also another set.
This one claims, I quote, that Socrates is committing an injustice by inquiring into
things below the earth and up in the sky and making the weaker argument appear the stronger
and teaching others to follow his example.
Making the weaker argument appear the stronger is a direct reference to the Sophists, who
teach people how to win an argument even if their case has no merit.
Socrates loathes the Sophists because they deny that there is such a thing as absolute
right and wrong, and because they charge for their services.
Socrates maintains that wisdom, which is what he claims to be teaching, should be dispensed
free of charge.
This vital distinction is lost on the average Athenian, however.
This is partly due to Aristophanes, the comic poet who wrote the comedy called The Wasps,
which I mentioned earlier.
Many years ago, Aristophanes also wrote a play called The Clouds, which presents Socrates
as the typical, or perhaps archetypical, Sophist.
Aristophanes wasn't making a serious judgment.
It was just a bit of good fun, but the image has stuck with the public and done Socrates
a lot of harm.
And because it's innuendo, it's virtually impossible to refute.
The rest of Socrates' speech is unashamedly combative.
He claims he's performed a valuable public service by lecturing the Athenians on their
inadequacies, and he warns them that so long as he breathes, he will never stop practicing
philosophy and exhorting people to discover the truth.
Well, you can imagine how that goes down with the jury.
When Socrates sits down, the place is in an uproar.
There's probably a lot of heckling going on.
In addition to the 500 or 501 jurors within, there's a large crowd gathered outside the
open air court.
There's no way of conducting the proceedings in camera.
Plato claims that he and others of Socrates' friends witnessed the proceedings, perhaps
in a semi-official capacity, as supporters of the defendant.
The jury doesn't retire to deliberate.
It decides immediately and votes straight away, and it votes on the indictment as a
whole, not on individual charges as we would.
So here it is.
Socrates' fate will be decided in a moment.
Each juror takes his place in a long line.
This is done in such a way that you can't tell what a juror has decided.
Each member of the panel will cast two wheel-shaped ballots, one pierced, and the other solid.
Their actual votes depend on which ballot, a solid or pierced, they cast into which of
two boxes, on left or right.
Then, as the votes are being counted, the jurors return to their benches and eagerly
await the result.
Once the moment arrives, a herald calls for silence, and the magistrate announces the verdict.
220 have voted to acquit Socrates, and 280 find him guilty.
The guilty verdict is not a landslide, but it's comfortable enough.
At this point, the accuser and the defendant are each invited to recommend the punishment.
The accuser gets up first and recommends the death penalty.
No surprise there.
He's entitled to ask for capital punishment, because Socrates has been found guilty of
an offense against the gods.
The defendant is expected to recommend a more lenient penalty.
That goes without saying.
He's also expected to make a tearful appeal, producing his wife and his offspring in court.
But Socrates never plays by the rules.
Instead, he recommends that he should be rewarded for the great service he has performed on
behalf of the Athenian state.
Athenians award victors at the Olympic Games a free meal in the Pritoneum, the equivalent
of the town hall.
Well, he, Socrates, has performed a much more valuable service than an Olympic victor, so
he should be given free meals in the Pritoneum for the rest of his life.
And he refuses to make a pitiful appeal by dragging his wife and children into court.
You can imagine the shouting and the stamping and the booing that this generates.
According to Plato, Socrates is eventually persuaded to recommend a very modest fine,
one minar in Greek money, whereupon his friends up the payment to 30 minars.
By now, the damage is done, however.
What Socrates is stating, loud and clear, is that he doesn't respect the authority of
the court.
It's a calculated and studied insult.
It's as if Socrates is going out of his way to antagonize the jurors and engineer his
own condemnation.
So, the jurors vote again.
This time, the vote for execution increases by 60.
Upon learning the verdict, Socrates tells the Athenians that they haven't gained very
much as he's an old man and will die soon anyway.
He further claims that the verdict that posterity will pass on the trial is that the jury voted
to execute a wise man.
And of course, he's right.
And then he passes judgment in turn on his accusers, saying that the truth condemns them
as vile and unjust men.
Socrates then treats the jury to his thoughts about death.
Death is nothing to fear, he says.
It's either non-existence or else it's a simple migration from one place to another,
from here to there as he puts it.
And if it's a migration, then what have we to fear?
We'll find ourselves in the company of people like Homer and Hesiod, and what wouldn't we
give to meet them?
He ends by delivering this memorable line, and so we part, you to life, me to death,
but which of us goes to a better destiny only the God knows.
I can't help wondering if some jurors don't have second thoughts when they get home.
Everything happens so quickly in an Athenian trial, there's no opportunity for quiet reflection.
Plus, it's a crowd event, a spectacle, and a crowd is easily manipulated even if it can't
be easily bribed.
Once a general feeling begins to take hold, a crowd is difficult to reign in.
It's clear that many years later the Athenians do indeed regret the verdict because they
engage the services of a celebrated sculptor to make a portrait of Socrates, which they
place in the agorah in a building called the Pompeon, where they keep equipment for
festival processions.
Usually a sentence of execution in Athens is carried out immediately.
On this occasion, however, the condemned man will remain in prison for about a month.
That is because his trial happens to take place on the same day that a ship sails from
Athens to the island of Delos about 100 miles away to commemorate the killing of the minor
tour by Theseus, an early Athenian king.
Delos as the birthplace of Apollo and Artemis is considered a sacred island.
The Athenians fear that if Socrates is executed on the same day that the ship set sail, the
vessel will become polluted and then pollute Delos when it arrives there.
So this is the reason for the unusually long delay between sentencing and execution.
Socrates is hauled off to the state prison where he will remain till execution day.
His friends will be allowed to visit him and indeed two of Plato's dialogues, the Crito
and the Fido, are set inside the prison during Socrates' last days.
Crito must be a rather large cell if we are to take Plato at his word because he mentions
14 people by name and also refers indiscriminately to others who also attend him.
Perhaps he is given this large cell as a special favor.
One of his friends, called Crito, manages to bribe the jailer to allow him into Socrates'
cell before sunrise.
Crito has made arrangements to smuggle Socrates out of prison and deliver him to a safe haven
but Socrates refuses.
So on the last day of Socrates' life, the day after the sacred ship has returned from
Delos, his friends come to visit him one last time.
The prisoner has slept in a legion which has just been removed and he is rubbing his limb
to relieve the pain.
The conversation turns to the subject of death and in particular to whether the soul, the
suke, is immortal.
Fido, who recounts Socrates' last hours in the dialogue of that name, tells us that he
sat on a stool at the head of Socrates' bed and that Socrates stroked his hair fondly.
It's a very touching detail.
As the hour of execution approaches, Socrates retires into the inner room of his cell to
bathe because he wants to spare those who will lay out his body from having to perform
the chore of washing him.
He then bids farewell to his wife, Xanthepe, and to his three children as he doesn't want
to see them weeping.
It's nearly sunset when the executioner comes in to ask Socrates' forgiveness for having
to administer the fatal dose of hemlock.
Socrates' friends urge him to eat dinner with them before he dies, but instead he sends
the executioner off to fetch the poison.
He then asks whether he can pour a little out to make a libation to the gods, but the
executioner informs him that he has mixed only the exact amount to kill him.
The executioner explains how the poison will take effect by working its way upwards from
his legs to his heart.
Socrates drinks the poison in one gulp and walks around his cell until his legs become
heavy.
Then he lies down, his friends weep, and he reproaches them, saying that is why he dismissed
the women.
The executioner pinches his leg and asks Socrates if he has any sensation in it, but he can't
feel a thing.
Gradually, the numbness moves upward.
When it reaches his abdomen, he says to Crito, I owe a cock to Asclepius.
Don't forget, pay it.
Asclepius is the god of healing in ancient Greece.
I think the most obvious explanation for Socrates' cryptic farewell is that he is thanking the
god, either for giving him a relatively painless death, or for curing him, the word is in quotes,
of the pain that his human existence.
Pito reports, this was the end of our friend, a man who was the best and the wisest, and
the most just of any we have known.
