It's October 45 BCE. We're in Rome, near the Circus Maximus,
straining to catch a glimpse of the most powerful man on the earth, Gaius Julius Caesar.
The great general is riding in a chariot drawn by four white horses. He's wearing a purple
toga emblazoned with stars, and his face is painted with red lead so that he resembles
the king of Roman gods, Jupiter, Optimus Maximus, Jupiter best and greatest.
Standing beside Caesar in the late afternoon sun is a slave who holds a laurel wreath above
his master's balding head. In a soft voice, the slave repeats over and again to the master,
remember you are mortal, remember you are mortal, remember you are mortal. The streets of Rome
are packed this day with cheering crowds who are celebrating a triumph. A triumph is a thank
offering to the gods for victory in war. It honors Caesar as the greatest Roman general of all time.
This is the crowning moment of his career, and it would be easy for the triumphator to forget
that he is a mere mortal, but doing so could also arouse the jealousy of the gods who would
be quick to exact vengeance. As Caesar approaches the temple of Fortuna on the route to the Roman
Forum, the axle of the great chariot he stands in suddenly snaps, unceremoniously pitching
both master and slave out of the cart. Everyone gasps in horror. This is a bad omen, all the more
so because Fortuna, the goddess of good luck, has favored the general so many times in his
extraordinarily successful career. Caesar recovers immediately and pretends as if nothing untoward
has happened, but he is sweating heavily, and the red lead makeup on his face is smearing
like blood. Has Fortuna finally deserted him? As Romans we inhabit a world where the gods
speak to us constantly through signs of this kind, and I guarantee you that there will
be much talk about this incident afterwards. Julius Caesar is the most famous man on the
planet. He has reached the pinnacle of his career, but physically he is in decline. He
is in his mid-fifties, which is old for anyone in the ancient world, and his health is failing.
He is tired, battle-scarred, and he suffers from attacks of epilepsy, which are rumoured
to be becoming more frequent. Even so, the great general is also enormously charismatic,
and he is gifted beyond any of his contemporaries. We sense his enormous energy the moment he
enters our line of sight. It is a picture of contradictions that perfectly captures
this great man in the late afternoon of his career. To begin with, Caesar is intensely
aggressive, highly competitive, and excessively vain. I tend to think that vanity is the result
of insecurity. Why on earth would Caesar be insecure? He has achieved more in one lifetime
than most people achieve in twenty. He has conquered Gaul and invaded Britain. Yet he
is so vain that the honour he appreciates most of the many that have already been heaped
upon him is the right to wear a gold crown in public. Why? Because the crown enables
him to conceal the bald patch atop of his head. Alongside the vanity, Caesar has a giant-sized
ego bolstered by his belief in his own greatness. To his credit, he is possessed of a subtle
and penetrating intellect, and he has an unrivaled flair for politics. He is a deft schmoozer,
breathable, working the crowd. To those who are his inferiors, Caesar is Mr. Affability,
but to those who pose a challenge to him, he is domineering, disdainful, and aloof.
Caesar stands for no cause other than his own. It is not recorded whether he has a conscience
or whether he has ever agonised over the sufferings of his enemies whom he has slaughtered in
the tens of thousands, possibly hundreds of thousands. I rather suspect that a moral
vacuum lies at the core of Caesar's being. As much as anyone who ever lived, he gives
preeminence to self-interest. And he is now dictator for life, a position that no one
in Rome has ever had before. It means that he can do pretty much whatever he likes without
any opposition from the Senate. But to understand how we got to this point, we need to step
back 15 years or so to when Caesar and Gnaeus Pompeius Maximus, Pompey the Great as we know
him, were the two most powerful men in the Roman world. In the beginning, Caesar and
Pompey were best buddies. Caesar was the junior partner with Pompey, a highly successful general,
and Marcus Lycinius Crassus, a wealthy financier, in a political arrangement called the First
Triumvirate or Rule of Three Men. Early on, Pompey wanted the Senate to ratify a political
settlement that he made after a victorious campaign out in the East. Part of Pompey's
request was for his army veterans to be given land to retire on. Crassus, for his part,
owed a huge sum in back taxes to the Roman exchequer. Or rather, the tax collectors who
worked for Crassus owed a huge sum, and he wanted them to be forgiven one third of what
they owed. So both men wanted something, and they agreed to bring in Caesar to force the
measures through the Senate because the young man had already demonstrated that he was a
highly skilled politician. In return, Pompey and Crassus promised to get Caesar appointed
as proconsul in charge of the Plum province of Transalpine Gaul. Pompey married Caesar's
daughter Julia to solidify the relationship. You'll appreciate from the arrangement that
Roman politics in the first century BC is a very, very dirty business indeed.
Well, everything went swimmingly for a while, but in 55 BCE, Crassus was killed while fighting
in Syria, and the year following, poor Julia died in childbirth. From this point onwards,
Caesar and Pompey increasingly came to see each other as rivals. The crunch came in January 49
BCE when Caesar was on the point of returning to Rome after eight years of successful campaigning
in Gaul, where he pacified the entire province, an astounding achievement.
Caesar now proposed that both he and Pompey should disband their armies, and he threatened
to initiate a civil war if Pompey failed to comply. Pompey refused, whereupon Caesar took
the fateful step of crossing the Rubicon, a small river in the northeast of Italy,
and from there marching on Rome. There was no mistaking Caesar's intentions. By law,
Roman generals were required to detach themselves from their armies at the Rubicon,
and not march south from there. It was now, as he crossed the river, that Caesar uttered the
famous words, alea jakta est, the die is cast. It is one of the great turning points in Roman
history. Had Caesar separated himself from his army, as the law required, he would have been
prosecuted for various illegalities, and his political career would have ended. Almost certainly,
he would have been exiled. But this immense gamble paid off handsomely. Barely 18 months later,
in August 48, Caesar inflicted a catastrophic defeat on Pompey at Pharsalis in central Greece.
Pompey then fled to Egypt, where he was murdered upon arrival. Pompey had been
eliminated, but his sons fought on. It wouldn't be until three years later, on March the 17th,
45 BCE, that Caesar finally defeated them at Munda in southern Spain.
Returning to our present story, the last of the events I described in Spain took place
only six months ago. Now we're back in Rome, cheering on the triumphator, but the civil war
had been bloody and divisive. Having produced the deaths of tens of thousands of Romans,
the conflict also created a huge image problem for Caesar. He doesn't want this to be his legacy,
so he comes up with the idea of representing his victories over his enemies, as Rome's victories
over Rome's enemies. Pompey had once celebrated a triple triumph, three celebrations in a row.
Caesar is going to go one better. He's going to celebrate a quadruple triumph. Of course,
he needs the Senate's approval, but the Senate is just a rubber stamp at this point. All power
devolves on Caesar. The first of the four triumphs will be held in celebration of his victory in
Gaul, which, thanks to Caesar, is now part of the Roman Republic. Some 60 Gallic tribes lost
their independence. Others were annihilated altogether. Caesar's biographer, Plutarch,
calculates that the great general enslaved a million Gauls and killed a million others.
That's no doubt an exaggeration, but it gives us some sense of the magnitude of the killing.
To quell the resistance, Caesar orders his men to chop off the right hands of their captives.
Not surprisingly, the policy proved extremely effective, so Gaul is triumph number one.
Then, after the death of Pompey, Caesar sailed to Egypt and supported Queen Cleopatra in the
Civil War against her brother Ptolemy XIII. Caesar defeated Ptolemy in a naval battle on the Nile
in 47 BCE. This wasn't anything like on the scale of his conquest of Gaul, but Egypt is exotic
and extremely rich in grain, so this is victory number two. A bit later, Caesar made a lightning
dash from Egypt to Syria, where he defeated King Farnakis II, who ruled a kingdom called Pontus
on the southern shore of the Black Sea in Latter-day Turkey. Weyney, Weedy, Weekey, Caesar
famously proclaimed after this victory. I came, I saw, I overcame. This is conquest number three.
And finally, Caesar defeated the last of the Pompeians, who were still supporting Pompey's
cause even after his death at Thapsus in modern-day Tunisia in April 46. That was a terrible battle.
Even after the Pompeians surrendered, Caesar's men went on slaughtering them. He could do nothing
to stop them. But that was triumph number four. Today, the Gallic triumph, the first of the four,
is being celebrated. The festivities will be spread out over 10 days. It's the most spectacular
public event ever staged in Rome, and it's going to be the greatest show on earth. At the end,
a huge public banquet will be held with 22,000 tables laid out in the campus Martius,
the field of Mars, on the west side of the city. Hundreds, if not thousands of prisoners of war,
will then fight to the death in the forum for the delectation of the crowd.
The procession with Caesar and his chariot at its center has assembled at the campus Martius.
We heard the cheer that went up as soon as the procession set off. It has passed through the
triumphal gate, which formally marks the entrance into Rome from the campus Martius, and from there
approached the temple of Fortuna, close to the river Tiber, where the axle of Caesar's chariot
breaks. After that, the procession moves on to the Circus Maximus, which is a vast arena
that accommodates perhaps about a quarter of a million people, and which is where chariot races
are normally held. As we watch the procession pass by, we see numerous wagons laden with
the loot that Caesar has seized from the Gauls, shields, armor, swords, and other magnificent
prizes. Paintings that depict his victories are held aloft, and a great number of sacrificial
victims that will be slaughtered afterward are also herded along the route. In glimpsing the
Triumphata's chariot, drawn by four white horses, we are certain to see a giant phallus attached
to the cart's undercarriage. This is to ward off jealousy and the evil eye. The Romans are
very fearful of the malign effects of jealousy, and who wouldn't be jealous of Caesar today,
and not just the gods? Behind the general, his soldiers chant in ritual unison,
Yotriumfe, Yotriumfe, hurrah for the triumph. They also sing ribald songs about Caesar's sexual
exploits. What song goes like this? Romans, guard your wives, we're escorting the bald adulterer.
How's that for catchy? Caesar was well known for his sexual exploits, especially with other men's
wives. A long line of Gallic prisoners slouches along dejectedly in chains. At their head is the
proud Gallic chieftain, Versingatorix, whom Caesar has kept in captivity for six long years
in Rome's stinking underground prison, which can be reached only through an opening in its roof.
Versingatorix dealt Caesar a crushing blow in battle at a place called Gagovia in southern
central France near Clermont-Ferrand, and very nearly turned the tables of history. So Caesar
is going to make an example of him when the triumph is over. Versingatorix will be garroted.
A garroting is a very painful form of execution. A rope that has been tied around the victim's neck
is tightened very, very slowly in order to prolong the agony from asphyxiation. Yet perhaps the
customary booing along the parade route isn't as loud as Caesar might have hoped for.
Versingatorix was a worthy adversary, and he deserved a better fate than being displayed as a
circus animal or freak. The triumphal procession eventually winds its way along the sacred way
into the Forum, and then up onto the Capitoline Hill. The day culminates in a sacrifice outside
the Temple of Jupiter, Optimus Maximus. This is an occasion to celebrate not only the greatest
general, but also Rome itself. Rome is the center of the universe, and its military might is far
greater than any par on earth can possibly match. We're now going to skip forward to the morning
of March the 15th, 44 BCE. That is to say, the Ides of March, the most ill-fated day in the Roman
calendar. The past four or five months have not been easy ones for Caesar. He's been irritable and
bad tempered. He's made it abundantly clear that he utterly despises the Senate, and as a result,
he has become politically isolated. Even before his triumph, he alienated a great number of people
on his way to power, and now he seems to have grown completely indifferent to public opinion.
In consequence, a murder conspiracy has formed against him, probably dating to the month prior.
It is one of the largest murder plots in history. Around 80 men have joined. The ringleaders are
Gaius, Cassius, Longinus, and Marcus, Eunius Brutus, both of whom fought alongside Pompey
in the Civil War and were pardoned by Caesar. Caesar is noted for his clementia, clemency.
No good deed ever goes unpunished. The dictator will spend the last evening of his life
in the company of his master of horses, or second in command, Marcus Lepidus. According to Plutarch,
the conversation at dinner eventually turns to this cheery subject. What is the best way to die?
Caesar reportedly looks up from some official business he's attending to,
and without hesitation says, unexpectedly. It's a good story, even if it's invented.
Caesar next returns home to the Domus Publica, his house in the Forum, and to his devoted but
hard-foot-upon wife, Calpurnia. I think it's almost inevitable that Caesar has a sense of foreboding.
Just as with the chariot-spoken axle, a series of ominous signs appear during the night. Calpurnia
has a nightmare in which she is cradling Caesar's bleeding body. And by all accounts,
she does all she can to prevent him from attending to his duty of appearing in the Senate the next
morning. The Senate meets at around 6 a.m., and three hours pass with no sign of Caesar.
Growing restless, the conspirators send one of their number, Decimus Brutus, to find out what's
going on. Decimus arrives at Caesar's house around 10 a.m., and, over Calpurnia's protests,
persuades Caesar to attend the Senate by revealing to him that he will be honored with yet another
title, King. So Caesar decides to go to the Senate after all. Perhaps he even knows about the plot,
and in the end, disdains to show fear. He arrives at the Senate house around noon. He has now kept
the Senators waiting five or six hours. That tells us much about the institution's subservience to
him. As he is about to enter the Senate, someone hands him a scroll revealing details of the plot,
but which he leaves unread. A moment later, Caesar catches sight of a seer named Spirina,
who warned him some weeks ago to beware the Ides of March.
The Ides of March have come, Caesar jokes. Yes, Caesar, but they have not yet gone, Spirina replies.
The Senate house is part of a giant architectural complex paid for by Pompey. The choice of venue
fits in very well with the conspirator's plans. There's a statue of Pompey inside,
so it can be inferred that the spirit of Pompey will be presiding over the assassination.
A Senator named Gaius Trebonius steps in front of Mark Antony, Caesar's consular colleague and
close friend, and engages Antony in a lively conversation, thereby preventing him from entering.
Inside, the house is packed. Many Senators are recent nominees of Caesar, taking their place for
the first time. Some of the conspirators have concealed their weapons in small boxes.
A hush falls as Caesar takes his seat. Then, swiftly, several conspirators rise from their
benches, obstructing the dictator from the view of the rest. One of them, named Tilius Kimber,
falls to his knees in feigned supplication, and requests that his brother be allowed to return
from exile. When Caesar tells Kimber that he is out of order, the man grabs Holder Caesar's toga
so that he cannot defend himself. In the mob attack that follows, Cassius slashes Caesar in the face
with a dagger, while another Senator, Bucolianus, strikes him in the back. When Caesar is out of
power, when Marcus Brutus, whom Caesar has trusted completely, comes forward and plunges his dagger
into him, Caesar says, Kai su technon, and you my child in Greek, there was a rumor that Brutus
was Caesar's son, so these last words, if true, have particular poignancy. It is at this moment
that Caesar gives up resisting. What he doesn't say, at least not until Shakespeare puts the words
in his mouth, more than 1600 years later, is et tu Brute? Caesar falls at the base of the statue
of his rival Pompey, just as the assassins had intended. This is a revenge killing. The conspirators
keep hacking at his prostrate body, wounding him 23 times according to one authority,
and 35 times according to another. As Caesar goes down, he draws his toga over his head
to cover his face, so that his assassins will not witness his death agony. Mark Antony, hearing
the screams and fearing for his life escapes. We don't know how long it takes Caesar to die,
the Greek historian Appian tells us that a friend of his named Artemidorus runs to the Senate after
he hears about the murder, and that when he arrives, the victim is still breathing. The conspirators
original plan was to carry Caesar a short distance to the tiber and toss his corpse into the river.
Had they stuck with this plan rather than allowing his body to be returned home, things would have
turned out very differently. This, along with their decision to spare Mark Antony, is a blunder.
In the end, they have too many struples. Caesar's funeral takes place a few days later on or about
March the 20th. Before dawn, the forum begins filling for a ceremony that will not be held
until after the sun goes down. Soldiers, several ranks deep, form a cordon to hold the crowd in
check, and when night falls, the soldiers beat on their shields. It is an eerie sound in the
gathering darkness, as if they are literally trying to wake the dead. Now Caesar's family emerges
from his home. Many of them are wearing masks called imargines, resembling the faces of their
ancestors. After the imargines, next comes Caesar's lictors, officials who carry the
fascades, as they are called, rods and axes that are the symbol of a magistrate's right to beat
or execute a Roman citizen. On this occasion, the lictors carry the fascades upside down
as a sign of mourning. Caesar's casket comes next, born on the shoulders of his soldiers,
and they are followed by senior magistrates, foreign dignitaries and clients, men whose
interests Caesar looked after during his lifetime. Slaves, perhaps hundreds of them freed by the
terms of Caesar's will, trail behind. Open casket funerals were customary in Rome, but this one is
closed due to the many knife wounds on Caesar's face. A series of gladiatorial contests takes
place in the forum afterward. These are intended to appease the angry spirit of the murdered dead.
In earlier times, it was thought that the dead would imbibe the blood that seeps underground.
Torchlight gives a ghostly air to the solemn occasion, and the consul, Marc Antony, delivers
a eulogy over the dead. This is the speech that Shakespeare, in his play Julius Caesar begins,
friends, Romans, countrymen, lend me your ears. I come to bury Caesar, not to praise him.
But this is Shakespeare's invention. We don't have a record of what Marc Antony actually says.
Cicero, the orator and politician, tells us that Antony describes Caesar as a very great man
and a highly distinguished citizen, although Cicero does not attend the ceremony any more than
does Shakespeare. It may be a rather conventional eulogy, but it inflames the Roman populace.
Antony works on the crowd to the point where they demand that he read Caesar's will,
which he just so happens to have hidden in the folds of his toga. And Plutarch tells us that
when it was revealed that Caesar had left 75 Dinarii to every citizen and had also bequeathed
his gardens on the far side of the river Tiber to them, an immense wave of goodwill and love
rolled over them. 75 Dinarii would have been sufficient for a family to live on for a month or
two. It was a considerable sum, in other words. At this moment, all hell breaks loose. A surging
mass of mourners breaks through the soldiers' cordon onto the rostra, taking possession of
Caesar's corpse and hoisting it on their shoulders. The mob parades around the forum with the dictator's
body held high. The same man we witnessed celebrating his quadruple triumph only a few months earlier,
when he was the most powerful man in the world. Roman soldiers lining the route struggle to
keep the crowd in check. Then a cry goes up that Caesar should be cremated in the forum,
rather than in the field of Mars as he had requested in his will, because Caesar is the
second founder of Rome. The idea gathers momentum and people begin building a giant
pyre in the forum, piling on everything they can lay their hands on, including benches and
personal possessions. Soldiers donate their leather armor, and entertainers who performed earlier in
the evening throw in their fancy robes. Ordinary citizens contribute their jewelry,
and then the crowd keeps Caesar's mangled body on top of the pyre. The pyre will burn for several
days as people keep throwing new objects on the blaze. Some keep vigil. Rome's Jewish population
is particularly affected by his murder. Caesar has been a great friend of theirs.
Pompey had desecrated the temple in Jerusalem by performing a pagan sacrifice in the Holy
of Holies, so the Jews supported Caesar during the Civil War. And later he permitted them to
build the first synagogue in Rome. This is where this story becomes personal for me.
My son's maternal grandfather, who was Jewish Italian, was named Cesare. My son is named Richard
Sanford Cesare after both of his grandparents. So the Jewish connection with Caesar continues,
even though I'm not Jewish myself. And let me add that Caesar is still honored in Rome to this day.
When I was last in the forum, someone had laid red roses next to the temple of the Divine Caesar,
as he eventually was known. As one of the greatest men who ever lived, Gaius Julius Caesar simply put,
extended the bounds of human possibility.
