One day in the year 654 CE, the Chinese emperor Gaozong is asked by his concubine, Wu Chao,
to greet their newborn baby daughter for the first time. The concubine has previously
borne the emperor two sons, whereas his wife, the empress Wang, remains childless.
We should bear in mind that, like all courts, this one is rife with rivalries, above all
between the wife and mistress, and nowhere more so than here in the imperial bedroom.
The story that comes down to us from the official records is that when the emperor arrives to
greet his newborn Wu Chao, pulls down the covers to reveal the baby and discovers to
her horror that the child is dead, apparently from strangulation.
Wu bursts into tears and asks her attendants what has happened. They cry out, the empress
has just been here and Wu screams, the empress has murdered my child. Do you believe her?
More importantly, does the emperor believe her?
Concubines must satisfy their masters in all matters, including sexually, and perform
as loyal servants to the wife. But favoured ones, such as Wu Chao, have the ability to
concentrate great power in their hands, and this makes them potentially dangerous as we
are about to see. Women in Chinese society were supposed to keep a low profile, and any
woman who stepped out of line was vilified. The society was very much influenced by Confucian
ideals, laid down by the philosopher and teacher Confucius, who was born in the second half
of the sixth century BCE. He advocated that women should acknowledge the authority of
their fathers and their husbands. It's not quite the same thing as to be submissive, but
it comes pretty darn close.
What are we to make of the relationship between the concubine Wu Chao and the empress Wang?
We can hardly expect it to have been amicable. Do we believe the charges leveled by Wu Chao
and her servants at empress Wang that she has slain the newborn baby?
The new book of Tang, an official history of China written in the 11th century, depicts
Wu Chao as bloodthirsty, power-hungry, and sex-crazed. Typical charges throughout history,
filed against women who do not accept the prescribed role that society has obtained for them.
In time, as we shall see, Wu Chao will transform herself into the empress Wu Zetian, an extraordinary
accomplishment that she achieves by supplanting the queen in the emperor's affections.
British author Jonathan Clements provides one version of events in the salacious title
to his biography, Wu, the Chinese empress who schemed, seduced, and murdered her way
to become a living god. It makes a very good read, but I think it's obvious that the official
Chinese historians have done a hatchet job on Wu Chao.
The bad press she receives is due to the fact that she is not only a woman and a concubine
of that, but also a usurper. A Stanford University scholar, Mark Lewis in his History of the
Tang Dynasty, entitled China's Cosmopolitan Empire, points out that all the records of
the period were composed and edited by men who were not only her political enemies, but
who regarded her entire career as a perversion of nature. A perversion of nature, strong
words. Courts are, as we have come to know, full of backstabbing and malicious gossip,
as people jockey for power and influence. And the Chinese court was no exception. We
should certainly not accept all the negative testimony uncritically.
Who had many enemies who wanted to paint her in the worst possible light, even though by
the end of Wu's more than 50 years at the imperial court, China will have made huge
advances economically, socially, politically.
The Tang Dynasty spans three centuries, from 618 to 907. It is often evaluated as the golden
age of Chinese culture, bringing us, possibly, the invention of gunpowder and woodblock
printing. Glazed terracotta horses, those magnificent creatures, are first produced.
In literature, poetry especially is of the highest quality.
Buddhism is flourishing and enjoys imperial patronage, though towards the end of the dynasty
its followers will be persecuted. And it is a time of relative freedom for women. They
are not required to find their feet, which is often seen as a sign of submission. Elite
women enjoy considerable independence and influence, not least at the imperial court.
Wu Chao was born in 624. Family was quite prosperous. Her father had made a fortune
in the timber trade. She received a classical Chinese education that emphasized music and
literature. At the age of 14, she is selected to become
a concubine. Initially to the emperor Gaozong's father and predecessor, the emperor Taizong.
As Jonathan Clements has observed, admission to the ranks of palace concubines was equivalent
to winning a beauty contest of the most gorgeous women in the medieval world.
This is not all Wu possesses, however. She is also highly intelligent, very determined
and extremely ambitious. It was customary since earliest times for
China's noble men to take concubines. During the Tang dynasty, this practice extends from
the imperial household and aristocracy down the social economic scale to include well-to-do
families, and it would persist well into the 20th century.
The usual way for a man to acquire a concubine was to purchase one in the manner that one
would acquire a servant. This means that the majority of concubines
come from the lower classes. Wu Chao, like other imperial concubines, is therefore an
exception. She has been raised by her rich and successful father to be an educated, elegant
credit to her class and gender. In the imperial court, Wu Chao initially is
appointed a siren. That's to say, she's a fifth grade concubine, which means that
she's little more than a maid. In time, however, she greatly impresses the
aging ruler, who refers to her as Mei Nian, which translates as charming lady. Hardly
surprisingly, she also attracts the eye of at least one of the emperor's 14 sons, Prince
Gao Zong. It's even possible that she goes out of
her way to seduce Gao Zong. There's a story that Wu once took the opportunity to become
intimate with Gao Zong when he was, I quote, changing his clothes, a euphemism for relieving
himself. So it's possible the pair began a clandestine affair behind the emperor's
back. Gao Zong's father, the emperor, Tai Zong,
was the second emperor of the Tang dynasty. He had assisted his own father, Li Yuan, in
overthrowing the previous emperor, thereby bringing the Xui dynasty to an end in 617.
Tai Zong is said to have ascended to power amid a dynastic feud that saw him ambush
and kill two brothers before his father abdicated in his favor. Notwithstanding these violent
beginnings, Tai Zong brings peace and prosperity to China. Or at least that is the image he
carefully crafts in official accounts of his reign, which present him as a benign and paternalistic
emperor who surrounds himself with talented advisors. Though he is hardly an innovator,
Tai Zong does follow through on his father's initiatives, setting up state schools, establishing
a civil service to improve local government, and reforming the military by exempting soldiers
from taxation. He is also largely responsible for reuniting China after a period of civil
war. Late in life, demonstrating how history so often repeats itself, Tai Zong banishes
his eldest son and presumed heir for organizing a revolt against him, and he then appoints
his ninth son, the future emperor, Gao Zong, to succeed him.
When Tai Zong dies, Wu Chao has her head shaved and is sent to live in a Buddhist convent.
This is customary practice once the emperor dies in the case of all concubines who have
failed to provide the emperor with any children. At the reason they were sent to live in a
convent is because it was considered an insult to the memory of the dead emperor if any other
man were to have sexual relations with one of his concubines.
It was also perhaps a kind of punishment for not bearing the emperor children, so Wu
Chao, who is now about 24 years old, faces a life of total seclusion and withdrawal.
And indeed that might have been her lot in life had not the new emperor Gao Zong visited
the convent where Wu Chao is confined. Gao Zong arrives ostensibly to pay his respects
to the spirit of his father on the anniversary of his death. But when he and Wu see each
other, we are told, he is moved to tears.
It all sounds very romantic, and perhaps it was, though the negative press that accompanies
Wu throughout her life and into the grave depicts her as a scheming and conniving temptress
who used this occasion to entrap Gao Zong.
Whatever the facts, Wu Chao is released from the convent soon afterwards and returns to
the imperial court as a concubine of the second grade.
Let's just think about the role of a concubine for a moment. It doesn't take much imagination
to realize that the institution has the capacity to cause serious rifts, particularly in the
case of a concubine who supplants the wife in her husband's affections, or even in the
case of one who is able to provide him with an heir if his wife is barren.
And there is another factor to bear in mind. Since a husband can have many concubines,
one is almost inevitable among the concubines as well.
Even in ideal circumstances, there is a delicate balance to maintain. The wife must accept
that her husband will probably form an emotional as well as a physical bond with another woman.
Yet the husband must take care to limit the influence of that woman over his household,
just as his wife feel supplanted and humiliated.
And the concubines should refrain from jockeying for power among themselves. They must compliantly
accept their unequal statuses and roles.
The American author Pearl Buck explores these tensions in her 1931 Pudet surprise winning
novel The Good Earth, which provides an excellent account of the importance and influence of
concubines in Chinese society prior to the First World War.
Well, it's evident on this occasion that a rivalry does emerge between the emperor's
wife, the emperor's Wang, and Wu Chao. The competition is heightened by the fact that
Wu Chao gives the emperor two sons while the emperor's remains childless.
The situation is comparable to the one in Genesis, where the slave girl Hagar, after
giving birth to Ishmael, looks with scorn upon Abraham's wife Sarai because she is barren.
We now return to the moment where we began. Wu Chao has invited the emperor to see his
newborn daughter. When she pulls back the covers over the cot, she discovers to her horror
that the child is dead, whose attendants cry out, the empress has just been here, and Wu
screams at the top of her lungs, the empress has murdered my child.
Frankly, we don't know whom to believe. The official account suggests that Wu Chao has
murdered her child to cast suspicions on her rival for the emperor's affections, the empress.
In other words, she murdered her own daughter to advance her political career. Is that likely
or rather is it possible? Of course it's possible, but the testimony is fraught with obvious
difficulties and the verdict is by no means certain. It's just as likely that this story
is an invention of Wu's detractors. She may genuinely suspect the empress of murder without
any thoughts of her own advantage and advancement. It's also possible that the infant has died
of natural causes. Neonatal deaths were extremely common in China at this date as they were
throughout the world. Whatever thoughts may be passing through the
emperor's mind when he first gazes upon his dead child, the empress Wang is initially
cleared of the suspicions. After all, what is the word of a concubine worth when compared
with that of a queen? Over time, however, the emperor comes to side with Wu and comes
to believe that his wife is complicit in murder. And then something else happens of which we
have only a vague report. The empress Wang and her close friend, the number one concubine
known as the pure concubine, are accused of attempting to murder the emperor.
When the supposed plot is discovered, Wang is unceremoniously stripped of her title and
immediately placed under house arrest. It's now December the 12th in the year 655 and
the emperor Gao Zong is about to make a decision that will further unsettle his court with
long lasting repercussions for the empire. He announces that he will marry his new number
one concubine, Wu Chao, who is now 31 years old. Just imagine that you are a member of
the ruling class. How do you react to this news? The world is being turned upside down.
The social hierarchy is under attack by a shrewd, manipulative and highly capable woman
who now has her hands on the levers of power. We don't have testimony as to how this news
is received at the imperial court or indeed elsewhere in the land, but it's easy enough
to imagine the gossip. There must be many members of the court at this moment, including
former supporters of the disgraced empress Wang, who are fretting for their careers and
even for their lives. How can they be sure that Wu won't pursue a vendetta against them
as well? For that matter, what is Wu Chao thinking at this time? How does she see her own future?
What are her goals for herself, her family, and indeed for China? Is she really as self-assured
and dominating as the sources suggest? Some accounts suggest that Gaozong is a weak and
vacillating emperor whom she now has eating out of her hand, but that testimony may be
intended merely to discredit her further. And so often in history we have no access to
the main actor's thoughts, to her motivation, to her intentions, or to her ideals.
One of the most frightening anecdotes told about Wu Chao relates to a visit the emperor
was intending to pay to his former wife and former number one concubine when they were
still under house arrest. Wu is said to have caught wind of the planned visit and become
fearful he was going to reinstate the pair. To forestall him, we are told, Wu administers
100 lashes to each woman and has their hands and feet amputated. Even this is not the end
of her reported cruelty, however. She is said to then immerse their bleeding mutilated bodies
in a vat of wine which causes them to undergo a lingering and painful death. And this is
what she says, now these two witches can get drunk to the bones. Later she orders them
to be decapitated and their bodies cut into pieces. Is any of this true? If we are to
believe what we read, Wu is a monster with an insatiable sexual appetite which she gratifies
by having affairs with supporters. She is reported to practice necromancy, communicating
with the dead to predict the future and also to delight in torture. She reputedly has one
prince so savagely beaten that the welts well up whenever it is about to rain thus enabling
him to predict the weather. Well, none of these accusations can either be proven or disproved
at this late date in history, although it is safe to say that the weather has always
defied reliable forecasts. That notwithstanding, there is no denying
that for a woman in feudal China to grasp power the way Wu has done, she must be more
than the charming lady as the late emperor, Tai Zong, described her. Within a decade of
the former lowly concubine's ambitious marriage, many of the trappings of power pass into her
hands primarily as a result of Gao Zong's failing health. He suffers from a chronic
illness, we don't exactly know what, that leaves him partially paralyzed. And even when
his health is relatively unimpaired, he is probably no match for this enterprising,
temptress turned empress. Yet the fact remains that so long as Gao Zong
is alive, Wu Chao demonstrates considerable tact. She doesn't try to overshadow her husband
nor forcibly rest the reins of power from him. When he holds audiences, she sits with
him on a throne like his, but hidden by a screen.
By all accounts, the pair have a strong conjugal bond and make a good team, sharing for sons
and two daughters. They come to be known as the two sages, which suggest that in time
they're accorded a degree of public acceptance. Their marriage lasts for nearly thirty years
until the emperor's peaceful death in 683 at the age of 55. He's believed to have had
two strokes by then, though the hostile testimony claims that Wu poisoned him.
After Gao Zong's death following thirty-four years of rule, Wu first becomes the emperor's
dowager and then the emperor's regnant. The term dowager refers to a widow whose title
derives from her late husband. It doesn't imply power. Regnant, however, means that
she commands as much power as an emperor, even though she is not accorded a commensurate
title.
Gao Zong is first succeeded by a succession of sons until the year 690 when Wu Chao orders
the last of his sons to abdicate, whereupon she proclaims herself sovereign ruler of China.
She now takes the name Wu Zetian, which means Wu, the pattern of heaven. She is 66 years
old, China's first and last female emperor, and she will rule alone for the next fifteen
years.
Wu Zetian's imperial legacy is impressive. The British historian, a C.P. Fitzgerald,
goes so far as to say, without Wu there would have been no long-enduring Tang dynasty, and
perhaps no lasting unity of China.
She moves the capital from Chang'an to Yoyang about 600 miles north of present-day Shanghai.
As she does this, partly for political reasons, Yoyang is the ancestral heartland of her clan,
but it is also an intelligent and far-sighted economic decision since the new capital lies
close to important trade routes to the south.
In government, Wu Zetian creates a meritocracy by instituting a program whereby the bureaucracy
comes to be filled with appointments made on the basis of formal exams followed by interviews,
in which she hand-selects the best from those who pass the exams.
This means that she surrounds herself with scholars rather than aristocrats, and this
in turn reduces, if it does not wholly eliminate, the cronyism and nephatism that had characterized
the court previously.
By doing this, Wu is also conforming to the Confucian principle that a ruler should seek
advice from those most capable of giving it.
Indeed, although Confucius had issued strictures against female rule, this does not prevent
Wu from incorporating many Confucian principles into her statecraft.
She permits her ministers to criticize her, even to ridicule her for her dependency on
omens.
At the same time, Wu Zetian is utterly ruthless.
Leaving aside the horror stories, she institutes a highly efficient secret police force.
She encourages informants to report on her rivals.
She installs copper boxes in the capital in which any citizen can anonymously post a
denunciation, thereby creating an atmosphere of fear and suspicion, even within the same
family.
By one estimate, she exiles or executes or forces to commit suicide 80% of her chief ministers.
Wu also improves the lot of peasants by reducing their taxes and passing measures to increase
productivity.
She establishes arms houses for the sick and poor.
She encourages the arts, including literature, thereby paving the way for an artistic efflorescence
under her successors.
To a limited degree, she elevates the status of women, and not only by her example.
She passes a decree that increases the period of mourning owed to a deceased mother, so
that it equals that due to a father.
She states that a ruler should watch over his people as a mother does over her children.
It's possible, too, that she sponsors a work called Biographies of Exemplary Women, intended
to be an educational work for Chinese women, though some authorities place it much earlier
as earlier as the first century.
She should not, however, see her as an early feminist, or anything like some historians
actually see her as deeply conservative.
The historian Shen Zhou Shui of the National Taiwan University, for instance, argues that
the Empress, I quote, not only failed to establish the right of women to enter public life, she
also reconfirmed that their only legitimate domain was the home.
In the realm of spirituality, Wu Zetian promotes Buddhism, which was introduced into China from
India along the Silk Road some 400 years earlier.
Many Buddhist temples are erected during her reign, and many cave sculptures are carved.
The religion, or philosophy, however we label it, becomes the dominant one practiced by
the Chinese people.
Here again, in fact, will Buddhism achieve such prominence in Chinese society as it does
during her reign?
At the same time, Wu deftly avoids alienating devotees of the other great teaching movements
in China, including Taoism and Confucianism.
She promotes good relations between the indigenous Chinese, known as the Han, on the one hand,
and the many ethnic minorities that populate her empire on the other.
Today there are 55 recognized ethnic minorities in China, and there were doubtless many more
in Wu's day.
She promotes non-Han generals to defend her empire.
She avoids costly foreign wars, thereby reducing the amount of state treasuries spent on the
military.
She leaves China secure and intact after facing a number of external threats, not least
from the Tibetan Empire, which is encroaching on the western border of China.
It is during the Tang dynasty that Tibet first becomes a thorn in China's side.
A few months before Wu Zetian's death in 705 at the age of 81, she is forced to abdicate
by her eldest son, Zong Zong, whom she exiled years before.
Wu now renounces the title of emperor, as well as her status as a living god.
By the end of her life, she has become extremely superstitious and increasingly under the control
of a small set of advisors and flatterers.
It probably doesn't take much to persuade her to go quietly.
I have talked before about the Cleopatra's nose theory advanced by the 17th century French
thinker Blaise Pascal.
Had Cleopatra's nose been smaller, she would not have been so dominant, and the face of
history would have looked very different.
While we don't know the length of Wu Zetian's nose, it's safe to say that few women in
history, including Cleopatra, have been as dominant as her.
Wu's closest Chinese equivalent, Xu Chi, a concubine during the Qing dynasty who rose
to become the emperor's dowager, or emperor's wife, in the latter half of the 19th century.
Like Wu Zetian, Xu Chi started out as a low-ranking concubine and moved up the ladder.
When the emperor died, she led a coup and established herself as regent.
Although Xu Chi never had the title of emperor, she effectively ruled China for almost half
a century, until her death in 1908.
Whereas Wu Zetian consolidated China's borders, its political apparatus and something of the
cultural identity, Xu Chi reached outside to connect China to the world.
And whereas Wu Zetian connects us to China's past, Xu Chi connects us to modern-day China.
Like Wu at the end of her life, one of the emperor's sons ends Xu Chi's long rule.
Like Wu, Xu Chi is a polarizing figure.
One sees her as ruthless and manipulative, others as a talented administrator who did
what was necessary to avert the collapse of the Qing dynasty.
Like Wu, Xu Chi is a victim of the double standard imposed upon women throughout history.
Had they been contemporaries in the same court, they would doubtless have been rivals.
But since they are separated by time, they are allied as sisters.
Wu Zetian is today buried beside her beloved Gao Zong.
Legend has it that the late emperor chose this very spot between two hills because they
reminded him of her breasts.
While Wu Zetian's reign is but a moment in 3,000 years of Chinese history, her career
endures as a striking conjunction of the woman, the means and the moment.
