I will tell this story through two men, the Roman Emperor Honorius, who ruled in the West
from 395 to 423, and whose survival strategy is to buy protection from the invading barbarians.
And through a Visigoth invader named Alaric, whose relatively modest ambition is to be awarded
the title of Roman General and to receive annual tributes of gold and grain for his people.
The beauty of this tale is that it reveals how large contours of history can be shaped by individual personalities.
Honorius and Alaric have had several chances to sort things out between them and to avoid the sack of Rome.
We will skip ahead for the moment to the last opportunity to set the scene.
It is August 410 and the invader is making his final attempt to negotiate a peaceful coexistence with the Romans.
Alaric has abandoned all of his previous demands, the gold, the grain and Roman generalship,
and is asking only for the wretched province of Noricum, which, according to the Greek historian Zosimas,
is situated at the far end of the Danube River, constantly troubled by invasions,
and which contributes little tax to the Roman treasury.
That is to say, it is the central part of what today is Austria plus Slovenia.
Zosimas writing a century after the events tells us that when Alaric's offer is read aloud in Honorius' court,
everyone is struck by the fellow's moderation.
No less confounding is the fact that Honorius flatly refuses to accept it.
Learning of this decision, Alaric begins the historic sack of Rome,
a term incidentally that may derive from the Italian fare il sacco, or metere al sacco,
referring to filling a sack with plunder.
Let's pan the camera out to Rome at large where the situation is dire.
Chaos reigns. The army has just withdrawn from Spain, Hispania, and is about to abandon Britain, Britannia.
Waves of Germanic tribesmen, the barbarians as we collectively call them,
are sweeping across the Italian peninsula.
They are fighting native Romans and also fighting one another while plundering the empire for survival.
Every day they pose a greater threat to the weakened central authorities.
Before we dive into the epic confrontation between Honorius and Alaric and explore the tragic outcome,
let's look in on the emperor himself as he takes a siesta on the afternoon of August the 24th, 410.
A messenger has just burst into the imperial bedroom in his palace at Ravenna, crying out,
Sire, Sire, Rome is perishing.
The slightly-addled emperor starts up out of his reverie in alarm.
What terrible news! Rome is perishing? What can have happened?
He is thinking, you see, not of the eternal city, but of his highly prized fighting rooster,
which he happens to have named Roma.
And so Honorius cries out in fright to the messenger, but he has just eaten from my hand.
The messenger apologizes profusely for the confusion he has caused
and explains that he is referring to the city of Rome, not to the emperor's pet rooster.
What a relief! Honorius sinks back on his couch and goes back to sleep.
Procopius, the 6th century historian who reports this fanciful anecdote, clearly despises Honorius.
He concludes with the biting commentary, so great, according to popular report,
was the folly which possessed this emperor.
Rome is perishing. The anecdote may indeed be too good to be true.
If it is, it provides a marvellous example of the Italian proverb,
se non è vero, è ben trovato. If not true, it's a great invention.
So, how have we come to this point in history?
Rome's decline has begun nearly two centuries earlier.
Around the year 235 CE, the emperor Severus Alexander
was murdered in a mutiny led by one of his army commanders.
From this moment forward, the empire becomes increasingly unstable.
Invading tribes of Goths, Visigoths, Huns and Vandals, move into the power vacuum,
fighting one another and threatening the imperial authorities.
Still, it's important to understand that the Goths and Romans have never been implacable enemies.
They've had close links since the middle of the 3rd century, particularly in trade.
In the half century from 235 to 284, the Roman senate will ratify no fewer than 25 emperors,
and that's not counting the several pretenders who create fiefdoms and lay claim to the imperial purple.
The Romans who live in the capital become increasingly anxious to protect themselves
from the barbarian hordes that are sweeping into Italy from the north.
So, around the year 270 CE, the emperor Aurelian begins work on the so-called Aurelian Wall,
a 12-mile-long defensive barrier around Rome, with no fewer than 381 projecting watchtowers,
and which his successor, the emperor Probus, completes about 10 years later.
We refer to the Goths, the Visigoths, the Huns and the Vandals, collectively as barbarians,
because that's the term the Romans give them.
But it ill describes peoples who were by no means bereft of civilized values,
as Alaric himself soon will demonstrate.
I prefer the term non-Mediterranean to describe these migratory populations,
but for the sake of convention, I'll continue using the term barbarian here.
Although the barbarians are sharply differentiated from one another in their ethnic allegiances,
they sometimes combine to achieve a particular objective.
Many of them too become semi-romanized through contact with the indigenous population
living inside of their empire.
They adopt Roman manners and come to value Roman ideals.
And some too, such as Alaric, are eager to take their place in the social hierarchy.
It's important to understand that the barbarians are not intent on destroying the empire,
rather they want accommodation within it.
By way of background, it's also important to bear in mind that although the empire is officially Christian,
Christianity has not yet won universal adherence.
It's all too easy to believe that once the emperor Constantine ordered his soldiers
to paint crosses on their shields before the battle of the Milvian bridge in 312,
which he fought against his rival Maxentius for control of the empire,
that paganism was dead in the water.
But that was far from being the case.
Pagan worship will continue well into the 6th and 7th centuries.
And we will see how that plays out in this story.
Another fact to bear in mind is that increasingly over the course of time,
the Roman Empire has become too unwieldy to administer as a single unit,
so that eventually it's split into a western and eastern half.
The definitive year in which the split occurs is 395,
when the empire is divided between the two sons of the late emperor Theodosius I.
Arcadius is given the eastern half and Honorius rules the western half,
which includes the city of Rome.
Never again will the two halves be ruled by a single emperor.
The eastern sector is centered at Constantinople, modern-day Istanbul,
the great city founded by the emperor Constantine the Great in 324.
Here, Greek is spoken and the eastern Orthodox branch of Christianity will take root.
Originally known as Nova Roma, new Rome,
Constantinople will come to Overshadow Rome,
but it does not feature in this story.
In the west, where what we will know as Roman Catholicism will be practiced,
the primary language is Latin.
As waves of invaders fight for Rome's faded glories,
the nature of the western empire's army changes.
Instead of there being citizens and non-citizens who serve in different units
known as legiones and auxilia, both now fight alongside one another.
In addition, many of the non-Roman soldiers are in fact barbarian volunteers.
This means that barbarian soldiers are defending the empire against barbarian invaders.
Rome itself, however, is no longer the western capital.
Its population has dwindled considerably from its peak during the 1st and 2nd centuries CE.
And it no longer attracts the brightest and the best from all over the Mediterranean, as it once did.
The former emperor Valentinian transferred the imperial residence to Milan in 375.
And then, after the Goths settled in the Po Valley near Milan,
Honorius moved his residence in 402 to Ravenna on Italy's Adriatic eastern coast.
He chooses this location because of its relatively secure situation.
Ravenna is protected by marshland and is highly defensible.
Ravenna will remain the capital until the year 476, when the western empire finally ceases to exist.
So Procopius' suggestion that Honorius isn't too fussed upon learning that Rome, some 175 miles away, is being sacked, has some merit.
The emperor's disregard for the city is indicated by the fact that he never visited it once during his lifetime.
Honorius has at least one lasting virtue.
It is he who officially abolishes the bloodsport of gladiatorial combat after a monk named Telemachus throws himself into the arena to separate the combatants before being stoned to death.
That apart, Honorius doesn't command much respect.
The Irish historian J.B. Bury, who died in 1927, wrote of Honorius that
his name would be forgotten among the obscurest occupants of the imperial throne.
Were it not that his reign coincided with the fatal period in which it was decided that western Europe was to pass from the Roman to the Teuton, meaning German.
Honorius is neither diligent nor hardworking. He isn't energetic or gifted or courageous.
He seems largely content to leave Rome to its fate. He doesn't have a particularly large army in any event.
So the only way he could defend Rome is by buying off the invaders, which he does in his own fashion.
First by promising to pay an indemnity, if the barbarians will just go away, and then by failing to deliver on his promise once they do so.
As a devout Christian, Honorius also takes the disastrous step of excluding from office, including from the military, all pagans as well as those who subscribe to Arianism.
Arianism is a heresy proposed by the early 4th century Alexandrian cleric Arius, who maintained that Christ is not divine, but a created being who had a beginning like the rest of us and who therefore cannot be the redeemer.
As a result of this policy, Honorius deprives himself of the services of thousands of able administrators and officers.
Honorius' fateful opponent, Alaric, is a charismatic Germanic leader who styles himself King of the Visigoths, that is the Western Goths.
The Goths are a Germanic people of uncertain origin. There's a report that they come from Scandinavia, but the Black Sea region is more likely.
The Goths, by the way, have won a spectacular victory in 378 over the Romans at Adrianopolis in modern-day Turkey near the border between Greece and Bulgaria.
The Romans were routed, and the body of their emperor, Valens, who led them into battle, was never found, so the Goths are a force to be reckoned with.
Alaric's name means, literally, everyone's king, and it reflects the fact that he has attracted people of different backgrounds to his banner.
In particular, he has united two Gothic tribes, the Tevingi and the Gruthungi, who are what we know today as the Visigoths.
His army also includes 10,000 barbarians who deserted the Roman army, hoping no doubt for plunder, as well as a large number of runaway slaves.
What really gives Alaric the advantage over the emperor is when Honorius's Magister Militum, or Master of the Armed Forces, a half-Roman and half-vandal named Flavius Stilico, is accused in 408 of conspiring with the barbarians and seeking to have his son elevated to the throne.
Up to this point, the emperor has been dominated by Stilico. He has married Stilico's daughter, Maria, and when Maria died, he married her sister, Germantia.
After the alleged betrayal, Honorius has Stilico executed and orders the massacre of thousands of Goths serving in the Roman army, whose loyalty he now suspects because they lament Stilico's death.
This is a fatal misjudgment on Honorius's part. The survivors, some 30,000 in all, joined forces with Alaric in what becomes a very motley army, but one that is armed to the teeth.
Let's pause to think about this for a moment.
Although we have no testimony from the Gothic side, we can well understand their predicament and what is urging the Goths onward. They are being propelled from behind by the Huns, a nomadic people who originated in Mongolia.
Like any refugee population, they need food and a place to settle. Probably a lot of camp followers are with them, both women and children.
There's is a community on the march looking for a place to settle and all too common occurrence in the ancient world. Desperation motivates them as much as greed.
Alaric must demonstrate considerable leadership skills to hold them together, especially when their morale is at a low end.
He no doubt makes all sorts of extravagant promises to those who take up his banner, land, plunder, security, and an end to their wanderings.
But Alaric has his own agenda as well. He wants recognition by the Roman establishment. He doesn't want to destroy the empire. He wants a part of it.
Alaric first invades Italy in 401 and then again the next year. In 408 he returns with his sights set on Rome.
After pillaging a number of cities on the way south, he encamps outside the city walls by November.
He then begins a blockade to cut off grain shipments to Rome from North Africa on which the population is dependent.
Soon the inhabitants are dying by the thousands. The stench inside the city becomes unbearable.
It's reported that some of the city's population murder their fellow citizens and feed upon their bodies.
Mothers are alleged to taste the flesh of their own slaughtered innocents. The famine is aggravated by plague. Thousands die in the streets and in their homes.
Eventually Alaric agrees to relax the siege in return for a huge indemnity of gold, silver, silk, and pepper.
Representatives of the Roman Senate politely inquire, if those are your demands, oh king, what will you leave us with?
Alaric holds back at them the words, your lives.
With this the Roman Senate agrees to pay the goth general 5,000 pounds of gold and 30,000 pounds of silver worth more than 100 million today as well as 4,000 silk robes and 3,000 pounds of pepper.
Pepper, I should point out, is an expensive ingredient in Roman cookery.
But ransom is not what Alaric desires most keenly. What he wants is to be commander-in-chief of the Western Roman army and this honorius stoutly refuses to give him.
So in 409 Alaric returns yet again, besieging Rome once more, though he again lifts the assault after the governor of the province of Africa, in support of honorius, interrupts the regular flow of essential grain supplies from North Africa.
He does so not because he takes compassion on the starving population, rather he knows that if no grain is arriving to feed Rome, his army won't be fed either.
In 410 Alaric makes a final effort to negotiate with honorius. All he asks for is the northern province of Noricum.
Honorius, however, refuses, whereupon Alaric elevates a Roman senator to the rank of emperor and initiates a rebellion.
Only now, at the 11th hour, does Honorius agree to negotiate.
Finally, we seem set for a happy ending after all.
But then, the unexpected happens as so often seems to be the case in history.
Alaric is within five or six miles of Ravenna when a rival goth named Saras ambushes him.
Saras too has been seeking the post of commander-in-chief of the Western Roman army.
As he marshals only a small band of followers and fears Alaric's forces, Saras has recently allied himself to Honorius.
However, it's unclear whether in attacking Alaric he is operating under Honorius' orders or acting upon his own initiative.
And Alaric doesn't stick around to find out.
Assuming that Saras is attacking him on the orders of the emperor, he breaks off the seemingly promising negotiations and heads back to Rome.
Around midnight, on August the 24th of the year 410, Alaric bursts through Rome's Salarian Gate, which is part of the former Emperor Aurelian's Great Wall.
According to one report, he is let in by a Roman noblewoman who seeks to save the city from starvation by preventing another siege.
Due to the depleted state of the Roman army, it's true that Rome would be hard put to defend itself.
Alaric does not reduce the city to a pile of rubble, however, as he could so easily have done.
On the contrary, as the British medieval historian Peter Heather states in his book The Fall of the Roman Empire,
it is one of the most civilized sacks of a city ever witnessed.
Consider, for example, the anecdote told by the Christian historian and theologian Erosius.
When one of Alaric's chieftains is on the point of seizing a large quantity of gold and silver,
an elderly woman warns him that the treasure belongs to St. Peter's Basilica, the predecessor to the present-day St. Peter's,
and that if he pilffers it, he will be forever haunted.
The chieftain is reported to relay this message to Alaric, who orders him straight way to return the treasure to St. Peter's.
Erosius tells us that priests and nuns alike are spared, and that churches and their treasures are left untouched.
A probable explanation for the invaders' restraint is that many of the Visigoths are themselves Christian.
Even after Alaric's troops have been pillaging Rome for three days, much of the city remains intact.
It is, by the way, the first time in nearly 800 years that Rome has been sacked.
The previous occasion was in 387 BCE, when Rome was assaulted by the Gallic chieftain, Brennus.
On that occasion, only the citadel, known as the capitaline hill or capital, the site of Rome's most venerable temples, was spared.
By comparison, only a small portion of the city is set on fire in this attack.
The hardest hit areas are around the Celerian Gate and the Roman Forum.
Even so, no sack can be entirely civilized, of course, and this one is no exception.
Once you let your men loose in a city, it's inevitable that a wild, violent and fiery assault will ensue.
Many thousands of people will perish with thousands more taken prisoner.
One of the captives is Gala Plachidia, the sister of the Emperor Honorius, who becomes a most valuable hostage and will return to her later in the story.
Hundreds of women are raped, hundreds of others sold into prostitution, and a great deal of property is looted, even if it isn't church property.
Allegedly, however, only one senator perishes by the sword.
Saint Jerome, best known for his Latin translation of the Bible, known as the Vulgate, which he completes in CE 405,
eloquently sizes up the outcome in his commentary on Ezekiel, one of the books in the Hebrew Bible.
The Roman Empire has been decapitated. The entire world has perished in one city.
In its aftermath, the sack of Rome sparks an intense war of words between Christians and polytheists, many of whom still reside in the Roman Empire.
Having been marginalized by Honorius' policies, many polytheists try to capitalize on the fall of Rome by claiming that it proves that the traditional gods
are deeply offended by the snub that they had received from Christianity and were punishing Rome in consequence.
By extension, this means that Christianity has brought catastrophe to the world.
Christians argue the very opposite. Leading the charge is Saint Augustine of Hippo, who rebuts the polytheist argument in his work, The City of God.
He points out that Rome has suffered many disasters under polytheism as well, and that what matters anyway is not the earthly city of Rome,
but God's spiritual heaven, hence the title of his work.
How significant historically is the sack of Rome? The Cambridge Ancient History, the definitive contemporary work on ancient times,
devotes precisely one sentence to it. It states, the three days the Goths looted and burned. Nothing more than that.
The loss of Rome to the Barbarians does not signal the downfall of the Empire in the West.
As we've seen, Rome had not been the site of the Imperial residence for 35 years.
However, the Roman Empire will, from this point forward, cease to exercise meaningful control over the Western Mediterranean.
Further, more and greater disasters will follow shortly.
The loss of Carthage, the capital of Roman Africa to the Vandals a generation later, proves to be a much greater blow to the Empire,
because Carthage is a hub for the collection and distribution of grain from North Africa to Italy,
and also second only to Rome in population throughout the West, so its fall to the Barbarians poses a more significant loss.
At least in name, however, the Western Roman Empire will continue to exist until the very brief reign of Romulus Augustus,
little Augustus, 475 to 476 CE.
His Imperial title is ironic, because Romulus was also the name of Rome's first King, and Augustus, the name of its first Emperor.
Revena itself survives unscathed.
The unambitious and uninspiring Emperor Honorius lives until August the 15th, 423, almost 13 years to the day after the Sack of Rome.
No hero who defends his Empire to the death Honorius expires of Pulmonary edema, a buildup of fluid in the lungs.
He leaves no heir.
Alaric by comparison is a tragic figure, having spent the greater part of his lifetime seeking a homeland for his people and an official title for himself.
He obtains neither.
On August the 29th, 410, after just six days in the city, Alaric departs with his victorious army laden with plunder.
He heads south along the Appian Way, destroying all in his path, including the wealthy city of Capua, a former Greek colony, until he arrives at Calabria on the toe of the Italian peninsula.
Alaric is intent now on launching an attack on Sicily, and then seizing North Africa, which is his new goal.
He sees Africa as a power base from which he will be able to cut off all of Italy's corn supply and starve it into submission.
However, he loses a large part of his fleet in a storm and dies of a fever soon afterwards.
The slaves, who dig his grave, are slaughtered to preserve the secret of its location.
The great 18th century English historian Edward Gibbon supplies Alaric's fitting obituary.
Whether fame or conquest or riches were the object of Alaric, he pursued that object with an indefatigable ardour which could neither be quelled by adversity,
nor satiated by success.
Alaric is seceded by his brother-in-law Atulfs, who abandons the general's original plan to hunker down in Africa.
Instead, Atulf turns around his army and the extended community that accompanies it, and leads them north into Gaul,
which by now has broken away from the Western Empire.
They settle in Aquitaine, a lovely region in today's southwest France, bordering on the Atlantic Ocean to the west and the Pyrenees to the south.
And do you recall Honorius's half-sister, Gala Placidia, who was taken hostage during the Sack of Rome?
She is a formidable woman.
In a delicious twist of history, Atulf ends up marrying Gala, and when Atulf is murdered, Gala remarries and gives birth to a son who becomes the emperor as Valentinian III.
So we do have a happy ending after all, and Alaric himself isn't quite consigned to dust.
In July 2013, the mayor of Cossensa in southern Italy, where Alaric met his death, gave permission to knock down an old hotel and set up a museum honoring the Visigoth.
This caused a storm of protest in Rome.
I suspect Alaric would have enjoyed the furor that that caused.
Who said that history isn't living all around us?
In July 2013, the mayor of Cossensa, Gala Placidia, who was taken hostage during the Sack of Rome, was taken hostage during the Sack of Rome.
The mayor of Cossensa, Gala Placidia, who was taken hostage during the Sack of Rome, was taken hostage during the Sack of Rome.
