The year is 987 or 988. We're at the church of St. Basil in southern Ukraine, not far
from the Crimea. We've arrived at Kersan, a coastal city at the mouth of the river
Nipa, for the baptism of Vladimir, the grand duke of Kiev. Vladimir is accompanied by his
bride, the 27-year-old princess Anna, who is the sister of the Byzantine emperor Basil II.
What makes this day so extraordinary is that Vladimir, who is also known as Vladimir the Great,
has been an active pagan up to this point in his life. In fact, he's gone out of his way to
persecute Christians, and his people, known as the Rus, are not highly regarded by some Muslims,
either. The Rus are an ancient Slavic tribe known as the filthiest of all of Allah's people,
according to the written account of the Arab ambassador and amateur anthropologist Iban Fadlan,
who traveled to this land a half century before us. But now, Vladimir's seen the light,
and the streets of Kersan are lined with cheering people for the baptismal rites.
Or has he seen the light? Well, not exactly. He hasn't undergone a conversion like that of
St. Paul's say, at least not that we hear about. But he does realize that it's in his best interests
to become a Christian. That's because Vladimir wants to marry Anna, and the reason Vladimir wants
to marry Anna is because he sees an alliance with the Byzantine Empire, centered in Constantinople,
400 miles due south across the Black Sea, as a way to strengthen his control over his unruly realm.
In turn, the Byzantine emperor, Basil II, has agreed to give his sister in marriage to the
grand duke on the condition that Vladimir converts to Christianity. And if the grand duke converts,
that means all of his subjects will necessarily follow suit. But it's hardly likely that Vladimir's
pagan subjects will abandon the worship of idols without objection. So we can expect some rocky
times ahead, perhaps even an insurrection. Kiev is the capital of modern-day Ukraine,
and Vladimir has been the grand duke for eight years now. As the illegitimate son of the previous
duke of Kiev, he has had to wrestle for the throne by fighting off the claim of the half-brother.
He did so not only by usurping the throne from his sibling, but also by treacherously murdering him.
From a moral standpoint, Vladimir doesn't have much to recommend him, at least not before he
converts to Christianity. He is, or was, a polygamist. He's had five wives and 800 concubines. According
to a report we receive from the Russian primary chronicle, which is our earliest source for the
reign of Vladimir. The primary chronicle was compiled in the 12th century, just over a century
after Vladimir's death. It was written in the liturgical language of Old Church Slavonic. It
paints a highly unflattering, even unpalatable picture of the grand duke prince before his
conversion. It claims that in the first years of his reign, Vladimir actively promotes paganism,
the worship of many gods, and even tolerates human sacrifice. It does so to emphasize the
contrast between the pagan self and the man he becomes under the influence of Christ's teachings.
So we have to take it with a pinch of salt. While Christianity has been around for nearly a millennium
by the time Vladimir comes to the throne in 972, it has not yet reached its zenith. In Eastern Europe
and Scandinavia, paganism still flourishes. We don't have any written sources for Slavic
paganism before the arrival of the Christians in the 9th century, but it's clear that it was
primarily animistic. That's to say Slavic pagans worship spirits, or animi, which are believed
to control rivers, fields, woods, the household, the stables, and so forth. They also worshiped
their ancestors. There were other more powerful gods, chief of whom is Perun, the god of thunder
and lightning, a figure rather like Zeus in Greek religion, and Jupiter among the Romans.
Another important deity is Svarog, a god of light, fire, and the sun. In fact, it's Vladimir who takes
steps to establish an organized pantheon of Slavic gods. The Slavs believe in the afterlife, and
they also practice abominations, or at least that is what the Christian sources claim. They are said
to kill or expose unwanted infants, as well as the elderly, if the elderly are unable to work.
Vladimir is not the first of the Rus to become Christian. According to legend, the apostle
Saint Andrew, brother of Simon Peter, brought Christianity to the region in the first century
CE, and Christianity began to make inroads among the Rus about a century before Vladimir came to
the throne. Photeus, the patriarch of Constantinople and one of the foremost scholars of the Middle
Ages, whose life spanned most of the ninth century, and who oversaw the east's break with Rome,
claimed that many of the Rus had adopted Christianity following the conversion of the
Bulgarians in 864. Vladimir's own grandmother, Olga, converted to Christianity and was active
in the faith. She also helped to found a church in Kiev. So, Christianity has had its devotees
long before the 980s, when Vladimir embraces the faith. None of our sources suggests that Vladimir
has an epiphany at the time when he embraces Christianity. On the contrary, what he does
is to embark upon an investigation of the faiths, as scholars dub it, and what I would call a religious
fishing expedition. According to the primary chronicle, Vladimir lets it be known that he is
on the lookout for a new religion. In response, he receives ambassadors from Byzantine Christians,
Jewish Khazars, Muslim Bulgas, and Germans representing the Pope. He dismisses the Jewish
ambassadors, claiming that the fact that Jerusalem has been destroyed is evidence that
God has abandoned the Jews. After hearing from each intern, Vladimir sends his own ambassadors
to the homelands of the different groups to find out more about their practices.
Here is part of the account he is said to receive. When we journeyed among the Bulgas,
we beheld how they worship in their temple called a Mosque, while they stand Ungert.
Ungert, which refers to the practice of loosening the belt, connotes a lack of discipline in this
context. The envoys continue. The Bulga bows, sits down, looks hither and thither like one possessed,
and there is no happiness among them, but instead only sorrow and a dreadful stench.
Their religion is not good. Notwithstanding the ambassador's report, Vladimir is at first
greatly attracted by Islam, particularly when Muslims die, their carnal desires are believed
to be fully satisfied in the afterlife, and Vladimir happens to be very fond of women.
What puts him off Islam is the fact that he would have to undergo
circumcision and give up both pork and alcohol. Drinking, he observes, is the delight of the
roots. We can't survive without that pleasure. Continuing with their report to Vladimir, the
envoys state, then we went among the Germans and saw them performing many ceremonies in their temples,
but we beheld no glory there. And finally, the envoys report on their visit to Constantinople,
and the stunning beauty of Hagia Sophia, the Church of Holy Wisdom, built in the sixth century.
They tell the Grand Duke, the Greeks led us to the edifices where they worshiped their God,
and we knew not whether we were in heaven or on earth. For on earth, there is no such splendor
or such beauty, and we are at a loss how to describe it. We know only that God dwells there
among men, and their service is fairer than the ceremonies of other nations.
We don't precisely know what motivates Vladimir's conversion because he doesn't write anything down,
but quite aside from his desire to ally himself with the Byzantine emperor, adopting Christianity,
is a way of entering the modern world at the end of the first millennium,
and of being on the right side of history. Vladimir may also have calculated that paganism
just wasn't delivering the goods any longer. Gods are supposed to help you achieve military
victory. That principle lay at the core of both Greek and Roman polytheism, and it was no less
true of Slavic polytheism. But Vladimir hasn't had much joy in war lately. So Vladimir settles for
Greek Orthodox Christianity after his ambassadors conclude by stating,
when a man has tasted something sweet, he does not want anything bitter.
The envoys reportedly add that if the Greek faith were evil, it would not have been adopted by your
grandmother Olga, who was wiser than anyone else. Well, the tale of the religious fishing
expedition or investigation of the faiths is almost certainly apocryphal. It is believed to
have been inserted into Vladimir's biography much later, at a time when Rome and Byzantium
were at loggerheads. Even so, that doesn't rule out the possibility that Vladimir did indeed
conduct some private inquiry into the merits of the major monotheistic religions.
And the anecdote usefully underscores something very important, that it wasn't a foregone
conclusion that Vladimir would embrace Byzantine Christianity, headed by the Emperor Basil II.
The Emperor is not only a great general, but also a very capable administrator. And he possesses
considerable powers of persuasion, whereas Vladimir is more accustomed to get his way
using violent means. And it is he who makes the initial diplomatic approach to Vladimir.
Basil's goal is to stabilize the western frontier of the Byzantine Empire. He also
wants help in fighting off claimants to the imperial throne, and Basil is no saint.
There's a story that after he once captured 14,000 Bulgar prisoners, he gouged out the eyes
of 99 out of every 100 of them, and left the 100th with just one eye to lead
fellow soldiers back home. Still, Basil's request for assistance represents a potentially great
opportunity for Vladimir, who views an alliance with Byzantium as a way to strengthen
his control over his realm and increase his political standing. Vladimir, as we've seen,
is a dodgy claimant to the grand dutum. He suffers from what Nora Berend, the Cambridge
University scholar of medieval European history, calls legitimacy deficit. An alliance with Basil
will help him to shore up that deficit. No epiphany then, but becoming a Christian
does make very good sense for many reasons. The Russian French writer Vladimir Volkov in his
book, Vladimir the Russian Viking, suggests that Vladimir is ultimately convinced rather than
converted. So, as a matter of expediency, he is more than ready to accept Basil II's proposal
of an alliance. But he wants something tangible from the deal as well. Basil's sister, Princess Anna,
whom he considers born in the purple. The emperor may well have been outraged at
hearing this. The problem, however, is that things are heating up. Although Basil has
ousted one pretender to the imperial throne, Bardas Skleros, another called Bardas Fokas,
is preparing to launch an attack. So Basil agrees, on condition that Vladimir sends
6,000 mercenaries to help him deal with the problem. And so a bargain is struck.
I can't help wondering what Anna's reaction is when her brother sits her down in her private
quarters at the imperial palace in Constantinople to inform her of her fate. The princess is of
delicate and refined sensibility, and is used to an extremely sophisticated lifestyle.
She has probably never met a pagan in her life, and undoubtedly has the worst image of them,
especially as to their treatment of women. To make matters worse, Vladimir is a
feigned womanizer. It is alleged that he has raped one of his wives in the presence of her
father. He has also violated numerous girls and seduced numerous married women. Or at least that
is what the Nikon Chronicle claims, a historical compilation that was undertaken during the reign
of Ivan the Terrible in the 16th century. And although this may be a wild exaggeration, reports
of his sexual excesses undoubtedly make their way across the Black Sea from Kiev to Byzantium.
Basil doubtless had to use all his powers of persuasion to get his sister Anna to agree to
the match, claiming that the future of the Byzantine Empire now depended on her and on her
alone. In effect she is a pawn to cement the political alliance, the fate of so many women
throughout history. In the end Anna agrees, but for some reason Basil still delays handing his
sister over to Vladimir. Eventually Vladimir loses his patience so he seizes the city of Kersan,
which was under Byzantine control at the time. Even so he acts with commendable restraint. He
does not sack the city and he spares all of his captives. It is no doubt with considerable trepidation
that Anna eventually sails from Constantinople to meet her future husband. He is not completely
unprovided for. She has some of her saintly relics with her to help ward off the devil.
Let's hope too that she derives some consolation from the fact that her husband has generously
agreed to dismiss his five other wives and eight hundred concubines.
The Nikon Chronicle tells us that as soon as Vladimir sets eyes on Anna, he is blinded.
All the remedies his doctors recommend prove useless. Anna tells him that the only cure
is for him to be baptized. And when the bishop of Kersan performs the baptismal rite,
his sight is miraculously restored, whereupon he declares, I have seen the true God.
Immediately after the sacrament of baptism has been performed, the wedding takes place.
It is the practice in the Greek Orthodox Church to take a saint's name and Vladimir chooses the name
Basil out of respect for his brother-in-law. History does not record how the pair fares in
their married life. They have one daughter together. But what is clear is that Anna is a
considerable force to be reckoned with. Very soon she is, as we say, onto his case, eager to undertake
the Christianization of the poor pagan ruse. And once Vladimir becomes a Christian,
he is reformed overnight, according to the official accounts. Vladimir begins building
churches, lots of them, many of them on sites where pagan temples once stood. This is a good
way to make the adjustment from paganism to Christianity more palatable for the masses,
because a holy spot sanctified by long usage can more easily be converted to the observance
of a new religion than one that lacks any previous religious associations.
Vladimir allegedly abolishes torture and capital punishment throughout his realm
and acts generously towards beggars and the sick. All of this may seem too good to be true,
and no doubt it is. But so far as we can tell, he does take his conversion very seriously.
The most important new edifice that he puts up is the Church of Our Lady, also known as the
Church of the Tithes, which is the first and largest stone church in Kiev. It is so named,
because Vladimir sets aside a tithe or portion of his own property to finance it.
Though Greek architects and artists are imported to design and decorate the largest churches,
quite soon a native Russian style develops, characterized by the classic onion dome.
Giving us some sense of the rapid progress of church building, the Nikon Chronicle
states that in 1017, just two years after Vladimir's death, 700 churches in Kiev
will burn down after a fire breaks out. Though the figure may be exaggerated,
it should not be dismissed out of hand. One of the most effective ways by which
Vladimir promotes his brand of Christianity is by introducing a literary language,
Church Slavonic, a language that is never spoken. It's solely for liturgical purposes.
This is a brilliant move, since it helps to unify the development of Christianity
throughout his ethnically diverse realm. It also has the benefit of limiting the
influence of the Greek Orthodox Church, which employs Greek. Vladimir also encourages
the spread of education. Along with successfully recruiting priests from among the Rus, he also
sets up monasteries. Even so, the conversion of a whole people does not occur overnight.
Moreover, Vladimir doesn't seem to make much attempt to educate his people in the
niceties of Christian doctrine. The tens of thousands who undergo baptism under
his direction probably know next to nothing about the faith they are made to embrace.
They are recorded as saying, if this were not good, the prince and his boyars,
that's to say, Vladimir's inner circle, would not have accepted it.
Yet, Vladimir does now become as ruthless in the suppression of paganism
as he had been previously in the suppression of Christianity. And to demonstrate his zeal
and perhaps persuade his wife Anna that he really has turned the corner,
Vladimir orders the smashing of stone images and the soaring of wooden images of local gods.
Their grotesque names now seem to him to be ridiculous.
Darsbog, Mokosh, Rogel, Sim and Strybog.
Icons of Saints are set up throughout the land in their place.
Vladimir also orders that the colossal wooden statue of Perun, the god of thunder and lightning,
be attached to a horse's tail, dragged down to the river and beaten by 12 scrapping young men
before being flung into the Nipah River. All of this takes place under his approving eye.
While Vladimir clearly has a flair for the dramatic, this public and exaggerated exorcism,
probably also reflects the grand duke's fears that the rejected gods might still possess untapped powers.
I think there's no doubt that Vladimir compels his subjects to witness this humiliating spectacle,
humiliating both for the erstwhile gods and humiliating for the people,
so as to demonstrate that they are powerless to defend themselves.
Indeed, the smashing of idols under the full glare of public scrutiny would seem to be a
highly effective way to drive a nail into the coffin of paganism.
And although many jeer at this, others weep when they see it happen,
an indication that polytheism still has a hold over the population.
Moreover, it isn't the case that the Christians will deny the existence of the pagan gods hence
forth. Rather, they will present them as themes whose objective is to ruin the human race
and win it for the devil. Belief in the devil is ubiquitous in the Middle Ages.
Sometime later, Vladimir dispatches heralds announcing to the inhabitants of Kiev
that they are required to undergo baptism in the Nipah River,
adding, according to the Russian primary chronicle, that anyone who doesn't go down to the river
will incur the prince's displeasure. I think we can draw the obvious conclusion
as to what his displeasure would amount to. Another strategy Vladimir uses to impose Christianity
is to take children from the parents of the best families for instruction.
This is a not-so-subtle way of ensuring that anyone who might prove recalcitrant
can be pressured to toe the line. The Russian primary chronicle says that the mothers of these
children weep bitterly for them as if they were dead. In short, the Rus' mass conversion is by
fear. Hilarion of Kiev, who served in Kiev from 1051 to 1054 and who admires Vladimir greatly,
leaves us in no doubt that the prince is ruthless. Hilarion praises Vladimir for his use of strength
and power and tells us that there is no one who resists the order to be baptized, since
Vladimir's piety was combined with fear. This description shivers down my spine. It reminds
me of the Spanish Inquisition. In the south, the population seems to go along with conversion
without too much protest. This is not the case throughout the land, however. In Novgorod and
provinces to the north, resistance remains much stiffer. In fact, more than 50 years after
Vladimir's death, we still hear of pagan rituals being conducted in Novgorod.
Vladimir also dispatches missionaries to convert the holdouts. And they aren't really missionaries,
rather they consist of a henchman of his backed by a military contingent.
Learning of this, a certain rabble rouser named Bogomil rallies the locals in defense of the
ancestral gods. So when Vladimir's men arrive in Novgorod, they find their way barred. It is only
when the grand dupes men threaten to burn the whole city down to the ground that the people
agree to abandon their former gods, whereupon their wooden idols are burned and the stone idols
smashed. It is from these seeds that the Russian Orthodox Church is born. Yet not surprisingly,
many of Vladimir's Byzantine allies remain deeply suspicious of the converted Rus.
Although Vladimir has committed his forces to Basil II and campaigned on his behalf in Bulgaria
and elsewhere, his army is thought to be in league with the devil, with the objective of
undermining the Byzantine Empire. Vladimir is also politically shrewd. Although he has pledged
his loyalty to Basil II, the Byzantine emperor, he also maintains cordial relations with the
Pope in Rome. And strengthened by his embrace of Christianity, which now helps him to unify his
people, Vladimir puts that power to great effect, making himself master of part of modern-day Russia,
as well as of a vast area that stretches from southeast Poland to the river Volga. By the time
of his death, he will have doubled the size of the area over which he reigns. And today,
the inhabitants of Belarus, Russia and Ukraine are all happy to claim dissent from the Rus.
In addition, Vladimir plays a major part in urbanizing his realm, building several new cities,
more than one of which he names after himself. The Kievan Rus will reach their greatest
ascent in the 11th century and then begin to decline. Yet, their fortunes are always
to be tied to Constantinople for better or worse. And when Constantinople ultimately declines in
commercial importance, so do the Rus. The Mongols eventually overrun their lands in the 1240s.
Vladimir dies in his mid-50s in the year 1015, some 26 years after his destruction of the Idols.
It's good for Christianity that he lives so long, because that gives the new religion
time to take firm root under his guidance and enforcement. Another example of contingency
and longevity playing a major role in the direction that history takes.
Hilarion of Kiev sums up Vladimir's legacy as follows. He ordered everyone to become a Christian,
the small and the great, the slaves and the free, the young and the old, the rich and the
indigent, and there was no one who resisted his beneficial order. If some lacked love,
they were baptized for fear of him who ordered it, for his piety was combined with might,
so that at the same time all our land rendered glory to Christ with the Father and the Holy Ghost.
About 150 years after Vladimir's final breath, he is made a saint. The Russian primary chronicle
describes him as the new Constantine of mighty Rome. This is a reference to the Roman emperor
Constantine who took the bold step of legitimizing Christianity throughout his empire and who,
like Vladimir, underwent baptism. The parallels and the claim to his saintliness
are, however, exaggerated. Although the Russian Orthodox Church today sees Vladimir as its founder,
it's important to emphasize that Vladimir was not even a Russian. Russia as such didn't exist in
his day, and the Rus were Ukrainians rather than Russians. Yet when the Russian Orthodox Church
established itself as autocephalus fully independent of Byzantium in the late 16th century,
it appropriated the heritage of Kiev and made Vladimir its national hero.
It is a reminder of the immense power of living history.
