Okay, and welcome to the December, 2020, and so seminar, which will be presented by yellow
Brandeburg from the Macquarie University, although part of 2020 in Amsterdam, so seminar, which will
be presented by yellow Brandeburg. So, welcome yellow, and we will have, we're muted there for a moment.
Thank you.
You did your PhD in Amsterdam with Eric Riesfeld, is that right? And I've completed postdoc.
Yeah, sorry, I was just, I still had the YouTube link open, so I was hearing
double sounds, so I was like, what's going wrong? But now we're full focus, yeah.
Good. The joys of the Zoom seminar. So you are currently, you have moved to a postdoc position
in Macquarie University as of, sometimes you bring this decade of a year and will continue
in that position for at least another year as well, if at any point you actually get
sounds of the equator. Yeah, yeah, so it's a three-year position, but indeed, so far I've been
working remotely, but yeah, as everybody actually, so yeah. Indeed, so we have a few people are done
and we're expecting a couple of live participants for the discussion later, which ought to be
lively and interesting. I did, now I mentioned when we spoke before the possibility we might
give a single boost to something, if you have come across a reading or
some kind of resource in recently that you'd like to, you think, well, if that's something the
Ansel community might be interested in knowing about, have you come across any good papers or
books recently? Yeah, yeah, I'll share the screen. I made a little commercial break
slide. You can see it now, right? Yeah, so here it is. So on the left, there's something in the hands
book, An Active Psychiatry. We just had a reading group on it with the people,
Namster them, and I can warmly recommend it. I think it deals with the topics of
psychiatry, but also pushes an activism further in a number of directions, mainly that of the
notion of values, I think in a more existentialist direction and has some
really good points in developing a more relational realist metaphysics for an activism. So I really
enjoy that. And the other one is a little bit of a shameless self-promotion,
but I know many people in an activism are interested in the links with the free energy
principle. I worked on this in my PhD as well. And I received lots of students who
really want to work on all that stuff. And I just been publishing this preprint
a few days ago, where we share some doubts about the possibility of such a kind of approach,
specifically with the notion of market length. So this is not what we're going to talk about
today at all. But I thought for those interested in the more free energy principle kind of things,
I think this is a conversation which at some point we need to have with those people.
Excellent. Thank you very much for that. And I love the idea of a commercial break. We might
continue to use that one as things go on. But now I think we have a good few people online. God
the pandemic, it has pushed people for full-on internet engagement. And we have one or two
people coming into the live session. We'll keep them quiet until later on. But in the meantime,
Jelle, I can invite you to present the December 2020 EnSauce seminar.
Thanks a lot, Merrick. And so hello, everyone. Thanks for having me. And I'm just going to pretend
we somehow have cornered off a little corner of the internet and have a chat among friends.
It's somehow a bit weird to know that you're being broadcasted to the World Wide Web.
So I treat this as a kind of internal seminar. And so the topic today is the topic of my research
project in Macquarie called the world of the fingertips and what is cognition and the attention
crisis. And this is a bit of a new topic for me. And I'm still experimenting a little bit
with how to best introduce it. And so how I've been doing it was kind of starting with big
alarming claims about the attention economy and the idea that human attention is being harvested
for commercial gains. So this is the kind of kind of alarming story that you find in Shoshana Zubov's
work, The Age of Surveillance Capitalism. And also this is, I just have the books here,
this very good book by James Williams, Stand Out of Our Light. I can later on share the links to
those books or so. And in that literature, you find a more or less explicit or implicit
view of human nature. And sometimes that's a rather cognitiveistic view. Sometimes it's an
extremely behavioristic view. There's a lot of evolutionary psychology in that literature,
how we're just wired to be addicted to the internet or to smartphones, etc.
And then having presented all those positions, you can share like, oh, actually, there is some
space here for a more kind of embodied and inactive position that shows that both the kind
of vulnerabilities that we have in relationship to those technologies, but also the possibility
to have somehow in interacting with them, maintain some kind of autonomy. I tried this a
few times and that results in a kind of a big, big stroke kind of a kind of picture where you
really have competing pictures of human nature. And so today I want to try something a little bit
different and more trace a little bit my own thinking in how I arrived at this project. And
this really starts from more inactive principles and arrives in the end about the logic questions
about human nature and how that works. So this is the experiment for today. And then the starting
point now is actually something that I was reminded of again in Sonic's book. And then often in
inactivism, people write about sense making as a kind of projection of value on a neutral world.
So we kind of enact this world, we create it reconstituted. And in some sense, that's right,
right? That world is a co-production of us. But there's also something and in high diggers terms,
that might be something like the throne is or sense making, right? So in inactivism, we find
ourselves making sense of the world and in kind of the Amsterdam terminology, we find ourselves
being solicited in a meaningful way by a field of affordances, right? So we don't choose, we don't
decide which things we are affected by, how we make sense of the world. But we find ourselves
being affected in this way. And that is actually where agency starts. So we encounter this world
that is not completely of our own making. And of course, there's lots of aspects that do contribute
to this world. Of course, personal history, typically something like a history of interactions
with the environment, the kind of skills that you have acquired during your lifetime,
the social material environment itself, including all the practices of the education of attention,
etc. A form of life, the behavior settings, I believe the last answer seminar was on behavior
setting, the layout of the affordance in the environment. And like making this list, I got
to the question like, what about technologies? What about the kind of digital technologies
that we carry around with us? And of course, these aspects here are not mutually exclusive.
And I think there's a lot of overlap between them. But these are more like, I think, from
different theoretical vantage points in inactivism, you arrive at some of those, some of those
concepts a bit more permanently than other ones. And so I kind of noticed that I've been showing
these kind of pictures for years as a kind of a scenario of the hallmark of skills action where
an agent is engaging with multiple affordances at the same time and somehow maintaining a grip
on this interaction with the environment. And to my own embarrassment, actually, I suddenly
realized that the amount of technology that's going on in this picture, the amount of technological
mediation that's going on here. And if you come at it from a more affordance perspective,
this really leads to a couple of embarrassing questions that I was at least at that point
not able, still not actually able to answer properly. So is this an affordance? And you might
think in terms of solicitation of invitation, that's definitely the case. If you think about
when you read a book, and the phone is lying next to you, you definitely can feel the solicitation,
the invitation of something, even without the kind of push-up messages that you might every
once in a while encounter. And yes, it is an affordance in the sense that you can do lots of
things with it. But then you also might think, no, no, the phone itself is not the affordance,
it's a kind of gateway, it's a kind of mediated to affordances. And what are the affordances?
Yeah, maybe the apps on it, or the things you can do on the app. So there's a kind of,
the phone is kind of entwined in a new kind of niche. And I didn't quite have the terminology
and the concepts to think about it. And of course, there is a large history of what,
and this is the term I think that's from post phenomenology. So kind of more philosophy of
technology, angle to phenomenology. And they call this technological mediation. So the mediation
of intentionality by technologies. And of course, we find this in high-deck already,
or about the hammer. Well, if you carry the hammer, then the whole world shows up as for
hammerable, as far as kind of affording hammering. And in Meloponte, you find the example of the
blind person's cane. And these are all forms of the mediation of intentionality, but kind of
opening up to the same world in a different kind of way. At least that would be my way of,
my intuitive way of characterizing this. And then the question is like, so what about these
digital technologies? They don't, in a sense, they seem similar that they are transparent.
You see through the hammer, you see through the cane, and you see through your phone into something
else. But rather than showing up, allowing you the world to show up in a different way, it
shows up a new kind of world in which action possibilities are aligned in a different kind
of way. So the question is like, how to think about this? Is there something like a digital
niche, a cyber niche? Is that the right kind of terminology? And so I want to, as a kind of take
a few steps back about how to think about the influence of technology, I want to mention this
example from the fifties, really, early sixties. And that's the example of the remote control
for television. So in another book, very good book, the attention merchants, the subtitle is
the epic struggle to get inside our heads. The writer Tim Rue vividly captures the kind of
sentiment at the end of the fifties about the arrival of commercial breaks on television.
And the Zenith radio company, or this is engineers to kind of find an antidote against
this arrival of commercial breaks. And they develop this device that allows you to shoot out
commercial advertisements. And the result is something like an ad blocker of a letter where
you can kind of shoot at your television and mute the sound, and later on switch channels, etc.
And of course, this is something that we now know as a remote control. And this was really
meant as a kind of way for consumers to gain and maintain autonomy, be able to decide what you
want to look at. Rue calls it the resistance against the industrialized harvest of attention.
I think this is the kind of terminology that we find now again in the literature on the attention
economy. And then we kind of vividly described, and this is an abbreviated quote, how that dream
of autonomy was really short lived. So the remote control made it almost effortless, practically
non-volitional to redirect our attention. In fact, in the course of sustained channel
serving, the voluntary aspect of attentional control may disappear entirely. Having thus
surrendered, the mind is simply jumping about and following whatever grabs it.
So you can really think here about the idea like you're sitting late at night, you should be going
too bad, you want to go to bed in some sense of wanting, but there is this kind of behavioral
cycle going on of sustained channel serving. And I think Rue highlights a few key points here,
the idea that something like volition or executive control seems to be disappearing
entirely from that episode. And in some sense, this appearance of control is also the hallmark
of the kind of descriptions of skilled action that drivers gives, kind of skilled coping, skilled
mindless coping. Although this is a mindless coping, but not in the right sense of the world.
So there's parallels there between the kind of skilled coping examples, but also, of course,
big differences. So I think Rue presents us here with a puzzle, and the pieces are something like
friction or sensory motor effort, it becomes so easy to change channels that we somehow become
more impulsive, volition and executive control are disappearing. And the question is how to
put that puzzle together. And so I think what you find here is really an, I'll call it clashing
anthropologies. And it's anthropology, in a sense, it's sketches or pictures of human nature.
But then the human nature is not something that's immutable and unchangeable, but something that
is, you might say enacted. So this remote control is really designed for a particular kind of agent.
And that's an agent who knows what it wants, and just needs the easiest means to realize in the
world what it wants. So the kind of distinction between what are your goals, what are your values,
and what you can do if you have a strong distinction between those, then it's a
good device to have. It's a less ideal tool, I think, for a situated agent that figures out
in interacting with the world what it wants. So the goals and the concerns and the solicitations
are not independent of your interaction with the world, but they're shaping each other.
So the kind of the anthropology of autonomy, we are rational beings, we know what to do,
and we just need to shape the world so that it becomes as easy as possible for us to know what
to realize what we do. I think that in this case had very unintended consequences. In many cases of
behavioral design in modern technology, that's not unintended, that's completely
intended, the kind of behavioral effects it is having.
So what you find in the literature really are two narratives here on attention, but the narratives
are way more than narratives on attention. There are narratives on autonomy, there are narratives
on agency, there are these kind of anthropologies, I should say. And so I already mentioned James
Williams' book, and this is a standout of a light, you see the subtitle, freedom and resistance in
the attention economy. And so this is really an attempt to describe what our possibilities are
in the age of the attention economy, how we can think about freedom, what is at stake,
and how we can regain it. And part of Williams' narrative is following Herbert Simon in saying
that while historically there has been a kind of scarcity of information and therefore an abundance
of attention, but now in this kind of information-rich time to live in times of information overload
and therefore a scarcity of attention. So what we need to do is put something like a boundary in
place to kind of separate us from the information in the environment so that we can reflect and
decide and be autonomous again. On the other hand, we have a completely different narrative,
and I think that narrative follows the more behaviorist principles. So Nera Jaal writes
also, I think the subtitles and the titles are really telling here, so hooked, how to build
habit-forming products. And it's a story about how to get users hooked to your products. And that's
a story about you can make the environment as inviting as possible, but the real thing is to
get inside the agent and hack their habits. So in environmental competition, there's still a lot
of competition between different kind of companies, but if you can be prior to that and instill in a
user an urge or something like this to engage with the product, then you're really talking,
then you're really getting people hooked. And interestingly, in terms of a kind of quasi-phenomenology,
I think Jaal is really closer to the point in terms of the idea that indeed, if you structure
how agents find themselves in the world, what kind of habits they have, how they are solicited
by this world, then you don't need to place interesting things in the world. They will
look for themselves. So you really have hijacked agents in some particular kind of way. And of
course, for Jaal, this is situated in a general picture of human nature where in the end, we are
behaviorist machines. So autonomy and agency are not really in the cards anyway, so there's nothing
really, really ethically wrong with the kind of hook model. James Williams has something more to
defend. He wants to have a more robust idea of autonomy and freedom that is at stake.
So the hope is here that inactivism really can provide a more
realistic anthropology. I think the success of the attention merchant shows that we are situated
beings formed through our interaction with the environment. And autonomy is not something that
puts a boundary in place between us and the world, but it needs to be achieved through interactions
with the environment. So that's where it kind of combines the points from Jaal and Williams, I think.
I think we're doing still right quite time, right?
Yeah, I think we're good at the time. Then I'll make a little excursion through
neuroscience, hopefully to get back to the same point. So I've been a long-term fan of
something that's called the affordance competition hypothesis, some of you might know it. And I think
it's a general framework for neuroscience. It's very much in key with what importance
an activist principles. And what you get from there, of course it's a bit neurocentric, but
you get there is the idea that this is a quote from Paul Cissek. So decision-making is not a
single unified phenomenon with a single neural substrate. So we should stop thinking about
decision-making as one thing, but rather a distributed process that emerges differently
across the nervous system, depending on the information that finally determines the choice.
And you see a lot of work at the moment, both by Cissek but other people as well,
there's a recent paper by Bernard Hummel, which Cissek is a co-author and says nobody knows what
attention is. So it seems that from a neuroscientific perspective, some of those important kind of
constructs that we use in everyday decision-making attention are not unified single phenomenon,
but are things that executive control is another one of them, but are really
things that emerge in a particular kind of situation depending on the layout of the action
possibilities. And so one important distinction that Cissek makes is that between action
specification and action selection. So you see here that this is a kind of general framework
that he's having. And you see that if we talk about action selection, there's a lot of projecting
to the base of ganglion. And as we talk about action specification, there is more cortical
arrows that are being drawn. And in his recent work, Cissek talks about this as within behavior
and between behavior selection. So you might think like, oh, of all the things that I can do,
there is the selection between different kind of behaviors. And then in the classical example
of lifting the cup, that's a question of action specification. And those processes happen in
parallel. That's not a kind of sequential model. But once you decide to lift the cup,
the specification is something that's left. That there's a different kind of process. And typically,
we have more executive control over the kind of selection process and less of the specification.
There's not much use in controlling actively how to grasp the cup. I just want to grasp the cup.
And so the examples he's giving are related to the difference between pointing and grasping,
for example, these are macaque studies. So choosing between pointing and grasping is action
selection. Specifying where to point is action specification. And so,
normally, there seem to be very different mechanisms for these different kind of
forms of selection. I mean, you might not even call the second one decision making.
And so, at least intuitively from this perspective, the fact that we engage with
nowadays with much of our environment in a kind of pointing kind of way,
makes it that we make very, very relevant behavioral decisions. Am I going to go on
Facebook or am I going to write the paper with the swipe of a finger or the point? So we use the
kind of, from that kind of perspective, we use the kind of action specification mechanisms for
actually things that intuitively we would like to be forms of action selection and things to be
deliberate. So I think there's also a big possibility to combine this more and more
neuroscientific angle with the kind of issues on the attention economy. And I think the kind
of work on affordance competition is very much in key with an activism. And the crucial bit here
is that from this perspective, affordances, we don't have just like a whole row of affordances
or so, but this kind of hierarchical organization within them. Some of them are specifications,
some of them are selection and nested within each other. And they, each of them, have different
forms of cognitive control associated with them. So here we have a different kind of
mismatch, I guess, between the technologies and environment and the anthropology that we are,
that we have. And this is a mismatch between the structure of digital environments and the
structure of behavior or what you might call the affordance competition. And of course,
this is not something this kind of affordance competition hierarchies, not something that's
fixed. It might be very much dependent on development as well. But I think it also gives a set of
tools to rethink about our relationship with digital technologies. And in much of the more,
also the more post-phenomenological literature on philosophy of technology and attention,
there's really not much interesting interest in cognitive science. And I think an activism really
has a good position here to also take these insights from cognitive science to the table
and still have a robust story about what we want to achieve autonomy and agency. So to wrap up,
so I think an activism is really in a strong position to formulate this realistic anthropology
for the attention economy. And this is not a talk that says it has been done. I have a paper on this,
but this is really, this is where my thinking, how it came from thinking about affordances
in this more towards this more attention economy topics. And I think both neuroscientifically,
as in terms of the central concepts of an activism, there's a really, really good position to pursue
this kind of project. So this is where I am at the moment. And I would look forward to discuss it with
you. Thank you. That's great. Thank you. Thank you very much. So we, we have at least one of the
voice here in the live session with us. And I think we may yet be joined by one or two other
latecomers, but I guess we'll see if they show. So I obviously, as ever, have many comments and
questions, but I will also offer the first response to the non-meric member of the discussion.
Is there anything you want to say? Yeah. Thanks very much, Jelle. It's interesting to see how
considerations from the strong physicalist realist stance of ecological psychology,
the still emerging and not yet defined field of an activism. And social technical considerations
are coming together. I believe that there's an awful lot of unsteadyness in the conceptual
formulations that we're using here, which is one of the reasons that we have these ENSO seminars,
of course. But I want to draw, I want to come to your use of the term anthropology.
I object. Anthropology, of course, as a discipline has a shameful history of voyeuristic habits of
privileged European males going to people who are culturally distant and interpreting them from
within their own Christian, Eurocentric cultural point of view. Now, anthropology as a discipline
has been through an awful, awful lot. And it tries to resist strongly positivist formulations to the
extent that it aspires to generalize to something called the Anthropos, which is something in
construction, but not necessarily finished. The use of the term anthropology must be done
then in a cautious manner when it engages with scientific discourse. Now, you introduced
a stonking cultural construct, a European cultural construct, the psychological subject
driven by attention with executive control and decision making. And you can put perception
in there as well. And there you've got a something that we have built here in the West
on a largely Platonist and Christian foundation have constructed methodologically. So when it
comes to attention, for example, nobody ever really anymore asks what is attention or does
attention exist? They ask how do we operationalize attention? And you have to ask the same thing
about executive control and decision making, not do they exist? But how do we operationalize them?
Because if you get too positivist and realist about those things, they go away.
So I'm worried about your realistic anthropology. I think what you're doing by engaging with the
psychological subject in this way, I don't think you can use anthropology. I want to say
that's not appropriate. I'm coming from a position of extreme skepticism with respect
to scientific psychology. So please excuse that. I don't expect everyone to share that.
But I do think the nature of scientific current scientific practices and the aspirations of
a field called anthropology, they there's a great tension there. So that's what I want to draw your
attention to. So I should confess, I wasn't completely aware of these tensions when I was
using the concept of anthropology. I think, and here I'm also a bit, I mean,
all of those concepts are troubled, right? I mean, so what is implicit in this literature,
you might think is a picture of human nature. But human nature is just as troubled as anthropology,
I think. For me, at least, I went for anthropology as a kind of lighter notion than human nature.
But it's a picture of how people make sense of the world, how they arrive at decisions,
how they attend, what kind of control they have over their environment. And that picture you can
distill from skin is beyond freedom of dignity. And then you have a picture in which we're enslaved
by our environments. And the picture you can get from, it's implicit in all the works on the
attention economy, there is, even if they're pointing outside, even if they're pointing to
even like Zuboff writes about surveillance capitalism, it's not about human psychology,
but it's about the capitalist system. But it all operates with a particular kind of,
either a deliberating agent or a behavioristic agent or something like that. So I want to
zoom in on those kind of implicit commitments that are made. And I think there,
and activism similarly has a position of what it is to be a sense making agent
that comes along with its own kind of vulnerabilities. And getting those vulnerabilities
into view requires you to somehow make commitments about what it is.
Yeah, but when you say the person, I think you're thinking of people like you. I don't think you're
thinking of this person. This is a person from Tierra del Fuego, one of the crowd who was genocided
at the start of the 20th century. He met anthropologists, they didn't understand him.
People of that tribe even met Charles Darwin. Charles Darwin regarded them as animals,
which is funny because Charles Darwin went down to tell us all that were animals, which is a bit
odd. But you can see from his reaction, he didn't understand them and they had no common basis.
Would you say that any account of decision making, executive control, and attention would apply to
this person as well as to someone who was brought up within a capitalist western heavily industrialized
society? And if not, then it's not anthropology really. It's building something within the,
I'm going to say it, neoliberal and secular capitalist order.
So,
I mean, the story represents about the role of technology on everyday life is,
yes, it's the role of technology on everyday western life. I mean, that's clear.
For people like you and me.
That's a story I can't tell because that's a story I have most experience with. I haven't done
research in those kind of areas. Well, I'm very unfair here. I'm sorry. The anthropology I
describe has much larger aspirations. I won't be squashed into any particular western viewpoint,
obviously. But there's a similar tension, isn't there, between the strongly realist commitments
of affordance layouts, as described in the Gibsonian framework, and the less secure
commitments to the person, body, agent, individual that arise within an activism. So,
as I said, the field is not yet established. The persistent tension between ecological and
inactive approaches, which some people don't see as a tension, I absolutely do. But it extends all
the way out then. Well, I think, as well, sorry, Yellow, as I see it, there is a, I mean,
when Yellow introduced the term, he introduced it in the plural, right? There are multiple
anthropologies. That's right, yeah. And as such, there is sort of an inherent recognition of the
bandedness of any of these, and the limitations of any of these, rather than sort of placing one
as sort of superior or more encompassing than the other, but rather the anthropology is inherent in,
it's the implicit foundation in which any given description of a specific behavior or cognitive
system or cognitive function is presented. Maybe just to briefly follow up, I think
these are anthropologies in positions in literature, right? So they're implicit
in positions in the literature, rather than they're in persons, right? So when I meant realistic,
I didn't mean so. This is, it's realistic in the sense that it's more
closer to real life, but not realistic in the sense like this is what happens in person.
This is, no, in that sense, it's a more kind of looking at these positions in the literature
and deriving from them the kind of implicit commitments they make to a particular kind of
picture of human nature. And that's indeed, that's a pluralistic concept without any commitments,
from my side at least, about how that applies to even us in the West and let alone to any
and to kind of any human or so. So it's something that's kind of a generalistic
claim. So I don't think I want to go there. We need to go there.
That's great. So I see Erika's joined in. I know Erika has a question as well. So I'll pass on
to you there. Hey, hey, can you hear me? Yeah. Hi, Jelle. Thanks. It was very interesting. I knew
already part of the story, of course, and it's good to hear you telling it here. I have a question.
You started out talking about technological mediation and post phenomenology. But then you
end up with your positive story, which is the field of affordances, in which the field of affordances
plays an important role. So I was wondering, what in the end does this talk about post phenomenology
and technological mediation do for you as work, doesn't do any work? Or is it just an idle wheel
in the paper that you just gave? And if not, then how will you avoid creating a dichotomy between
technological affordances and all the affordances of this aspect of the environment, which is my
hand, and that can also do many things, just like an iPhone can. Yeah. I think avoiding this dichotomy
is really, really important. And so you might think about the affordances of VR or so. And that's
like, no, then the whole environment becomes digital in a sense, and you duplicate the story.
But what we encounter here is I think kind of hybridity, where at once I'm sitting reading a
book, and next to me is a phone, which is a simple object, visually not much more complicated than
the book. But that allows me to enter completely new domain, which at least intuitively seems to me
a completely new domain in the sense that one, the layout of action possibilities there is different
to the kind of things that I can do is so much more than I can do here and now
in a non-digital environment. So, yeah, avoiding that dichotomy is
important. And therefore, it all needs to kind of be tied back to somehow like, I think, one field
of affordances that somehow, in whether you pick up your phone or not, kind of more changes,
changes shape. And that's the question about how to think about it.
And I guess this is probably where post phenomenology can offer some insight, exactly how
this field of affordances as a kind of construct, I think it's needed to keep the kind of unity
and to avoid the kind of dualism that you were sketching. But then still, how do the technologies
in the environment, which are not themselves the affordances, but that allows you to see
through something into new affordances, how does that kind of mediation process of intentionality
work? And I think there are some concepts from post phenomenology could help. And I haven't,
in the kind of more, in either the inactive or the ecological psychology literature,
found any kind of good starting points, except for, I think, what is the common ground for both
inactivism and post phenomenology, namely the kind of Heidegger-Meller-Punty kind of descriptions
of hammers and canes. But that's a two basic kind of example to pursue further.
Okay, thanks for that to be continued.
Okay, so I'm just keeping a high five on the channel on YouTube. But I do want to throw out
a question of my own, which is going to be not terribly well formed. But it's a question about
something that felt not terribly well formed. So I'm hoping that there's some kind of resonance
there. And that was the concept of the agent that's in play here, because you essentially,
back to an extent, was your notion of these multiple anthropologies as well, what kind of
agent are we talking about? And it feels to me that there are, I guess, it wasn't clear what moves
me from one being one kind of agent to another under different circumstances, because there are
certainly times when, you know, someone might ask me, well, what did you watch on the television
yesterday? I said, wow, I watched about 45 minutes of the Netflix menu. And, you know, that was it.
And then there are other times in which I barely see the Netflix menu, because I'm flicking
straight through to what it is I'm going to. And the, the Netflix menu is obviously designed
to encourage some sort, you know, some aspects of that, and less others. But,
but my level of commitment, and obviously that, you know, just have vast the sea of potential
options is, you know, plays a role, it makes it very difficult to distinguish, well, what
are the difference between them? What do I care about? And, and that is, there's an important
external, not wanting to get into boundary questions, but there's an important environmental,
I guess, discussion about where my desires are, and how I recognize what I want.
But I guess I didn't even really see much of a hint towards the, well, how, where do those
desires come from? Or how are they playing a role in, in structuring that feel of affordances?
Yeah, I'm just wondering, what literature do you want to point to and say, well,
we'll use them for the moment, and then we'll figure it out the details as we go.
Yeah. No, great. Yeah.
So I think the two things here are, so if you read the more ecological psychology literature on
attention, their attention is always understood, attention and distraction are understood relative
to a task. And, I mean, in psychology, that kind of makes sense, right? Because you give people
a task, but in everyday life, that's complicated. And I guess the task is already an advance over
having a goal, right? Because a goal is something in your head, and then how does it shape your
openness to affordances, not quite clear. But I think something like a behavior setting also
could be something in the right direction, where sometimes we have the right kind of configuration
with our environment, where it is clear what the purpose of the situation is.
I'm tired. I deserve to watch the new episode of The Crown. I know this is the right kind of series,
and then I've watched it before. So this is what I'm going to do. And that's a kind of,
yeah, engagement with technology, which is then, I think, not detrimental in any sense,
and just leads you to where you want to go. And that's fine. And so I guess the kind of,
the kind of really deep distraction kind of moments are the fact, the moment where there's not
really a task, or where task shifting is easier than engaging with a task. So sometimes, I mean,
at least personally for me, it's like when writing a paper that's a bit stuck,
every progress you try to make in the paper, one sentence later, the task has somehow switched to
social media, to checking your mail or whatever. So it's easier to switch tasks than to make progress
on one particular. And of course, yeah, and then the notion of task has its own complexities,
and the notion of behavior settings as well. But I guess those would be two kind of stabilizers
of everyday actions that could be made appropriate for such a kind of way of thinking,
I think, without bringing too much trouble. Okay, thanks. Yeah, I mean, I guess it gets at the
how do affordances compete. The notion of the importance of competition actually captures
some nice aspects of the dynamics, I think, but it becomes that as well. Well, what are the mechanics,
I guess, of competition? How are they actually getting it? Yeah, and then, I mean, the wrong
way to pursue that would be like, okay, do affordances compete in the head in my neural system,
or do they compete in the world, right? I mean, no, it's got to be a more relational story where
there's only one competition process that is surely aided by the kind of neural dynamics that's
going on competitive dynamics, but also by the layout of the world and the setting and the
practice and part of somehow combining those in without completely losing the cognitive science,
I think that would be a miss. And that's what you find in some of the more post phenomenology
literature, and also not going completely neuro predictionistic, where in the end,
everything happens in the brain. I think that's from this perspective to the challenge.
Fred is waving in his camera here, so I presume that's a...
Yeah, it's a... marrying ecological concepts and inactive concepts is always something of a
challenge. Sense making is an interesting term that sort of does service in both worlds sometimes,
except that in the ecological framework, it's always a sense making of an agent.
And in action introduced the very interesting formal device of participatory sense making,
which destroys the notion of a rarefied individualist experience. So one could expect two people
sense making together to have an attire if we're going to use affordance language to have a different
topology of affordances, which shifts from a resolutely individualist and indeed neurocentric
view to a much less well specified place. I think it's a very interesting formal intervention
from sense making to participatory sense making. And I wonder if that has any...
if that side of the formal figures of thought of an action feature in your analysis.
Good. No, no, so that they have not yet.
It's funny and interesting because I think there's a lot of opportunities there to think about the
role of social media and the internet in this context, right? So there's people working at
Google who do like qualitative studies about people's experience of social media and they
write about the kind of continued sense of social obligation because in my terms the
affordance of replying to a message is always there 24 hours a day because this device is there.
And so it gives... that gives a kind of the kind of messaging that's there. It is.
There's two individuals that reciprocally send messages to each other. So that kind of the shape
of that kind of technology seems to reinforce a kind of individualistic me against other people,
me against the world kind of picture rather than I guess kind of more participatory sense making
where that whole distinction kind of falls away. So I think there that... yeah, I haven't really
gone there but I think there's great great kind of both challenges and opportunities there for
such a kind of framework. There's a really interesting question about the temporal dynamics
involved actually because I know there's the occasions where you come across a conversation
on Twitter but it's a conversation that's a day old or two days old and it's like you don't want to
be the someone raising the undead thread. But then on the converse of that something vaguely
approaching participatory sense making is involved in the pylon where it's like this is happening
now. So everyone just... you either have the horrendous Troll-esque pylon or you have something
that sort of builds up to where you have... a recent one in Ireland was there was a very...
there's a television broadcast that happens once a year called The Toy Show which is a
pre-Christmas commercial thing that just this massive event. The entire country watches, kids
stay up late and they launched a funding appeal and of course it became this thing that everyone
gets involved in piles on the funding appeal. So in the course of about three and a half hours
they raised six million euro but because of precisely the kinds of dynamics that kind of
Twitter and the internet allowed. And so there is a fascination, some really interesting questions
about the kinds of dynamics, I think particularly the temporal dynamics that different technologies
allow, that there is the possibility for participatory sense making through these
forms of mediation as well. And I think that's a great example. I think another one is also the
fact that... I mean on Twitter you interact by text that are written down. So every statement
there is by definition a preposition. And so in a conversation I can start with on a position
and we find convergence but the very fact that it's already written down, you cannot backtrack
so easily on the things that you said when things are written down than when one things are...
when you're in a conversation where indeed in a kind of participatory way you can find common
ground or something like this. So again I think one of the reasons why this discussion escalates
so quickly is that no, this is... you need to stand your ground because you've put down your cards,
right? And while normally in a conversation we don't do that. Without shame you can...
No, yeah, it's maybe a phrase in the wrong kind of way. Let me rephrase it. And that kind of turn
taking participatory interactive process is something that's just not facilitated by that kind
of technological structure. Natural language isn't literal. No, it's written languages by
definition so it's a pretty good point. So that is a... we're sort of getting on towards our
finish time so I'll... I guess I'll give a warning for anyone who wants to throw a
text up on the YouTube chat just if you want to jump in on the last minute intervention.
I'm Fred Federerick. Either you'd like to make a final comment. But
with that I think we might bring the session to a close. So Gela, thank you very much
for that presentation and there's lots of nice food for thought. It was a rich
round for digging in. Well, there's certainly plenty for a three-year postdoc on that,
that is for sure. So thank you, thanks very much for giving your time for the Encel seminars
and yeah, we look forward. Hopefully we can meet again in person soon as well.
That'd be fantastic, yeah. Thank you.
Okay, thanks everyone and we will see you next month for Manuel Arras Escrivall
or who will kick off January 2021 if we ever get there.
