Hey everyone!
I've been getting a lot of requests lately as to who to debunk next, and several dozen
of you have asked me to address the complete insanity that was Terrence Howard's recent
appearance on Joe Rogan's podcast.
While I normally avoid lunatics of this caliber, I felt this one was worth addressing for a
few reasons, so let's take a closer look.
If you don't know who Terrence Howard is, he's an actor.
I'll be honest, I've never seen him act in anything.
He was in a really popular TV show that I didn't watch, and I've never seen any of
his movies.
If he might be a great actor, he might suck.
I don't know, and I don't care.
What's more important is his extracurricular activities as a delusional narcissist who
thinks he's the smartest person in human history.
I don't know exactly when he started showing the world his God complex, but he was away
before the Rogan appearance, so let's go back just a bit.
Here he is making a total fool of himself on the red carpet at the Emmys in 2019.
I've made some discoveries in my own personal life with the science that, you know, Pythagoras
was searching for.
I was able to open up the flower of life properly and find the real wave conjugations that we've
been looking for for 10,000 years.
Why would I continue, you know, walking on water for tips when I've got an entire generation
to teach a whole new world?
That's a big remark.
Okay, let's break this down.
The science that Pythagoras was searching for.
Pythagoras was a philosopher and mathematician.
The only things he did that could be considered part of the embryonic stages of science were
ideas like the harmony of the spheres, where the planets moved according to the frequencies
of musical notes, which of course was just baseless conjecture and whimsy, coincidentally
Terry's two favorite things.
He says he was able to open up the flower of life properly.
That's this.
The idea of opening this up doesn't mean anything, it's just 19 overlapping circles.
If you pull them apart, you get 19 circles.
Yes, it's nice and pretty looking.
Shapes are neat.
Real wave conjugations, meaningless.
Conjugation is something you do to a verb in an inflected language according to tense,
number, and person.
Here's a conjugated Italian verb.
In biology, the word is used to describe horizontal transfer of genetic material between bacteria.
You can't conjugate a ham sandwich and you can't conjugate a wave.
10,000 years is a random number that goes farther back than all of recorded history.
He tosses out walking on water to foreshadow his blatant messiah complex, and he has absolutely
nothing to teach even a small child, let alone an entire generation.
That's a big remark, says the interviewer, clearly pretty desperate to get out of this
ridiculous conversation without directly insulting him.
What do you intend to do?
Well let me put it this way.
All energy in the universe is expressed in motion.
All motion is expressed in waves.
All waves are curved.
And where does the straight lines come from to make the platonic solids?
There are no straight lines.
So when I took the flower of life and opened it properly, I found all new wave conjugations
that expose the in-between spaces.
That's, it's the thing that holds us all together.
Okay, we're ready to look up the grid.
I didn't do it too well.
Trigonometry was the...
Platonic solids?
How is energy expressed exactly by motion?
Whatever he could mean by that, he's wrong.
For example, potential energy is the energy held by an object by virtue of its position
in a field, like a gravitational or electromagnetic field.
No motion, yet energy.
Matter can be converted to energy.
No motion required.
No, not all motion is expressed in waves.
The motion of a wave is a wave.
Periodic motion can be expressed with a wave.
Linear motion also exists, hence straight lines exist.
What are platonic solids?
It's these, convex regular polyhedra in three-dimensional Euclidean space.
Regular polyhedron means that all the sides are the exact same shape, that shape being
a particular regular polygon, which means a two-dimensional shape with all the sides
and angles being equal.
There are five of them, and they were conceived of as hypothetical abstractions, just like
everything else in geometry.
And just for fun, if you take a simple cubic lattice structure for an ionic solid, you
can get those straight lines he said don't exist.
Again, he did not open any flower of life, he did not conjugate any waves, he doesn't
specify what these spaces are and what they are between, or how they hold anything together.
In short, it's pseudo-spiritual bullshit and these anchors are justifiably laughing their
asses off.
Let's get one more tidbit.
I'm sharing that.
On Tuesday when I receive my star, I'm going to be able to prove that gravity is only an
effect and not a force.
I'm putting something on YouTube where I will build the planet Saturn without gravity
and build the Milky Way galaxy without gravity.
Did you also say you're getting your star on the walk of fame?
Interestingly enough, in the context of general relativity, you can argue that gravity is
an effect and not a force.
But it does not follow then that gravity isn't real, and it gets much worse from there.
He's going to build Saturn and build the Milky Way galaxy?
How exactly?
Like in a simulation?
That needs gravity.
If he built a planet or a galaxy with his hands, I would worship him as the one true
God.
But something tells me that in reality, he's been watching some electric universe frauds
on YouTube and now he thinks he's smarter than Einstein.
And we've come to find that the universe, they are abandoning the standard model.
The ideas of black holes in dark matter for an electric model of the universe that is
in response to the Birkeland current and all these things, it's a better version, a better
vision of how we should see the universe.
That's how I see it and I think it should be explored.
Bingo!
Terry binged some Thunderbolts project videos and is repeating what he heard as though he
thought of it.
Then this woman tries to change the subject again and he starts whining about not ever
having been nominated for an Emmy.
Anyway, this is the magnitude of nut job we are dealing with, but it gets much worse.
Around that same time, Terrence started yapping about his new form of math, which he dubbed,
I shit you not, teriology, and which included the startling new revelation that one times
one is two.
Which prestigious mathematics journal did he select to announce this groundbreaking development?
The View.
Let's take a look.
And when I was at Oxford, now this is the point where four bubbles meet equally and
oppositely.
Can I touch it?
Yes.
And it's where 12 planes meet.
This is an undiscovered geometry that I'm now making known to the world here on this
show.
Isn't that fantastic?
I know.
What was the reception?
Well, when I was at Oxford, they were so upset because how can a man that didn't graduate
from one of their prestigious schools come and tell them that the square root of two was
a rational number?
And I said, I didn't come to tell you guys this, I just came to prove to you that it's
a rational number and they were, they didn't like it.
You heard right.
Terrence presented his bullshit at Oxford and the smart people laughed at him.
But why would they laugh at poor old Terry?
Do you think the ladies of the View will be a more receptive audience?
Well you have to remember our entire world economy is based on one times one equaling
one.
Yeah, our entire economy is based on one times one equaling one.
Well, economics does involve numbers, so it should obey the basic logic surrounding numbers
that even children can understand.
So what's the problem?
So if you can prove that an action times an action equals a reaction, which science proves,
then one times one must equal more than one.
And to have the physical proof of it, that kind of shakes things up a bit.
Well you're a shaker up for me.
Wow, if you can prove that an action times an action equals a reaction, okay, numbers
are not actions, they're numbers.
So that doesn't mean anything.
An action times an action also doesn't mean anything because actions are not numbers.
So no, two actions do not necessarily cause a reaction, no matter what he could possibly
mean by reaction.
If two forces are acting on an object that are equal in magnitude but opposite in direction,
the object won't move.
Two actions, no reaction.
Sorry, Terry.
But more importantly than demonstrating how everything he just said is bananas idiotic,
let's review what multiplication is.
One is an elementary arithmetic operation, which is essentially repeated addition.
One times four literally means the number one four times, and then you add them up.
One plus one plus one plus one equals four.
One times three, write one three times, add them up, you get three.
One times two, one twice, one plus one is two.
One times one means you write one one time, so it's one.
There's nothing to add.
His revolutionary discovery is just him being dumber than a toddler, and toddlers do like
to shake things, so this lady isn't wrong.
Well you're a shaker up there.
Let's be clear, there are only two possibilities.
One, Terrence Howard is doing a Joaquin Phoenix style extended piece of performance art and
is therefore profoundly brilliant.
Or two, he's a delusional narcissist incapable of living his life without pretending that
he's the smartest person in human history.
Or let's be honest, a god.
I'm putting my money on the ladder because I've seen this all before.
Pick your favorite flat earther.
This is their defense mechanism too.
The smallest of minds can't face a world that doesn't recognize their self-proclaimed brilliance,
so unleash a word salad, convince yourself it's science, and hope that nobody challenges
you on it.
Everything inherently is dielectric because it has matter and then it has a relationship
within the medium, the universal background, the absolute frame of reference, the field
of energy that is the ether, it receives energy from that.
These types of people enact the most impressive mental gymnastics imaginable to maintain their
own ego, and the more I encounter it, the less I find it cute or entertaining.
It's a disease that infects impressionable people and measurably worsens society.
It's not something to simply laugh at, although we are going to laugh quite a bit more before
I return to this thread in my conclusion.
So as promised, let's dive into his very recent appearance on Joe Rogan's podcast.
It's three hours long, so we aren't going to hit every moment.
Rest assured, he was completely insane from top to bottom, but let's just go through
some highlights.
My first memory was almost like when you're dreaming and you're falling, and you hit the
bottom and you wake up, that was my first memory, but I didn't wake up here.
I was inside my mother's womb, and I was about maybe six months inside the womb.
He comes out hot in the first 30 seconds, claiming that he remembers being in his mother's
womb.
I'll remove the suspense for you.
No, he didn't.
That's physically impossible.
Is that any proof, Terry?
I remember all of that coming out.
Remember being compressed, being born, I remember being circumcised, I remember the whole nine
and the proof of it was when my wife, Mira, that you just met, when she was six months
pregnant with my son, Karen, I wanted to prove to her what I was talking about.
So I put a light on her stomach every day at six o'clock at night, and I would move
that light back and forth, and I'd put a song on for a week straight.
First thing he wanted to do is see light.
He loved light from that early stage, and I can ask him the square root of two, the square
root of five, the square root of that, the square root of pi, the square, and he will
run it off.
So his proof of him remembering being born is a random anecdote about his wife's pregnancy,
his kid liking light, and a lie about his son being able to do math that Terry himself
can't do.
But there's more.
And then when I was about five years old, I had another dream, and it was this mansion,
and he would hand me these shapes, and each shape was different and amazing, and I had
access to all the knowledge.
The proof of it is the 97 patents that I have now.
The proof of it is the industries that I've innovated.
Yes, the proof that he has access to all the universe's knowledge is that he has some patents,
something that anybody can get for anything and proves absolutely nothing except that
he likes to waste money.
He's never innovated any industry.
That's why he doesn't actually do anything except ramble like a lunatic on podcasts.
You know, I had the Grand Unified Field equation.
I had already put that together, and at seven, eight, I was working with these things, and
then I went through all of the hell that I had to go through.
Yes, he had a Grand Unified Field equation at seven years old, but he wrote it down once
in the dog ate it, and then he forgot what it was.
That's why he didn't get the Nobel Prize for physics.
Also, his girlfriend goes to another school.
That's why you don't know her.
But my intention was to rebuild the periodic table, build a new periodic table, because
the stuff I had learned in college, I went to school for chemical engineering the first
year over at Pratt, and at the time, I think it was like 108 elements, and I told the teacher,
the professor, about the relationship between hydrogen on the spectrometer and carbon and
silicon and cobalt, and I was like, it's the same exact color, same tone, just doubled
in each octave, and he was like, no, each element is the same element, and it will always be
that element.
And I was like, you don't see the relationship, so I left school.
Did you leave school or did you flunk out because you kept writing, cobalt is an octave
of carbon on your exams instead of answering the questions?
And I was going to spend 40 years rebuilding the periodic table, and I found out that Walter
Russell had already did that, and he did it based upon the natural curvature of everything.
Walter Russell, who was not a chemist, made this in the 1920s, and it doesn't mean anything.
The chemical elements display periodicity.
You can illustrate that periodicity in rows, or you can make spirals and other shapes.
It's arbitrary, and listing elements this way doesn't offer any novel insight into chemistry
or any predictive power whatsoever.
Terry just likes the shape as much as he likes pretending to understand chemistry better
than chemists, or 10th graders for that matter.
And when you say rebuild the periodic table, what do you mean specifically?
Well the way the periodic table is laid out, you'll see hydrogen sitting all the way over
there by itself, but they don't show that hydrogen has the same tone as carbon.
What do you mean by tone?
Same tone, same key of E, same key of E. 40.5 Hertz, the next one would be like 80.5 Hertz.
81 Hertz, you go to silicon, it will double up and would be 162 Hertz, you'll go to cobalt,
and it'll be 324 Hertz.
It's in that base, if you were to take the angles of incidence, or the tones that they
create, their color, like you can turn color back into sound.
Joe wants to know what the hell he's talking about, and Terry is off to the races rambling
about tones.
These are not tones, they're not notes, they're not keys, they're not anything related to
music whatsoever, they're atoms with a particular number of protons in the nucleus.
He's throwing out random terminology and random numbers.
Angle of incidence has to do with light, sounds are not colors, and there's nothing
more to say about this unparalleled gibberish.
You'll see there's a relationship between hydrogen, carbon, silicon, cobalt, rhodium.
They're all bonded, they're all as the middle point between two noble gases.
So those things don't really exist, it's only one substance.
No Terry, those elements exist.
Hydrogen and carbon and silicon and cobalt and rhodium are different elements, they
are not the same thing.
Hydrogen gas is not the same as a hunk of coal, which is not the same as a sample of
silicon and so forth.
They're just the halfway point of their respective periods, which is irrelevant.
Now the problem is, the first thing that we're able to perceive is hydrogen.
That's the first visible element, because before it is too dense for us to perceive it.
You understand what I'm saying?
No, hydrogen is the first element because it's the element with one proton in its nucleus.
Hydrogen has one.
That's the smallest positive integer.
Of course you're so insane that even something as trivial as one being the smallest positive
integer can no longer be taken for granted in your illustrious presence.
But as you reach into the next octave, the carbon octave, and they call that a bisexual
tone, because the carbon has two tones to it.
It has a negative side and a positive side, the part where lithium behaves.
Lithium is contractive, beryllium is contractive, boron is contractive, but the moment you
get to carbon, you balance it out.
It gets to a perfect balance of plus and minus four, so it's a double tone.
Carbon is bisexual, you guys.
Atoms have sexuality.
Elements being contractive is also meaningless.
Everything he is saying is meaningless.
What they've tried to keep from us, if you want to break water into its component parts
of hydrogen and oxygen, all you have to do is introduce beryllium, or the sound of beryllium.
And will violently break away from any other thing, even hydrogen, to bond with that beryllium.
Ah yes, the infamous they.
What are they trying to keep from us now?
You want to perform electrolysis on water, but how?
Not electricity, heavens know.
Use beryllium.
But wait, not even beryllium itself, just the sound of beryllium.
What's that sound again?
Yep, that's what beryllium sounds like, startling, no?
I'm sorry that I made all the water in your body turn into hydrogen and oxygen gas and
you're dead now.
Elements don't have sounds, but even funnier than that, beryllium is the only alkaline
earth metal that does not react with water.
Every time he speaks, he's wrong in so many ways simultaneously that it's almost impressive.
The reason that arsenic kills us is because our DNA has nitrogen and it has phosphorus
in it because nitrogen unwinds into the next octave right after silicone and becomes phosphorus.
Our DNA has both of those in there, but it's going by tone.
So the moment arsenic, which sits as a minus three on the next octave, the moment arsenic
is introduced, the body thinks that, oh, this is my thing that I need.
And it tries to wrap itself around the arsenic, but it causes the DNA to unravel.
Wow, arsenic is harmful because it interferes with biochemical pathways.
For example, it enacts allosteric inhibition of pyruvate dehydrogenase, which is an enzyme
involved in aerobic respiration.
That means it binds to the enzyme, in this case not specifically at the active site,
and the interaction changes the shape of the enzyme just enough to render it incapable of
carrying out its function.
The cell can't make ATP, so it enacts apoptosis and dies.
There are similar effects on other enzymes involved with signaling, DNA repair, and so
forth.
Virtually anything that's harmful to biological systems is harmful because of sophisticated
interactions with the cellular machinery, which require knowledge of molecular biology
to understand.
No, DNA does not wrap around arsenic, nor does it unravel.
Terry has no clue what DNA is, what it does, or literally anything about molecules in general.
But nature doesn't allow us to unravel that, but now with the wave conjugations, we can.
We couldn't do that before because we didn't know the angles of incidence that were necessary
to open these things up, and you couldn't do that with the platonic solids because the
platonic solids were averages and approximations.
It really is just breathtaking the way he throws together totally unrelated terminology
with this much confidence.
What does one even do with this?
Wave conjugation, angle of incidence, platonic solids, these don't go together.
It's like saying you need 6 hammer the ice cream to monkey of 11 dizzy.
Your reaction to these two statements should be the same.
And the platonic solids are specifically the opposites of averages and approximations.
They are hypothetical idealized structures.
Reality consists of approximations.
Again, it's just breathtaking.
It's legitimately challenging to come up with sentences that are as wrong as everything
he says.
It took me several minutes to write the monkey sentence because I kept wanting to write things
like monkey of fire, which accidentally make more sense than I wanted.
He has a gift for gibberish.
Because the universe is based off of equanimity, which Einstein left out in his theory of relativity.
The balancing side of the gravity, gravity was caused by electric force.
Electricity is always seeking a higher pressure condition.
It spins northeast as trying to get to the center of an area, the center of a cone.
But the next electric wave is coming, so it gets pushed out, and as it's pushed out,
it gets to the vortices.
Yeah, gravity is not electric, matter specifically disperses from higher to lower pressure.
You can't spin northeast, that's a cardinal direction.
Center of an area can't mean center of a cone, since areas are two-dimensional and
a cone is three-dimensional.
And what is pushed out to what vortices?
How does this guy do this?
We are only 19 minutes in, and it's all like this.
But instead of following the natural curvature of these 64 circles overlapping, they averaged
the space where they met, and they invented straight lines.
Why did they do that?
Because they believed that the world was flat.
The irony here is that figures like Pythagoras and Parmenides were the first people in recorded
history to propose that the Earth is a sphere, and substantiated logically.
But more importantly, the Platonic solids are just derived from playing with polygons
and making polyhedra.
And even more importantly than that, none of this geometry has any correlation with
any of the bullshit he's spewing about chemistry and physics.
They're utterly separate realms.
Then we get to the fancy animations.
This is hydrogen, and as I was saying, electricity is always trying to get to the center of that
triangle, but it gets pushed out.
That's not hydrogen.
It's not even a triangle.
And where's the electricity exactly?
Eight bubbles me.
They gave me the patents to that.
I called that the tetraion.
Don't worry guys, he patented the shape.
You can patent shapes now.
I know the guy who has the patent on the rhombus.
He's a billionaire.
Spheres that's going around this, but the greater attractor has grabbed the two weaker attractors.
And this looks just like a photon, and guess what, it has 30 poles.
Yeah, it looks just like a photon.
Massless, chargeless photons look like this dumb shape he made up, because he says so.
This is where 12 bubbles meet the arboreans.
And then I put five of them together and they make these natural starfish.
But then when I put 10 of them together, they lay themselves out and they predict all distribution
of matter within the electric field.
Hey, he used the magic word, prediction.
What do they predict?
The distribution of matter, what?
Where?
Show us a prediction, Terry.
No?
Back to gibberish.
One of the first things, but when Walter Russell came out with his book and he introduced
his periodic table, he watched as different people went up and collected Nobel prizes
for deuterium, for tritium, for all these things that he had discovered.
And I was like, okay, let me wait until the patents are granted before I'll talk about
it.
Walter Russell wasn't a chemist.
He was an artist and he was delusional.
That's why you worship him, Terry.
People aren't awarded Nobel prizes in chemistry for drawing pretty pictures.
Yuri got a Nobel for discovering deuterium because that actually matters.
You just don't know what isotopes are, even though you use that word all the time.
Back to Neil deGrasse, when he wrote his response to my paper and he said, if you have
any other questions, you're going to have to see somebody else and he wouldn't take
my calls anymore.
I was like, okay, so I wrote the book based off of those responses and I reached out to
another guy, Dr. David Tong.
That would be very interesting that that would be his take as a public educator, that
he wouldn't want to talk to you anymore.
Yeah, Terry sent his ramblings to Neil deGrasse Tyson since everyone who knows zero things
about science assumes that Neil is the president of science and Neil was gracious enough to
explain to him how everything he says is wrong, probably more politely than I would.
But Terry, the narcissist, presses forward, shocked that an intelligent, busy person wouldn't
want to waste his time placating a toddler.
Joe seems surprised too, forgetting that educators enjoy educating people, not spending time
and energy trying to show an insane person how insane they are.
Why this fixation with Neil?
The reason I wanted to talk to him was because of his show, The Cosmos, that he was doing
after that incredible guy Carl Sagan did.
The very first episode he had was talking about Giorgiano Bruno and he said that Giorgiano
Bruno was looking for that grand unified field equation and maybe one day somebody is going
to do it and when they do it, it's going to change the world and I'm like, dude, I've
done it, I've got it here.
Giorgiano Bruno was not looking for a grand unified field equation.
Quantum physics didn't exist in the 16th century.
The concept of fields didn't exist in general.
The term was coined by Faraday in the 19th century.
This is the problem with science illiterate morons like Terry.
They have no respect for science whatsoever.
They have no interest in learning basic scientific principles, the history of science, what any
scientist did, what scientists are doing now, how to do science, none of it.
They are singularly obsessed with the lofty idea of one brilliant insight that can change
the world.
It doesn't matter what it's called.
That's why he keeps saying grand unified field equation because it doesn't mean anything
to him.
It's a fun phrase, nothing more.
That's what everyone was trying to do since antiquity because he says so and he's the
one who's done it because he says so.
Walter Russell talked about the fact that the sun gave birth to the earth, that it didn't
coalesce from some field and the proof of this.
Do you guys know that the earth is drifting away from the sun and all of the planets in
every solar system is drifting away from their primary at the same exact rate, like 1.5 centimeters.
This is a universal expansion that's happening with everything moving away.
Them saying and the web telescope have proven that those galaxies couldn't have formed 13,
14 billion years ago.
If you would just add up linearly, how long it would take the earth to go from the sun
to 93 million miles away, it's 9 trillion, hold on, let's go.
This is what I'm talking about.
He can't be bothered to learn literally anything about astronomy.
The expansion of the universe has nothing to do with the dynamics of an individual solar
system.
Sun did not give birth to the earth, as though our planet emerged from inside of a star.
He knows nothing about planetary formation, and the idea that we have measured this for
all other systems, how exactly would that work?
We can detect an exoplanet's orbit increasing by a centimeter, how?
But sure, play with your calculator that you already told us shouldn't be used because
it lies about arithmetic.
Well, because I know they're watching me right now, and they're mad at me.
Who's day?
The people that want that, our entire world economy is based off of the politicians and
the authorities that give the politicians their accreditation.
And those authorities, those universities are all based, their entire curriculum is based
off the platonic solids.
Look at the level of paranoia beyond the simple delusions.
The shadow government is watching Terry because he debunked the platonic solids which are
the basis of every economics course in every Rockefeller-Jesuit institution.
I'm shocked that he's not a flatterther because this is exactly how they talk.
But don't worry, he's an anti-vaxxer, obviously, and Joe is too.
You took a bold stand, no, years ago when the governments were trying to poison their
citizens.
You took a very bold stand that nobody else took.
That's what I was like, wow, I appreciate you because I lost three, four jobs because
I refuse to take it.
I refuse to take it.
I bet you feel better about it now, especially when you know all these people that have health
problems because of it.
Cancers has increased 300 percent.
All cause mortality, up 40 percent in some age groups.
Pulmonary embolisms almost up like 500 percent.
Yeah, what caused that?
No, none of those things are true.
You heard them on the internet and believed them, but Terry has a little bit of biochemistry
knowledge he wants to share.
I can walk you through what the spike protein did to the BRCA1 gene, that's the gene inside
of our DNA that tells us that there's a damage, there's damage that's happening almost like
the crews that go along the highway and they immediately put up cones every time there's
a problem.
Well, the spike protein, which is never, no protein has ever been able to enter into
the nucleus of a cell.
Not only did it go to the ribosomes and say, hey, you know what, I don't want you to produce
whatever protein like if it was a skin cell, you're not going to produce keratin anymore.
You're just going to produce these spike proteins.
That spike protein went into the DNA and it tells the BRCA1 gene turn off and that's
the gene that says, hey, there's a mutation here, let's scrap that thing.
And so now the cancers are building up.
The spike protein doesn't do anything to any gene.
He doesn't know what genes are.
Genes don't tell us things.
They are instructions for protein assembly.
That's why he goes to his pathetic analogy of something he saw on the highway because
he doesn't know how transcription and translation work.
There is nothing unique about this spike protein and he doesn't know what ribosomes do.
They translate any mRNA transcript that binds.
Making a spike protein doesn't render it incapable of producing other proteins.
Spike proteins can't go into DNA.
They can't tell a gene anything.
They can't turn off genes.
Genes don't detect mutations.
The enzymes they code for are what do that and he doesn't know what cancer is.
This is really pathetic.
Let's skip ahead.
So is he saying that just by doing these calculations he created the exact form of Saturn including
the rings?
Just the exact form of it.
Just with the calculations.
So you change the angles of incidence that these linchpins, because remember each one
of these are opposing vortices.
So there's 12 vortices to this that are opposing.
So once the angles of incidence change, you change the motion and pressure conditions,
you can now change the condition or the crystallization.
So he's pretending to explain planetary formation without gravity and without explaining literally
anything about what he's doing.
Click a button, the planet is there.
What are the dots?
Where did the matter come from?
How did it arrange itself?
Planetary formation is a process.
This just materialized that of thin air.
How?
There are no vortices.
Nothing is opposing.
There is no angle of incidence.
There is no crystallization.
He is just listing random buzzwords.
Now because we have the angles of incidence, material engineering can now separate the
space between carbon and nitrogen or carbon and boron and have the same elements of titanium,
vanadium, chromium, magnesay and iron or nickel, cobalt, nickel, copper, zinc, gallium
or germanium in those higher octaves.
We can do that between silicone and phosphorus or silicone and aluminum.
So the transparent aluminum now becomes possible because we can now control the pressure and
change the pressure and motion conditions where we couldn't do that before because they
were going by Cartesian space at 90 degrees and 45 degrees straight lines, the Euclidean
space that they've made up, this orthogonal or church like space that they've generated
because they wanted to promote that cross.
He doesn't even know the names of the elements.
He's saying mangasane instead of manganese.
He says silicone instead of silicon because he doesn't know that silicone is a different
material.
He can't pronounce orthogonal.
He's never even heard these words spoken before and he is doing nothing whatsoever to actually
explain anything about what he just showed to Joe.
He's practically speaking in tongues and Joe is lapping it up.
And as the cherry on top, he pretends that this brilliance was hidden because the Catholic
church loves the straight lines from the cross.
Does he not know how much power this symbol still has over normal people even today who
would never fall for any of this bullshit?
He just knows that churching up the story gives it a Da Vinci code vibe that ensnares
gullible people.
Can you tell me how a planet is formed under this theory?
So you have a sun and how does the sun give birth to these planets?
90 minutes in, Joe finally asks him to actually explain something and Terry's
response is astounding.
Stars crap out planets the way we take a dump on the toilet.
Case closed everyone.
Planets are fecal matter.
And the red spot on Jupiter will be a planet leader.
Of course this is meaningless since it's a storm, it's a cyclone.
How does a bunch of wind form a planet exactly?
And he's just so objectively wrong about every trivial detail.
The red spot is not at the equator, it's 22 degrees below the equator.
And the human anus is not located on the waist.
This is such a stunning example of the difference between real science and insane ramblings.
Ask this question of an astrophysicist.
You'll get mountains of data, explanations, equations, predictions, confirmations of those
predictions through observation.
Ask Terry at what do you get?
The sun takes a crap.
The end.
Who falls for this stuff?
Everything is just one great being, we're all God.
That's what Jesus was talking about, that's what Buddha was talking about, it's recognizing
the divinity in you.
Actually neither of those people said anything like that, Buddha didn't proclaim to be divine
and in Christian mythology Jesus didn't say I'm God and so are all of you.
He just said that he was God.
That's kind of why the Romans killed him.
Terry is just looking for excuses to call himself God and he's as dumb with theology
as he is with science.
Here I've invented, here I'm an Oscar nominated actor that is known all around the world,
face recognition, vocal recognition all around the world.
I've invented a new form of flight, tangential flight, the ability to fly around your own
center of mass, something they've never been able to do and you don't hear anything about
it.
Harsicism is oozing out of every pore of his body and congealing into little origami cranes
in front of our eyes.
He's world famous kind of so his imaginary invention must be brilliant.
Tangential flight, tangent to what?
He doesn't know what a tangent is and of course his little toddler toy doesn't actually fly
or do anything, he just has cute animations.
Instead of all the props having to turn themselves around to stop and turn in opposite directions
they just switch the direction, they just, so it's a collective pitch and it changes
and so now instead of going up you're going down but now five of them will come together.
So I was trying to reach out to Elon Musk, I was trying to reach out to Jeff Bezos, I
was trying because my main goal was I was building these to clean up the upper atmosphere,
all of that debris that's up there and ultimately to mine the asteroid belt.
You can immediately see that someone is clicking on a screen to trigger an animation so it's
anyone's guess as to why Elon Musk should care about this crappy video game.
Terry is not only smarter than every physicist in history but he's better at building space
crafts than everyone alive despite never having built anything.
The hubris is off the charts.
It's not worth listening to this entire rant but he genuinely believes that he has invented
revolutionary technology and that he's being ignored for literally no reason.
And so it's just going to react and immediately it converts into a plasma and so we can project
anything into space.
All of that has been accomplished and it's ignored.
Delusional narcissists always have this precise brand of persecution complex.
James Tore, Ben Davidson, they all do the same thing.
All the experts are morons because they ignore my super brilliant revolutionary insights.
The whole establishment is against me because they're afraid of my truth.
Honestly, I think we've had enough.
I got 2 hours into the 3 hour podcast and there's just no point in continuing.
It's the epitome of manic hogwash with virtually nothing to even sink your teeth into and there's
only so many times I can point out that what he's saying is meaningless.
In the end, there's only one point that needs to be made.
Pretentious tools like Terry can hope to fool as many people as they can by speaking confidently
and using jargon they hope the listener doesn't understand.
But what can they do with it?
What can they physically achieve with it?
Terry thinks he's reinvented physics but that's because he never learned any physics
in the first place.
Take this free body problem for example.
This is something he was supposed to learn in high school.
You use Newton's Laws, plug in some numbers and you get an answer that correlates with
reality.
You can predict what will happen when you let go of the block.
And guess what?
When you let go of the block, that thing does happen.
Terry's gibberish doesn't have that power.
His ramblings have no utility, no predictive power, no technological application.
It's a parlor trick.
It's basically hypnotism.
But as I mentioned before, it's not harmless.
His way of thinking is dangerous and these types of people are often dangerous.
Do you want some evidence?
Because I was angry.
I was really angry.
And I was going to use all of the knowledge that I had and I was going to destroy mankind.
Oh my God, right out of Marvel.
I was like, yeah, I was about to, but then...
Well, I'm glad you didn't.
Things like these are very revealing.
It's not a joke.
He genuinely believes he has this kind of power and he has contemplated exercising it in a
violent, destructive way.
Do you know who else has had such thoughts and acted on them?
Go and read the Manifesto of the Unabomber.
It's the exact same self-aggrandizing tone, the same superiority complex, the same incessant
rambling.
This is the psyche of cult leaders and domestic terrorists.
I'm not saying that Terrence Howard necessarily would or will blow something up in murder
people, but those who blow things up in murder people tend to think this way.
They have this strain of delusional narcissism in them that enables them to first think they're
better than everyone else and also that they deserve the right to exercise power over others.
Terry is mentally ill.
He should be checked into a mental institution to get treatment for his personality disorder.
Cue the onslaught of people saying I have no right to diagnose anyone based on a podcast
appearance.
Yeah, technically, you're right.
But also, he is a delusional narcissist with a personality disorder that should be committed
to a mental institution.
Sorry.
And if the people in his life really cared about him, they'd have done that a while ago.
Now let's pivot to Joe.
In my video on Tucker Carlson, I gave Joe a bit of a pass.
But here, Joe just fails miserably and his failure is twofold.
First, Joe desperately needs a better bullshit detector.
Anybody who can't tell that Terrence is completely full of shit within a few sentences has terrible
judgment end of story.
You don't even need to be able to articulate with clarity how he is wrong.
It's just blatantly apparent in his manner of presenting ideas, the way he vomits esoteric
terminology rapid fire, the way he overperforms to give the impression of profundity.
It's immediately apparent to any rational person.
But the other problem is a more pernicious type of mental defect, which I've mentioned
many times, and that is the anti-establishment bias.
Joe has that in spades.
This is not something like your explanation of these things and your description of the
very nature of reality itself is not something that should be taken lightly.
No.
It's something that, like...
Thank you for saying that.
It needs to be laid out and it needs to be slowly examined because you've obviously spent
a lot of time working on this.
People with this bias can hear any ridiculous story from any unqualified, clueless weirdo
and they will immediately give it far more credence than it deserves simply because it
feeds their desire to see established knowledge arbitrarily overturned.
Joe is psychologically incapable of seeing how stupid this all is because he desperately
wants this story to be true.
Wow.
I wish I could really truly understand exactly what you're saying because I'm kind of getting
it and you're doing a great job explaining it.
But if you're right, that really changes everything and it accounts for why physics
kind of hits a stalling point.
It doesn't matter that Joe has no clue what he's saying.
Instead of entertaining the idea that he isn't really saying anything, he just blindly asserts
that the emperor has all his clothes on and that the imaginary garments must be so much
better than the drab and outdated clothing that establishment science provides.
A field which obviously must be stalling just because he refuses to lift a finger to learn
how vibrant the field really is.
It's contrarianism on steroids to the point where even the most trivial self-evident facts
can be called into question just because of their addiction to perceiving themselves
as superior to the masses.
Even something as trivial as 1 times 1 equals 1.
This insistence that the dissenting voice should instantly be taken more seriously than substantiated
knowledge is an infantile attitude that is destroying our culture and I'm tired of everyone
looking the other way for fear of making waves or insulting people.
Terrence should be mocked to his face on a daily basis.
He may not be evil or deserve severe punishment, but these are the checks and balances that
maintain civic responsibility.
If you act like social poison, there should be an antidote.
Everyone in his vicinity should be constantly showing him how delusional he is until something
registers and he takes it upon himself to change.
Because as insane as he is, his ramblings have an impact.
Certain people listen.
Their minds warp.
They choose to further disregard the body of human knowledge or any concept of expertise
and we all suffer the consequences of the poor choices they make as a result.
But what's the one thing we can say for certain about Terry?
This is what you'll be remembered for and your acting will be just a footnote.
That about sums it up.
He will be remembered as a pointless lunatic no matter how badly the contrarians want to
delude themselves.
So that's it for Terrence Howard, it is genuinely astounding to me that anyone would listen
to this guy for more than 30 seconds and subjecting myself to several hours of his ramblings has
probably taken a few months off of my life.
So I hope you got something out of it.
I'll see you next time.
