So on this episode, what I want to discuss is how to hang a floor-dry system from an ICF wall
so we can take the ICF right to the roof. And it's very simple. I want to show you that you
don't have to cap yourself. You can use ICF past just the basement, right? So just kind of open
your mind. It's easy to do and there's tons of advantages. You hear of lots of stories where
someone's like, oh man, like, I know a guy who has an ICF basement. Oh, it's the best. Like,
he loves it. It's super warm in the winter, you know, nice and cool in the summer. It's a beauty
thing. So my point today is, why not just take that to the roof of your house? That's what we do on
a day-to-day basis. That's kind of our niche is we do full ICF houses. So if you look up here,
you can see where we got a bunch of hangers inserted into the wall. And that's where we're
going to hang the floor from. But I'll just kind of back up a little bit and I'll show you
how we got there. When we start stacking this block, we'll get, you know, say three rows high.
We won't have any of this bracing up. Then before we put our bracing, so these are what
we call the shields. And this is what holds the whole wall together. It allows you to straighten
your walls. It holds your scaffold up so you can have something stand on while you pour the concrete.
But before you put the shields up, you have to do a floor layout. So just a little bit of forethought.
So what we do is we got three rows high. We lay out our floor joist system based off our floor
layout. So these, this is a three and a half inch wide, 20 inch high, open webbed floor joist
at two foot on center. So here's one joist. Here's another joist. And here's another joist.
So we do a full layout. Then we know where to put our shields so that they're not in the way of a
floor joist or in the way of a hanger. So let's jump up top. I'll show you the hanger system we're
using today. A couple more tips on what to keep in mind so that once the concrete's placed,
you can hang your floor simply. It just keeps everything easy. And then you just keep stacking
block from there. A whole bunch of steps later, a bunch of block, rebar obviously. You set all
your bracing up your scaffold so you can walk. Then you're at a point where you can start setting
your hangers in at the height that you need. So whatever you need for your basement slab
and the ceiling height in your basement, figure all that out. Now what's worked out really well
here is after our shields, they're 10 feet high. We've actually gone and chalked out the top of
our subfloor right here. So we've set up our laser level. We can chalk this line above all these
shields so that they're not in the way. Works beauty. Then we just measured from the top there
to the bottom of our hangers. So in this scenario, it's 20 and three quarters, 20 inch for the open
web joist, three quarters of an inch for our subfloor. Once you have all that information,
then you can insert your hangers.
So this is the Levan hanger. What's nice about it, I just have to do two vertical cuts
so I can put this hanger anywhere in the whole, in the whole ICF system. I'm not limited to anything.
Now once I know my heights, then I just basically do my two vertical cuts
and I slide these bad boys in place.
Like so. Then what we've done here is because I can't actually screw through the hanger into a tie,
we've had to do this two by four ledger, which is just a perfect distance down from the top of
our subfloor. Screw it to the webs. Then I screw my hanger down to it.
That prevents any settling or potentially any lifting of the hangers. I'll spray foam the hangers
in place so that the concrete doesn't want to tip them forward. I still need to run rebar
through the two holes on the inside of the wall. So those two holes on the back of the hanger
will run rebar through those. And then we got a little more prep work to do,
but then we're ready to, or then we're ready to pour the concrete. Now another couple elements that
in this viewpoint is this is going to be the front entry of the house. So you see a secondary
chalk line. We actually just got to cut this down for our door buck and there's a few elements
there that I won't share today, but you do have to think ahead. Make sure you get your doors in
position because when we pour, we're going to pour our concrete up here about halfway in this block
and then it'll taper down and we'll just go nice and level across the bottom of where the
future door is going to go for the main floor. The best thing about this Levan hanger system is
it doesn't take a whole lot of forethought. You know, a few tricks that I've showed you right now,
then you pour it. It's after that, it's simply set the beams in your beam pockets,
couple teleposts. You just drop your floor joists in place and away you go. It's pretty much done.
So it's a very simple system, a little thinking ahead of time, but then when it comes to setting
the floor, it's quick and easy. So this is the next step. You can see that it's a lot cleaner
job site. We've poured the concrete, we've stripped down our bracing, and now we're ready to land the
floor system. So we'll simply, we'll just put in our center beams, we'll land the floors, but we'll
show you that as we go. And then it's just easy to keep going on, taking this thing to the roof.
Let's check out how simple it was just to land those joists and those hangers. So we put a little
forethought into the hangers, but then after that we just simply drop them in place. We sheet the
floor and then we'll just jump up top and we'll just do the ICF right from the main floor and
take it to the roof. But let's take a look at these hangers. The first thing you're going to want to do
is just take your laser level and just go around the whole building and try to just figure out,
you know, if some of the hangers settled or if some of the blocks settled, figure out which
hanger is the highest and then just kind of base everything off of that. Just kind of get an idea
what's happening. Because the worst thing is if you set all your joists too low and then a couple
hangers were high and then you had to adjust everything else. So it's just kind of one of those
four thought things. But the other, the other thing to point out with when you're hanging this
system is don't go by your original chalk line that we had the other day. You'll want to chalk
a brand new line and it's just a reference line. So I think what we did here is the joists are 20
inches high. We went 21 and a half. We chalk a brand new line because then that's deadly,
the concrete set and nothing is going to move. This, this line will have a 20 inch joist and
then what we can do is you can see we've got a string line here. We can put a 2x4 on top of
the hanger or we can put a 2x4 on the top of the joist and slide it up and make sure it's bang
on with the chalk line. And then if we just need to tweak and put a little shim in there just to
get it perfect, that's what we do. The most important thing at this stage is to make sure that the
joists are all perfectly straight. Because if you just throw these in and yeah, we've done a good job
of putting the hangers in who we're going to be very close. But if there is a little wave and you
put hardwood flooring in and when you put your baseboard down you might have to scribe the baseboard
in order to match. So if you just put a little more effort into this then it'll save you down the
road when you're finishing. And that just goes with construction in general. It's just doing a
little bit now to save yourself time later. Just in case I freaked a few of you out talking about
shimmy joists and all that, don't be afraid. As you can see everything worked out really well.
We we only had to shim maybe one or two joists and I'm talking a micron. It wasn't much at all.
I'm not here to freak you out. I'm just trying to give you all the information you need
to do the job properly. The other thing I want to point out is as you look down
the top of these joists and you can see this orange string line here that's the top of our
subfloor. And you can see how we planned it so that when we poured this concrete here
the subfloor and the top of the concrete are deadly flush with each other. Congratulations you
did it. You got up above the floor. You installed your Levan hangers. Now it's smooth sailing.
You're out of the mud. 70% of your hard work is done. Your footings, your peel and stick,
your waterproofing, your weeping tile, all that. You can see where I'm going with this.
I'm halfway done already. I just go a little further. Now I have a nine foot
ceiling height on my main floor. Now you have all the benefits that go along with
a full ICF house, the resilience, the wind resistance, sound resistance, continuous
insulation, you have the thermal mass, all of those advantages. So I have other videos
describing what those are. I'm just saying it's such a beneficial system. It's easy to take it
to the top and I'm here to show you how.
