Helen, I've been trying to think of a way to start this podcast interview by giving you
the best opportunity to explain your view. And I think the best way to start is how I
often start with certain people. I did this with Keith, I mean with illusionism. I'm going
to do this with panpsychism. What I want you to do is give me a brief philosophical history
of the mind-body problem from your side, from how you grew to listen to this problem, to understand
it and tell me which philosophers or scientists have played the biggest roles in shaping your
current view. Because I think it gives us a great understanding of how you came to this view. I
know Berkeley is obviously going to be one of them, but I mean it's a great way to understand how
your thought processes have formed over the years. Yeah, okay, so that's a very interesting
question. So I think I first became introduced to consciousness. Actually, my dad introduced me
to the knowledge argument when I was still in high school. And so and I loved that. And I had very,
very strong dualist intuitions right from the get-go. So my first philosophy of mind class that I
took spent a lot of time discussing different particular physicalist theories and the minutia
of those theories. And I spent the whole time sitting there like, what, this is completely
missing the point, right? This is missing consciousness. Where are the feels coming from?
So I spent all my time sort of sitting there idly drawing little pictures and diagrams and
concluded based on this that there could be no such thing as mental causation. And what I was
drawing out was these standard diagrams that have been used to support epiphenomenalism. So the
idea that, you know, there's the physical world and every physical event is caused by a previous
physical event. And those physical events cause conscious experiences, but there's sort of not
any room in the picture for the conscious experiences to do causal work. The conscious
experiences are just sort of an extra that explains the feelings, but nothing more. So,
so I quickly became concluded that epiphenomenalism was true and my philosophy professor spent the
rest of my undergraduate career time to disabuse me of this and never succeeded. So my I while I'm
currently working on idealism and developing an idealist view of the nature of reality and the
nature of the mind body problem. I'm actually not not necessarily a committed idealist. I'm sort of a
committed antiphysicalist. So I have very strong intuitions that consciousness can't be reduced to
can't be reduced to something non conscious. And not only intuitions, I think these intuitions can be
developed into good arguments to this effect. But at this point in my life, I'm sort of neutral
between dualism of an epiphenomenalist sort and idealism of an epiphenomenalist sort. So I mean,
I guess you asked for people who had influenced me on this journey. And it's a little bit funny,
because I think I actually kind of came fully formed to these views that I have prior to reading
people. And then it was subsequently I started reading people like Dave Chalmers and going, ah,
he's said everything I want to say only way better than I could say it. And Thomas does have that
Yes, is very, very frustrating.
But so I sort of I began my career as a dualist, and I put no stock whatsoever in the truth of
idealism. It sounded like a bonkers theory. I met Howard Robinson, who is a contemporary idealist
philosopher when I was in grad school, and I was blown away that he was actually an idealist. And I
didn't think there were any such people. But subsequently, it actually I started thinking
about idealism more carefully as a result of two things. One was thinking about just reading
Barkley when I was in grad school and thinking about abstract general ideas. So this is sort of
the question of that the early modern philosophers were interested in of how it is that we can have
thoughts that latch on to not just a particular thing, but latch on to many things that are very
diverse in different ways. So how we can have a thought, a particular thought about triangles.
That's not about any particular kind of triangle, but just triangularity in general. And so that
led me to reading a lot of Barkley and the early modern philosophers and sort of increased my
interest in idealism. And at the same time, I was being exposed to work contemporary work in the
philosophy of perception. And these people called naive realists. And naive realism is this view
about perception where the thought is that somebody should start with representationalism
because I think it's the more intuitive view. So for a representationalist, there's this world
out there and light bounces off of the object and enters my eye and stuff happens in my brain
and causes me to represent a mug that's before me. But what it is that I'm sort of directly
grasping is this thing that my brain generates, this experience of the mug, this representation of
the mug. I don't directly grasp the mug. I sort of grasp the mug that I'm looking at or anything
in the world in an indirect kind of way. And naive realists say, no, no, the intuitive view is that
vision is kind of like touch. We sort of reach out and we sort of grasp the object. And the object
is a part of our thoughts. And listening to this in grad school, and I found this completely
just insane sounding. How is it that my thoughts, my conscious experiences could have things like
cups and trees and computers as a part of them? That made no sense to me at all. And it made no
sense until I started thinking, well, but if the whole world is experiences, if the whole world is
made up out of consciousness, then maybe it's not quite so insane. And that sort of led me down the
road of interest and idealism and just sort of playing with it as a view, not because I thought
it was true, but because it seemed interesting. And I was curious, is it a view that could be
defended? And actually, the more I sort of played with it, and the more I thought about it, the
more I realized there actually are some genuinely good things to say in favor of this view. And I've
sort of argued myself into giving it significant credence, although I'm not a committed idealist.
I mean, there's so many idealists today, giving such great arguments. I mean, if you think of people
like Bernardo Kastrup out there, you've got someone like Donald Hoffman who does conscious
realism, but I mean, it's a form of idealism, in a sense, if you when you think about it,
you take consciousness to be this fundamental reality. I mean, you're talking about a difference
in the nature of consciousness. I think a great way to go with this is let's go with one of your
papers is called dissolving, I think type B physicalism. Yeah. Remembering the title
curriculum. Let's dissolve physicalism. Tell me why that's just go with it.
Well, I don't know that we actually can dissolve physicalism. So I kind of, I think there are
certain versions of physicalism that don't work. But I actually am inclined to think that there is
a plurality of metaphysical views out there that actually are each, not just internally
coherent, like from the inside, you can stamp your feet and say, no, I refuse to listen to
anything you say, but that are sort of deeply like internally plausible, I guess is maybe the way to
put it. So let me try to think how to express this. So I think it's, it's well known that
you can for, you can take and you can just refuse to listen to the other people's sides
arguments, you can say, I disagree with that premise, I refuse to accept that. And as a result,
I don't have to accept your argument, I'm going to hold on to my, to my position. So, you know,
when you have something like a physicalist faced with a knowledge argument, the physicalist could
say, look, I just don't think that Mary, when she sees red for the first time, learns anything.
I think that's, I think that's the wrong way of thinking about it. I don't think she'd be fooled
if you showed her a blue banana. But I think that you could also be a physicalist who actually
genuinely accepts the intuitive starting point, and nevertheless, can still defend from the inside
that viewpoint. So I think, and I argue in that paper at the end of the paper, the idea is that
it's a kind of mysterious. So the idea is that we,
we have a particular sort of cognitive structure to our minds. And that cognitive structure is
essentially sort of limiting to what it is, what kinds of things it is that we can understand.
And depending on sort of the formatting of how it is that our brain goes about making sense of
consciousness in sort of conscious terms versus physical stuff, sort of using physical terms,
it may be that our brain just is not set up to be able to match those two kinds of things together.
But it doesn't, that doesn't mean that it's impossible for these two things to be matched
up. That could just be a limitation due to kind of like our neural hardware. And so I think that
if a physicalist were to embrace a view like that, that they can simultaneously accept things like
the knowledge argument, except the actual intuitive datum, the datum that Mary as a human being, Mary
as somebody with an art cognitive architecture that works like ours, she would be fooled by a blue
banana. She would learn something new, even if she had all the physical knowledge, but it doesn't
mean that there's something more to consciousness. So I think, I think a physicalist can,
can sort of embrace what the dualist says and still maintain their physicalism.
At the same time, I think that a dualist can embrace a lot of things that a physicalist
wants to throw at them and really listen to them and still not have to be moved. And I similarly
think the same kind of thing for idealism. So I actually think that there's sort of a plurality
of views that they're not just defensible from the inside in that you can say, mean or meaner,
or you know, stick your tongue out at the other side and say, I refuse to accept your starting
points. You can accept the starting points, explain away as needed and come to an internally
plausible view for these very different views. And I kind of think that, sorry, I'm interrupting.
I completely agree with that. I think that when I started this podcast, I had such a specific
thought going into it. What I thought consciousness was, I wrote essays on it as well. It's part of
my dissertation. So I had my own view. But when I listen to people's coherent arguments, the more
you actually try and sympathize or empathize even more with these views, the more you understand
that if you set up a great bunch of assumptions prior to starting the argument, you can really
flow with your argument and you can give something succinct and not Nina Nina. So people can listen
to it. I mean, and you do a great job at this. I think you do a perfect example. You're a perfect
example of someone who can defend idealism with some really coherent arguments and even just
reading your papers. I mean, you've done a great job at that. I think at this point, do you want
to defend your actual position? I mean, what is your position regarding consciousness? What is
consciousness to you, Helen? Okay, so would you like me to talk about consciousness or about
idealism itself? Let's talk about idealism because I mean, we obviously know that that's
like your view on consciousness. Okay, well, in a sense, sorry, I keep I keep sort of,
I sort of agree with what you're saying, but I keep sort of also disagreeing and it's
it's made it a little hard to directly answer the questions. So I think in a sense, I think that
idealism is not itself a view of consciousness or a view of the mind body problem in the way that
like materialism or dualism or panpsychism, those are views that are coming and are
essentially trying to like answer the mind body problem. Whereas idealism, I think is
essentially a view about the nature of the physical world. And the view basically is just
sort of in a nutshell what it takes to be, I guess I should say an idealist of the sort that I'm
interested in. So I think of this as ontological idealism. But what it takes to be an idealist
basically just is to think that the physical world around us, it's real. But what it fundamentally
is, is conscious. It fundamentally is built up out of phenomenology. So I sort of think of this
a little bit by analogy to like reductive physicalism. So reductive physicalists, they want to say,
you know, look, I think consciousness is real. I think there is such a thing as pain. I'm not
trying to do away with pain, I'm trying to give an analysis of it. And this is the analysis.
Pain reduces to some sort of physical state, some sort of brain state, functional state.
Similarly, for the idealist, the idealist wants to say, the physical world is real.
There are rocks, there are stars, there are atoms. But what are they fundamentally? I'm trying to
give an analysis of it. And the analysis is such that it ultimately reduces to phenomenology.
Now, that sort of doesn't answer your question, right? Because you asked me about my view of
consciousness, which I haven't said anything about what consciousness is, what it is that this
is built up out of. You're talking, so we're going metaphysics here, we're talking about the
fundamental nature of reality. And we know that if everything is fundamentally matter,
that's going to be physicalism. And if everything is fundamentally mind, then you're going towards
more for an idealistic viewpoint. So you're basically saying that the fundamental nature
of reality is conscious, rather than consciousness is something, something, something.
Yeah. Yeah. So consciousness is sort of coming in, as you're pointing out,
consciousness is coming in as a primitive. So I mean, I suppose you could try to reduce
the physical world to consciousness and reduce consciousness to something else that doesn't
tend to be the way that idealists go. We do tend to take it as a primitive, as just so generous.
Yeah. But so, but that makes it very much very similar to panpsychism, because you're obviously
now taking that to be the fundamental property of reality. At what point do you guys diverge?
Yeah, that's a surprisingly tricky question. And I think the reason is because there aren't really
sufficiently precise agreed upon definitions of what it takes to be a panpsychist versus to
be an idealist. So there are people who are panpsychists who think that consciousness is one
fundamental, one sort of fundamental property, but that there might be other sorts of fundamental
properties that are not conscious. So it'd be kind of impure panpsychism, which would be quite
different. The idealist, according to the idealist, it's all phenomenology is sort of what is essentially
the nature of reality. So that's one potential difference. I think some of the differences
between panpsychism and idealism come in in sort of two respects. One is just in the canonical
form of panpsychism and the canonical form of idealism, why looking different,
and the others in their motivations. So sort of the canonical form of panpsychism is what some
people have called micro psychism. So this is the idea that the fundamental building blocks of reality
are tiny particles, quarks, whatever it is, maybe something smaller, and those fundamental
particles have as their intrinsic nature consciousness. So panpsychists give arguments for
this, of course, and then everything else is built up out of them. So we get consciousness in at the
ground level in building everything up, but sort of the fundamental locus of it is at the very tiny
level. By contrast, the canonical representation, I think of idealism, at least in the Western
tradition would be Barclay's idealism, which has basically the world all as experiences in the
mind of God, at least as one way of putting it. So there's sort of a difference in terms of whether
the one starts with these very, very tiny things and experiences coming in as parts of them, and
the other starts with these sort of very large experiences, experiences of the universe.
Now that's not essential to the two views because there are now panpsychists who call themselves
Cosmosychists, Philip Goff being one of them, and they are going to embrace this bigger top-down
picture. But I think the other difference between idealism and panpsychism really comes from the
standard motivations for the views. So panpsychists typically come to their view as a way of giving
a solution to the mind-body problem. So they look around and they go, look, I think that
consciousness can be explained in the same way that we explain all the other stuff in the world.
We explain liquidity by, we've got a bunch of molecules, they arrange in the right way,
and liquidity emerges. I think consciousness is the same. I think you can take these little
physical building blocks, put them together, and you can build consciousness. But in a sense,
that's agreeing with the physicalist. But also the panpsychist says, but I also agree with
the non-physicalists, with the dualists, because how could you take non-physical things and put
them together and sorry, non-conscious things, non-conscious things and put them together and
have consciousness pop into existence out of that. So they sort of infer from that that the
consciousness must have been in there from the start. And it's the only way we're able to build
big consciousnesses like ours up is that we started with little consciousnesses. This is obviously a
cartoonish caricature of the view. But so the mind-body problem is the central driving
force. They're getting people to panpsychism. With idealism, the standard route to idealism
actually doesn't have to do with the mind-body problem. It has to do with trying to give an
account of the physical world around us and just directly of its nature. So I can say more about
that. Go ahead. Oh, okay. Yeah, so I mean, I guess if we sort of started with like Barclay as sort of
the father of the Western idealist tradition, you know, very rough caricature again of the view,
you look around and you're like, you know, what do I know about the world? Well, I know it's
populated by mugs like the one I'm holding by trees like the trees I see outside by stars and so on.
What's that? It's a really nice mug. You know, the last time I did an interview,
I had a different mug and I was also complimented on it. I like mugs. So,
right, so I know, I know all these things, but what do I know about these things?
Well, the mug in my hand, I know it feels solid and warm. I know, you know, I see blue
in the mug and white on the inside. I see brown, sort of with light reflecting off of it,
because I shouldn't quite describe that way. I see brownish, bobby, upy, downness when I look
inside of the mug and see the tea sloshing around. Now, all of these things that I just described
were the ways that it seems to me were experiences that I have when I look at the mug, right?
Hardness, warmth, and so on. And when you think about it, all of the information that we gain
about the world around us, empirically, we gain through our senses, through the experiences
that we have of the world. Even when you're, you know, in a science laboratory, you're looking
through a microscope or, I mean, presumably when you're running tiny particles together in a particle
accelerator, right? What it is you get from that is the experiences that you have of looking
through the microscope. So now, we could say, all right, there's some sort of mind independent
matter out there that we don't know anything about what it's like. We just know that it causes us to
have certain experiences. That's one sort of view we could have. But why, first of all,
Barkley thinks, you know, Barkley is an empiricist, he thinks we should just pause it,
what we get through our experiences, and nothing more than we need to pause it.
Why go about pausing that? Why not just pause it? That it is the thing that we're directly aware of,
experiences. Why not just pause it that we've got warmth, cylindricality, hardness, and so on?
And that's what the mug is. After all, that's all I directly have evidence of. And if you
tell me there's something more to it than that, I don't know what the hell it could be.
So that sort of is the motivation for Barkley getting to idealism. And I think the standard
motivation for getting to idealism is thinking, you know, this is what we have evidence to think
that there is. And there's not evidence to think there's anything more. So if we don't need anything
more, if we can do without it, that looks like the more simple parsimonious view.
Yeah, which is a very coherent way of thinking. I mean, ideally, if that's the way it all looks,
the best assumption to make is that that's just the way it all looks and is.
Yeah, I mean, I find this kind of argument actually quite compelling. I think a lot of people
don't. I mean, I guess the question is, can we actually come to a coherent view that's able to
respect what we learn from science, that's able to respect our intuitions about the world having
a sort of stability that it does, and does the ultimate view that we get when we really try
to flesh this all out, does that look good? And that's, I think, maybe where idealism has work
to do, at least. But I hope to fill. So coming into this view, I mean, you must have had knowledge
of, I mean, reality, we dark matters 95% of the universe. We don't know anything about it.
It's dark energy, we know nothing about the fundamental nature of reality. So
coming into this, was that does, does what we've learned from physics and basically everything
we know about biology, everything else we know, did that play a huge role in forming this view for
you? Was that was that a driving force for you to no longer trust reductionism or physicalism?
Yeah, that's a very interesting question. That was not a driving force for me. I think that
some of the cases that you present are interesting puzzle cases, though, for the idealist and cases
that the idealist really needs to think about and be able to speak to. So, I mean, what I started
off describing was the sort of experiences that I have of the world, right? And I started saying,
you know, that it seems like we want to have a world that has that, at very least as a part of it.
It's interesting that the cases that you're describing things like dark matter, you're
describing things that I, as you say, you know, we don't have the ability to perceive.
So that might be taken to be something that would pose a challenge for the idealist,
insofar as the idealist wants to say that everything in the world is experiences.
So how do we account for the sorts of things that perhaps are, you know, certainly that we
can't experience or perhaps are essentially imperceivable? So would you like me to talk
about this a little bit or? Yeah, this is about, I want to listen to what you have to say.
Okay, all right. Yes, I mean, I just think you've sort of actually hit on quite a challenging
sort of puzzle case. So I think it might make sense to get to this after getting more of the
positive view out, but maybe. I think let's do that first, and then we'll get, we'll touch on this.
I'll try and just make, you know, but continue. So wait, let's, let's start off with, I mean, so
let's run through some of the various types of idealism that they are. I mean, because
Barclay's idealism is very much, I mean, there's a lot of credence placed on God. God's one of the
main driving forces behind this, and your view does not have that behind it. It's more of a
secular version of this. So let me let's touch on the different versions of this and how yours
differs from most of the others. Oh, I am not, I'm probably not the best person to give a rundown
of all the different versions of idealism. Well, at least the most, the most commonly brought up
views. Yeah. So, well, okay, so, so you've brought up Barclay's idealism. So Barclay's idealism,
we started off describing a little bit how he came to the motivation for it. But as you've touched
on, God is playing this very central role. So maybe I should just say a little bit about how
that comes in. So if the world is just a world of experiences, if the cup that I'm seeing right now
just is sort of the experiences that I'm having of the cup, you very quickly run into problems,
right? For one thing, if I sort of set the cup down out of view, and there's no one else in the
room perceiving it, does the cup pop out of existence? That seems bonkers. So Barclay's
answer to this is no, it doesn't. The world around us is stable and persists in the way we think that
it does. And the answer, the solution to this is God. So at least on the caricature that of the
view that is typically presented to undergraduate students, God is always perceiving the totality
of reality. So God is experiencing the cup even when I'm not. And this actually, I think,
is important in other ways. So it's not just that God is ensuring that my cup continues to exist.
But if you think about it, there's a lot of features of the cup that I'm not aware of,
like even when I am looking at it, I'm not aware of the backside of the cup. But the cup's backside
doesn't pop in and out of existence. Why will God is experiencing it? Similarly, the molecular
structure of the cup that maybe with a high powered microscope I could perceive. But I'm not
currently. The molecular structure doesn't pop in and out of existence because God is always
experiencing it. So God is playing this really big role, which, as you've pointed out, I want to
get away from for a variety of reasons. So I sort of think of my view as kind of a neo-Barclayan
view. So it's very much in the Barclayan tradition. It's a realist view that, you know, a view that
says cups exist, they're real, rocks exist, they're real. You can't refute the view by kicking a rock.
But God is not the thing that's accounting for the stability and persistence of objects and their
properties. A different sort of view that has also been kind of resurrected recently is the
phenomenalist view. So phenomenalism is a position according to which reality is not
constructed out of experiences per se. It's constructed out of potentials for experience.
So this cup, you know, right now I'm experiencing it. I put it down and I'm not looking at it.
But nevertheless, were I to turn my head and look at the cup, I would have certain experiences.
And according to the phenomenalist, those potentials to have experience,
those maybe conditionals, those counterfactual claims, those obtain even when I'm not actually
looking at the cup. And that is what the cup is constructed out of. So this is a position that was
associated with Mill and that Mike Pelisar has recently done an admirable, remarkable job of
resurrecting and defending. So there's sort of another version of idealism, or not exactly
idealism, but view in the ballpark. We've touched a little bit on panpsychism. There are, of course,
there are a lot of views that are sort of idealists, but are very of a different kind. So there's
sort of transcendental idealist views, which have also recently been resurrected as forms
of linguistic idealism. So these are views basically where we're not giving a view about
the nature of the world around us, we're giving a view about the nature of what we can know,
and of the world as we interact with it, or maybe what it is that our words are about
in the more recent forms. So I am very much not an expert on Kant, but Kant is the person
associated with transcendental idealism, which would be this sort of idea that there is a cup,
a thing in and of itself, but that is sort of outside of the bounds of my ability to grasp.
What I grasp is something that's more akin to what a Barclay would hold that we grasp.
So yeah, so we've got a whole lot of different, but sort of interconnected web of views that are
all called idealism or idealist adjacent. Yeah, so there's like a plurality, I'm sorry,
a bit of a tongue twister there. Yeah, so there's a lot of, there's many different views there,
and a lot of them sort of coincide in certain ways, but yours differs in some other ways.
Why have you excluded God from this? Okay, good. So I guess there's two reasons.
One is just that, so I'm agnostic, and for Barclay, God is playing this really metaphysically
like heavy weight role, right? I mean, God is ensuring that the backside of my cup at every
moment continues to exist, and that, you know, that this has a molecular structure even when I'm
not looking at it under a microscope and so on. And that's, I would kind of prefer a view that's
just more theologically neutral in part because of my own agnosticism. But beyond that, I think even
if you are a theist, a committed theist, that there is value in stepping away, at least temporarily,
stepping back from God, playing the central role. Because I think that God kind of is like a black
box to us. And I think part of that's that, you know, we don't feel comfortable, I mean,
I certainly wouldn't feel comfortable just speculating about the structure of God's mind
and what it's like and how everything hangs together, right? It's something where you'd
feel sort of compelled to go and look at theology. And even then, the answer you're going to get is
probably, oh, divine mystery, we don't know, humans aren't going to presuppose about what God is like,
right? So I think if we sort of step back from talking and thinking about God, I mean, God,
you can sort of smuggle a lot into God, you can say like, ah, well, God's doing it. And then
it's sort of like, that's the end of that, right? You've shut the case, you've said God, and now
there's nothing more to say. And I really think that we want to have a more substantive view than
that. So I think that, you know, stepping back from God and just thinking about the structure
of the mind or the phenomenal unity that constitutes reality can enable us to do that,
can enable us to say something more substantive than a theistic view could. And if at the end of
the day, you have theistic inclinations and want to add some of those traditional godly attributes
back into the picture, you can do that, but with a sense as to how it all could work behind the
scenes that I think you wouldn't get otherwise. Within your agnosticism, I mean, where are you
most inclined towards? Like, are you inclined towards a sort of theistic God, a deistic God,
polytheistic God? What are you looking at? If you had to sort of posit some sort of a
some helpful Barclay, basically. Yeah, well, myself, I mean, this, this is not sort of part
of the arguments that I give, but I'm, I'm sort of agnostic between sort of atheism and a deist
God, I sort of I find, I find the cosmological argument rather persuasive. And I find, I find
a particular variant of the fine tuning argument that has to do with fine tuning,
psychophysical bridging laws kind of also quite persuasive. So,
you know, dualists and certain sorts of idealists take it that, you know, we've got our brains
and we've got conscious experiences and the relation between there's some sort of law like
relation between them, right? So when my brain is in brain state five, I'm having a reddish
phenomenal experience. Whereas the bridging laws could have been different, my inverted twin
could have been in brain state five. And if the laws were different, it could have caused a greenish
experience to be generated. And so, you know, this is a standard way that dualists think about
consciousness. But then you can ask these questions like, well, why is it that our experiences,
particularly experiences like pain, why is it that our pain experiences feel bad? You know,
couldn't the bridging laws have been different such that whenever we have tissue damage
occurring and signals being sent to our brain and this thing happening in our brain, that we
feel pleasure. But, you know, our brain, you know, causes us to pull away from it, even though we're
actually feeling pleasure. I think that that's perfectly possible. You might think, you know,
well, it's just, it was just good luck. It was just luck that the bridging laws worked out right.
I mean, you could have someone who experiences pain as we feel it, but enjoys it. I mean,
to some people, the wires. Yeah. Yeah, I mean, I mean, I tend to think that if for those cases
of actual people, there's probably other functional differences within their brain beyond, beyond
this, but, but that's absolutely right. Yeah, so, but in any event, I mean, I guess, if you don't
want to posit that that's sort of just good luck and random, one way of going about explaining
that would be that God ensured that we had sensible bridging laws, that God fine-tuned the
bridging laws. And this is sort of, I mean, there's, it's a complicated argument, but
I think this sort of fine-tuning argument gets away from you can't do things like the anthropocentric
kind of response, right? So, you know, if the bridging laws were different, we would still
be aware of the bridging laws being different. So, so I'm sort of, I find those kinds of arguments
somewhat persuasive and persuasive enough to leave me as an as an agnostic, but I find the
problem of evil, the problem of suffering really just seems insurmountable to me. So,
I'm not inclined to believe in the sort of God that Barclay would posit.
It's always fascinating to know someone's spiritual slash religious beliefs, because
a lot of the times it does play a role in the way they view consciousness. I mean,
this is a very fascinating book called by John Hogan called Blind Body Problems,
where he dissects different philosophers and scientists and talks about their upbringing
and how they came to a certain view that would predispose them to have that philosophical view
in the end. So, yeah, you think your agnosticism played a role in this, in this idealist view of
the world? Ah, I would be inclined to think not, but I'm probably too close to it to be the best
arbiter. I mean, I think, you know, the sociology of philosophy, the sociology of academics is like,
I mean, it seems fascinating to me, although maybe it's just because I'm an academic and so
everybody thinks the sociology of them seems fascinating, but yeah, no, I mean, I think it's
a super cool, super cool question. I might need more distance from myself. Yeah, no, I do know
that your your husband is as an ethicist and you guys have written a lot of papers together as well.
Because this podcast is also all about reality, the nature of reality, morality. I mean, I think
it all plays a very big role. So Metaethics is a big part of what you discuss as well. How do you
think that this view sort of changes the way we should behave morally? I mean, how has it, how
can it affect us? So how, how idealism could affect us? People perceive the nature of reality in
this way, then there's no physical person. There is a mind that's possibly there are these conscious
agents, in a sense, but there is no physical person to actually go and kick if I had to.
Yeah, my answer might be somewhat disappointing. So I actually think that there's probably very
little by way of implications here. And I think part of the reason is that one thing that I'm
aiming to do with idealism is to sort of show, to show that, you know, we have our views about
what the world is like, and we get our views partly just by the way the world seems to us,
partly from science, right, from gaining, we gain knowledge all sorts of different ways.
But what I wanted to do is to see, can we, can we show that there could be a world whose nature
is an idealist world that looks just like we think our world actually is? So in a sense,
I'm sort of using the way that we think that the world is as a guide, and then trying to say, you
know, yeah, the world could be just that way as an idealist world, and that I think there are
advantages to doing so. But as a result, since I'm using what we think about our world as the guide,
I think it's going to wind up looking very much the same as we ordinarily think.
So I actually do think, you know, you said there aren't physical, there aren't physical
beings. And in a sense, that's right. But in another sense, that's, that's wrong, right? So there
are bodies that have all of these, you know, there are, I have a body and it's solid and it's
warm. And, you know, I have a brain and it's you cut my head open, it's sort of gray and squishy.
And if you look at me under an FMRI, you know, you'd see different patterns of things lighting up,
corresponding to blood flow in my brain. And all of that's true. So in a sense, in a sense,
I'm sort of maybe making a very Barkley in point. So Barkley, when people would say, you're doing
away with matter, you're doing away with, with the world that we know it. And he's like, no,
I'm doing the common sense thing, I'm giving you matter. If what you mean by matter is something
we don't know anything at all about, yeah, I'm getting rid of that. But I'm not getting rid of
bodies. I'm not getting rid of any of the properties you know about.
Okay, no, that's, that's a very good answer. I think, I think that there was, there was a,
oh yes, a part of me wanted to ask at that point, let's say, let's, let's move beyond
hurting someone or kicking someone. What happens then when someone dies? Because ideally,
at that point, this is going to become a very different place. What goes on then? What happens
when someone dies in this reality? Yeah, I mean, I suppose there's a sense in which
the idealist view that I'm developing is sort of under, under determines that. So certainly,
you know, we have a body, and it's fundamentally made up out of phenomenology. And I have a brain
that's also made up out of phenomenology, and it's going to start functioning very differently,
right, just as we ordinarily think. So, you know, blood, my part's not going to be pumping
blood, my lungs aren't going to be breathing, decay is going to eventually set in, and the body
is going to rot. All of that's going to happen within the physical world. And just the way that
we think that it does. But the idealist is giving a particular account of sort of the nature of
the things that are rotten, basically. And the nature of the decay, I guess, itself is that it's,
it's all sort of, in some sense, phenomenal, in some sense, conscious. Not that my body remains
conscious. It's not that there's a little consciousness experience in my body, but that,
you know, when you think about the bones that make up my skeleton, you know, yes, they're there,
they're made up out of whatever molecules they're made up out of, structured in the way that they're
structured. But what are those things, ultimately, like, you know, what is, you know, a physicist
could give us a mathematical equation that explains all of these things, they can tell us about the
relations between things. But what fundamentally is the intrinsic nature, what are the things that
have these properties that have these sandwich relations, I guess. So that's what the idealist
is telling us. So, you know, the body is going to wither and rot. Then there's the question of the
mind, which we haven't really talked about how the mind and the body are related on the idealist
view. And I think there's not just one view that ideals could have about this, I think idealism
is compatible with a number of different views on this. But I think probably any view that a
physicalist or a dualist, I guess maybe more dualists could have on this would be open to the
physicalist, or sorry, it would be open to the idealist. So, you know, I think it would be
compatible with an afterlife to whatever extent other views are compatible with the afterlife.
But I don't think idealism itself determines that.
It's, it's, it's, when you, when you talk about this nature of reality, this, in this ideal world,
let's talk about things like that we talk that a lot of people, let's say illusionist, for example,
that try and count, count to these arguments, we're saying, look, the truth is, is that our
perception of reality is not what we think it is. Fundamentally, the more we've been learning,
the more we've been exposing how little we know, how little we matter, and how not important we
are, for example, Darwin taking us off the top of the food chain, and you've got people taking us
out of the center of the universe slowly, we're learning that this is not really about us. And
just because we have these experience doesn't mean it should be fundamental to reality. So,
does that bring us towards some sort of a solipsistic view on how we view ourselves and
consciousness or well, mind? Yeah, there's actually a sense in which I think that idealism
of the sort that I'm interested in meshes really well with the observations that you were making.
So, you know, you talked about Darwin taking us off of the, you know, Darwin just putting us,
we're just another animal, right? And our sun isn't the center of the universe, our planet isn't the
center of, you know, the solar system, right? Now, when I talked about idealism thus far,
and I was talking about Barclay and idealism, I mean, I was giving examples of the sorts of
experiences that I have. And I was saying all of these things seem like, you know, they're telling
me something about reality, like they're a part of reality. And on the view that I defend, that is
true. So, in a sense, I am saying the thing that you're disagreeing with, namely that our experiences
are a part of reality. But I don't think that that's in any way privileged or special. So,
in a sense, I completely agree with the examples that you're giving. So, I, yes,
I have certain experiences, I look out and I see a tree and it looks green. And the greenness,
I think, seems like it's there as part of reality. And the idealist is going to say it is. But my
inverted twin, or there to be an inverted twin here would look out and would see a tree and it
would look red. There's no reason we should privilege my experiences over my inverted twins.
Redness just as well seems like it belongs as part of the world. Similarly, a bee has their
perceptions. A bee perceives maybe ultraviolet that I don't perceive. That all, just as well,
I mean, nothing privileging my experiences, the bees experiences seem like they're equally
well part of reality. The bat echo locating, its experiences equally well seem like they
count as part of reality. And you could go on and on and on and on. And all of these
experiences, none of them seem privileged or prior to any of the others. So, for the idealist
view that I'm developing, and I would be inclined to think that really on a Barclay in view as well,
all of this is part of reality. And there's not sort of a, there's not special glowing experiences
that are the real true ones. They all equally count. And if you think about it, God, Barclay's
God doesn't just perceive the world from a human point of view, right? He doesn't have a single
vantage point on the world. The idea is that you perceive the totality of the world, he perceives
the totality of the world, which is going to include vastly more than human beings are aware of.
So the idealist view, there's a lot of phenomenology and it's not, for my view,
not necessarily for all idealist views, human experiences are not privileged in a way that
they would be maybe for like John Foster, possibly. In psychiatry, there's this field
that's called phenomenological psychopathology. And there's, there are these two tools used to try
and understand schizophrenic patients. And one is called the ease and the other's called the EE,
but it's the examination of anomalous self experience and the examination of anomalous
world experience. So what happens is you look at this patient and you try and understand
while they psych out, almost becoming psychotic. So close to psychosis, they start to do all the
things you're talking about. I mean, to have these different experiences that are so diverse
from the average experience. I mean, someone starts seeing the world as being a part of it,
being part of consciousness, someone, someone might not see red the same anymore. Some of them
even don't see visual illusions that we often see. They actually see it as accurate representations.
They see the truth actually, they see more than we do in that sense. So it's intriguing to see
how different experiences do exist even among this one species that has really identical DNA.
I mean, we're all basically the same. It kind of fits with your view in a sense, if you think about
Yeah. Yeah. No. And I mean, and questions about how to deal with hallucinations and illusions
are also just like a super interesting question. And I think even within just sort of like a
neurotypical subject, I mean, you think about things like after images, right? Where you're
looking at, you know, some red light and the relevant photoreceptors become fatigued and
then you look away at a white wall and you see this green patch. Well, in a sense, you know,
what you're perceiving of the wall, on my view, like that really is a feature of the wall,
the greenness of the wall is a feature that some other, you know, some other creature with a different
sort of visual system that maybe only is capable of seeing green green light would see. And that
also is a feature that is a part of reality and that puts us in touch with reality, but in a very
different way from the way that we normally are. But I think there are challenges for the idealist
in how to make sense of these things. It's a it's a complex picture. But but yeah, I think the
idealist has the resources to deal with the complexity. The I think it's really fascinating
to see when someone really becomes when they're psych patients, where I mean, I don't mean to
use them as like tools of examples, but it's really fascinating to see when someone becomes
truly solipsistic, where they really think that once they close their eyes, nothing else exists.
And it's a it's an intriguing thing to perceive because I've witnessed it from patients. And when
you see how real that feels for the person, you can understand that that might be a real feeling.
I mean, it might be a real experience. And so it does coincide well with what you're saying. I mean,
this this could just be the way the world really is for all of us, fundamentally. But yet this
person is just fortunate enough to experience the reality of it.
Yeah. Um, yeah, I mean, I guess, sorry, I've had a whole lot of thoughts as you've been talking. So
one is that I mean, there's there's an interesting question about what sorts of things for the idealist
are part of reality and what sorts of things are just parts of our minds. So the way that I think
about it, I the view that I develop is one on which reality is this vast unity of consciousness.
But it's just sort of sensory experiences that are bound together into a unity. So if you sort of think
to me, would it be okay if I sort of said a little bit about my view and how it works?
I think so, yeah, I think. Okay, so. So we had sort of Barclay's view that I gave where we
have God and God is always perceiving the totality of reality. God doesn't just see the world from a
single vantage point. He sees it from all vantage points. He sees, you know, he sees all of it.
But it seems like there's a lot about God that's not essential to
to ensuring the stability and persistence of the world as he needs to for Barclay's view.
So, you know, I think God doesn't have to be all good. God doesn't have to be all powerful.
I don't think God has to be an agent. I don't think God's beliefs are a part of what's doing the work.
What's doing the work is God's experiences, right? And God's experiences, God is not just
having, you know, a giant experience of everything that's happening that's just all disconnected
from itself. God's experiences are structured in the same way that our experiences are structured.
So when I, when I look at a tree, I don't just see greenness and leaf shape and brownness and
trunk shape all sort of scattered around. The leaf shape and the greenness are bound together.
The brownness and the trunk shape are bound together. My experience has structure
along various different dimensions. And the thought is that God's experience in order to be
a single experience of the world and in order to be coherent has to have structure too. And so
God is having the thought is for Barclay. We can sort of think of God as having this
gigantic multi-perspective experience. And that experience, that multi-perspective experience
is what's doing the work of ensuring that the world persists even when we're not perceiving it,
when we're not there. So for me, reality, just the physical world around us just is this structured
multi-perspective experience structured using the same resources that structure our own experiences.
You sort of refer to it as like a tapestry of reality.
Yeah. Yeah. So I like the analogy of a tapestry because a tapestry, you've got all these threads
that are, they're not just separate threads, like, you know, piles of little yarn everywhere, right?
There are threads, which in the case of reality are phenomenal threads, bits of,
bits of experiences. And then they're, but they're structured, they're woven together into a single
whole unit, kind of like a tapestry. But so on this view, the idea is that what makes up
reality is sensory experiences. So, you know, experiences of color and warmth and solidity
and line and smell and pitch and so on. Now, there are more to our experiences than just
sensory experiences. So I think, I'm inclined to think there's something called cognitive
phenomenology. So this is the phenomenology of thought. And I'm inclined to think that cognitive
phenomenology is not a part of the physical world itself. The cognitive phenomenology sort of comes
from our minds. And it's kind of like, like a cognitive overlay on reality. So when I'm aware
of the physical world around me of this sensory tapestry, I don't know, do you remember those
overhead transparencies? Did you have these when you were a kid in school?
Yes. The clear, the clear overhead and then they put it down and then they could like write on it
with markers and you could put another overhead transparency on top. I kind of think about
cognitive phenomenology like a, like a overhead transparency on reality. But it's coming from
our minds. So, sorry, this has taken us quite far from where you started, but you had this
really interesting point about. Well, you had, you'd raised this really interesting
case of people who wind up, you know, not just believing that they're the only person who exists,
but having this experience, this sensation as of being, you know, the only thing that's real.
And so I think, I think it's quite interesting because on this sort of view, cases like that,
there's going to be a question of, is that what kind of phenomenology is that? Is that some sort of
cognitive phenomenology? Or is that actually sensory phenomenology? And not obviously not all
sensory phenomenology is part of the physical world. I think there can be hallucinations that
are part of our mind, but not the physical world. But it is interesting because whether,
whether something is purely cognitive or whether it's sensory does wind up
playing a big role in how we think about it fitting into reality.
Along with you with, in your idealism, you also talk about naive idealism. Do you want to touch
on that as well? Sure, yeah. So this is a view about perception that I think that idealism meshes
really well with. So for the idealist, for the idealism, just as I, as I've stated it,
just as a view about the physical world and what the physical world is ultimately like.
But then there are all these other questions that that doesn't touch on. So when one question is,
it doesn't tell us about how our minds relate to our brains. So it doesn't directly answer the
mind-value problem, although it has implications for it. Another thing that it doesn't do is it
doesn't tell us anything about how it is that we, maybe our minds interact with the world,
how it is that we perceive the world around us. And I think I mentioned earlier that when I had
first come to idealism and started thinking about it, part of what led me to do that was
thinking about this view naive realism, which is this idea that what perception is essentially
is this relation between us and objects in the world. And that when we stand in this relation,
sort of the objects in the world, in some sense become a part of the experience or part of the
character of the experience. And that's something that always struck me as really, really mystifying.
And this still strikes me as completely mystifying. The basic idea behind naive idealism
is that that sort of intuitive idea of perception that naive realists want to hold on to is something
that I think we can get and we can get really intelligibly, but only if the objects in the
external world that we're related to are themselves mental or phenomenal kinds of things. So I mean,
I think it doesn't make any sense to take an apple, a material apple and sort of shove it into
a computer program. I mean, I take my T mug for anybody who sees this online and I try shoving
it at the screen. I don't therefore put my mug into the computer. It's just not the right kind
of thing to be a part of the computer or a part of a computer program. Similarly, my mug is not
the right kind of thing to become a physical material mug. I don't understand how it can
be a part of an experience. I understand how I can be related to it in different ways,
but I don't understand how it can be an elementary constituent of an experience or
the phenomenal character of my experience. By contrast, if you think about something like
maybe stepping back from thinking about perception, it's really easy to see how my
experiences just in general can be constituents of other experiences and other judgments and
things in my mind. So when I introspect and I don't know, I feel slightly hot,
I'm able to directly, my mind is able to directly apprehend the hot feeling that I have right now
and the hot feeling can actually become sort of a part of the thought. It doesn't stand at a
distance from the thought. They're both constituents of, they're both sort of mental things, right?
There's the hot feeling and then there's the thought about it and there's not a mystery as to how
the one can literally sort of subsume the other. Well, if the cup itself is a phenomenal item,
is a bit of phenomenology, the thought is that we can have the same sort of thing be true
of perception. So I actually think I might need to say a little bit about,
no, I'll just try saying it without backing up anymore. Explain yourself as much as possible
so that it's... All right, well, the idea is that when we perceive objects, our mind literally
comes to overlap with the perceived objects. So when I perceive the cup, the cup winds up,
the cup is a part of the phenomenal tapestry, it's a part of the physical world. But the idea is
that the cup also becomes unified with my mind. So, and how is it that this is possible? Well,
the cup is more phenomenology. The cup is kind of like pain. Pain can be unified with the rest
of my experiences. And similarly, the cup itself, my mind can sort of, in perception,
can sort of reach out and expand and pull the cup into it, in a sense. So, I mean, we're not
talking about physically pulling the cup into it, like in terms of a spatial relation, but the thought
is that the elements of my mind are unified with the cup in the same way that they're unified with
my pains or my warm feeling. So the cup, actually, in a sense, is part of the physical world, but
it's also a part of me. And as such, I can think about it directly. I can directly grasp and apprehend
it and know about it. And that, I think, is one of the things that idealism can get that materialism
can't get, and that I think is a really interesting advantage to the view.
Yeah. This is bringing me back to one of your papers. I think it's called dualism all the way
down. You're talking about, you talk about phenomenal judgment, you talk about self-knowledge,
and I know how critical this relationship is. What is the paradox there? I forgot
what it was called, the paradox of? The paradox of phenomenal judgment.
Yes. Explain that to me, because while reading it, a part of me was just a little bit confused.
I wanted to just understand that a little bit more. Yeah. So this is a paradox that doesn't
have to do with idealism, particularly. It's a paradox for epiphenomenalist dualism.
So the dualist takes it that there's the physical world, and then there's also
consciousness. And consciousness can't be reduced to things in the physical world,
so we need a duality. And we quickly run into this problem, if you're a dualist,
namely the problem of how consciousness and the physical stuff interact with each other.
And there are some reasons that I think I mentioned very early on for thinking that
they actually can't. That maybe the physical stuff can generate consciousness,
but we should think that consciousness can't actually affect the physical world.
Why not? Well, it seems like every physical event can be entirely explained in terms of
earlier physical events, or at least every physical event that has a cause or something like that.
So that's one reason. I mean, conservation of energy also is going to potentially play into this.
So that might push you towards a version of dualism called epiphenomenalism,
which is the view basically that every physical event, everything happening in my brain,
everything happening in my body, can be explained entirely in terms of earlier
things happening in my brain, my body, the physical world around me.
So I can completely explain all of this without needing to posit consciousness.
But there also is consciousness, and consciousness is not just physical.
So when I take a pencil and I stab myself and the signal is sent to my brain and my brain does,
it's whatever it does, then there's also, I say, ah, and I pull away from the pencil,
but I also have an experience of pain. And the experience of pain itself doesn't cause me to
do anything. The experience of pain doesn't affect anything in the world. We could get rid of it,
and I would still, though, I would still pull away from it. So that's the epiphenomenalist
position. And it's a position that seems deeply counterintuitive to many people,
because you think, isn't it obvious that when I go and I order, I order a cup of tea,
that I ordered tea because I was thirsty and wanted caffeine, right? I mean,
isn't that what could be more obvious than that? And for the epiphenomenalist, that's just not the
case, right? You ordered the cup of tea. Why? Well, because your brain was sending certain
signals down to your body, which caused blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.
But you also do feel thirst. Now, why does the epiphenomenalist hold this? Well, because the
epiphenomenalist is convinced by the, you know, first that we have conscious experiences that
nothing could be more obvious than that, because we feel them. And second, that physicalism can't
account for these conscious experiences. Yeah. So we pause at the experiences because we know
that there are experiences, not because we think we need them to do causal work.
But then you run into this problem, the problem of the paradox of phenomenal judgments.
Sorry, I realized how it took us, of course, there, but it's fine.
Sorry. Well, we're here now, I guess. So the paradox of phenomenal judgments is basically
this idea that, you know, there are these experiences, the experiences don't come down
and sort of affect my brain. So how is it that I could possibly know about these experiences
if they're not actually doing any causal work? And so this paper is attempting to respond to this,
to this, and to give an account of how it is that a dualist, an epiphenomenalist dualist could accept
that you actually can know about your experiences, even if they're epiphenomenal.
And actually, it sort of made sense that you thought of this in the earlier response that I
was giving, I think, because the response that I give there appeals to the idea that the experiences
themselves, while they're not a part of my brain, they are a part of my mind, and they are embedded
in a sense in the judgments, which are also mental things. So there's this conscious judgment that has,
as a constituent, the pain itself or the phenomenal redness itself. And what I'm aware of
is the conscious judgment and the thing that I'm judging. And both of those things are generated
by my mind. But the awareness sort of isn't happening in my physical brain, the awareness
is all stuff that's being generated by my brain and is all happening sort of at the conscious
mental level, in a sense. Helen, who do you, which philosophers or philosophical views do you think
challenge your nature of reality the most?
It's interesting to see how we perceive our, the people who say no to our theories.
Yeah, well, I mean, who gives the best examples of why this, this wouldn't be true.
Yeah, it's a little hard. It's a little, I'm sort of paused for a little bit, in part, because
I'm not, I think maybe the task that I've set myself in a sense is easier than the task that
I think a lot of idealists have set themselves, in that I'm not trying to argue that you have to
be an idealist. I'm just trying to argue that idealism is possible, as opposed to that it's
necessarily true. I'm trying to argue first that it's possible and second that it's
more likely than you might have thought. So it's harder to give a knockdown argument of that
than it would be to give a knockdown argument of this is necessarily the way that reality is.
So, I mean, if you wanted to argue that it's not even possible,
sounds like a very strange, it seems like a very hard task to set yourself to argue that's not
possible. I think the biggest pretty much possible, I think that's why this is, I mean, it's because
no one can do that. Yeah, I mean, I think the biggest challenges to idealism come from the
incredible complexity of idealism. That's not necessarily a view as just a straight up problem
that the idealist has to reckon with. So, I mean, like I was telling you, when you were pointing
out that, you know, well, look, we're not at the top of the, you know, maybe we're at the top of
the food chain, but we're not at the top of like, in the sense, we're not has some privileged,
glowing place in reality, right? And I was like, yeah, but I don't think our experiences have
a privileged, glowing place in reality. There's, you know, the tapestry of reality is this, you
know, incredibly complex, rich thing that includes far more than us and our experiences aren't in
any way special. But once you accept and embrace that, you see that reality for an idealist is
incredibly complicated. I mean, you know, you think, well, my experiences are part of reality.
The experiences that an inverted twin would have, they're part of reality, the experiences a bat
would have, the experiences the bee would have, the experiences the snake would have,
the experiences the Martian would have. I mean, once you get to that, you're like,
is there any limit to all the experiences that are bound up as part of reality? Or is
reality sort of infinitely complex? And I think there are ways for the idealists to
stave off the idea that it's infinitely complex. But it does wind up being incredibly complex,
whereas, you know, a materialist can come at the idealist and say, look, we just think there's
this little simple particle, and it just has one simple little nature to it. And it, you know,
combines with other particles that are similarly simple and minimalistic. And the diversity of
experiences is just something that happens when you have different perceivers who actually are
perceiving things. But those aren't extra parts of reality, and they don't exist unless they're
actually is a bee or a bat or a person in the room. So I think that that's really the biggest
challenge for idealism just is the the profligacy of it, I guess, the idea that that it has all
this richness built into reality. Are there any specific idealists or people who believe
that ideally that the fundamental fundamental nature of reality is mined? Any specific philosophers
or scientists today that you think are providing this view with a lot of backing and like support
in a very effective manner? Yeah. You're just going to see my own ignorance and how at the
extent to which I'm in my own mind here. Yeah, I mean, there are a lot of there are a lot of
different people playing with a lot of very different but related views. I'm most
views are very different from each other. They're from what I've gathered so far.
Right, right. So I mean, I'm more familiar with the philosophical side of things, although I'd
love to learn from you about people in other disciplines who are doing relevant related work.
So I mean, I think there's a lot of work in panpsychism to sort of had a bit of a rise
before idealism has so it's sort of more well known and has had more development of it.
But I know Noam Chomsky had been referencing Galen Strausson who is, as he says, quite brilliant
and excellent and Philip Goff had a march. So there have been a lot of panpsychists recently
who've been sort of developing and trying to refine and hone those views. They're quite
different views, I think, from the view that I'm interested in. I really admire the work of Mike
Pelisar, who's a phenomenalist, again, a very different sort of view. But he's done just a
remarkable job of trying to show that phenomenalism, which is a view that I think a lot of people had
decided was dead and buried, actually has a lot more going for it than you might think. And he's
somebody who also you're asking about views that pose challenges to idealism. He's somebody that
does do that, that actually directly takes and says, look, phenomenalism trumps idealism and
gives a really kind of clever argument to that effect. So Pelisar argues that we, he sort of
imagines a world that has one sort of intrinsic nature, maybe it's a materialist world. And then
overnight, while we're sleeping, the nature of the world changes. And now it's a Barclayan world.
And then overnight, it changes again. Now it's a panpsychist world. Then overnight,
it changes again. And we're all living in the matrix. But of course, throughout all of this,
there is no change whatsoever to anything that we observe. The world seems, from our
perspective, exactly the same. And then you imagine that at the end of all of this,
the newspapers reveal nature of reality constantly shifting. Now, what would the newspapers say?
Would they say that the world ceased to exist? In every night, the world is ceased to exist?
No, they wouldn't say that. They'd completely ignore it. Or they'd be like, weird fact.
So the lesson that Pelisar draws from this is that what's essential to being our world,
the world that we care about, is the thing that all of these things have in common,
namely the potentials for experiences that we're having throughout all of these.
And so it's not, even if our world ultimately has a Barclayan god that is at the base of it,
that's not really what's essential to being our world. What's really essential is the potentials
for experience. So this is something that Pelisar has argued against all the other views,
which I think is a fun and clever argument.
Red argument. Yeah. I think the idealist can resist it. Whereas I think the other people
can't resist it, which is I think kind of cool. But it would be very difficult to tell the difference
if it did change constantly. Yeah. Yeah. This is very several philosophical questions indeed.
Yeah. Yeah. Well, I mean, I think, I think, you know, the way that an idealist potentially
could resist it is, you know, if you imagine that the world has been, imagine an idealist world.
And as I said, as I said a little bit ago when we were talking about naive idealism,
about the theory of perception that I propose, for the idealist, we're directly in contact
with reality, right? We directly grasp the world around us. So a way that I like to put it is that
so Dave Chalmers has this paper where he talks about like perception and the fall from Eden,
where he imagined this perceptual Eden. And in perceptual Eden, you know, the world, the world
was just as it seemed, right? The world seems like it includes, here we go. I've got a green dinosaur
I'm holding up. The world seems like it includes, you know, phenomenal greenness there as a part
of it. Greenness is a primitive element of reality. And it seems like I directly apprehend
this greenness when I look at the green dinosaur that I'm holding up. And then, you know, Chalmers
says, look, we think these things. And then we do some science and we realize, no, greenness
isn't out there in the world. There's just a surface reflectance property that the dinosaur has
certain wavelengths of light bounce off of it. My brain does certain things and I have an experience
as a result. But there's no like green property out there in the world. And, you know, similarly,
we maybe think that we directly apprehend, you know, properties in the world that we directly
grasp them. And then we learn that no, actually, we only grasp them in this very indirect way,
through this long complicated causal chain of, you know, physics. Now, if idealism is right,
we actually do live in Eden, right? If idealism is right, the world around us is precisely the
world that it seems. Greenness, warmth, you know, all of these things are actually part of reality.
And furthermore, they're part of reality that we directly apprehend. We don't stand at a distance
from them and just sort of, you know, get them indirectly and then have some experience that
our brain generates, right? We really are in touch with reality. So I think if that's right,
and if we imagine that we live in an idealist world, you know, that's the world that we've
always grown up in. And then, you know, at midnight last night, it turns out that
the nature of reality changed. And now we all live in a materialist world.
I actually do think, whoa, wait a minute, we went from having a world that is just the way
that it seems, that has greenness as part of it, that I directly apprehend to a world that I'm only
indirectly in touch with, and I, you know, just sort of stand at a distance from, and there's no
greenness or warmth in the world. That's a big cost. And yeah, I do think, you know, maybe that,
maybe we would say the world that we knew is gone. So I think, I think the idealist has
some resources to respond, but I still think it's a very, a very clever argument.
But ideally, ideally, if everything is fundamentally matter or mind,
there shouldn't necessarily be a change in our perception when the thing does change
from material to mind. I mean, it shouldn't actually still feel the same way, except we
haven't learned the science, perhaps in this new materialistic world that provides us with
knowledge now, that that's not true. You probably would still experience it as
Yeah, it would still seem the same way to us. But in a sense, something very different would
be going on. So it would be kind of, you know, like, like, you know, I could have, I know this is
just a philosopher's imagination of hallucinations, that we don't actually have hallucinations that
are qualitatively indistinguishable from from this, this world. But, you know, you could,
we can imagine that I could have a hallucination of talking to you right now on a computer that
would be exactly from the inside feel exactly the same way. But without there being any reality
outside of my mind. So I think we can't necessarily read off from the way that things would seem
from the inside to, to, to the sorts of questions about like, whether we're truly perceiving things
and how we're related to things. Is there anything surrounding your, your view on idealism that you
that you've always wanted to argue or say or talk about that you've been holding in and you just
really wanted to get out there? I think I think that would be the best time. Oh, gosh. I mean,
something you've always felt misunderstood by I mean, have people ever come to you and said like,
do you think, why do you think that the world is all mine? Like, have people come to you with
some basic arguments that you've always felt? Let me clarify and clear this up right now.
Yeah. I mean, definitely idealism is extremely misunderstood. I mean, I guess there's a,
I guess the two things that jump out are, which are things that I've said before, but, but that
still, I think maybe bear, bear forcefully repeating. So the first is just that idealism is
not at least a sort of idealist view that I am defending and that people like Barkley are
defending. It's not an anti-realist view. It's a, it's not a theory according to which there is no
world, there is no physical reality. It's a view about the nature of the world and the nature of
that physical reality. So, you know, you've got the, you remember who it was? Do you remember who
it was who was trying to refute Barkley by kicking the stone and saying, I refute you thus? I think
it was. Not Locke. Anyway, is a famous, famous, famous, ridiculous, ridiculous. No, it was
not humor. No, no, no, no, no, it wasn't, it wasn't a super famous philosopher. It was,
yeah, some, some, oh, I kind of know what you're talking about now. Yeah. Yeah. So I mean, and it,
I mean, it's just such a ridiculous misunderstanding of the view, right? Because
the view precisely is one where there are rocks and it's trying to give an account of what the
rocks are. So, I mean, Barkley. What rocks are, that's the problem is that we don't really know
what rocks are. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, so, I mean, kicking a rock doesn't help anyone. No, it doesn't.
But so I think that's why I like to, to sort of think about Idealism and to present it to people
who are physicalists with that sort of analogy to how reductive physicalists think about the mind.
You know, look, you're not denying, you at least don't think that you're denying that there is such
a thing as consciousness. You're trying to give an account of what it is and analysis of it. And
similarly, I'm not trying to deny that there are rocks. I'm trying to give an analysis of
what their nature is. So that's, that's one thing. I mean, I think the other thing is that I think
when people hear you talking about idealism and hear you defending idealism, it's always
naturally assumed that you are an idealist and that you think that the world is an idealist world.
And I'm actually engaged in a project that's, as I said, a little bit maybe sneakier than that
and harder to argue against, which is just the project of arguing that, you know, there could be
a world that is just as our world seems to us, that has a particular sort of nature and idealist
nature. And then second, looking at, you know, suppose that we take a world that seems just as
our world does, it's an idealist world, and suppose we take a world that seems just as our world does,
that's a materialist world, I think that there are both sorts of, I think both sorts of things are
possible. And, you know, take each of these possibilities and look at the complete total
worldview that's on offer from both sides. So not just what it says about the metaphysics,
but what it says about the mind-body problem, what it says about the nature of perception.
And then, you know, take those total packages and see which one of these looks more plausible and
has more theoretical virtues. And that's the project that I'm engaged in. It's the project of
not arguing that you can't accept a certain view, but of arguing you can accept this view.
And furthermore, when we compare the total packages, it actually looks much better than you would have
thought and perhaps better than the materialist view. Yeah, you're trying to ensure that people
apply as an important level of credence to this view as opposed to perhaps a materialistic view,
because ideally when people think about it, they automatically shun it down as if it's completely
absurd. But when you hear certain people's arguments, it means clear that this is a
possibility. This is because for people, when I started this, if I was, let's say, 10 years ago,
20 years ago, I would be completely materialist. I'd be physicalist all the way down. And even
though my intuitions are very much physicalist, I still don't, I know how much we don't know,
the unknown unknowns. So it's almost impossible to have that Gnosticism regarding reality. I think
Raymond Talis, I often bring it up, he says he's ontologically agnostic, but epistemologically,
he knows most of us are wrong. I mean, I love that, because that's so true. That's exactly why
I have this podcast. I mean, it's an opportunity for someone to bring up a view just like this.
I mean, to have that opportunity to discuss it. Helen, I mean, if we had to close off,
they've here to think of five philosophers, your favorite five philosophers, I know it's
difficult. It's like picking a mad rush mode of like, big people, who would those be? Because I
feel like when people read your work, get to know who you are, they're going to want to know who are
the people they should read that inspire you and make you the philosophy today. Okay, well, I would
definitely say, Dave Chalmers, who I know you've had previous guests, at least one,
sip me some not so favorable things about. So I'll just give a plug for Dave.
Hopefully, I have Dave on soon at some point. So it's fine.
Oh, fantastic. Well, everybody will enjoy his podcast. So actually, another person who you've
already had on whose work I just absolutely love is Eric Schwitzkabel, who I think, I mean,
just both in terms of defending views that might seem bonkers, but then giving really
interesting creative arguments for them that are incredibly fun. I mean, anybody who has
the opportunity to read any of his his work, I mean, everything he writes is just really fun to
read. Eric is very underrated. I enjoy his work very much. Yeah. And actually, my husband had asked
me who I thought the whatever the best philosopher of mind in the world besides Chalmers was. And
I was like, ah, you know, and he's like, well, who would you who would you whose work would you
be most excited about reading if you heard some new paper come out? And the tricky thing with that
is that, you know, in general, it's the kind of people who work in the on the stuff that I work
on. But I did realize that of all the people who don't do directly the stuff that I work on,
hands down, it's Eric Schwitzkabel, because anything he writes is going to be brilliant.
I mean, he's got some fascinating topics like the philosophy of science fiction. I mean,
he goes into some very intriguing domain. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And I mean, yeah, he's got a book on
the perplexities of consciousness that's very fun and accessible, arguing you have no clue what's
going on in your own mind. And I think a paper if United States, sorry, if materialism is true,
the United States is probably conscious that involves these incredible fantastical science
fiction examples to try to make this case. Yeah. But so I guess I've also mentioned Mike Pellisar,
if anybody's interested in sort of similar like idealist adjacent things, I think he's also a
very good and underrated philosopher. Oh, I don't know how's your name? Catty Balog is somebody
who's a physicalist, a, an opistory or a physicalist, who I think is a really also very underrated,
very subtle, interesting, interesting philosopher. Not sure if I've given it five.
Historical philosophers, some of the. Yeah, shout outs to Barkley and Locke.
I had a feeling those two names would come up. No, Helen, I mean, it's been an absolute pleasure
chatting to you. This has been such a fascinating conversation. I mean, even listening to you,
it reminds me of the conversation I've had with Eric. I can tell you that type of person who
is very intrigued by a lot of these ontological questions, the metaphysical side of things.
And it's really great to have people like you out there challenging and pioneering these,
these arguments and these views, because ideally there's, then we just get stuck in our own world.
Yeah. Yeah, no, I mean, I think in a sense, it is, it is, it's very much a creative,
a sort of a creative world building, almost endeavor that, but I hope is thought provoking
in the way that you described. So it's very nice to hear you say that.
I think without you, this tapestry would not exist. I mean, we all have to sort of give up.
Oh, no, which indicates that my view is wrong if you're right, but
we all have to sort of give our views and sort of get into that argument and just have a great
time doing it. Thank you. Thank you so much for inviting me on. This has been a pleasure.
Thanks so much, Helen. I really appreciate your time and I look forward to reading more of your work.
Super.
