Phillip, I want to frame this conversation the same way I did with Keith. I even did
this with Helen, actually, her idealist view, Keith's illusionism, and not with you and
panpsychism. But before we get into that, the question I asked them, which is what I'm
about to ask you is, can you give me a philosophical history of the mind-body problem? How you
conceptualize this, how you started reading about this topic, and how you got to where
you are today? The reason why I ask this question is, I believe it allows us to understand
your views and how it's changed over the years, and how you sort of came to the view you have
today or the conclusion you have today. So if you had to give me that philosophical history,
what would it be?
Thanks, that's a great first question. Yeah, I mean, the mind-body problem has been wrestled
with for centuries, and I think it arises because there are two things we know about
in very different ways. There's the physical world around us that we know through our senses
and which we learn more about through scientific investigation. But there's also the world
of our own experiences, our thoughts, our feelings, which we know about in a quite different
way, I think. I can't look inside your head and see your feelings and experiences. Each
of us knows about our own experiences just through being directly aware of them. If you're
in pain, you're just directly aware of your own feeling of pain. So there are these two
things that we think are real, namely the physical world we know through the senses
and our own minds. We know through our immediate awareness of our own conscious experience.
And the challenge is, how do these fit together? How do these seemingly very different things
fit into a single unified theory of reality? I mean, suddenly nowadays people call it the
hard problem of consciousness and think of it as the mystery of how do brains make consciousness?
I mean, that's one way into it. I suppose I think maybe that way of setting it up might
limit our options somewhat. But I think more generally, that's the question. How does consciousness
and the physical world fit together? And it's a problem I've been obsessed with as long
as I can remember, really, because all of the available options seem to have such deep
challenges associated with them. So it's sometimes say it's a little bit like Churchill
famously said about democracy. It's the worst theory of government apart from all the others.
So I sometimes think that's what it's like trying to find a solution to the mind-body
problem. You're sort of trying to find the least worst option. But yeah, that's the core of it,
I think. So if you had to look back at the philosophers, the scientists, perhaps, who
influenced your views the most leading up to this point, who stands out for you? Who were those
people who actively changed the way you perceived this problem?
I think Descartes has to be a huge influence. Going back to studying Descartes at high school,
Mr Foley was my philosophy teacher. I didn't do that well, actually. I would keep me to go
about and visit him one day. But I mean, what I think Descartes got dead right is that the mind
is better known than the body and the external world. This is what we find in the first two
meditations. Descartes' famous work is set up as six meditations where the narrator is sort of
philosophizing to himself or herself. I suppose himself if it's Descartes. And the method is to
try and doubt everything that we can doubt, to see where we end up, to see what, if anything,
can't be doubted. And the narrator, namely Descartes, concludes that the body, the brain,
the physical world, all these things might not exist for all we know for sure. But the one thing
we can't doubt is the reality of one's own conscious mind. So I mean, again, just to come to a vivid
case of if you're in pain, you can't really doubt the reality of your agony because you're
sort of directly in touch with it in a way that makes its reality totally evident to you.
So I think Descartes was right about that. After those meditations, it goes a bit
sketchy, sort of, tries to prove the existence of God and then prove the existence of everything
else on that basis. It goes a bit awry there, I think. But I mean, in more recent times,
the philosopher David Chalmers was a huge influence on me. You know, when I studied philosophy,
we were taught the two traditional options, dualism, Descartes view, that the mind is
separate from the body or the brain. At the other extreme, materialism, the view that all that
really exists is the physical world, bodies, brains, physical processes in the brain.
And I came to find deep for both of those traditional options. But we were just taught
that's what you've got to choose from, like in a lump bit. And I got really disillusioned and I
actually left my first degree just wanting to stop thinking about consciousness, thinking there was
no resolution. That's actually what I argued for in my end of degree dissertation. But I later
discovered the writings of David Chalmers, who really brought back to life, I guess,
something like the Cartesian project. Also, Thomas Nagel, his famous paper, What's It Like to Be a
Bat, where he argues that no matter how much we learn about the neurophysiology of a bat, we'll
never fully understand what it's like to be a bat, what it's like to adopt a bat's perspective.
Galen Strawson, actually, so I wasn't taught these things as an undergraduate. And then
when I started my MA, finally at the university, there was a professor who thought all the same
things I did who adopted this crazy view known as panpsychism that I that I adopt. And so this
was Galen Strawson. And he was a real confidence booster. I hadn't met another professional
philosopher who thought anything like the kind of views I was attracted to in the philosophy
of mind. So he, from personal interaction, he was a very important influence. And later also,
David Chalmers has been an important mentor as I got to know him personally. And finally,
someone who has a very opposed view to me, David Papineau, who was a physicalist with a total
opposite view to me, but was very kind in guiding me and and help him helping me argue against him
and understand his view and argue against him. And was really a model for I think, really set
me a model of how intellectual interaction should happen through civilized respectful
disagreement. So there's probably more than I can mention, but that's that's a handful of the
influences, I think. I mean, you mentioned so many great names, the legends in the field.
But something that captures my attention is exactly what you concluded with is that having this
discourse and disagreement actually helps us move forward. And I think you and Keith are doing that
wonderfully at the moment. I mean, mind chat, the fact that you guys are such esoterically
different views, opposing different opposites in a sense. I mean, to keep consciousness, phenomenal
consciousness is an illusion. Whereas for you, consciousness is the fundamental basis of reality.
So let's go through panpsychism. Let's run through this. Give me your definition of panpsychism,
how you see it, how you interpret it, and how it's different, perhaps from other views
of panpsychists out there who are perhaps popular in the field.
Brilliant. I mean, just to say on your last point, you know, I've just always loved to engage
with people with radically different views to me, just try and get into their mind and think,
how are they thinking these crazy sounding things? And I really do think that's a really productive
thing to do and something me and Keith have tried to have aspired to. Don't always achieve it.
Sometimes we get a bit annoyed with each other. But yes, but turning to panpsychism,
so I mean, in our, you know, I guess, in our standard way of thinking about things, consciousness
only exists in the brains of highly evolved organisms. And so only exists in
a tiny part of the universe and only in very recent history, at least in terms of the
cosmic history of the universe. But for the panpsychist, consciousness pervades the physical
universe and is a fundamental feature of it. Contemporary panpsychists don't necessarily
think that literally everything is conscious, despite the meaning of the word pan means
everything psyche mind. So the word literally means everything has mind. But contemporary
panpsychists tend to think that the basic building blocks of reality, perhaps fundamental
particles like electrons and quarks, or perhaps universe wide fields, many theoretical physicists
tend to think that fields rather than particles are the things that make up reality. But whichever
way you go on that, these basic constituents of the physical universe have very rudimentary forms
of subjective experience. So not the very rich, complicated experience that you and I have,
not just you and I or the human beings or their animals, which is the result of millions of years
of evolution. So the idea would be that that's what evolution does with consciousness molds
very simple forms over millions of years into much more complex forms that you or I enjoy.
But the thought was in the beginning, as it were, all there were were these very rudimentary
forms of experience at the level of fundamental physics and everything else is kind of built
up from there. So in essence, you're saying that let's say quarks, bosons, well, the most
fundamental particles that exist have experience in a sense, it's got some sort of an experiential
aspect to it, not necessarily a thinking cognitively engaging sort of experience,
but an experience nonetheless, this comes down to some sort of a qualitative phenomenon.
Absolutely. So, yeah, it's hard because people all automatically think of something like human
experience that I think of the electron feeling existential angst or wondering if it's Tuesday
or something. But, but you know, think about, I mean, as a way into this, I often like to
go down the spectrum of life from very complicated organisms, as we move to simpler
forms of life, mice, bed bugs to bed, but if bed bugs have experience, it's presumably
much more simple than we can conceive of. And as we move to simpler and simpler forms of life,
we find simpler and simpler forms of experience. For the panpsychist, this just continues right
down to the basic building blocks of the physical universe. But you said that an aspect of it is
experiential. And I'm not sure how you intended that exactly, but that can almost suggest a sort
of dualism like particles have physical properties like mass and charge, and also these invisible
consciousness properties. But that's not actually the the view as it's standardly defended these
days, the view is rather that all there really is at the fundamental level of reality is forms of
consciousness. And what we think of as particles or fields or physical properties like mass,
spin and charge are just ways of describing these fundamental forms of consciousness.
So it's a radically non dualistic picture of reality is not mined on the one hand matter on
the other. In some sense, all there is is mind. And what we call matter is just a way of describing
these fundamental forms of consciousness did not intend for for it to have that dualistic
aspect. But so in essence, what you're actually saying is that the charge, the the movement of
the particle, these are the things it's doing. It's not what it is fun. That's that's the basic
difference here. These are merely the way in which it's behaving. But it's not it doesn't explain
what it actually is. Yes. And this is the reason panpsychism after being
laughed at for so long in so far as it was thought about at all. I think for a long time there was
maybe just this guy Timothy Sprig in Edinburgh, who defended panpsychism. I
earlier my undergraduate career, I went to a conference they had just after he died
to to to to remember him. That was my one of my first conferences. But it's recently again,
come to come to attention, largely through the rediscovery of really important work by Bertrand
Russell from the 1930s. And very much as you said, Bert, heaven, Russell's starting point
observation was that for all its virtues and wonders, physics is confined to telling us about
what stuff does physics tells you what an electron does, what a quark does, how it gives us
detailed equations to predict how fields are going to evolve over time. And that's really
useful information and allows us to manipulate the world in extraordinary ways and build
incredible technology. But as a, you know, as a philosopher interested in the
ultimate nature of reality, you might want to know, okay, that's interesting, very interesting
what an electron does. But I'm also curious about what an electron is. And about that physics,
as it were, isn't really interested. It's just interested in the behavior.
So there's a kind of a hole in our scientific story of reality there. And then Russell's
observation is, well, we're looking for this, we're looking for a place for consciousness,
this mind body problem we started with, how the hell do we fit consciousness into our scientific
story? We've got this big hole, maybe we can stick consciousness in the hole. So I sometimes
put it by saying, on this view, matter is what consciousness does. So there's just conscious,
there's just very simple forms of consciousness interacting in simple predictable ways.
And what physics does is give us equations to describe how that stuff behaves. So in this way,
physics emerges from underlying facts about consciousness. So typically, people try and
do it the other way around, they can start with physics, or physical science, more generally
neuroscience, and try and work out how you get consciousness out of that. I think that's
impossible, incoherent even, for reasons we could perhaps discuss. But actually, it turns out to
be pretty easy to do it the other way around. To start with some facts about very simple forms of
consciousness, and get physics out of that. And that's very easy, because physics is just
purely mathematical. So as long as you've got, it's just about patterns, really. So as long as
you've got some kind of stuff, whatever it is, interacting in the right way to get the right
patterns, you've got physics. Yeah. And I think something we often don't, well, most physicalists
don't comprehend and think about more than they should, is that we even speak about the fact
that physics claims that 95% of the universe is inexplicable. It's not, it's something we don't
know anything about. So physics is so thoroughly incomplete, that it's, you shouldn't, it's like
almost a clue that you should not be a physicalist, because we, in essence, understand almost
nothing about the universe. Yeah, that's a good point as well. I mean, well, one thing I said,
I guess, it could go a few different ways. I mean, if you're talking about dark matter,
I suppose that's distinct, as I understand, at least from the matter that makes up our bodies
and brains. So someone like Sean Carroll, who I've argued with a great deal, thinks, oh, yeah,
physics is far from complete. But in terms of the matter in our bodies and brains,
in normal terrestrial conditions, so not in very high energy, or the kind of high gravity when
you're about to step into a black hole, he thinks, you know, in those conditions, it's very well
understood. And he uses this as an argument against the kind of view I adopt, where consciousness
is a fundamental feature of reality. But there are, I mean, there are two problems with that. I
mean, one is that although we do have some kind of consensus about physics at those energy levels,
the kind of experiments we use to support our theories in that region, as Sean Carroll agrees,
are all conducted with very small numbers of particles. You know, for example, in particle
colliders, we just have no idea, I would argue, whether the equations would look exactly the
same in incredibly complex systems like living brains, you know, one of the most, you know,
with 85 billion neurons, you know, we've never done any experiments to test that I feel, I think
it's a kind of zeitgeist of the moment that people assume some kind of very reductionist story.
But given that our physics is based on experiments of small numbers of particles,
I think we really just based on the experiments ought to be quite agnostic about that. But of
course, the more fundamental reason is, okay, even if, even if Sean Cowell right, for example,
we do understand the physics of the matter in our bodies and brains, that's only telling us
what matter does, not what it is. So even in that case, there's still the option of
the panpsychist hypothesis. Of course, you'd have to look at what, you know, what are the
reasons for accepting that hypothesis. But I don't think really what we currently know about
the physical world scientifically casts any doubt on that story.
Yes. I mean, when people talk about panpsychism, a lot of people sort of say it as if it's some
spiritual claim, because it was often associated with spirituality, a lot of people who meditate,
for example, people perhaps in Eastern traditions, they they've made this claim before many years
ago. So for thousands of years, many people have been saying, I mean, this entire universe is
conscious. If someone has a, an LSD trip or an asset trip, that they start to see things in a way
as if the universe is sort of palpating or has a heartbeat or sort of some sort of a living
system. So this has always been part of the conversation. But yet when people talk about
panpsychism, a lot of physicalist reductionists have this dark, they look down upon these people
as if they have absolutely no idea what they're talking about. What do you think they most
misinterpret about this?
In terms, so in terms of the connection to spirituality, I always say two things.
Firstly, that there is no necessary connection with panpsychism and anything spiritual.
Many of the contemporary proponents, like Angela Mendelovich, or Luke Rolos, or indeed David
Chalmers, you sympathetic to panpsychism, these people are the most, you know,
atheistic secular reductionists, but they reject the coherence of a materialistic
kind of consciousness. And they think consciousness obviously exists. So they don't believe in any
sort of transcendent realm. They just believe in pain and seeing red and think, you know,
look, we need an explanation of that. In many ways, I think there's perhaps a
division in the panpsychist contemporary community between people who are more secular and people
who are more open to spiritual ideas, a little bit like maybe you had in the psychoanalytic
community between Freud and Jung, you know, Jung was very open to spiritual convictions,
whereas Freud is like, this is supposed to be science. Get all this mumbo-jumbo out of my face.
But anyway, so firstly, there's no necessary connection. But if for independent reasons,
perhaps as you say, on the basis of mystical experiences, maybe through meditation or maybe
through psychedelics or whatever, you independently have certain spiritual convictions, then
probably a panpsychist worldview would be more consonant with those convictions. So,
you know, if you have the kind of mystical experience you just described where that
it seems to you that reality is filled with consciousness, well, if you're a panpsychist,
you already think that. And so, you know, whereas if you're a materialist and you just think
at the basic level of reality, it's just, it's just what you get from physics, then
it looks like you have to think the mystical experience of that kind is a sort of
delusion of some kind. You don't have to think that. Of course, it's a further deep philosophical
question, even so, whether it is rational to trust mystical experiences. I mean, on that score,
I am somewhat persuaded by the argument of William James in his chapter on mystical
experiences in his great book, The Varieties of Religious Experience. Most of this is a
psychological study of mystical experiences, just as a psychological kind. But at the end, he says,
you know, would it be rational for someone having that kind of experience to trust it?
And he says, well, look, if we say it's okay to trust our ordinary empirical experiences,
you know, there's a table in front of me, but it's not okay to trust the mystic to trust her
apparent mystical experiences, then there seems to be a double standard there. You know,
yes, a mystical experience could be a delusion, could be just something funny in the brain.
But our ordinary empirical experiences could be a delusion. We could be in the matrix, right?
This could be a long dream as Descartes made vivid to us. So, you know, I think all
knowledge is rooted in trusting experience, trusting how things seem to be. And
I don't see why you can say what the argument would be, that it's okay to trust
empirical experiences, but not okay to trust mystical experiences. What's the relevant difference?
I don't think anyone's ever answered that.
Yeah, I mean, even when you take into account, I mean, certain physical is someone like, let's
say, Anil Seth. I mean, the way he describes reality as a controlled hallucination and yet,
in a dream, it's sort of an uncontrolled hallucination. So, in a sense, when we're awake,
where our hallucinations are more attuned to the reality. So, although I am hallucinating this
experience, the fact that I do pick up the pen and it does feel like I'm picking up the pen means
it's a little bit more controlled, but that doesn't change the fact that I'm hallucinating,
in essence, the fundamental nature hasn't changed whether I'm asleep or awake.
They're both still hallucination. So, in what you're saying, it makes so much sense because the
truth is, whether it's mystical, whether it's some sort of a thought or whether it's reality,
they're both still inexplicably different. They're the same.
Yeah. I mean, Anil Seth's work is really, really interesting. We've debated a lot of times where
due to debate again in November of the Royal Institute of Philosophy annual debate.
And I'm always saying to him, I totally agree with all your scientific work. But I think
the scientific work on consciousness just leaves open all the philosophical positions.
You could be, Anil is a materialist, but you could have a dualist version of Anil,
a panpsychist version of Anil. We've got to distinguish the philosophical
aspects of the problem from the scientific aspects. Some people think, oh,
science is proving materialism. But no, materialism is a philosophical hypothesis
as is panpsychism, as in dualism. And we need to assess all these on philosophical grounds.
But actually, I've digressed slightly. Coming back to your point, which was an excellent one,
I think. Yeah. I mean, some philosophers get a little bit not annoyed by the word hallucination
there. It sort of seems to suggest that the external world is not real in some sense. But
if it just means that our experiences are in our own minds, in our heads, they don't put us in
direct contact with the world around us. We can't get outside of our own consciousness
to see if it corresponds to reality. So what do we do? You just, all you have direct contact
with is your own conscious experience right now. You don't even know
know whether you existed a few seconds ago. You can only do that by trusting your memory,
which is itself another kind of seeming, another kind of experience.
You know, of course, we can, you know, then people say, well, we can, we can check our memories,
we can check our senses, we can get precise with science. But only once you decide to
trust them in the first place, if I don't decide to just trust without any reason, my senses or
my memory, I can't get out of the present moment. I can't do any science. So although in a sense,
we can verify our senses, what our senses are telling us, only that's only in a kind of circular
way once we've already trusted them. So it seems to pretty, pretty much the same in the mystical
experience. You can't totally rule out it's a delusion, but it's the same in the case of
sensory experiences. And if anything, people who have mystical experiences claim that it seems
more real than their ordinary experiences. So I think I once, I think I once heard you mention
the fact that when someone claims to have some sort of experience in whatever way they have it,
what makes that any less true than anything that they've experienced otherwise. Like in
the normal realm, when you speak about this quite often, I feel that when I first started out reading
about consciousness, when I first entered the field from med school, when I thought about it,
I mean, I always wanted to study this, I was materialistic all the way through. I even wrote
an essay, my dissertation, Keith read it. He gave me comments. It was, but I defended illusionism
as a theory of consciousness using psychiatry. I'm sorry, I'm sorry. I'm going now.
I'm really joking. But prior to that, I had the emergentism view of consciousness.
Then I somehow slipped into illusionism. Sorry. Had the flu last week, I'm just, I'm slowly
recovering. And for everyone who's watching, and every time you see Philip looking down,
it's because he screens at the bottom. So don't, he's, he's just looking at me basically.
You give him a secret. So I, I'm in some context in case they're wondering,
is he reading something? What's going on? Well, I was turning my emails off actually that bleep
to one point. Anyway, but anyway, so yeah, as I was saying, when I started out, I started out as
someone who believed in emergentism, I mean, slowly you work your way up, then I went into
illusionism. And from starting this podcast and listening to people's coherent logical
arguments, philosophical arguments, I don't know anymore. I have absolutely no idea what I'm so
agnostic at this point that to me, if anyone approaches me with some sort of a cogent coherent
argument, I'm willing to listen all the way. And I think that a lot of scientists per se,
because of scientism, just look down on certain views like panpsychism, idealism, in fact,
we should talk about those two and how they're different or similar, because they both somehow
talk about the consciousness as being fundamental. But I think that link as we spoke about earlier
between spirituality and panpsychism is exactly why scientists or scientism hinders listening to
this philosophical argument. Do you agree with that? I do very much. I mean, I think
we're going through a strange period of history where people are understandably
totally blown away by the success of physical science and the wonderful technology it's
produced. And that has such a visceral effect on you think, oh my God, we can put someone on the
moon, we can have these tiny mechanisms that you know, just such incredible technology.
But it doesn't follow from that that experiments and observation is the only way of finding out
about reality. Clearly, experiments and observation are a very important, very successful way of
finding out about reality. But their success does not entail that there are not other ways.
And the least controversial way of finding out about reality, independently of observation
and experiments, is the reality of your own feelings and experiences. If you strictly follow
the kind of methodology of Daniel Dennett or my good friend Keith Frankish, and you only believe
in what can be established on the basis of observation experiment, then you're led to
disbelief in your own feelings and experiences, or at least you're not allowed to believe in
anything known on the basis of introspection that doesn't also come from external observation.
So Keith often says, oh, I believe in consciousness, I believe in feelings and experiences.
But when you dig into that, he totally agrees with Dennett. And Dennett says the
data for a science of consciousness or what he calls hetrophenomenology, which is
explicitly restricted to what you can know from the outside, including reports, when you
say something about your consciousness. But Dennett isn't taking that as testimony about an
inner realm of your inner life. He's just taking the report as a physical act that we need to
explain in terms of brain mechanisms or whatever. So the only things Dennett believes in, and Keith
believes in, are what can be established from third-person public observation experiment.
Why? I've never, my hours and hours and hours of talking to Keith, why can't I? Yes, of course,
experiments and observation are very important, but what about my immediate awareness of my pain?
Why isn't that another fundamental way of knowing about reality? So I think, you know,
someone like Keith is at least consistent. I think I'm consistent, but I think most people
in this confused middle way where they think, of course, my consciousness exists,
but they don't follow through and realize, in that case, there's a fundamental data point here
over and above experiments and observations. So you can't just say, we can only find out about
reality through observation experiments, because no, there's something else we need to plug in here.
And so that's the least controversial example, but I think there are other examples,
like our experience of value, you know, our experience of the human trafficking is abhorrent.
We think there's something objectively bad about this. And you could say, well, that's just our
subjective reaction. Well, it doesn't seem to be. Why? Why, if it's okay, I mean, that's just like
saying, oh, my experience at the table might be hallucination. I might be in the matrix. I might
be, but it's rational to trust my experience of the table. And it seems to me similarly
rational to trust my deepest moral experiences. So I think there are many different ways of
knowing about reality. And the task of the philosopher, which we've kind of forgotten about
in recent times, in my view, is to put them all together. It's the job of synthesis. Take what
we know from science, what we know from our careful ethical thinking, what we know about
mathematical reality, excuse me, the world of numbers and logic that necessary structural
reality mathematicians and logicians tell us about what we know about our own conscious experience
and synthesize it all together in a single unified theory of reality. So that, you know,
that's what I'm most passionate about is moving us on from this scientism, where we think,
no, it's just, you just got it, all we can really believe in is what we know from experiments,
and everything else has to be squeezed into that. And if it can't be, it doesn't exist.
Because that leads to this really impoverished picture of reality where really, there's,
that our official worldview is doesn't allow for the reality of consciousness, doesn't allow for
the reality of moral facts about good and bad and human dignity. And I think that's
a weird, unhealthy, difficult way to live. I mean, if it was the truth, it'd be the truth,
and we'd have to get used to it. But once we see that there is no good reason, philosophically
speaking, not to take seriously these other, these other ways of knowing about reality,
because all knowledge, including scientific knowledge is just rooted in trusting experience,
then I think we can, we can come to a more expansive conception of the world we live in,
and one that's a little bit better for our mental and spiritual well-being, I think.
I mean, you paint, it's a bit long-winded. No, no, it's fine. The more long-winded,
the better. I think the listeners, they want to hear you've used them. This is all about,
I mean, it's your episode. This is about you. But along all the lines of what you were talking
about, Dennett, how would you respond to something like this? Because Dennett once
said something about idealism and panpsychism in a way, describing them sort of as a
modern-day version of the Ian Vitale. I mean, I mean, we're always looking for something deeper.
We always want that little extra thing that makes us a little more special somehow.
And for humans, from it being life, being at the center of the universe at some point,
Copernicus ruins that, then Darwin takes us off the top of the food chain,
and now all we have left is consciousness. So we're going to find whatever way we can
to make this the most important thing. What do you think about that? How do you respond to
something like that? Well, it's an ad hominem argument, isn't it? Which means it's not engaging
with the argument. It's speculating, psychoanalyzing about the motivations of the person defending it.
You know, I think we're used to, we're very culturally used to the idea that
people who have religious or spiritual ideas, it's because they can't face the reality of
science or something, that they need to believe in something. But actually, for my own case,
I mean, I think I'm more subject to the motivations that lie behind the Dennett picture,
which are very seductive as well. You know, it's very seductive to have this simple picture that,
you know, experiments are giving us the truth, like the kind of Ricky Gervais story, you know,
listen to Ricky Gervais. I think Ricky Gervais, it's very important to his identity and his sense
of who he is, and his sense of security, that I think he needs to believe in this very simple
story. The experiments give us the answers, and we're on the right side of it. And these
superstitious fools, they're on, you know, I think that's, you can psychoanalyze people's
motivations in that way. And I mean, that's the, I feel often very silly defending the views I do,
because in the kind of, you know, culture that I was grew up in, and that I hang around in,
these things are, don't fit in. And so, you know, if I need to be, I need to constantly
analyze why I'm thinking what I'm thinking, and I'm constantly critiquing my arguments.
But I'm actually, I actually think I need to be more on guard about the seductions of
scientists, than the seductions of some need to believe I'm special or something.
You know, look, oh, I mean, at the end of the day, one can only speak for oneself,
that, you know, I'm sure I do have motivations, but fundamental in lots of ways. But fundamentally,
I've always just really wanted to know what's true. That's just been my job. I want to know the
answers here. And, and, you know, I've changed my mind a lot. I constantly,
sort of talking to myself in my head, trying to find the best argument, because I want to know,
is this right? Is this, I just, you know, I just want to know the truth. So, you know,
and then if Dennis says he doesn't believe me, then what can you do? But at the end of the day,
we should just engage with the arguments and, I mean, hatred phenomenology, as you say,
I mean, Keith calls it quasi phenomenal experiences. So this, so they're, they're sort of
implicit that it's implicit that it's existing, but it's just not what we think it is to these
to, to these thinkers. It's almost, it is there. It's just how we interpret it that's different,
and a bit misleading. So that, that doesn't sound too radical, does it?
You know, when you say our consciousness is just different to how we think of it,
what you've got to know about Keith and that, that it's position, I should be, he's probably
going to be listening, might listen to this bunny, is just come back to this point,
the heterophenomenology idea that the only data for a science of consciousness are what you can
know from the outside, right? That is the only things we can take seriously. So again, you know,
that includes what people say, but it's not what they say, because then you can, I think,
I think most people, when they, when they, you know, when they trust what someone says,
they're in pain, they trust, they're taking that as testimony and evidence about what can't be seen,
like I can't see your pain, but you tell me about it, and I thereby indirectly know,
that's not how Keith sees it, right? He sees the report, the act, the physical act of your
mouth moving as the datum. It is the first person objective, quantitative experience,
which that's everything, that's all that exists, right? First person's objective,
qualitative experience, which to you is the fundamental experience. And to Keith is the
complete opposite. Yeah, I mean, well, it's both, isn't I mean, of course, I agree with Keith that
that we, of course, who would deny that we do know a lot from the outside. And that's part of
the data, but I've just, I've never seen a good argument from Keith about why I can't just take
it as a starting point. Introspect, my feeling of, you know, then it's, then it's noticed,
you know, then it's got fascinating arguments about how introspection can lead as a stray.
Eric Schvitzkabel, one of my favorite philosophers who's a materialist,
has got some great stuff on that. But okay, introspection makes some mistakes.
Doesn't mean the whole story's wrong. Like, you know, that
yeah, Eric gives objective qualities we seem to experience are just not real at all. So,
so that, yeah, the challenge is, I think the more conventional
physicalist picture you refer to any of the emergentist picture that they want to try and
reduce or account for, they say, oh, yeah, we believe in subjective experience.
We want to account for it in terms of the purely third person quantitative science.
I think Keith and I both agree that just doesn't make any sense. That's just
thinking you can't even, you know, you can't even articulate these subjective private qualities,
like the redness of a red experience in the language of physical science. So,
you know, your neuroscientific theory couldn't even articulate the data. So it's not going to
be able to explain it if it can't even articulate it. So we both agree that doesn't make sense.
But he thinks, well, just believe in this stuff, you know, about through the third person way.
And if you can sort of translate your talk of consciousness into
the stuff, you know, about in third person terms and okay, that's fine. But
you're only allowed to do that. Why? Why? It's just, I think it's just over-enthusiasm with
science. But you mentioned Eric Schwitzka. I think I interrupted you there.
Yeah, sorry. No, we, I mean, Eric and I also chatted about it.
Oh, brilliant.
He is very skeptical. I mean, he's got that skeptical mindset that leads him to think of
so many creative different ways that you can interpret reality and the way we live.
I mean, some of his philosophy of science fiction is very intriguing,
very diverse writing. And I think that only happens when you are sort of
someone who can think metaphysically about things without necessarily having a religious or
spiritual view on it. There wasn't, there's almost no dogma towards it. You're just
naturally skeptical. Keith and I actually had a three hour conversation about illusionism.
We went into the ethics of it all. It was quite a long chat. But I just spoke,
I think about three days ago to Helen, yet to Chappelle, am I saying the surname correctly?
But we spoke about idealism and your view, panpsychist, the panpsychist and the idealist view
sort of overlap in certain ways to some people. And to some people, they believe it's completely
different. How would you differentiate between these two views? I mean, there's a lot of new
people out there. Bernardo Castro is Donald Hoffman with conscious realism slash idealism in a sense,
because he is taking consciousness to be fundamental. How do you differentiate your views?
Good. Yeah, it's a good question. Obviously, to start off with, obviously, I mean, I think of
all of these views as very much on the same side of the debate and close in all sorts of ways.
It's just wonderful that from both science and philosophy, people are really exploring these
ideas that start off with consciousness and build up on that basis instead of starting off with
matter and getting to consciousness starting off with consciousness itself. So, you know,
it's great all these views on the table. People define terms in different ways. The way I tend
to think about it is that the panpsychist, although they think consciousness is fundamental,
they also think the physical world is fundamental. But without being due list because
how do you square that circle? Well, the physical world is just somehow made up of
consciousness or infused with consciousness. Whereas the idealist, I think, tends to think
there's something more fundamental than the physical world. Either the physical world is
some kind of illusion, or there's some deeper reality underlying the physical world.
So I think Bernardo and Donald Hoffman fit into that camp. It's a little bit difficult with Helen,
actually. But her view is inspired by George Barclay, the great 18th century idealist who,
yeah, thought that the physical world is real, but it's not fundamental tables and chairs and
mountains and so on or constructions out of ideas. At the fundamental level of reality, we've just
got kind of immaterial minds. And the physical world is constructed out of ideas in those minds.
And she sort of relates God from that picture. So to her, it's the ideal, the Berkeley and
idealism without God. Yeah. So then God was central to Barclay's picture,
because it's a question, well, what happens to a table when we're not looking at it?
Yeah. And Barclay's idea is what God's looking at it. And then Helen's idea building on that was,
well, why does it have to have, why does this cosmic mind or whatever it is,
have to have all the attributes of God? Why does it have to be all powerful? Why does it
even have to be a sort of thinking agent in order to sort of experience the table when
no one's looking at it? So she instead of thinks of it as a sort of tapestry of experience,
lots of threads of experience. So, but if we, I think the problem is, I think she's
problem in terms of distinguishing her view from panpsychism is, I think she wants,
maybe does she want to identify that tapestry with the physical world?
Yeah. Helen is idealist in the way she thinks. There's almost, she's just defending a sort of
idea within idealism without actively calling herself an idealist. Right. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah,
that's a good point. And, and, but why that view that she explores should counters idealism rather
than panpsychism? I'm not totally sure actually. But after having such a lot conversation,
I'm still not entirely sure. Yeah, because it's not, it doesn't fit the most standard understanding
of idealism where there's something underlying the physical world. And, and that's, I mean,
that's the argument I have with Donald Hoffman. I'm not sure the motive, I never understand
the motivation for thinking there's something deeper than the physical world.
You know, so in a way you can think of panpsychism as a sort of middle way between
materialism and idealism. So there's for the panpsychist, you know, in some sense,
there's just the physical world, particles and fields. But that's filled out with consciousness.
And I don't see why we want a place for consciousness. Why can't we put it as it
were inside the mathematical structures of physics? Why do we have to put it at a,
at a deeper level than that? I've never really understood the motivation.
Sorry, this is going to digress, but it's going to go back to something you mentioned earlier,
which was, I mean, values inherent morals and ethics and how these all play a role.
I would like to ask, what about cultural differences? Because, I mean, if we have this
objective truth about ethics and morals, I mean, we clearly see a difference in culture. I mean,
and to some cultures, perhaps human trafficking might just be the way the culture has just
grown up over time. And to many people, maybe they don't see it as bad. I obviously,
though I'm not one of those people, but how do we differentiate them? Because then we have to
agree that we don't have objective morals or values. What are your thoughts on that?
Yeah, it's a very important challenge to the moral objectivist position. And,
you know, I introduce this by saying, if you're going to be skeptical about
moral objectivity, you need to say, well, why is it okay to trust your sensory experiences,
but not your moral experiences? Otherwise, there's a double standard. But actually,
you've just potentially answered that question by saying, here's the difference, you know,
with our empirical experiences, we get a great commonality, but then there's this disagreement.
And that's a very important challenge.
I said, why else have I thought about this? I'm trying to remember what my view on it is.
I mean, so one thing is, I think there's a lot more, I mean, I would say not so much,
I'm a realist about morality, but a realist about value, that there are facts about
what is objectively valuable. And when you think in terms of very, very general claims about value,
there is a hell of a lot of commonality and universality. For example,
pleasure is good, suffering is bad. Understanding is good, ignorance is bad, creativity is good,
apathy and banality are bad, right? Does many people disagree with those general value claims?
Now, where you get disagreement is when it gets into the how it all fits together,
you know, more specific value claims about justice or the ethics of abortion or whatever.
But then that's, to my mind, that's to be expected, given that things just do get,
hey, things just do get very complicated when the value equation gets so, so many different
factors are at play. So you sort of expect people to evaluate them in different ways,
just as you do in philosophy or any complicated topic. When there's complicated considerations,
and you've got to sort of do some highfalutin abstract thinking, people end up disagreeing,
that's kind of to be expected. The other factor, of course, is that there's a lot of
self interest with morality and people wanting to believe certain things and
in our modern times, corporations influencing how people think and so on. If you don't
want to believe equality is an important part of, economic equality is an important part of
justice. If you're very wealthy and you don't want to be taxed, you've got a motivation not to
believe that. Of course, there's that, you know, people coming out of certain religious cultures
or certain traditional views. So for all these reasons, you know, you'd expect, I think, there
to be diversity. But on these very, very general sort of axioms of value, like pleasure is good,
pain is bad. I think there's actually a lot of agreement which is consistent with value realism.
So within the psychos view, if you take, I mean, you mentioned something like abortion. So ideally,
that draws a lot of like philosophical questions with it. Because in essence, this is an experiencing
system, part of reality. And now we're drawing the line using scientific methods saying, okay,
12 weeks is the cut off line, because this is what has developed since then. How do we work
around these things? How do we work around perhaps life after death? I mean, there's so many aspects
to this where we, what does panpsychism tell us about these things? Wow, we're getting these
very deep and difficult ethical questions. I mean, in a way, panpsychism might not make
that much difference insofar as panpsychists tend to think at the macro level of reality,
not everything is conscious. And so they might, you know, the view is that the fundamental,
at the level of fundamental physics, everything is conscious. But at the higher level, they,
a panpsychist might hold the same as anyone else. It's a sort of open question. So they might not
think this, they don't necessarily think the table is conscious. They think the bits it's made up of
are. But I suppose panpsychists will naturally think spread consciousness,
think it's more spread throughout the biological world than other people may.
And I mean, for one thing, it makes it very difficult to think about the ethics of eating.
I argue a lot on Twitter with vegans about, you know, if you don't think plants are conscious,
then you've got a nice moral cutoff point. I'm just not going to eat. I'm going to eat things
that aren't conscious. I'm not going to eat things that are conscious. But I think panps
probably are conscious, or at least are communities of conscious entities. And
so you've got to eat something. It's hard to know what the moral draw off comes pretty
difficult. I mean, maybe same with the fetus. I mean, for anyone, it's very difficult to establish
that there were exactly consciousness emerges in pregnancy. But a couple of things, I mean,
I suppose, for that reason, I'm more inclined to place a lot of moral weight on
self-awareness, awareness of one's own existence, the capacity to understand
one's self and the world around one, which, for example, pigs have more than newborn babies.
So you might think in some sense, this was great. I'm not saying we should kill babies, but
there is, we've got to bear in mind that I mean, I think a pig is much more intellectually,
cognitively, sophisticated than a very early fetus. So I think those kind of things play heavily
for me. I was always very influenced as well by the argument of Judith Jarvis Thompson,
it's not so much necessarily denying a fetus a right to life, but thinking about
the right of the pregnant woman not to be forced to have her body used to sustain that life.
So Judith Jarvis Thompson, this wonderful analogy of you wake up, you've been kidnapped and knocked
out and you're hooked up to a famous violinist, it's a bizarre story really, the musical society
have hooked you up to this violinist because you're a rare donor and unless you stay hooked up to
this violinist in this hospital room for nine months, the violinist is going to die. Now,
everyone thinks the violinist has a right to life, but that doesn't mean you're obliged to allow your
body to be used to sustain that life. So I think for those two reasons, that would be my motivation
for being pro-choice that the lack of cognitive sophistication of a very early fetus and also
that the right for a woman to choose where the hair body is used in that way. That's a great
answer. Very difficult though. Just going back to your story about the vegan argument, just today,
I mean, my receptionist told me that she doesn't like vegans, but she's just joking around and
she's like, my main argument is that if you're eating all the plants, you're technically stealing
all the animals food. So in essence, you are still killing the animals. That is quite a ridiculous
but yet still quite fair, fair enough. I mean, the position I've come to is what I call
humanitarianism of just not eating any animal products that are factory farmed. A lot of people
say, oh, I don't agree with factory farming and maybe they'll buy meat that's not factory farmed,
although that can be very expensive. But very few people ask in restaurants, is the meat factory
farmed? Don't eat chocolate unless the milk is not factory farmed. Dairy is often one of the worst,
most cruel forms of factory farming. So it's strange to me in some ways being vegetarian if
you're happy to eat chocolate because milk, chocolate, dairy products. So my thought is if
more people did that, then that could really have an impact. But I'm going to read George
Mombio's new book, actually trying to persuade us all to be vegan for environmental reasons.
Maybe I'll end up vegan. He's, but anyway, let's not get into that. The main thing here is
let's tell me about some of, Philip, some of the best counter arguments you've heard
for pants against panpsychism. If you're to play devil's advocate on yourself right now,
what has really gotten your attention? Well, you really thought I might not be able to argue this
as well as I wish, but perhaps one day someone will.
That's a good question. I mean, probably the most discussed challenge is the so-called
combination problem, which is okay, it's all very well postulating particles having consciousness
or whatever. But ultimately, what we want to explain is our consciousness and
how on earth do these little conscious things come together to make our consciousness?
And on the face of it, it seems to be something very hard to make sense of. Is it even coherent
for lots of little minds to make one big mind? And this is something I've changed my mind about
a lot and thought about a lot. I think where I've ended up with, though, is I think that
the challenge is really is at its strongest, at least, if you're going for a very reductionist
panpsychist story where you say, really, all there is is conscious particles. And
what I think of as my mind is just a complicated collection of conscious particles.
So someone like Luke Rolofs tries to defend this very reductionist kind of panpsychism.
That is hard to make sense of. There seems to be a deep unity about my own conscious mind
that resists that kind of very, very reductionist story. It's hard to deny that my mind is
something over and above just a very complicated collection of particles, whether they're conscious
or not. But actually, and this comes back to my dispute with Sean Carroll,
I now no longer think there's much of a motivation to go for that very reductionist story.
You only feel pressured to do that when you start from the conviction that
everything that happens is ultimately explicable in terms of known chemistry and physics.
And I used to think that. That's kind of what I got taught as an undergraduate. But just from
talking to neuroscientists, really, we've got an interdisciplinary consciousness group at my
university here. And I just, we really don't know anywhere nearing up about the brain.
What we know about the brain, really, we know a lot about the basic chemistry. So like the bottom,
we know, we know a fair bit about large scale functions, what big bits do.
But what we're pretty almost clueless on is how those functions are
realized at the cellular level, how it works. And we'd have to know a lot more about that
before we could confidently say, you know, everything that happens in my brain is
explicable in terms of currently known chemistry and physics. I think we just don't know that.
So so I'm more attracted to at least not such a reductionist story. You know, once you're freed
from that, then you can just think that let's just stick with particles, the zegazemblissity,
just have basic capacities to, in certain circumstances, combine into more complex,
unified forms. And we should look to neuroscience to guide us in, in when that happens. I'm quite
attracted to the integrated information theory, which is one proposal as to when consciousness
arises in the brain. So I actually wanted to ask you about that at some point, your view
on integrated information theory and how do you feel it plays a role with the sort of explaining
or adopting a panpsychist view, because obviously they're starting off with phi and moving upward.
Do you feel as that that represents a panpsychist attempt at philosophical thinking?
So my view is we need to distinguish very sharp, not very sharply, quite sharply,
scientific bit of consciousness research and the theory and the philosophical bit. So the scientific
bit is to work out what kinds of brain activity go along with what kinds of experience. That's the
scientific bit and integrated information theory is one proposal on that. It says that
you get consciousness in a system when there's more phi, as you say, or integrated information in
the whole system than in its parts. So probably this glass of water isn't conscious because
there's probably more phi in the molecules than in the liquid as a whole. But in the brain,
there's hue in certain parts, the brain at least, there's huge, even though there's a lot of
fine and neuron, there's even more in the whole system. So that's why I get conscious. So that's
one interesting proposal. What I like about it is that it gives us, allows for kind of sharp
cutoff points between systems that are conscious and systems that aren't conscious. And
on philosophical grounds, I don't think it makes sense to have fuzzy boundaries around
consciousness. Like you think of a cloud, there's no sharp cutoff point between the
where's the edge of the cloud, which is this a little bit of water vapor outside the cloud,
or is it part of the cloud? There's probably no factor the matter there. But if we're thinking
of my consciousness, either something is part of my experience or it isn't, I don't think it kind
of makes sense. And for there to be fuzzy boundaries around my mind, that's something
we could debate. But IIT integrated information theory can make sense of that. But that's just
the scientific bit. And I think that like any philosophical theory, it's sorry, like any scientific
theory, it's neutral on all the philosophical options. So you could be a materialist proponent
of integrated information theory and think, just have an identity between consciousness and
Phi. Or you could be a dualist like David Chalmers and think Phi and consciousness are different
things, but there are special laws of nature that tie them together. Or you could be a panpsychist
and you could think, you know, consciousness is the fundamental level and that bubbles up when
you've got Phi or something. So yeah, so Phi, I think I like for certain specific reasons to do with
you can't have fuzzy consciousness, fuzzy boundaries and consciousness. And I suppose it fits
upon psychism in that it predicts that there's more consciousness than we ordinarily expect.
Are there any other neuroscientific theories that you sort of are attracted to?
Not really for that reason, because I mean, look, there's a lot. It's very early days,
there is no consensus in neuroscience. Some people thought it would be all wrapped up by now,
but it's very hard because consciousness is not publicly observable. And so
where you've got a human being, you can ask them what they're experiencing, but the more distance
you get from the human case, it's very speculative. Eric Schvitzkabel now thinks we will just never
know whether snail is conscious, because it's just too distant from the human case.
But I think we can try and look for philosophical signposts. And I think this important,
what we can look for, what we know about consciousness from the inside. And one thing
I think we know about consciousness from the inside is that there can't be fuzzy boundaries
when it comes to consciousness. And I think I'm happy to be corrected on this, but I think the
integrated information theory is the only scientific proposal that can accommodate that
philosophical data point. So to my mind, it's whatever its flaws are, very far from a final
theory of consciousness. To my mind, it's the only philosophically credible one.
Yeah. What are your thoughts on, like, let's say someone like Penrose and John
Bovecki and quantum consciousness, where's your head at with that?
I mean, Penrose thing starts with a fascinating argument to do with girdles and completeness
theorem. And it's interesting, though, that that is really when you think about it, it's not so much
to do with consciousness, it's to do with cognition, it's to do with understanding,
because what Penrose is thinking is he's wrestling with how to make sense of mathematical
understanding, given girdles and completeness theorem girdles and completeness theorem seems to
show Penrose thinks that, you know, a computer couldn't do the kind of mathematical and have
the mathematical understanding we have, because you can't reduce mathematics to a system of axioms
where you can prove everything with those axioms. So he thinks mathematical understanding must be
sort of non computational. And that's why he thinks there must be some kind of quantum,
non classical physics coming in here. So, you know, that's fundamentally his motivation.
I want, you know, I wonder whether again, this comes back to the need to connect everything to
kind of currently known physics or closely related to currently known physics. I mean,
in terms of that problem, I think I'd be
much more open to supplementing macro level physics with the idea that there are just new
causal dynamics that kick in in complex systems. This is sometimes known as strong emergentism.
So we don't have to go down to the quantum level. We can just say, look, there's new causal dynamics
that emerge in human cognition. And this is actually what I talk about like my new book I'm
working on that's much more about conscious understanding and conceptual meaning. When
philosophers and scientists talk about consciousness, they always talk about
pain and seeing red and itchers and these kind of very animal sensations. But I think consciousness is
permeated with meaning and understanding what things are and what they mean
fills my experience, you know, I don't experience colors and shapes, I experience tables and chairs
and faces and stuff. So I think Penrose is spot on and he's one of the few to be wrestling with
these deep mysteries about conscious understanding. But I think I would go a slightly different way
with that and just say go for stronger emergentism rather than trying to hook everything up to the
quantum level. And then people like let's say Rupert Sheldrake. What are your thoughts on someone
like his view on consciousness? So I'm quite good friends of Rupert Sheldrake and we're doing a debate
or a discussion rather in the near future on religion without belief. Because I guess
we're both kind of practicing Christians who have very unorthodox views of what it means,
what is involved in being a Christian and then we're hooking up with
oh what's his name? My mind's gone blank. Wonderful poet and environmental activist who
recently surprised everyone by converting to quite conservative Christianity and anyway we're
going to be having a chat with him. But anyway, coming back to yeah so Rupert's got very interesting
views. You know, I think he can defend them very very articulate, he can articulate them and defend
them very well. But so I suppose Rupert is defending his views as a scientist on empirical
grounds rather than strictly philosophical grounds. So I suppose it's kind of this may be a bit of a
cop out but it's sort of outside of my skill set in a way. I think you know knowledge is very
specialized now and I'm jealous to people in the 16th century when you could sort of understand
the cutting edge science, the cutting edge of mathematics. But you know in a way when it comes
to imperial questions I sort of have to because it's not my skill set I sort of have to trust
the you know the consensus and I suppose for better or worse the consensus is against Rupert.
But I suppose he would say that's for cultural reasons and people aren't taking him seriously
for cultural reasons and I'm very much open to that argument. I've experienced in philosophy
which is my area you know how ideology stops certain views being taken seriously and so I can
I'm open to that possibility but because it's not my skill set I just don't think I can assess
whether he whether he's right or not. It's absolutely fascinating views though and
you know I certainly you know he's had his TED talk banned and everything. I certainly don't
think he should be as ostracized as he is. I think you know yeah again there is a sort of
fear there isn't there about I suppose people worry about losing control you know being open to
any old stuff but look if someone can defend their views with rigor and seriousness then you know
they should be given a hearing and I think. I think but do you think that some people
are now mysterious regarding consciousness because there there are just that many convincing
arguments and we just don't know. Yeah mysterious is again a position we should take seriously and
I'm to some extent open to it myself. I mean you're asking for challenges to panpsychism.
I suppose another one would be well just the position of
shouldn't we be agnostic you know. Yeah I can't look into an electron to see whether it's conscious
or not. Maybe we should just be agnostic. Maybe we should just say there's a view that's very
closely connected to mine that just says so agrees with this Bertrand Russell starting point
that physics doesn't tell us what matter is only what it does and agrees that you know
whatever manner is it's it's somehow explains consciousness so you might say it's proto-conscious
that it's it's somehow has a nature that makes consciousness but it's not itself conscious
and you know I'm very much owned opposition that the philosopher Daniel Stoljar and his review
of my academic book conscious to some fundamental reality was sort of pushing this line you know
that there's something right about this Bertrand Russell position but we just don't know enough
to be able to say panpsychism is good so I'm kind of open to that but at the end of the day my current
thinking is what why go for mystery when there's an intelligible hypothesis as an alternative and
all we can ever do is science and philosophy I think is try and work out
you know the most simple parsimonious hypothesis compatible with the data if we can account for
not only consciousness but the facts of physical science and natural science more generally
by postulating basic simple forms of consciousness then that seems to me by normal scientific
criteria of you know the simp going for the simplest theory that can account for the data
that's the view we should go for we don't know for sure we'll never know for sure and we should
be open to other possibilities but I still think panpsychism is is just a bit more likely
to be true than I think other options on the table I think you give a great great coherent
argument for it I mean I've read Galileo's era of red consciousness fundamental reality and that
one's a lot more in depth and in detail for so like for all the people who read Galileo's era I
think I highly recommend you go read the other one because you're going to far greater detail and
it's obviously meant for a different group of people but if people have some sort of a view
on your view of panpsychism they should definitely read both before making a conclusion on that
oh thanks for who do you think because obviously I would recommend your books to someone who wants
to read about panpsychism who are the people you'd recommend people should read in order to get a
greater understanding of panpsychism um oh well it's just that yeah there's there's so much going
on at the moment I mean it's difficult isn't it because I guess a lot of academic philosophic
philosophy work now can be so inaccessible um I think this is you know again it's a reflection
of knowledge being so specialized and and often philosophers I think we're trained to try and
have these watertight arguments and so yeah you try and cover all bases and then it ends up getting
really complicated and the jargon comes in so that's why in a way you know I wrote my academic
book first because once you write a more accessible version you've got to be a bit looser with the
argument you can't cover all objections so then philosophers read it and say oh you haven't considered
this you haven't considered this and so then I could say well read the academic book if you want the
full story the full argument but um yeah so Luke Roloff's book combining minds is a wonderful book
um a little bit challenging I guess Hetahassel Merle great philosopher she's got a she's got a
great piece with Nautilus that I would recommend giving the basic panpsychist position something
on the integrated information theory for philosophy now she wrote for a special issue I edited um
and she's working on on on a book on antiphysicalism actually for Keith's series in philosophy of mine
Keith told me about recently um another resource people might want to look to is there's this
there was a special issue of the Journal of Consciousness Studies um on on 20 years how many
was it now 19 essays by philosophers and scientists and theologians responding to my book Galileo's
Era um and this is going to be coming out as a book actually later this year called
is consciousness everywhere so there's essays by Anil Seth and Sean Carroll and uh Giulio Tenoni
for the use of topics all coming up yeah I yeah but I mean well in in a way usual suspects but uh
I don't think there's I can't think another time these kinds of scientists have uh responded to
panpsychism so it's it's in a way it's I can't I personally can't wait to read this this is it's
quite um there is a development I mean these guys don't agree with me but you know I think
taking the view is seriously enough to engage with it I think is um is it is an achievement so that's
oh there's loads of stuff what is I suppose Miriel Bahari's a very good Australian philosopher who
defends it a more spiritual version of panpsychism inspired by Hindu mysticism
and partly based on arguing that we can trust the testimony of experienced meditators
she's been working on a book for a while I hope to come out soon um my blog yeah um yeah so tell me
for the book that you've got prepped and ready to go what's the goal here well what's the next
mission because I mean you've read you've written the academic one you've written Galileo's era
what do you hope to show us next I hope this book actually is going to be
I come both academic and accessible I've wrestled for a long time about which to do I can't
so tough to crack yeah I'm hoping maybe it's not possible but so each chapter at the moment
is divided into a more accessible bit and and the more technical bits and but the whole thing I
try to make quite accessible but it's it's it's a different book in content as well but it's
I guess the big idea is exploring the middle ground between God and atheism so I think
in the West people think you have to fit into one of those groups you either believe in the
Omni God all powerful knowing perfectly good or you think we're in this meaningless universe
where you know meaning only arises at the end of evolution or whatever
and I I've come to think that both of these views are are pretty implausible
both have data they can't handle
in terms of the Omni God it's the familiar problem of evil and suffering
why would an all all powerful loving God allow or create a world of so much suffering in it
in terms of atheism the meaningless universe I think one thing I discuss there is is the
that the fine-tuning of physics the discovery in recent decades that
for life to be possible many numbers in physics had to fall in a quite narrow range such that
it's it's incredibly improbable that that would happen just by chance I think on the
on the face of it if you just look at it this passionately that is very strong evidence for
some kind of goal-directed activity some kind of directiveness towards life
in the very early universe and I think I basically think is a cultural
indenial about this I think it's reminiscent of the 16th century where there was this growing
evidence for the earth not being in the center of the universe that didn't fit with the picture
that people have got used to and people couldn't accept it and they tried to think of these
ways of avoiding it you know they postulated these epicycles so they thought everything
went around the earth the sun and the planets and the stars they postulated these extra little
orbits of the planets in addition to their orbits around the earth and that didn't do it so they
postulated these orbits around orbits and um and we think oh god they were so stupid they
couldn't just accept the evidence and we're so enlightened now but I think every generation
has got used to a picture of how things are supposed to be and you get laughed at if you
don't fit into that and I think you know I think I think it's just culturally impossible
for people to take this evidence at face value which is that I think what we might call cosmic
teleology there's but so I think there's strong evidence for cosmic teleology for some kind of
directiveness towards life but also strong evidence against the omniguard and so I'm
exploring positions in between so Philip sorry to cut you off there but within this cosmic
teleology where do you think it's headed then after humans and life do you think artificial
intelligence is sort of the next step and then we're going to move forward from there what what
do you think is happening god knows nobody knows so look it so I as I say I think there is there is
very strong evidence and could change tomorrow but science as we have it now is very strong
evidence for a sort of directiveness towards life maybe that's the end of it maybe maybe maybe this
is this is this is the end of the cosmic purpose as it were but in a way you might think that's
kind of improbable to think that you know we're the culmination of this cosmic story so you might
you know we might speculate that there's that it's it's it's still unfolding some kind of
greater reality is yet to come but that would that that would be somewhat speculative I always
like a hero of mine growing up the heretical Catholic priest Tyre de Jardin who had this
you know he was you know early days after Darwin and parts of the church were sort of
worried about what to do at Darwin but he was inspired by the idea of evolution and the idea
of an evolving cosmos and you know he thought this these great leaps of life and sentience and
self-consciousness and he he thought the next stage would be people humans getting more informationally
connected up and this bringing about a new form of life and consciousness that he called the
new sphere so some people think you know if you look at the way we're all connected up with the
internet and what's up and stuff maybe he was under something but I mean he could have knows
I think that still might be possible we don't even know but I think but I you know I think it's
I think it's I think it's a it's a good life to live in hope that there is some point to it all and
that what we do contributes in some way to some greater purpose I find doing that helps me keep
my ego in check that I'm not just thinking of my success I'm just thinking I'm just contributing
in some way to some some some greater purpose and you know maybe there isn't a greater purpose and
you know but we'll never know and I think it's it's it's it's it's a good way to live to live in
hope of that I think it's a happiness conducive form of life so would you describe your religious
of if you had to pick on would it be more of a deistic god rather than theistic sort of omniscient
omnipotent interactive god would yours be more deistic you started off let the cosmic
teleology just roll and whatever happens happens so we need some kind of explanation of
why the source of cosmic teleology you know why things aren't better
we need a plausible hypothesis that explains can explain the you know the directness towards
life but can explain it why things aren't better why this source of cosmic teleology is not more
evident so look I explore a variety of options one is just teleological laws that Thomas Nagel
explored in his 2012 book mind and cosmos just so this isn't a kind of mind it's just impersonal
laws of nature that with sort of purpose is built into them another is is some kind of
something closer to the to the the traditional god as a sort of mind but a non-standard designer
maybe of limited power so maybe they really care maybe they're trying to do stuff but maybe they
yeah maybe all they could do is kick things off or maybe they've got limited powers of of intervention
or maybe it's it's the simulation hypothesis maybe they're just some you know scientists in
the next universe up trying out a simulation to see see what comes of it that would be a cosmic
teleology hypothesis one more naturalistically inclined people tend to like or cosmic psychism is
the other one I consider that the you know if we already think the universe is a kind of mind
because of our panpsychist views then it starts to be less mysterious that there might be some kind
of limited gold erectedness in it so I'm open to all those possibilities you know in terms of my
religious practice I think for me it's more about bringing the community together you know
marking that the seasons and the the big moments of life you know given my kids a moral example
connecting individuals in the community up to something greater and
you know inspiring moral action in the community things like that and so I think you know all
these things are all these matters are very uncertain and but you've got to live your life
and I think people are too folk when it comes to religion a lot of people are too focused on
is it true is it not true and I think you know I think I personally think for some people at least
are religiously engaged life with the community and the spiritual practice and is a wonderful
way to live your life and you know if it turns out all to be nonsense you've I still think you've
gained much in terms of a rich life and lost little really it's but you know rather than sort of
you know some people have no interest in religion and I'm not interested to persuade them
but I suspect there are many liberal minded people who would get a lot out of it but think it's kind
of Richard Dawkins has told them it's stupid or you know how do we know it's true and you know
whereas I think you know engaging with community and tradition can be a wonderful thing and
people can focus. He mentioned he's a fan of your work is Raymond Tellis and something
I like that he said well this when we spoke he actually told me now that I realize I realize
if he asked me a couple questions to ask you and I forgot to take them down before this interview
but then again we were meant to do it tomorrow so I was I was planning on doing that but
nevertheless he's a big fan of your work and he finds it very fascinating and something he said
that I really liked was he's he's ontologically agnostic about everything but there are certain
epistemologies that you can tell are just really just incorrect but when you when you're talking
about religion when you're talking about life all of this you have to be ontologically agnostic
we don't have the answers that's just the bottom line and I think that's a really cool statement
to make. Yeah absolutely absolutely and my wife's text me I think I'm gonna have to
uh attend to some family matters in the not too distant future but but just sorry just to throw
that in but um yeah no I I I totally agree with that I think I think a lot of people on both
we we use again it's come back to we're used to the the epistemic vices of the religious we're
used to the idea that religious people might be clinging to certainties but I think that's very
present for a lot of people on the scientific side as well I you know I think Daniel Dennett
he needs to believe this stuff for it you know he believes to believe it's obvious and it's
you know for a sense of identity and I think so like Ricky Giberti he has to sort of have this
easy picture that's painted I think I think you know yeah just um this kind of uncertainty
is unsettling to a lot of people I think um uh you know I just you you'll never know you've got one
life you know and um you have your best yes diagnostic I think that's yeah let's do it put it
or you can have your best guess and you know it doesn't have to be um you know I'm certain
or it's a load of nonsense I mean I I've never had a mystical experience but I have I have
what I would describe as spiritual experiences to the some often with morning or evening light
or you know watching my kids play or something you know a sense that there's a way things are
supposed to be or there's a greater reality at the root of things and most people think you've
I've got to think oh yeah that's definitely right or you've got to think no that's nonsense but
a middle way is to sort of engage with that take it seriously work with it in your spiritual
practice and you'll never know one way or the other but you can maybe live a richer life through
engaging tentatively those experiences beautiful Philip you're already touching on that but like
concluding this is obviously called mind body solution I mean you're already touching on it but
how would you say we should move forward in order to get one step closer to that mind body solution
we're a long way from the final answer humans always think they're at the end of history and
we're kind of there we just need to you know dot a few i's and cross a few t's you know so I think
that that needs to be the starting point what I'm most passionate about and here's we're going from
what we what we don't know here's one thing I feel most confident about is that
consciousness is not just another scientific problem and the reason it's not another scientific
problem is that we're not dealing with some public observation and experiments we're not
dealing it's a very different kind of data we're dealing with something that's privately known
and trying to explain this privately known reality you know science is used to dealing with
things you can't observe but that's in that's we postulate things you can't observe to explain
what you can observe in all other cases the task of science is explaining the data of
experiments or observation this is a totally different explanatory project we're trying we're
not trying to do that we're trying to explain this privately known reality so we're not even at
first base we've got to get on to that this isn't just another scientific problem it's a
philosophical problem it's how we bring together what we know about scientifically and what we know
about privately trying to meld them together and you know so we're still about you know debate
Nanel Seth and he's saying oh well what are the predictions of panpsychism what does you know what
scientific experiments result but that's that's not at first base because that's seeing it that's
seeing it as just a scientific problem and it's not just a scientific problem you panpsychism
might be wrong there are lots of good challenges but treated as a philosophical problem not a
scientific problem so we've got to understand the nature the philosophical underpinnings
we've gone from pretend you know in the latter half of the 20th century people pretended consciousness
didn't exist to avoid the problem since the 90s the 1990s we take the problem seriously
but too many people still think just do more neuroscience and we'll solve it we need to
see the philosophical underpinnings of the problem we need to see that it's fundamentally a task of
how we bring these things together as philosophers ultimately scientifically informed philosophers
once we get there I think we'll be at least on or at least on the first stage and I think just
that first stage actually will in itself necessitate a kind of revolution in how we think about
science how we think about the way we know about the world around us so so yeah exciting times ahead
I think that's a beautiful way to end Philip thank you so much for your time
it's been an absolute pleasure thanks tab and it's been lovely finally speaking with you hope
we get to chat yeah I mean I'm looking forward to it hopefully after your book comes out we can
have another chat but I really appreciate your time I mean this is and please just continue
doing the work you're doing because as I said the more diverse the views the philosophical
arguments as we as we spoke about not neuroscience but philosophy the more diverse and the more
people like you come out and speak about it the more we can engage in this topic and this podcast
would not exist without people like you so thank you so much for that thank you very much we'll see
you again
