These lectures are part of the Great Courses series.
They are produced by The Teaching Company.
The Great Courses cover a broad array of university level disciplines.
The lectures in each course are either 30 or 45 minutes long.
By listening for less than an hour a day, you can finish even the longest course in just weeks.
Browse our catalogue or website and imagine how much you could learn if you spent just 30 minutes a day for the next year
in the best college classrooms in the world.
The lecturers are university professors carefully selected by The Teaching Company and its customers
for intellectual distinction and teaching excellence.
These lectures are titled The Vikings, Part 1.
The lecturer is Professor Kenneth W. Harrell.
Dr. Harrell is a professor of classical and Byzantine history at Tulane University in New Orleans,
where he has been teaching since 1978.
He earned his bachelor's degree from Trinity College and went on to earn his master's and PhD from Yale University.
Dr. Harrell specializes in the Mediterranean civilizations of Greece, Rome, Egypt and Byzantium
and in the ancient Near East.
The author of two books and numerous essays, he is also a veteran for the Middle East.
He is also a veteran field researcher who has served on the editorial boards of the American Journal of Archaeology
and currently the American Journal of Numismatics.
Dr. Harrell's skill and dedication as an instructor are tested by the many teaching honors he has won.
Nine times he has earned Tulane's annual student award for excellence in teaching.
He is also the recipient of Baylor University's nationwide Robert Foster Cherry Award for Great Teachers.
Professor Harrell prepared the course guide that comes with these lectures.
The course guide includes a detailed outline of each lecture, a glossary, timeline, biographical notes, maps and an annotated bibliography.
To get the most out of this course, you may find it useful to follow along with the outlines or review them before or after each lecture.
Lecture 1 The Vikings in Medieval History
My name is Kenneth Harrell and I teach ancient and Byzantine and early medieval history at Tulane University in New Orleans.
I'll be guiding you through a 36 lecture course on the Vikings.
This course is really an excellent way to introduce the early Middle Ages as well as medieval Scandinavia
because the Vikings have a very far-ranging impact on early medieval history
and in some instances medieval history is almost inconceivable without them.
Before we get into that and the structure of this class, I think it's useful to think about some of the stereotypes about Vikings
which most of us are familiar with and they usually are stereotypes that are popularized in novel and film
and they're with us and I think they're going to endure a long time.
Viking is usually used to designate one's worst nightmare of a Nordic warrior,
sporting a horned helmet, slashing with the two-headed axe,
descending upon unsuspecting monks and peasants from long ships
and believe me, we'll have a fair amount of Viking pillage and attacks in Western Europe and in Russia.
But this is a stereotype and it's important to stress that even the Scandinavians in the Middle Ages
use the term Viking for a very specific occupation.
The best explanation is that the word comes from North Vic, meaning a cove or a small fjord.
It would be a place where pirates would lurk and they could prey upon merchant ships
and so to go a Viking or to go out Viking was essentially a way of saying I was going out on a pirate raid.
The term then gets extended to cover any Scandinavians between roughly 790 and 1100
who either go on raids or are trading or conquering overseas kingdoms
or even engaged in settlements such as Iceland which is, we speak of the Viking Age settlement.
So it's fair to say that Scandinavia from 790 to 1100 experienced what we call the Viking Age
and you can talk of Scandinavian civilization in the Viking Age.
On the other hand, the term Viking really should be used to designate Scandinavians overseas,
especially as raiders, attackers of Christian kingdoms,
and then later as merchants as well as colonizers and eventually as kings,
such as King Canute of Denmark who conquers England in 1014, 1016.
So we need to keep that designation in mind.
The other important thing we have to keep in mind is that Scandinavians were known by a number of names overseas.
Viking was just one of several.
Frankish Chronicles, that is the monks who would be writing today in what is Western Europe,
France, the Lowlands, West Germany, often just vaguely referred to them as Northmen or Normani,
from which we get the word Normans.
And that is well known in the prayers that are repeated in the 9th century.
Oh, Lord, deliver us from the fury of the Northmen.
Common prayer is a result of Viking raids.
In England where Danes were prominent, usually the Vikings are simply referred to as Danes.
The term Norman is used for those Scandinavians who settled in Normandy in northern France.
Those Scandinavians from Sweden who operated in Russia are very often known as the Rus,
a word of obscure origin, there's several explanations for it,
or Varyngians, which means men of the Pledge.
That's a term used to designate, especially Swedes and other Scandinavians who come to serve in the Byzantine armies.
That is, they're men who take an oath and fight as a retinue to the Byzantine emperor.
But all of these terms are referring to the same people.
They are the Scandinavians from this period in the early Middle Ages who are popularly known as the Vikings.
Now, we have an enormous amount of information about the Vikings.
Unfortunately, most of it comes, at least in the early phases, from their opponents.
So we're constantly filtering these monastic chronicles and hostile reports of their victims,
and we're balancing that against archaeology,
and then what the Scandinavians tell about themselves in later generations when they've converted to Christianity.
So part of the theme of this course is going to be looking at really three very different sets of evidence.
The contemporary literary records, which are written by largely Christians, some Muslim accounts,
who see the Vikings as hostile as their worst nightmare, that stereotypical barbarian,
and in the case of the Western Europeans, they're drawing on a very, very old Roman tradition of seeing northern barbarians that way.
Then we're looking at all of the work that's been done in archaeology, recovery of ships, for instance, Viking settlements, fortifications.
There's really been some significant work that's been done in, say, Iceland on the early settlement patterns.
And then finally, we'll be looking a great deal at the sagas and the poetry written in Norse,
most of these from manuscripts of the 13th, 14th, 15th centuries,
but reporting events going back into the 9th century and earlier.
And those present some of their own problems as well.
So we have these three very distinct set of sources.
As for the stereotypes, I think it's important to dwell on them for a moment because they really do color our notions about the Vikings.
And I've taught courses at Tulane with Vikings prominently figured there.
And many of my students always think of, I think there's this commercial of a Visa card where someone doesn't pay
and all of these barbarians come surging in.
Most people identify him as Vikings.
I think they're actually Huns, but that's slightly flashed.
And many of my students come up to me and say, well, is that what happened to an English king in the 9th century when he didn't pay his debts?
He was descended upon by a group of Vikings, and I assure them, well, it didn't quite work that way.
But that stereotype is there, and it's very powerful.
It leads to cartoons, it leads to various heroic sagas, novels, other types of genres.
It was extremely powerful in the 19th century, and the 19th century fixed a number of our notions about the Vikings.
Richard Wagner's Cycle of the Ring, for instance, is based on the Norse version of the Legend of the Vulsongs.
And we'll be talking about the Vulsongs later in this course, which is the earliest set of heroes known in Scandinavian literature.
And there's a later German version of it in the Nibelungelid, but Wagner...
Norse, that would be Ragnarök in German, Götta Damerung, and created this very heroic image.
It was also captured in contemporary paintings, and anyone who's gone to some of the palaces of Mad Ludwig of Bavaria can get a very good idea
of the types of very heroic and idealized painting of the Valkyries and Sigurd, who slayed the dragon.
All of these notions of almost the primeval barbarian, who's untouched by civilization.
And these notions are also very old. They go back to the Reformation when Scandinavians and Germans were shaking off the control of the Roman Catholic Church
and very often pointed to the Vikings and the Scandinavians as their original ancestors.
And so you have this very, very powerful, heroic notion that is really capsulized in the 19th century music and literature.
It then unfortunately gets matched up with some German political ideology at the end of the 19th century.
In Presto you have your Aryan ideology of the 20th century, the Second World War, in which some of these myths and legends were invoked by the Nazi regime
in ways that I think would really stun most Viking kings and warriors of the Middle Ages.
I couldn't imagine how these images would get misused.
Modern scholarship since the Second World War has really taken a new look at the Vikings.
And there has been a great deal of work done on not only the archaeology, but understanding the sources, both the Scandinavian as well as the Western European sources.
There has been a tendency among some scholars to revise our opinion. Some of these notions have gone a bit extreme.
Professor Peter Sawyer has pioneered some of these arguments in a really seminal work that came out about 30 years ago on the age of the Vikings.
And he tends to downgrade the importance of the raids, the size of the raids, the amount of money that might have been taken in Plunder or Dengald, which is essentially a Viking to pay off.
The Vikings essentially find the Frankish king in silver and that's called Dengald, payment of money to the Danes. It's also paid in England.
And these numbers have been reassessed.
This has led to revisions about the importance and impact of the Vikings, how much of a destructive impact they had.
It's often noted that Western Europe at the time of the 8th and 9th centuries was a pretty violent place.
And the Vikings were just part of the general landscape of Mayhem that characterized most of medieval Europe.
There has also been a tendency in the revisionist scholarship to stress the continuity between the Viking Age and the earlier periods as well as the later periods.
For instance, agricultural change is almost non-existent. The pattern of agriculture you saw in Scandinavia in the Viking Age is very much the same you would have seen 700 years earlier.
And this has also led to an effort to stress the continuity, the fact that many people in Scandinavia were not engaged in the Viking raids.
Several very, very good studies have stressed the importance of trade. You really can't have piracy without trade.
And one of the notions would be that the Vikings or the Scandinavians to be more accurate were probably more often engaged in trade rather than in raiding or attacking.
And again, you have to qualify what the monastic chronicles tell you.
So there has been an effort to understand the Scandinavians within their own archaeological context as well as their own material culture that we can reconstruct.
Now some of these opinions have gone a bit too far in my opinion.
They've tended to downgrade the importance of the Scandinavian impact in medieval Europe.
And that is because you are stressing social and economic patterns, the more ordinary developments.
And you tend to put on the sidelines matters such as military and political, which by definition are always extraordinary.
And so one of our efforts in this course will be to balance those two perspectives to try to bring in what all the new archaeology tells us,
the new understanding of what life was like in Scandinavia in the Viking Age against the record of the Viking attacks,
taking into account that many of these are again from hostile sources.
But nonetheless, these attacks were of a major order and had a very, very significant impact throughout most of Western Europe, particularly in the 9th and 10th centuries.
And that is part of our task to balance that.
And that gets us to the organization of this course and what I plan to do.
Because of the nature of the sources and what I wish to achieve in this class, we're going to take a somewhat broader perspective than one might think of the age of the Vikings.
The first third of this class, we're going to look at three related subjects.
One is the importance of people, geography, and early culture in Scandinavia, going back into the Bronze Age,
particularly the period between 1550 and 1100 BC, very often known as the Northern Bronze Age,
where really many of the cultural foundations of later Viking Age Scandinavia are laid.
And what is extraordinary is to understand the continuity and the ancient quality of Scandinavian civilization at the time of the Viking Age.
It was by no means new, and these Scandinavian gods have been worshiped in one form or another for well over a thousand years before the Viking Age began.
Also in this first part, I want to stress very much the importance of the ancient Scandinavian religion as well as its heroic ethos.
This requires us to look at what the Scandinavians themselves thought about it.
We have in Scandinavia the best evidence for a pre-Christian religion anywhere in medieval Europe.
That is because of the extraordinary survival of manuscripts in Iceland.
Above all, two works I'll refer to repeatedly.
One, the Poetic Edda, which is a series of manuscripts that collects poems, which may go back to the 9th and 10th century.
It is disputed, and these are poems.
Some of them are nomic poems.
There's the wonderful Velospa, which is the poem of Ceres, a prophetess of Volva in Old Norse, who tells of the origins of the world and its destruction.
And these poems give us an insight into the heroes and gods of the pagan past.
And only in Iceland and Scandinavia have this type of information survived.
And it's because of the peculiar nature of the conversion of Scandinavia to Christianity, particularly the conversion of Iceland, which was by an act of parliament,
and was not accompanied by the kind of zealous destruction that you would get in other parts of medieval Europe.
The second important work is a work imposed by Snorri Sturlson, who lived between 1179 and 1242, an Icelandic chieftain of rather dubious reputation.
He gets assassinated in these really bizarre politics of the early 13th century, but he was a prolific writer, an incredibly witty author.
And he wrote a work called The Prose Edda, which comes in three parts.
And the first part in particular, which is really set as a conversation between a legendary king of Sweden and these three mysterious figures, records many of the myths that were apparently well known in Scandinavia.
Now, this literature, to be sure, at the end of the Viking Age, and just after the Viking Age, has to be qualified.
It's written by Scandinavians who were Christians. It's written in the Latin alphabet.
Nonetheless, it gives us a window into the gods and the religion of these people, and it corresponds extraordinarily well with what we're told in classical sources,
that is Greek sources, Roman sources of the Roman Empire, as well as what medieval sources tell us, and as well as what the archaeology tells us.
So we're in an exceptional position to look at the importance of these pagan cults and how they shaped the Scandinavians in the Viking Age.
And finally, the breakthroughs in shipbuilding and warfare are part of that Scandinavian background.
So that is what we will look at in the first third of this course.
The cultural background, the geography, landscape, the religion, and the achievements in shipbuilding and warfare that made the Viking Age possible.
Then the second third of this course, we're going to shift and look at the Viking impact on the wider medieval world.
And here we will really range quite widely, and if nothing else, the scope of Viking activities is nothing short of staggering.
Their impact on the Carolingian Empire, arguably really Western Christendom in the 9th century was essentially the Carolingian Empire, was extremely profound.
It would reveal the weaknesses of the Empire of Charlemagne, it would lead to the emergence of feudal states.
Most of the feudal states of Northern Europe, actually the states that went on crusade in the 11th and 12th century, can be traced back to lords who emerged during the Viking Age
who could fight off Viking attacks, consolidate their area where the monarchy had failed.
And so the Viking attacks really have a very important role in propelling the development of what we would call feudal Europe.
They also had a profound impact on England, we'll be spending two lectures there, especially the attacks of the Great Army from 865 to 878.
And the movements of that Viking army, which were primarily Danes, really force us to re-evaluate our notions about them being mindless barbarians who simply attack and plunder the scale of movements, the logistics,
their understanding of the political situation in England which they exploit very adroitly, they are able to play off the competing English kingdoms.
Within a matter of 15 years, they overthrow three English kingdoms and virtually bring King Alfred to his knees. It really is an extraordinary story in and of itself.
And so the Viking impact in England really does make the Kingdom of England possible. The settlement of Danes in England is on a very large scale, we'll be looking at that as well.
We'll also be examining their impact on Ireland and Russia, that is in the east and the west, the far ends of Viking activity.
And remarkably, those two experiences, one of Norwegians in Ireland and Swedes in Russia, are really quite comparable in many ways.
And we will see that the results will be quite different. In Ireland it does not lead to any political unity.
In Russia it leads to the creation of this Orthodox Kingdom around Kiev, which becomes the basis of the Russian state.
But in their initial stages, Norwegians and Swedes were essentially after the same thing. They were engaged in the slave trade, they were engaged in raiding,
they set up important ports, or in the case of Russia, fortified market towns on rivers to develop trade routes.
And so that both in Russia and Ireland, you'll see a very, very similar pattern in the way the Scandinavians operated overseas.
And finally, in this second, third of the course, we must look at perhaps the most daunting and impressive of all of the Viking achievements, and that is their tackling of the North Atlantic.
These are the first people who sail outside of the site of land.
And the discovery of the North Atlantic islands, the Shetlands, the Faroes, Iceland, Greenland, and ultimately their brief venture into Vinland really has fired everyone's imagination.
Most Americans, at least, immediately recognize the names Eric the Red, really responsible for what I always think the first land fraud in Western European history.
I mean, he settled Greenland by giving it the name Greenland, and why the Icelanders followed him.
Well, they were really desperate for free land, the ones that went along with them.
And his son, Leif the Lucky, who's credited with the finding Discovery of North America.
This is really an extraordinary venture.
In the overall scheme of things, Greenland was a pretty remote settlement, and the Scandinavians had a very vague notion of what Vinland is.
It's essentially Newfoundland. They didn't really understand they had found a new continent.
But the settlement of Iceland is a remarkable achievement.
Iceland, just below the Arctic Circle, is settled largely by Norwegians between 870 and 930.
And in Iceland, and to some extent you would have seen this in Greenland and Vinland also, is really the first European colonial settlement or the first frontier society that Europeans set up outside of the core of European civilization.
And Iceland is extremely well illuminated for us by its family sagas and its other documents.
And it is also important to us because Iceland is where most of this literature will survive.
And it is one of the great achievements of the Viking Age that Iceland was settled the way it was.
The last third of this course is then going to shift back to the Scandinavian homeland and try to assess what that experience in the second third of the course meant for the homeland.
And there we'll look at two very important themes.
And these themes will actually take us a bit beyond our usual date.
The Viking Age is usually thought to end around 1100.
And that will get us to look at the creation of the classic Scandinavian kingdoms.
At the start of the Viking Age, there was no Norway, Denmark or Sweden as we understand them today.
And in the course of these lectures, I will refer to these areas, but they must really be looked upon very tentatively as geographic regions.
For instance, Denmark in the Middle Ages is twice the size of the modern kingdom as today.
It included the entire peninsula of Jutland or Jutland, as we would say in its Anglicized version, all of the Danish islands.
And the southern provinces of Sweden, particularly Holland and Skåne, which are now part of Sweden, they've been part of Sweden since 1658.
But in the Viking Age would have been cut off by forests, so they were virtually islands and they're really attached to the Danish kingdom.
Norway was at least four or five distinct areas.
No one knew whether this would ever come together as a kingdom or not.
And in Sweden, you're dealing not only with the Swedes, the Sviar, that is the Swedes proper living around Lake Maleron, which is where Stockholm is today,
but also people known as the Gotar or Gietas in Old English, the Goths in what are now the Swedish provinces of Vastagotland and Östergötland.
And these were an independent Scandinavian people who had their own rulers through most of the Middle Ages.
And so you're looking at an extremely diversified and politically divided area.
By the end of the Viking Age, the kingdoms that we know as Norway, Denmark and Sweden have come into existence.
And they are a direct outcome of that Viking experience for two reasons.
One, the overseas ventures, especially in the 9th and 10th centuries, net an enormous amount of booty and wealth.
And it also led to the creation of ever more professional armies.
Warriors who were really must be accounted as among some of the best soldiers of the Middle Ages and increasingly better ships.
The classic longship or the great dragon ships are really from the late 10th and 11th centuries.
And with these types of fleets, with this wealth, with these professional warriors,
that is, Scandinavian monarchs who had made their reputations by raiding and battling overseas,
could use this military power to impose their control over areas and set up territorial kingdoms.
We see this first in Norway with King Harold Finehair, operating somewhere around 880 to 930,
who gives the first definition to Norway, and it's sea power that enables him to do this.
In fact, it's the only way he could ever run Norway is by the sea.
Less than a generation later, the same is achieved in Denmark with a figure by the name of Gorm the Old,
who creates a kingdom in Jutland, and eventually that comes to encompass the Danish kingdom of the Middle Ages, I just described.
It's later in Sweden. The Swedish kingdom is really almost a composite between those two groups, the Swedes and the Goths, or the Gotar.
But even by 1100, there clearly is going to be a Swedish kingdom.
It's a question of what family is going to rule and what of the two groups is going to have the major say in this.
But there is a capital, the kings have converted to Christianity and there will be a Swedish kingdom.
And that's an important point to stress, because today in Europe, among the various political structures that exist today,
with the exception of England, the three Scandinavian kingdoms can quite legitimately trace their descent back to the kings
and the institutions that were set up in the Viking Age.
And only England has that same claim that it has a continuous monarchy.
Well, you know, there's a slight interruption with Cromwell that goes back into the Middle Ages as well.
And that is an extraordinary achievement coming out of the Viking Age that these kingdoms were forged.
Now, the emergence of those territorial kingdoms go hand in hand with another important development,
an development that helps end the Viking Age, and that is the reception of Christianity.
And we will spend a fair amount of time on that issue.
It's not only the question of conversion that is Scandinavians embracing usually Christ as legitimate God,
but also the Christianizing of the society whereby slowly, and this takes 300 years,
it's in some ways not completed until the 12th century, until after the Viking Age,
but it sees the substitution of the ancient martial ethos that I'll be talking about in the first third,
the old heroes with the Christian vision, with the acceptance of the Christian doctrines of a transcendent God,
with the notions of heaven and hell, and the setting up of institutions of Christianity.
And I often make the distinction between conversion and institutional Christianity.
Institutional Christianity would be bishops, the churches, the whole structure of the medieval western church,
which those territorial kings, those sea kings, will impose.
And very often the imposition of Christianity is closely linked with successful Viking sea kings
who often convert to Christianity while serving overseas.
They come into contact with the great cathedrals, the monarchies of England and France,
and as any monarch, and especially any aspiring monarch,
loves to have bishops because bishops do neat things for you.
They give you coronations, you great, great ceremonies, you build neat churches,
and it makes you look like a big league power.
And many of these early Christian kings, King Canute of Denmark, Norway and England at one point,
Saint Olaf of Norway, later kings of Sweden such as Olaf and his son,
Arnold Jakob, all of them want the ceremony, the legitimacy, the high services associated with bishops
in a physical structure, and therefore their monarchies are often very closely
promoted at the same time that institutional Christianity is imposed,
setting up bishops' benefits and the like.
And so in the last third of the course, we're really looking at two themes.
One is the political transformation of Scandinavia into these kingdoms,
which is a direct result of the Viking Age,
and the second is the reception of Christianity and its adaptation,
its assimilation into Scandinavian civilization,
and that too is part of the Viking heritage.
Those first missionaries got to Scandinavia because of the trade routes and the attacks of the Viking Age,
starting very early in the ninth century.
One of the ways of halting Viking raids came to Louis the Pius,
probably one of the most original thoughts,
probably the only original thought Louis ever had,
which is try to convert the North men, make them fellow Christians, so they'll stop attacking us.
And this is carried out over the course of the ninth and tenth century with little success,
and we'll go into that, why it's difficult for the first missionaries to have any impact on the Scandinavians.
But once we get into the late tenth and early eleventh centuries,
where we have these powerful sea kings after 250 years of Viking activity,
they're able to give the backing to the bishops and the missionaries
to make Christianity not only a religion of victory,
but the religion of a monarchy and acceptable to the Scandinavian populations.
And that conversion to Christianity and that Christianizing society of Scandinavian society
is one of the reasons why the Viking Age eventually passes.
The Scandinavians are essentially brought into the wider European community.
And I'll close with a few thoughts on what that meant for Scandinavia.
Above all, for the early Christian kings coming after 1100,
what they did with that martial ethos is essentially reinvented as a crusading activity.
And the final two lectures will look at Scandinavia in the immediate aftermath of the Viking Age
and how these Christian kingdoms redefined themselves
and how particularly Denmark and Sweden attempted to direct their energies in crusading activities
in the Baltic regions, particularly the eastern and southern shores of the Baltic,
hoping to carve out larger Christian kingdoms.
In the case of both Scandinavian kingdoms, Sweden and Denmark,
in the long run it didn't succeed.
But it is an important way of measuring how civilization had changed
and really why the Viking Age eventually comes to pass.
And with that, we will close with this course.
