Lecture 6, The Norse Gods
In this lecture, I want to emphasize and develop the themes of the evolution of an independent
Scandinavian civilization starting the age of migrations and running into the Viking period.
And one of the great common bonds among the Scandinavians was their devotion to the ancient
Germanic gods.
They were not Christianized until really the end of the Viking age, and even into the
period after the Viking age, in the case of Sweden, many were still worshiping the
old gods, probably at the opening of the 12th century.
And the devotion to those ancient Germanic gods is understandable, as we'll see in this
talk.
We're going to stress the literary image of these gods that have come down to us from
Norse poetry and saga, but also there's an enormous amount of archaeological evidence
and classical sources that indicate that these divinities were worshiped for a very long
time in Scandinavia.
They were also very closely associated with the veneration of the ancestors, and in burial
practices, particularly well represented in ship burials.
These are either symbolic ship burials.
There are many instances where you have a model ship in the grave, or the stones are
arranged in a ship pattern to give you the impression of a ship, and the goods are put
into that grave site.
This is common not only in Scandinavia, but also in Scandinavian colonies in the Viking
age.
They've been excavated on the Isle of Man in the Shetlins and Orkney Islands.
And finally, the full classic ship burial, where the deceased is of great rank and is
usually put on that ship with various grave goods.
Usually one of the wives accompanies him a little reluctantly.
She's usually strangled and put on the ship with the warrior or the prince.
And we have descriptions of these types of ship burials, one from the poem of Beowulf,
where the legendary ancestor of the Danish kings known as Skjold in Old Norse is sent
out to sea on a ship burial, or the very spectacular one described on the Volga by an Arab observer
in 921, 922, when the ship is actually burned at the riverbank.
So the gods are associated with very, very important social customs conventions, veneration
of ancestors, perpetuation of family traditions, and the burial of the dead.
This adherence to those ancient gods is one of the hallmarks of defining Viking age Scandinavian
civilization, and one of the great distinctions between the Scandinavians and their Germanic
kinsmen in Western Europe, as well as other peoples with whom they come into contact.
What we know about this ancient Germanic religion, and as I've mentioned in previous lectures,
we know a great deal in comparison to other pagan cults in Europe prior to the conversion
of Christianity, depends a great deal on literary traditions.
These have come under considerable question in recent years.
How much can we trust literary accounts written largely in Iceland?
Most of our manuscripts surviving from the 13th and 14th century, really the application
of writing may be dating to the 11th or 12th century in many instances, so the manuscripts
are even later versions of earlier recording of these legends.
Nonetheless, if we throw the literature out, we're really pretty much in the dark in understanding
our archaeological evidence, and the literary sources, granted they are stereotyped, they
are sometimes misunderstanding earlier practices, nonetheless do very much illuminate and work
in tandem with the other sources.
And with that proviso, I do believe that the poems, which survive in the so-called poetic
edda, that is a collection of poems made in Iceland, and some of these poems going back
to originals of the 9th and 10th century based on oral poetic traditions, as well as the
prose narratives that have come down to us foremost, the prose handbook, known as the
prose edda, written by Snorri Struelsen around 1220 AD, these two literary works in particular
are main sources for the vision of the gods, the myths of the Norse gods, who really come
out as marvelously witty, creative figures, often foils to human figures, and undoubtedly
reflect traditions and notions about the gods going back into the Viking Age and before.
And using this literature, especially in tandem with archaeological and art historical material,
and a lot of reports that come to us from Roman authors and later Christian authors,
give us some kind of picture of what Scandinavian paganism was, and particularly the values
of that paganism, its importance in motivating society, and particularly its close links
to the heroic ethos associated especially with the cult of Odin, the supreme god and
the god of war in the Norse tradition, which is fundamental to understanding the Viking
Age, and therefore I think it's very important to spend some time on these poems and this
conception of the gods as it comes down to us, because otherwise the Viking Age is extremely
difficult to understand on its own terms.
The prose edda in particular is a marvelous work. It is clearly one of the great literary
masterpieces produced in the aftermath of the Viking Age, and Snorri wrote that poem,
that handbook, it's not a poem, it's in prose, in three parts, and it really is a way of
instructing aspiring Icelandic poets how to use ancient Norse mythology and poetic techniques
in order to get patronage at one of the courts of either the king of Denmark or the king
of Norway, where the old poems were recited, and if you couldn't get the royal court well
then you would head for a yarl, that is an earl, a prominent man who was interested in
being celebrated in the old tradition.
The other important point about Snorri's work is that Snorri very, very cleverly recasts
the Norse gods as heroes of old, who came to be viewed as gods by later generations.
This was a very important literary conceit that Snorri puts in his preface, because
many Christian authors saw the gods as demons, as ancient powers, a part of the army of Satan.
And in Anglo-Saxon England, in Frankish Gaul, among the freezians of the low countries,
in Saxony and West Germany, almost nothing of those dramatic gods survives except very,
very brief references, because the old gods were rooted out as demons, they were cast
down, they were destroyed. Their names survived, for instance, in the days of the week. In
English this would be Tuesday, Tyr, Wednesday, Woden, the equivalent of Odin. They would
survive in certain place names, and a couple of other instances, but on the whole the old
dramatic religion was to simply erased and Christianity was brought in. This was not
the case in Scandinavia, particularly in Iceland, and Snorri's account therefore allows
us to see the gods in operation as literary figures.
Snorri actually poses most of the mythological material in the form of a dialogue between
a disguised king of Sweden talking to three mysterious figures. He goes by the assumed
name of ganglery, which means the wanderer, and he's being instructed the Swedish king
about the lore of old. And in that account comes a coherent view of the cosmology, the
old order, as apparently the Scandinavians conceived of it in the Viking age, and this
prose account of Snorri is based very closely on one of the oldest poems, and the first
poem in the poetic era, the so-called Velospa, which is cited by a prophetess, Avolva, who
has gone into some type of trance in really a very, very archaic form of Icelandic, in
a very powerful, alliterative verse, where she talks of the creation of the world, the
progress of the gods, the great halls, and ultimately the day of destruction, Ragnarök,
the day when the gods will fight the giants and the forces of chaos will triumph, and
the sun will sink into the sea and the land will fall away, but there is also a vision
of a rebirth, apparently under the god of Baldar, which is alluded to at the end of the poem.
So Snorri is drawing on this poetic tradition, and this poetic tradition is a very, very
early oral verse going back deep into the Viking age.
So what I wish to do is to give you some sense of what this worldview was and how it corresponded
to the Norse's own physical world, and then to discuss some of the key divinities who
are so important for the Norse society of the Viking age.
In the Velospos, she sings of the beginning of creation, which is conceived as a primeval
frozen land, which is obvious to Scandinavians living in the homeland that they do.
There a great primeval giant, Ymer Dwell, and he was, we have no information of who
is origin, it's simply a poetic depiction.
He lived in this great icebound cabin, a chasm, this gap.
He was fed by a great primeval cow, and that cow, by licking the ice blocks, eventually
uncovered an imprisoned god, Burri, who in turn had offspring, and three offspring of
that original god Odin, along with Vili and Ve, his brothers, slay the giant Ymer, and
use the body to create the world.
And the world that is created is conceived as essentially a huge sacred tree, Yggdrasil,
which has various worlds in its branches.
Now, this sort of conception really corresponds very well with the reality of Scandinavia
in the Viking age, divided up among the various forests.
And furthermore, the distance between these worlds, particularly Midgarth, the middle
world, where the mortals dwell, and Asgarth, the world of the gods, or Elfheim, the world
of the elves, these are great distances that have to be traveled.
And in the poems, and in the myths, and the accounts that come through Snorri, there's
always this great travel, this deception, there's dangers.
You go through forests and over great mountains.
The god Thor is always being deceived.
And so this concept of the world is very much in line with what the Scandinavians own physical
reality was all about.
The gods create humanity.
They breathe life into these formless creatures, Ask and Embla, who are representing actually
primeval trees, Odin gives them life and being.
Another aspect about this cosmology is that there are different halls where the deceased
go.
The greatest go to the Hall of Odin, Vahala, as we call it in English, or Vahal, in its
proper Norse nominative form.
And those are the great heroes who have fallen in combat.
But other halls are available to you, and your station in the afterlife was very much
dependent on your own activities in life.
Women who die in childbearing, that's a noble death.
They go to the Hall of Frig, who is the wife of Odin.
Those who die of old age and sickness are seen as despised.
They go down to Nifflheim, that is the lower levels, presided over by Hel, the daughter
of the trickster god Loki, where the English word Hel comes from.
And while that is a rather grim and gloomy area, it's not necessarily associated with
the punishment of a Christian Hel.
And in a very odd way, but very significant way, one's social rank and one's deeds in
life actually dictate it, the type of hall you went to in the afterlife.
And the tree was obviously the sacred symbol in which all these worlds were encased.
And that sacred tree is usually the centerpiece of many dramatic rituals and worship.
Most great halls, we're told this in the legends, are built around a sacred tree.
Dramatic people is usually associated in oak tree.
It's some version of Yggdrasil of Norse mythology.
When Charlemagne conquers the Saxons in the 8th century who are worshiping the dramatic
gods, the first thing he has to do is run around and chop down sacred trees because
that's where the Saxon pagans go to worship.
The tree is constantly under attack by dragons and serpents.
It's constantly renewing itself.
It has three great roots with the Norns, past, future and present, who represent destiny,
reside.
There's a great wisdom well where the god Odin goes and gives up an eye in order to have
a drink in order to get inspiration.
And so this world tree is the central focus of many of the early legends and myths associated
with Odin in finding knowledge.
Odin actually hangs himself on the world tree nine days as he says in the Havomal, a sacrifice,
a gift unto myself in order to release the power of the runes.
And this gets us to the final days of that cosmology.
That is, the Norse never quite seemed to conceive that it was possible to have an eternal order
given their conditions.
And at some point, as Odin often says in poetry and myth, the wolf is watching the hall.
At some point, the forces of chaos, the great giants, the wolf of Frenair, the Fenrir, the
offspring of Loki, who will devour Odin in the final battle, they will be released and
there will be a great destruction often known as Ragnorok.
And that too is recorded in the Velospa, not only the creation, but the ultimate destiny,
the destruction of the world.
And Odin's task is to populate Vahala with great warriors for the final battle.
Now, the gods that the Norse conceived, these ancient dramatic gods, as I said, probably
date from the Bronze Age.
They were articulated increasingly in the Celtic and Roman periods.
And as they come down to us in the Viking Age, they are a very, very different set of divine
forces than any Christian would recognize.
To be sure, Christian warriors had a very powerful ethos.
And most Christian knights, well into the Crusades, were very, very good on worshiping
Christ and weak on the Ten Commandments.
And they loved the Old Testament with the god of hosts.
But nonetheless, this Christian perception of the vine was really quite a contrast from
that of their Germanic ancestors.
The supreme god was Odin, known as Votan in German or Woden in English.
He had become the premier god by the time of the Viking Age.
In Germanic tradition, before the Viking Age, he probably wasn't all that important.
But in the Viking Age and in the Icelandic Sagan poetry, he's the lord of warriors,
of poets.
He's associated with ecstasy in all of its aspects.
He is the god who inspires warriors, the great berserkers into battle.
And yet, he is the god who inspires poetry.
And that might seem a little odd to us.
But to the Scandinavian, that was perfectly logical.
Because poetry was essentially celebrating great deeds.
It was an ecstatic state, just as battle was.
The great frenzies that led berserkers into battle was the sort of inspiration that gave
a poet the ability to record those great deeds to act as examples to future generations.
And so these two powers were closely associated with Odin.
And one invoked Odin if only one had aspirations of being a great hero.
He was a god driven in order to obtain wisdom in all of its aspects.
The power of the runes.
And the runes are an alphabet, probably going back to about 200 BC, devised on North Italic
scripts that came in as one of the benefits of trade in the Celtic Age.
And those runes were essentially letters used to show possession of weapons or jewelry.
They had powers of magic.
One carved runes on weapons so that the weapon would work well to cast spells against the
enemy.
And again, this was associated with the power of Odin.
The casting of runes was a powerful form of prophecy and magic which gave you victory
in battle and a way of communicating with the gods rather than an alphabetic script
for recording mundane documents as we would imagine.
Odin is remembered in the midst as handing out swords and horses to his warriors.
Sigurd in the Valsong Saga is one of his greatest heroes.
And then the heroes that follow in the 6th and 7th century in the Scandinavian tradition,
Rolf Krocke particularly, the great king of Denmark who held a hall at Lidar built around
a sacred tree, probably close to the modern town of Groskilde today, the old Danish capital.
He too was a great warrior, remembered for being devoted to Odin.
And one does not invoke Odin and take service with Odin lightly.
Odin is a whimsical god, a god who could be summoned up with great power, but also a
god in the end who is extremely jealous of his followers and is going to collect them
at the appropriate time so they could populate the great Hall of Valhalla for the final battle.
In the case of Rolf Krocke, the great Danish king of whom I'll speak of later, the legendary
king who has his ride to Uppsala and takes on a challenge with his Swedish rival, Adil's,
in a great contest of heroes, on his return.
He's greeted by this farmer by the name of Rani who offers him hospitality.
And Rani is a man with a hood over his head and he has one eye.
Remember Odin gave up an eye in order to drink at the wisdom well and he greets Rolf Krocke
in the virtues of his victory over the king of the Swedes and Rolf Krocke is quite impressed
with all his heroes and Odin says, and I give you some weapons to take with you.
He says, oh, farmer, no, not necessary.
We'll go on.
We don't need you.
And he rides on and then realizes those weapons had been offered not by a farmer, but Odin,
in the disguise of a farmer, he had offended the great god and his doom is upon him.
We do not turn down gifts of the great god Odin, those in noble, the giver, even more
than the person receiving.
So Odin is without a tout the god of the Viking Age, the god of poets, of warriors, of sea
kings who would launch out on those great raids and this god of Odin is already being
celebrated in verse in the age of migrations in the generations before the Viking Age.
In fact, one of the best descriptions of him is by Adam of Bremen, who is writing in
around 1070 AD and he says, Odin is fury, fury in all of its aspects, writing in Latin.
There were other powerful gods of the Viking Age, extremely important in reflecting the
conditions of that age, foremost and best known to us is Thor.
Thor is regarded in mythology as the son of Odin, a powerful red haired, barrel-chested,
a good-natured god, quick to arouse, to wrath, but just as easy to appease, who rides across
the skies in his goat chariot, hurling his primitive hammer as his prime weapon, Mjolnar,
which he throws and returns to his hand every time.
And Thor in some ways is something of a parody of Odin.
There are numerous myths told about him, most of them quite good-natured and really
reflects the very marvelous, witty side of Scandinavian storytelling.
The stories of Thor, both in the poetic Eda and in Snorri's handbook, are eternal.
They're just marvelous accounts to read and have ensured the memory of that god long after
he's, the worship has disappeared.
His exploits are famous.
He is battling the various giants that threaten order and will bring on chaos.
And these giants are always trying to carry off Oscard or make off with one of the goddesses
like Freya or Sif or Ethun, one of them.
And Thor is always there for the rescue.
Thor is a good guy.
He sometimes always doesn't quite get it right, you know, and half the time he gets frustrated
because it gets too complicated and he takes out his hammer and starts clobbering giants.
But he's certainly a god who was invoked by most Scandinavians.
He's associated with the skies and especially in sailing conditions.
Helgi the lean, who's one of the early settlers of Iceland and had acquired some Christianity
probably in Ireland or Scotland before he arrived and was sort of a Christian.
He said, on land, I worship Christ.
When I'm out to sea, I worship Thor.
He's the only one who makes sure that the weather is good for me.
Thor was also matched up with one of the most delightful mythological figures from all religions,
the god Loki, who is the trickster god and really represents the Scandinavian delight
in cleverness and deceit.
Loki is sometimes, I think, Odin in reverse.
He's constantly duplicitous.
He's coming up with all sorts of schemes.
He usually gets caught in his own schemes.
And many times he accompanies Thor in mythology on various travels and acts as the the clever
foil to Thor.
The most famous is the travel to the legendary realm of Utgard Loki, where everything is illusion
and Thor is trying to carry out great tests of strength, but he's being deceived by the
giant there.
Thor himself was, by most Scandinavians, invoked as the primary god against the Christian god
later on.
There's a famous story told of an old Icelandic lady who said to a Christian missionary,
Thor has challenged Christ to a duel.
He hasn't shown up yet.
This is typical in mythology.
Thor is always fighting giants.
And the Christian missionary said, well, Christ has just been very polite about this because
if he showed up, Thor would simply be incinerated.
That didn't probably convince the Icelandic lady, well, no show means you lose in Icelandic
law.
It sort of reflects the attitudes of both sides.
Thor is associated with his attempts to destroy the Midgarth serpent, the great serpent that
encircles the world.
And again, these myths, just as the myths of Ragnarok where Odin is being swallowed
by the wolf, Thor fishing for the Midgarth serpent, the great dragon that encompasses
the earth, these are depicted in artwork, both in Scandinavia as well as artwork in
the British Isles, often in contexts where you have both Norse and Christian traditions.
They are not just stories of myth.
They were powerful stories used to educate and explain the gods.
They are not the same as necessarily worship.
Worship of the gods is far more than just the myths.
But nonetheless, these myths are current with the Viking age and the age of migrations.
And finally, the important divinities of the Vanir.
This is Njord and his son and daughter, Freya and Freya, which simply mean Lord and Lady,
these were important fertility gods who are associated also not only with prosperity but
veneration of the ancestors.
The early kings of Sweden, the Ynglingar kings, who took the name Yng or Yng in Old English,
is one of the titles of Freya and we think those early Swedish kings at Uppsala were
seen as human avatars of the ancient gods.
What is remarkable about the ancient gods of Scandinavia is that in comparison to other
pagan cults, perhaps through the whole Viking age, this is still under debate, they do not
have the kind of institutional organization we would associate with Greco-Roman paganism
or with Christianity.
There are very few temples that have been excavated.
There are reports of such temples, one at Uppsala by Adam of Bremen.
And now excavations in Iceland have revealed what we think were small temples attached
to farmsteads.
There are at least several examples of that.
Most rites seem to have been held in the open air.
The great halls of kings and princes functioned as essentially religious centers, particularly
in the spring festivals where before the sailing season, the campaigning season, great boasts
were made and toasts and the handing out of gifts, these would be associated with Odin
but also rites to the Vanar.
There is no priestly caste that we can discern in the Scandinavian traditions.
There are cirruses, that is a vulva, a woman who is dedicated to Odin and Freyja, the goddess
of the Vanar, who are able to communicate with the other world, they can cast the runes.
But there is not the kind of centralized hierarchy.
There are individual cults, there are numerous divinities that all Scandinavians worship.
There is a great deal of personal choice, what divinities you choose to worship.
But nonetheless, the kind of institutionalized religion that would be associated with medieval
Christianity, it just isn't there and there isn't even anything close to so-called druid
caste apparently in the early Celtic religion.
Nonetheless, in the face-to-face society of Scandinavia, these gods were well known.
The stories of the myths and the legends, and you have to remember, large amount of the
year was spent indoors during the winter in the autumn.
And the retelling of these myths meant that everyone knew who the gods were.
That the morality and the religious rites were very well understood by everyone.
It was very much a communal and family religion.
It was particularly very well associated with the veneration of the ancestors.
The funerary rites to which I alluded to for the great ones, that is the noblest members
of society, approached the funerary rites that would be expected of the great heroes
of God Odin himself, the great ship burials, or the piling up of great war gifts.
This would be associated with people of rank.
But even in the lower levels of society, there is good deal of information that returning
to the barrows, the sites where your ancestors were, celebrating with the festival in memory
of the ancestors, even if not individually, at least collectively, was an important obligation
of all Scandinavians.
And that the ancestors, as far as we can tell from Icelandic literature, they didn't go
so much into a spiritual afterlife.
If you didn't propitiate them, they actually physically came up and walked the world and
did nasty things.
And there's all sorts of ways of getting rid of these types of guys in Iceland, especially
wizard types.
And the Hebrides, they're a real problem in Iceland.
They never die quietly, and if they come up and walk the earth, you have to get the body
and burn it.
And there's various ways to take precautions if they haven't been properly propitiated.
And so, appeasing those ancestors is a very important obligation, and it's associated
with the burial and funeral rites, and associated with the worship of the ancient gods.
And these gods had been worshiped in these sites, in these locales, for centuries.
And on the eve of the Viking Age, they are one of the key cultural and spiritual values
that tie all the Scandinavians together and make them distinct for the rest of the world.
And perhaps one of the best ways to understand the power of these cults is a, it's not actually
a Scandinavian example, it comes from a Frisian chieftain.
And the Frisians, as I mentioned, were the people dwelling on the shores of Holland, who
were dramatic people in close association with Scandinavia, they were merchants, and
remained devoted to the ancient gods well into the 8th century.
And one of the English saints who showed up and tried to convert the Frisians and explained
to him the value of baptism, almost had this Frisian chieftain, it's about 700 AD, is when
the incident takes place, on the verge of baptizing, and he asked the question, well
if I accept this new powerful god, Christ, what happens to my ancestors?
And this is where the saint blew it, and he said, this is Saint Willebrode of Anglo-Saxon
England, and he said, well, you know, your ancestors were not Christians, so they're
dwelling in hell.
And the chieftain looked at him and said, no, I prefer to spend eternity with my ancestors.
And if that doesn't capture the power and value of those ancient cults of the dramatic
tradition, no other incident is better in my mind.
