In this talk, I wish to deal with an important activity of the Viking Age, and that is the
importance of trade, especially seaborn trade, commerce, conducted by Scandinavians,
but also by other peoples, from the 8th through the early, well, middle of the 12th century
even.
And this is an important point to keep in mind that the Vikings, the Scandinavians of the
Viking Age, to be more accurate, were just as much engaged in trade as they were in raiding,
attacking, as well as settling overseas.
And the advantages in shipbuilding, so important for their success in war, were also the advantages
that translated into their success in commerce.
And it's too often forgotten that many a Scandinavian was far more a merchant in his career than
he was a Viking, although there are many individuals who combined both activities, and there are
individuals who actually switched their activities in the course of their voyages, that sometimes
they might raid, and other times they might trade, depending on circumstance.
Nonetheless, the direction of trade, the volume of trade, the types of goods that were exchanged,
all of this changes significantly in the Viking Age.
And many economic historians actually speak of the Vikings as developing what is known
as the Northern Trade Ark, which eventually comes to extend from Dublin in Ireland, and
Dublin is essentially a Viking settlement for the period we're discussing, and terminates
at the city of Ottil, which is the capital of the Cossack Cognate, at the mouth of the
Volga, where the Volga River flows into the Caspian Sea, or to the shores of the Black
Sea that lead the so-called Rus, that is the Swedes operating in Russia, to the city of
Constantinople, today Istanbul.
So that you have this wide trade arc cutting right across Scandinavia, in which all sorts
of slaves and goods are exchanged, and the Scandinavians become the primary merchants
involved in the carrion trade as well in supplying markets with various goods.
Well, that important feature of the Viking Age, which is easily lost in the annals of
campaigns and attacks and raids, really must be stressed, because it is a very, very important
aspect.
It's actually probably almost as important as the raids.
There certainly could be argued that trade might have transformed Scandinavian society
in some ways more than the raids and overseas settlement did, but in any case, it's important
to look at the role of trade in the whole of the Viking Age.
So in this lecture, I plan to look at two aspects of the problem.
One is the forces that were driving trade and commerce in the medieval world in the period
we're studying, roughly from say 700 to 1100, even almost up to 1200 in some cases.
And then the second part of this lecture is to concentrate on the role of Scandinavians
in directing this trade, in amplifying it, and extending the range of different types
of goods and transactions.
And that's a pretty impressive order, because we'll see the Scandinavians really play an
extremely important role in many parts of the medieval world in expanding and even developing
trade routes.
Well, first, the Viking raids would not have occurred if there hadn't been prosperity.
You don't really attack neighbors who don't have much in the way of plunder.
And when the Vikings began to attack Western Europe in 790, they hit a series of well-established
trade routes, as well as kingdoms in England and the Great Carolingian Empire that was
constructed by Charlemagne, who ruled from 768 to 814, who creates essentially the political
order, the basis of the political order of medieval Europe.
These areas had been under economic recovery for well over a century.
In fact, some historians like to speak of what is a period known as the long eighth
century, extending from essentially 675, 675 to about 840 AD.
In this long period of 150 or 175 years, however you want to cut up the period, let's see significant
developments in Western Europe in trade and commerce, the development of towns, monasteries
as major economic centers that marks a great level, a great leap up from where the European
economy had been at the time of the collapse of the Roman Empire in the fifth century AD.
And there were several important forces that were driving this economic development and
prosperity.
One was that by the middle of the seventh century, say about 650 AD, there was a certain amount
of political order that was being imposed in Western Europe.
That is, the Anglo-Saxon kingdoms simplified into the four great kingdoms of Vikings attack,
Northumbria, Mercia, East Anglia, well that's more of a courtesy from East Anglia and Wessex.
We also saw the unification of Western Europe under the Frankish kings, first the Merovingians
and then starting in 751, 754, the Carolingian family that took over, the family of Charlemyne.
And the imposition of that political order is extremely important.
That allowed for commerce to proceed, it gave you the stability and the predictability that
is necessary for all types of economic transactions to take place.
There were also important currency reforms issued by Charlemyne and Charlemyne's dad,
Pepin the short, which introduced a new type of silver coin, the so-called hammered denier.
That type of coin was adopted in England and so in at least Christian Europe, there was
pretty much a standard currency that was used in sophisticated transactions in towns and
cities.
That type of political stability, that return of some kind of ordered law, was important
for the expansion of trade routes in this so-called long 8th century.
And in this period, the Frisians excelled.
They had always played an important intermediary role between Western Europe and Scandinavia
in the late Roman age and in the age of migrations and starting from 675 AD on, the Frisians really
emerged as the major merchants in the North Sea and beyond.
They had their own shipbuilding tradition and they did not make the sort of breakthrough
the Scandinavians did.
They were content to depend on what are known as hulks and cogs and these are large cargo
vessels, not warships, capable of moving large amounts of goods and people.
The hulk was essentially a coastal vessel.
The cog was a vessel that really operated more on river systems.
Nonetheless, the Frisians had the type of ships necessary to move bulk goods, especially
from Scandinavia, timber, slaves, furs, arctic products that would be obtained into Western
Europe and vice versa to bring the ceramics, the wine, weapons, especially iron swords,
steel swords from the Carolingian world into Scandinavia.
And this trade was in progress at least 100 years before the Viking age.
And so when the Vikings attacked Western Europe, they were following very well-known trade
routes that had been already pioneered by the Frisians.
In Frisia emerged a major market town called Duristat and Duristat was the most important
market town in Northern Europe.
It stands at the base of the Rhine river system.
It's on one of its tributaries and therefore it's linked to Cologne, which is the largest
city north of the Alps in the Middle Ages up until, really up until the 12th century,
from Cologne across the Alps to Venice, which is the prime port for the export of Mediterranean
goods.
And the Carolingian Empire really led to the re-establishment of trade routes in Western
Europe to the Mediterranean ports where various goods were exported out to the Byzantine
world, that is, the Byzantine Empire, the Eastern Roman Empire in Asia Minor and Greece,
or to the Islamic world, which was in Spain, North Africa, and today the Middle East.
These were the great cities of the Middle Ages, these were the great markets, and what
the Carolingian Empire did, compliments of the Frisians, is link the Northern lands to
the Carolingian Empire, the goods were taken over the river systems of Europe to the port
towns in the Mediterranean where the products were exported south and east.
And this trade network is extremely important and Duristat was at the center of all this
Northern trade.
Duristat also had important trading partners.
One was called Quintavik, which is essentially the predecessor of the modern city of Boulogne,
and a port in England, which is known in Anglo-Saxon as Hamwick, the future city of Southampton.
And so England, Scandinavia, Northern Europe was now linked into this trade route.
In Scandinavia, the trade routes helped stimulate the development of market towns already in
the 8th century on the eve of the Viking Age.
One of them is at Hedibi, which is today just across the, it's on the southern side of the
Schleifjord, which Schleif or Schleswig is the modern German city.
So Hedibi is actually the predecessor of Schleswig.
It's a Danish town, and it's where most of the trade goods I've mentioned before come
from Western Europe.
They cross the Danish peninsula, they go to Hedibi, and they're exported out to the Baltic,
particularly to Birka and Sweden, or even to ports up in Norway.
So the Friesian merchants actually stimulated the first steps to developing these market
towns in two generations before the Viking Age, and therefore sailing along these areas
and transporting goods had become quite routine.
Now the revival of long-distance trade routes was really very important to the success of
the early medieval economy, and economic historians in the Middle Ages are deeply divided over
whether the European economy in general, including Scandinavia, in the time of the
Viking Age was underdeveloped, is one term that's often used, that it was essentially
nothing more than a souped-up subsistence economy, and trade, particularly long-distance
trade, played a rather minor role for a society that was essentially a subsistence society.
And that is a minimalist view that's taken often in ancient and economic economies, and
I must be quite frank.
I tend to error on the other side.
I believe that these economies are more sophisticated than just subsistence, and that trade and
commerce played an extremely important role in medieval life.
Not only for the Carolingian kings, but also for the Vikings, or the Scandinavians of the
Viking Age, trade, at one important point, generated lots of income and hard cash in
the terms of tolls and taxes you could levy on trade, and that would be collected in silver
and hard money, and that was always appreciated by any monarch, Carolingian king or Scandinavian
sea king, as opposed to taking rents and commodities and agricultural products or labor services.
So in my estimation, this long-distance trade is extremely important in the revival of prosperity
in the Carolingian empire, the ability of Charlemagne and its successors to tax or to
collect money from their subjects, and so sustain royal institutions.
Well, what's driving this trade, and really ultimately driving this economic development,
is a point that might seem a bit odd to us at first, and it's the cities of the Islamic
world.
It is important to keep in mind that not only Scandinavia, but Christian Western Europe,
were economically quite undeveloped in comparison to the lands of the Mediterranean world, that
is the old heartland of the Roman Empire, the southern and eastern portions of which
were now part of the Islamic Empire, the empire that had been conquered by the successors
of Muhammad, and at the start of the Viking Age, an empire that was ruled by the caliphs
of Baghdad, the so-called Abbasid caliphs, who had established the great city of Baghdad
as the capital of Islam.
Well, the cities of the Islamic world, and these were true cities.
These are cities.
Baghdad is a city that gets up to a million strong.
The cities of the Islamic world, Baghdad, the great cities, the caravan centers of Iran,
the cities of Central Asia, Damascus and Syria, Cairo that emerges in this period in Egypt,
Tunis, and Cordova in Spain, the seat of an independent Islamic dynasty there.
They had an enormous appetite for labor, consumables, raw materials, and this was fed by the European
markets.
And the generation just before the Viking Age, say about 750 to 800, the prime commodity
being exported from Western Europe were slaves.
Many of them obtained from the peoples of Central Europe who spoke various Slavic languages.
And these were Slavic tribes that had moved into Central Europe starting in the 7th century
who spoke related dialects that doesn't imply they had any sort of cultural or political
unity, but they had a series of related dialects, and they moved in the lands between essentially
the Privet Marshes today in Russia and the Elba, which used to be essentially the boundary
line between East and West Germany and becomes, in effect, the boundary line of the Carolingian
Empire, Charlemagne.
These numerous tribes that moved in there and spoke languages quite distinct from the
Germanic tribes who had migrated into the Roman Empire, they became the prime targets
for slave raiding, for two reasons.
One is that the bishop said it wasn't a good idea to enslave Christians, and that kind
of cut down on slaving, you know, enslaving your fellow English and Frankish neighbors.
But second is that as agriculture develops in both England and the Frankish Empire, you
shift over to turning your laborers into serfs, and serfs, while they are tied to the land,
have all sorts of rights, and no landlord wants to sell his serfs off.
He needs the labor services.
So for both economic and religious reasons, the slave market in Western Europe was drying
up.
You didn't have large numbers of captives.
And so what happened is you had extensive raiding in Eastern and Central Europe, and
those slaves were then shipped to Venice and other ports and exported to the Islamic world.
And it's a significant point.
By 800, the word slave, or esclave, say in French, or slavus in medieval Latin, is essentially
the word slav being used to designate a captive who's destined for the slave markets, and
that means the Islamic world.
Now there's been some very, very clever study done by Michael McCormick recently on this,
a really monumental work on the early European economy, and the best guess is that slaves
yield the highest return on any product exported either from Scandinavia or Western Europe
to the Islamic world.
They were the commodity most in demand.
And this meant demand for laborers on plantations, the usual girls that populate the harems,
slaves that are enrolled into the slave units of the Islamic world.
There is an appetite for labor to sustain these huge cities of the Islamic world for
two reasons.
One is cities consume people.
The disease rate, the destruction in cities, you always need to replenish population.
And second, the Islamic world and the Carolingian Empire were recovering from a demographic
collapse that had started in the mid-sixth century when a plague had swept across Europe
in the Middle East, which was probably on the same order of the Black Death in the 14th
century, and had major economic and demographic consequences.
So as a result, when the Vikings launched out on their raids, they found in place well-established
trade routes.
Slave markets in the Islamic world, in Spain, in Baghdad, the Middle East, they encountered
a network of trade routes in Western Europe that were moving bulk goods of the Arctic
and the timber products of the forest to the Mediterranean world and to point south.
Most of this trade was in the hands of the Frisians.
As a result of the Viking raids, as a result of the superior Scandinavian ships, by 840
the Scandinavians captured the Caryan trade and developed that northern arc of which I
spoke at the start of this lecture.
And starting from about 840, the Scandinavians take over many of the trading activities
going on in northern Europe, and all those trading activities eventually going to lead
to markets in the Islamic or Byzantine world, and here is where they developed this so-called
northern trade arc.
And there's several reasons why the Scandinavians succeeded in this regard.
One is those ships, the Canare, the cargo ships.
They have built ocean-going cargo vessels that could move products in a way that none
of those Frisian vessels could.
Second, Scandinavian ships, both warships and cargo ships, can move up rivers and can
be carried from portage to portage in a fashion that no other vessel could do.
And that gave the Swedes, particularly the advantage, to develop the river routes of
Russia.
And we'll discuss several lectures about the long-term implications of that.
But in economic terms, starting from 750, the Swedes move into trading posts in Russia,
and the most important one is at Holmgaard, that is the future Nuffkarad, and they develop
two trade routes eventually, one down the Volga to the Caspian Sea, and the other through
various river systems that pick up the Nieper, which flows into the Black Sea, and these
trade routes become major trade routes in the Middle Ages.
This is a Scandinavian contribution to it and the biggest commodity of slaves.
The Scandinavians are rating the Slavic populations of Eastern Europe and selling them to the
Islamic world.
And this results in the development of a number of fortified market towns, which become the
future Russian cities.
It results in very, very sophisticated trading arrangements with the Turkmen Khans, who have
consolidated kingdoms on the Middle and lower Volga, and who are the middlemen between Northern
Europe and the Islamic world.
And the Swedes become very, very accustomed to going down the Volga and trading with the
so-called Bulgars, these are a Turkish-speaking tribe, and the Khazars, another Turkmen tribe
or Turkish-speaking tribe, who have cities that are connected across the Caspian Sea
to the great centers of Baghdad and of Iran, such as Hamadan.
And so what happens is the Scandinavians bring in large numbers of slaves captured from the
Slavic population, furs, timber, Frankish swords.
There are at least two independent Arab reports that indicate the Muslims are really impressed
by Frankish weapons, and the Scandinavians have them, they're buying them, they're being
shipped to Baghdad.
And in return, the Swedes are acquiring enormous amount of silver.
A lot of this is in the form of Muslim coins issued in Baghdad and Iran.
They're known as Adiram, these are very heavyweight coins, originally struck at a theoretical
weight of 2.97 grams, and they are these flat, hammered silver coins with Islamic script.
There are at least 80,000 of them that have been found in hordes and grave deposits in
Sweden, primarily around Lake Maloran and in Gotland.
There are also thousands of them found on the Volga trade routes leading from the Caspian
Sea, and the volume of silver that moved up to Sweden is really quite extraordinary.
And in addition, there are fragments of silk, which seems to be one of the most important
commodity.
Silk production is one of the big features of Baghdad and Iran, starting in the 8th century,
and some of these silk seem to be from Central Asia or the Islamic world.
We have fragments from Berka, fragments from Hedibi, one of the market towns in Denmark.
This is another commodity that's moving north.
Various furnished goods, aromatic spices are all moving into Scandinavia to enrich their
lives, including scales, so that apparently Scandinavians are used to weighing coins and
using coins as coins rather than just as bullion or jewelry.
And one of the most remarkable objects comes from the town of Helga, which was found in
excavation, and that is this statue of a Buddha from the Gandaharan period, I think, or like
the 1st or 2nd century AD.
And I just have a vision that a Swedish merchant on the Volga was negotiating with one of the
Turks and said, you know, here's my Slavic slaves and here's the furs, what am I going
to get?
And he said, well, I'm a little short.
But wouldn't you like a statue from, you know, what is it?
I don't know, it's a novelty.
And it appears in Helga, it's one of these curious trade goods that shows up in the type
of exchange and the volume of exchange that's going on on the eastern trade route.
The Scandinavians also pioneer a Western extension of that arc, and that terminates
at the cities of York and England and Dublin and Ireland, both of which are essentially
Scandinavian trading towns through this whole period.
And Dublin in particular becomes the most important market for the export of slaves
from Western Europe.
These would be Irish captives, English captives, Frankish captives, people taken in Viking
raids, and in the case of the Irish, it's usually the Irish are enslaving each other
and selling them to the Vikings, and the Vikings are arming the Irish with better weapons to
incite them to do this, and this slave trade is essentially destined to Muslim Spain.
And by one estimate, somewhere between 50% and 2 thirds of the slaves arriving into the
Islamic world for a period of 250 years is by Scandinavian merchants and carrying trade.
They are supplying the bulk of the labor demanded by the Islamic world, which is an interesting
point to reflect on.
The movement of labor is essentially from Europe to the Islamic world, whereas in our
day it's essentially in the reverse.
Europe is drawing labor in from the Mediterranean in Islamic world, and that's a very important
point to keep in mind.
Well, besides all the products coming into Scandinavia that enriched their life, including
the curious Buddha, but also silks which are clearly worn by all the upper classes in Scandinavia
by the 10th century, there's references to them all the time in the Icelandic saga, wine
as a commodity that everyone is used to consuming.
The trade also led to the development for the first time of market towns.
That is concentrations of populations that we have not seen before in Scandinavian history.
There are three of them that are extremely well known by archaeology, as well as a curious
document prepared for King Alfred the Great, probably dating about a little before 895.
It's a Anglo-Saxon translation of the Spanish bishop Erosius in the 5th century who wrote
this world history to justify Christianity, see how wonderful Christianity is because
life was miserable before Christianity, and he recites every disaster known in classical
history and now things are better.
Well, he didn't encounter the Viking Age, he died at 414.
In any case, that is updated in Anglo-Saxon tradition, and then appended to it are two
voyages, one by a man who is identified as Othehere, or Ohtar in probably Norwegian, Ohtar
is his Norwegian name, Othehere is his Anglo-Saxon name, and he reports a voyage going from the
Arctic Circle along the coast of Norway to a town we believe is the archaeological site
of Kalpong today in Vestfold, which was a major market town of over 100 acres, which
is clearly the processing center of all the Arctic goods coming in, the timber, which
is then being exported east and west, and where silver and other commodities are coming
in.
And this account is really remarkable, he gives us a very detailed account of how trade is
carried out with the laps, and Ohtar himself is a merchant prince who's made a fortune
in trading in seal skins, whale bone, and at the court of King Alfred, he's clearly
treated as a nobleman of very high rank, and he essentially made his fortune in merchandising,
he has no evidence that he was a Viking.
The other voyage is by a fellow named Wolfstein, by Anglo-Saxon name, and may well have been
an Englishman, we're not sure whether he was Dane, and he gives us an account of the voyage
from Hedaby in southern Denmark, along the southern shores of the Baltic, and the trade
involved there, that includes slave trade as well, and he names several important ports
there.
One of them is a port that's been excavated, Vollen, or Wollen, which may be the site of
the later Jomsborg, the Viking encampment.
Another one may have been at the mouth of the Vistula, it's called Trusso, we're not
sure exactly where it is, one guess it's the predecessor of Danzig or Gdansk, but what
it shows is the extension of Scandinavian style market towns at the mouths of all the
great rivers of the Baltic, certainly by the end of the 9th century.
Hedaby has been excavated, Berk has been excavated, both of these towns in Denmark and Sweden
respectively, emerges major market towns, covering maybe 60 acres.
They have together, along with Kalpeng and Norway, several important similarities.
One is there was probably a resident population of over a thousand people.
There was specialized areas for manufacturing.
The number of imported goods from these towns is impressive.
Ceramics, glassware from the Rhine, silks from the Near East, perhaps some of them originating
from central China, some would even claim from Chinese workshops or inspired from Chinese
workshops.
All of this is the wealth pouring into these towns as a result of the commerce, as well
as the marketing of plunder and slaves, and most of these slaves are taken as captives
and raids.
Second, the towns clearly are also home to foreigners who are resident there, Frisians,
Saxons, English, Slavs, that is they have a certain international quality.
They're nothing on the order of later medieval towns and they're not even incipient cities.
Nonetheless, they play an economic role in Scandinavia that is all out of proportion
to their size.
In these towns is where Scandinavians come into contact with other civilizations.
It is here that they learn all sorts of products and skills and make money in a fashion they
have never done before.
It's through these towns, for instance, that the artistic styles of the Middle East were
transmitted to the Scandinavians and inspired some of the later jewelry styles.
It's in these towns where the first coins are minted in Scandinavia, again on a limited
number.
Furthermore, these towns are important economic centers, which means any aspiring king in
Scandinavia is going to want to control them.
And it's no accident that the three classic Scandinavian monarchies that emerge at the
end of the 10th and in the 11th century are all going to center around one of these towns.
The Norwegian kingdom is based on Kalpeng and its associated towns in the area around Oslo,
especially on the western shore of the Vicken Vestfalt.
King Harold Finehair and his successors need those towns.
It produces revenue.
At Berka in Lake Malloran, that city is the nexus of trade routes up to about 975, 980
when the receding lake, the Lake Malloran, causes Berka to lose its port.
And what happens is the merchants simply relocate north of Berka on an estuary that connects
them to Uppsala.
And a new town, Sektuna, is founded and Sektuna simply takes over where Berka had once been.
And Sektuna is not only the new market town connected to the eastern trade, it also doubles
as the capital and the mint of the first Swedish kings.
And Hedibi is perhaps the most important market town in the north.
It is clearly the fiscal means whereby the first kings of Denmark, Gorm the Old, Harold
Bluetooth, Sten Forkpeard, gained the revenues to build the impressive camps of which I spoke,
the Danverker, the various fortification systems.
And it is also the town where, again, the first coins in Denmark were probably minted.
So that the monarchies that emerge and become eventually the territorial monarchies of Denmark,
Norway and Sweden very, very much depend on the development of trade and of these new
market towns.
And finally, the most important thing of this point about these markets towns, it is here
where the first Christian missionaries will arrive, starting with St. Angster in the 9th
century, and it's through these towns that Christianity is really transmitted to the
northern peoples.
