Lecture 14, the Duchy of Normandy.
In this lecture, I'm going to concentrate on the creation of the, what eventually became
the Duchy of Normandy, it was actually originally a county, often referred to as the county
of Bruon, the major city in Normandy, until it was elevated to a duchy in 996.
And Normandy, the founding of Normandy is a event of major European importance.
It not only closes the period of Viking attacks into the Carolingian Empire, but also represents
an important change in the development of feudal Europe.
And the Normans will come to play a very, very significant role in European history
from the 10th, really, up until the 12th and 13th centuries.
Their descendants will be found across Europe, in England, in France, in Spain, Crusader
States and Southern Italy.
And the Normans are descendants of Vikings who acquired land in Northern France as a result
of this act of enfiefment by Charles the Simple.
So it's important for us to understand why Charles did this, what were his motives, also
why the Viking sea king, Rolf, whereas he's known usually in the Latin Chronicles as Rolo,
why he accepted this land, and why he proved so successful in turning Normandy into, in
many ways, the premier feudal state of Europe.
And turning his Viking warriors into the finest knights of Western Europe.
Powerful fighters, restless adventurers, devoted to Christ, as I always note, a little thin
on the Ten Commandments, but devoted to Christ, and the greatest nobles and knights of Western
Europe not only capable of conquering, but also ruling distant areas by adapting local
institutions.
This is really quite a success story to come out of the Viking Age.
And so let us first look at both Charles the Simple and Rolf in the original deal back
in 911.
Well Charles the Simple, when he came to the throne in 897 was in a particularly weak position.
He was a descendant of Charlemagne, and he had twice been passed over as king, as too
young, and in 897 a Capatian king, that is the former count of Paris who had been elected
king of France, had died, and the western Frankish nobility finally went with Charles.
He was a descendant of the Carolingian House.
Charles was in a very, very difficult position.
By the time he became king of western France, or western Francia, we may as well start calling
it France, he was fiscally bankrupt.
He faced very, very powerful vassals.
He was in a very, very weak position politically.
If he had to endure a third Viking siege of Paris, he knew he would not survive.
And when this large Viking company showed up at the base of the Seine, commanded by Rolf,
between 895 and 897, that is in the very final years of King Otto, Charles knew he had to
do something about this.
There were a series of raids and attacks up the Seine, there were negotiations, several
important abbeys got sacked in the process.
But finally in 911, Rolf and Charles the Simple came to agreement, and Charles agreed
to invest Rolf with a thief.
The area originally involved was the lower sections of the Seine, around the city of
Rouen.
It was called in the Latin text terra normanorum, that is land of the Normans, land of the Northmen.
And as I mentioned in previous lectures, the Franks were generally pretty vague about who
these Vikings were.
They called them Normani or Northmani, meaning Northern men.
They referred to both Danes and Norwegians by that name.
We have good reason to believe that Rolf's group were largely Danes.
And in any event, this thief was relatively small from the later Duchy of Normandy, but
it included the important cathedral city of Rouen, a major city in northern France, as
well as the strategic bridges around Petra.
That is, it guarded the approaches to Paris.
And it was on the Seine River, one of the premier river systems, into France.
Both sides had good reason to accept it.
Only for Charles, he didn't have any money to pay.
In my opinion, there is no Frankish currency to speak of.
The royal currency by 9-11 was gone.
Most of the abbots, bishops, and secular vassals of France had usurped the right to
coin money to collect what we would call tolls and the profits of justice.
And the Frankish monarchy had essentially lost control over its finances.
And this is directly accountable to those payments of Dangal, especially by Charles
the Bald, where Frankish subjects would become increasingly reluctant to hand over money
to the Frankish king.
And that meant plate, that meant religious objects, that meant old coins, which were
melted down, minted into coins, and paid off to the Vikings.
Charles just didn't have the money.
Charles also was very, very keen on defending the approaches to Paris.
And the earlier measures done by his ancestors, especially Charles the Bald, had not worked.
So what you do, you turn these Vikings into your vassals and give them the land and the
means to establish their own fief, and hopefully they will do the job for you.
And in this case, Charles the Simple chose the right man.
Rolf had several reasons to accept this.
I mentioned in the previous lecture that the three major periods of attacks by Viking
raiders in the Carolingian Empire, to some extent, reflected generations.
That is, the attacks of the 830s and 40s was one group associated with Ragnar Lodbroke,
that legendary figure who becomes very important in Scaldic poetry.
Then you had a second phase coming in, especially in the 870s, 880s, a new group coming in from
Scandinavia.
And what Rolf's group represented in 911 was probably the third generation of these professional
warrior groups.
And you have to look at Rolf's position and why he would accept the land.
For one thing, these Viking companies were not armies in the modern sense.
They were collections of different contingents of fleets, anywhere from 5 to 15 in size.
Many of these men came from the same community.
So within a Viking fleet of 100 ships, which maybe is what Rolf commanded, he had a number
of subgroups.
These subgroups reflected distinct communities where there was a leader, a Yarl, which is
related to the English word, Earl, a Lord, who had around him his friends, his relatives,
the members of his community who fought with him.
So the Viking fleets were generally made up of much smaller units.
They had been operating with Rolf from some 10 to 15 years.
Many of these men went to sea at about age 15 to 20.
Many a famous Norwegian king started his military political career at 15 or 16.
And after rating 10 or 15 years, this group gets up into the ages between 35 and say 50,
55.
And in the course of a successful Viking career, they've acquired money.
They've acquired horses, weapons, wives, concubines.
And these Viking fleets become a whole road show.
They're like their own little city moving around.
And Rolf really had to satisfy him now.
Many of them were now at a point where they had done 10 or 15 years of rating, and they
were keenly interested in acquiring land.
And Rolf was able to deliver it, and in so doing would satisfy their aspirations, keep
control over that group, and turn himself into a respectable territorial lord.
And after all, that's essentially what many a Viking sea king wanted.
Following the traditions of the great legends of Scandinavia, you think of Rolf Krocke,
the legendary Danish king after whom this sea king is named Rolf Rolo in his Latin version.
That's exactly what Rolf did in legend.
He Rolf Krocke raided widely, built a great hall in Denmark, and retired as a great king.
And the only difference is this Rolf, Rolo, is going to build his kingdom in France rather
than in Denmark.
So both sides had reasons to come to this agreement.
The act of homage actually took place at St. Clair on the Seine, and we have several chronicle
reports on it.
And the reports are, well, the chroniclers are hostile to Charles the Simple.
I mean, the name Charles the Simple Loan tips you off, they're not particularly impressed
by their monarch.
But furthermore, they delight it in telling the scene, because in the scene of homage,
Rolf had to do two things.
If he was going to become a vassal of the Frankish king, he had to convert to Christianity.
And he's more than willing to do that.
That's not a problem.
Christian God is powerful and is the God of that land, and he accepts baptism.
And most Viking sea kings, after a while, kind of like the idea of baptism.
You know, you have a big ceremony with bishops, and it's really impressive.
It impresses your warriors.
But the second part of the ceremony was the act of homage.
And that included an act whereby Rolf, Rolo, would have to bend down and kiss the foot
of his new lord, Charles the Simple.
And when he was asked to perform this, Rolf just looked like, you've got to be kidding.
And he turned to one of his warriors and said, look, you kiss the foot for me.
And one of these hulking Viking warriors went up to Charles the Simple, who probably stood
about 5'4".
And you have to think of a dain of about 5'9", or 5'11".
And he said, OK.
And he picked the king's foot up, threw the king on his back and kissed the foot.
Well, if that doesn't, if that is not an omen of the relationship of the future dukes of
Normandy to the kings of France, nothing else is.
From the start, I think Charles the Simple had a lot of second thoughts about giving
this feudal principality over to Rolf, who turned out to be far more energetic and far
more successful than the king probably really wanted.
And the late Carolingian kings repeatedly tried to curb the powers of Rolf and his descendants.
And the counts and then eventually dukes of Normandy learned that defiance was probably
the best way to go in dealing with Carolingian kings.
You could always extort more concessions from them.
The success of Rolf's duchy can also be appreciated and underscored by looking at another possible
Viking duchy that was founded about the same time.
And that would have been a group of Norwegians and Danes who simultaneously, a couple of
years later, probably around 916, 917, settled on the mouth of the Loire, around the city
of Nantes.
And in some ways looked like they were going to carve out a second Viking principality
in the Carolingian Empire.
And it's worth the moment comparing the two situations just to get a sense of Rolf's success.
Well this group was very similar to the group that got the Fife in Normandy.
They'd been operating on the Loire for about a 10 or 15 year period.
They knew the city of Nantes very well, just as Rolf's group knew the city of Ruon.
Both cities had in some ways prospered from Viking raids because Vikings often showed
up, sold plunder, and what is even more embarrassing to the monks, sold their captives, and many
of these captives end up being sold into the Muslim world by Christian merchants.
No questions asked.
Their leader was a fellow by the name of Rangvald, and he was again a charismatic sea king.
The difference, however, is significant on two points.
These group of Vikings who settled in Nantes and had aspirations to rule the lower Loire
and the region of Brittany today, that vast peninsula, and Nantes is essentially the natural
capital of that area, there were two significant differences in this group.
They first never received permission from any Frankish king.
There was never any kind of active vassalage, homage.
And that was important.
Even though the council dukes of Normandy usually honored their feudal ties in the breach
rather than in the performance, they still had the legitimacy to rule that area and
gain the cooperation of the clergy as well as the other local people in order to run
an effective feudal state.
The Vikings in Nantes never had that.
The second point is that this group never really had the same kind of control by their
leader.
Really made the switch from being raiders and plunderers or brigands or whatever term
you want to use from the Chronicles to, in effect, landlords and knights.
And what happened is Nantes, in effect, became a base for the next 20 years for this group
to raid widely over Brittany.
And while they enjoyed considerable success, eventually it annoyed the local population.
In the count of Brittany, a fellow by the name of Allent Barbatort, or the Twisted Beard,
he had this bizarre Twisted Beard as his prominent feature, in 936 nailed this Viking
group in a major battle in northern Brittany and then marched on Nantes, captured the city
and sacked it and scattered these Vikings.
And the difference between the group settling in Brittany and around Nantes and a Rolf group
is really quite significant.
That Viking group never made the transition from raiders into landlords and knights, whereas
Rolf's group from the start understood what they had.
They had one of the premier areas of northern France, superb farmland, and these Viking
warriors, within a matter of a couple of years, turned themselves from sailors and warriors
into landlords and began to learn how to fight as mounted cavalry.
And so the Vikings who settled in Normandy quickly become the military cast of Normandy.
There is very thick Viking settlement in and around the area of Rouen and the Lower Sain.
As the Duchy of Normandy was expanded by other additions, large areas were brought in where
there was very little Viking settlement where the local population was there.
These areas were given out as fiefs to followers of Rolf and his descendants.
There was some more settlement in the region around in the peninsula of Contienne today.
There were a group of Vikings that relocated from Ireland into Normandy, but most of the
settlement was down in and around the immediate area of Rouen.
They came in fairly significant numbers.
It's difficult to estimate how many of them there were.
But from the start, you have Vikings who probably had local women.
Some of them were bilinguals, and within a generation they've given up their Norse tongue,
their worship of the ancestral gods, and they've become French speakers and Christians.
And that is a very rapid and significant change.
And it contrasts very much with the settlement that we shall see soon in England, where Danes
came in much greater numbers and where the Danes probably retained their ancestral language
much longer than the Normans in France, and furthermore, where those Danes actually had
a very, very powerful influence on the modern English language as well as English legal
institutions.
In Normandy, the number of Norse words that passed into modern French were very limited.
They're very specialized.
They're terms of navigation, words for oyster, stuff like, you know, the sort of thing you
would expect to get from Scandinavians from the sea.
These were just a limited set of technical loan words.
Otherwise, the language of the court at Rouen from the start was French.
Even more significant, Rolf marries the daughter of the Count of Maine.
That is Papa.
That is a French-speaking lady.
And their son, who succeeds as the second count, he carries a perfectly legitimate Frankish
name.
The Count William and all of the later Norman rulers carry names such as Richard, Roger,
Robert.
These are Western European Frankish names.
They do not use Norse names anymore.
The Dukes of Normandy, they become the Dukes of Normie after 996, and before that there
are the Counts of Rouen.
But this family of Norman rulers, as I said, understood that they probably could gain more
by exploiting the weakness of the Carolingian monarchs than obeying their ties of vassalage.
And Charles the Simple and his successors had some real doubts about why, you know,
whether they should have given so much over to these Normans.
There are several efforts in the 930s and the 940s to move in and repossess the thief.
That is to oust the Norman ruling family and take the area back under the French crown.
When the Dukes fail, there is one right after the death of Rolf where his son is still a
minor, there is a brief pagan reaction in Normandy at one point, the Frankish kings
try to exploit that.
But in all instances, the Normans prove themselves more than equal to handling any royal army
that come in to their area because they very, very quickly learn to use the heavy cavalry
and to build the moat and Bailey castles that one associates with the Normans in later
medieval history.
And these are rather simple structures of essentially building a mound and a stockade
on top of it with the trench around it.
And it's nothing like the castles that excite your imagination from the 13th century on,
these imposing masonry structures.
These are essentially stockades nonetheless when constructed at strong points and controlling
roads and manned by a determined group of heavy cavalry can pretty much dominate the
countryside.
The Normans, in effect, take over the military techniques which will inhibit future Viking
raids and also beat back Frankish kings who want to take the duchy back.
One of the most significant points that comes out of this is that the Norman rulers align
themselves with the counts of France, that is the counts around Paris.
And that is the Capetian family.
Those are the descendants of Count Odo who was briefly king and had been the defender
of Paris against the Second Siege of the Vikings.
And what in effect happens is an alliance between the Normans and the Capetians to get
rid of the Carolingian monarchs of France.
And this ends in 987 in the proclamation of Euclipaix as king of France, Euclipaix establishes
the royal family, the Capetian family, and that is the family in one way or another that
will rule France down to the French Revolution.
That alliance between Euclipaix and the Normans, particularly Duke Richard II, is cemented
by a marriage relationship, there's marriage alliances, and in 996 Richard II is made
Duke of Normandy.
And that is a major achievement.
As Duke of Normandy, Richard II becomes one of the peers of France.
That is one of the great seven vassals who come to serve the king of France who is now
the Capetian monarch who lives in Paris.
And from that point onward, the Norman dukes are established not only as one of the great
peers of France, but one of the great secular rulers of Western Europe.
And it will be these rulers, William the Conqueror, who will conquer England, and it will be vassals
of these rulers who migrate into southern Italy and establish the Norman Kingdom of
southern Italy and Sicily, who are such prominent important figures in later medieval history.
In fact, it is inconceivable to think of medieval history after 1000 without the role of the
Normans.
They become absolutely all important.
Why did they succeed so much as opposed to that other group in Brittany?
In part, a lot of this success goes back to Rolf himself.
When that original settlement went through, Rolf set the pattern which proved successful
for all his successors.
First, not only did he very quickly adopt French and Frankish style institutions, he
also learned to forge an alliance with the clergy within Normandy, particularly the bishops
of Rouen and particularly the great monasteries.
And from the start, the Norman rulers, first as counts, then as dukes, pursue a very, very
close alliance with both the prelates as well as the monastic institutions.
That is a significant shift from their Viking ancestors, who saw monasteries essentially
as targets.
And it is also a testimony to any aspiring king later on in Scandinavia who wants to
create a kingdom in Scandinavia.
If you want a successful kingdom, you need to work with the elites of the Christian church.
In the case of the prelates, that is the great bishops and clergy who are the lay clergy
who run the institutions of the church, these men quickly turned out to be nothing more
than relatives of the Norman ruling elite.
That is, Rolf and his descendants did what the Carolingian kings is, appoint members
of the nobility to run the church.
The greatest example of that in Norman history is the half-brother of William the Conqueror.
His name was Otto, bishop of Bayou, who commissioned the Bayou tapestry.
And while he was a bishop, he was also a nobleman and warrior.
To Otto's credit, he did have some conscience as a churchman.
His preferred weapon in battle was a mace.
He would never use a sword or an axe, because that would cut people.
He would just give you a concussion, so he wouldn't technically shed any blood.
Nonetheless, he was a valiant warrior and right there at the Battle of Hastings with
his half-brother.
So part of the success of the Normans is this ability to co-op those Christian institutions.
They also were extremely good about patronizing monasteries, especially the monastic reforms
emanating from Clooney, imposing the truths of God.
And that's an effort by churchmen to limit the destruction and the time of fighting among
feudal lords.
You're not supposed to fight battles during high holidays, you're supposed to ransom prisoners.
One of the rules was to ban the use of the crossbow because it wasn't a gentlemanly weapon.
No one paid attention to that one.
But in any case, again, the Norman rulers were very good in that regard as well.
Above all, he could keep his vassals in line.
Rolf, right down to William the Conqueror, really kept tight control over their vassals.
They were able to tap into their military power.
And they also were very, very good at stopping Viking attacks.
By 925, 930, there are no more significant Viking attacks occurring on the northern shores
of France.
And that's a result of several reasons.
One is that Viking activities shift to the British Isles.
There's intensive colonization of Iceland.
There's a lot of activity in Ireland, others are going east.
So Scandinavian interests in part shift.
By 925, 950, I also think that enough people have left Scandinavia in that first century
of Viking activity that the population is stabilized, that some of the population pressure
driving those Viking attacks has diminished.
But the third reason is that Rolf and his successors were extremely good and aggressive
at patrolling the Norman coast.
And as descendants of Vikings themselves, they were more than willing to bring in colonists.
There's a significant settlement of Vikings in Normandy in 942, for instance, in the Cône-Tien
Peninsula.
There is reports of others showing up from England receiving thieves.
They had no objections of taking in Scandinavians, but they weren't going to tolerate any raids.
Any more than they were going to tolerate any kind of indiscipline on the part of their
vassals.
And so Normandy really turns out to be a model, a successful model, of how to create a kingdom.
The descendants of Rolf, why they were French speakers, why they were Christians, still very
actively remembered and promoted the connection with Scandinavia for a very long time.
We know, for instance, that they hosted a number of important Viking sea kings, including
Saint Olaf, the future king of Norway, who reputedly was baptized at Rouen, probably
somewhere around, somewhere between 1010 and 1014, when he was in the service of Ethelward
the Unrede, who was in the English King in exile in Rouen.
And at that baptism, Duke Richard, Richard II, actually stood in as the godfather for
Olaf, the future king of Norway.
So they're very conscious of that ancient Scandinavian tradition.
Several Norman chroniclers very proudly pointed to that descent.
They manufactured marvelous and a number of tales about Rolf and his descendants.
And Rolf lives on not only in Norse legend as a great Viking warrior, but also in the
Norman Chronicles.
Nonetheless, for all intents and purposes, these rulers were now part of that wider
Carolingian world.
They were part of that feudal order.
Well, just a couple of important points to make about the long-term success of these
Normans to understand how important the founding of that duchy was.
The descendants of the Normans, the original Vikings who settled in Normandy, went on to
carve out two of the four great kingdoms of Western Europe.
The one most well-known to us is, of course, England.
In 1066, later in this course, we will discuss that William the Conqueror, then Duke of Normandy,
will cross the channel, conquer England, and rule England as king, and his descendants
will forge a very, very effective monarchy in England, one of the great four monarchies
of Western Europe.
A lesser-known kingdom, but just as important and for contemporaries in many ways more important,
were those Normans who trekked south into southern Italy, took service as mercenaries
in the Byzantine army, and eventually carved out a kingdom in southern Italy and Sicily.
This is a second Norman kingdom, and a Norman kingdom that came to be one of the dominant
kingdoms during the period of the Crusades, and in many ways was regarded as more successful
and important than either the original Duchy or the Kingdom of England.
And just to give you a sense of the power of that later Norman kingdom in southern Italy,
William Rufus of England, say the son of William the Conqueror in the year 1100, had 10,000
knights in fief to service in England.
His contemporary, Roger II, the king of Norman Sicily in Italy, had 30,000, and the Normans
in the southern areas of the Mediterranean had so much more resources and so much more
potential power than their northern kinsmen.
Well, to sum up briefly the overall historical implications of the Viking attacks on the
Carolingian Empire, it's important to keep several conclusions in mind.
These attacks were definitely not the sole reason why the Frankish monarchy failed.
Coming back to several earlier lectures, I mentioned that the Frankish monarchy, the
Carolingian monarchy, established by Charlemagne, had certain institutional weaknesses.
It was attempting to play the role of the Roman Empire.
It didn't have the money and the resources to do so.
And it also was plagued by a perpetual problem of civil war because there was never an issue
decided does the monarchy in Western Europe mean single succession of a crown, or is the
kingdom meant to be divided.
So the Vikings clearly attacked the Carolingian Empire that was weakened, that was subject
to civil war, and to some extent owed their great success to the political divisions and
military clashes within the Carolingian Empire.
Nonetheless, the Vikings revealed more dramatically than any other invader the institutional weaknesses
of that monarchy.
They essentially did in the family of Charles the Bald as the rulers of France.
They carved out the premier feudal state of the new order that was to emerge.
And you must think about it, all of the great feudal dynasts who went on crusade and who
were to play such a significant role in later medieval history, the Normans, the Dukes of
Anjou, Maine, Brittany, Aquitaine, Flanders, all of these feudal lords had their origins
in strongmen who were able to control Viking attacks in their area.
And so those Viking attacks literally brought about the emergence of that new feudal political
order in northwestern France.
And in so doing, they also provided a model for Scandinavians in the homeland on how to
organize their own states or kingdoms later on in the 10th and 11th centuries.
