Lecture 20, Iceland, a Frontier Republic.
In this lecture, I plan to cover Norse Iceland, or Viking Age Iceland, as a Frontier Society,
and this Frontier Society should be understood in two ways.
One is the social and economic conditions that led to the type of settlement patterns
I briefly described in the last lecture.
And then to look at the society, see how it governed itself, and why this term is applied
to it.
Because the Icelandic society that emerged in the 10th and 11th century, while Scandinavian
in origin, is a distinct, in fact, a unique society that responded to the unusual conditions,
not only of the landscape and the terrain, but also of the people themselves who moved
into this new homeland.
And Iceland has been illuminated to us from two remarkable set of sources.
And again, as I lecture in this series, I refer to the Icelandic literature.
These are the family sagas, the Norse sagas, written in Icelandic.
Most of them written between the mid-13th and mid-14th century, but referring to figures
who were involved in the original act of settlement in the period of the 10th century and into
the early 11th century.
These family sagas are a very controversial source.
They have been used in various ways.
The initial attitude towards the family sagas is that they were really accurate narrative
chronicles of family events, the people who went out there.
In the last lecture, I referred to the family of Un the Deep-Minded and Helgi the Lean,
known in two of the great family sagas, Nyall Saga and the Laksdala Saga.
Then there has been an attitude that's set in more recent years that these are more like
historical novels, that they are written sometime after the event, anywhere from a hundred
to two hundred years later.
There's been a great skepticism.
And now there's a new opinion, a new, much more balanced opinion, which is taking the
sagas in tandem with that other important evidence we refer to, and that's archaeology.
And that is being pioneered, above all, by Professor Jesse Bayoch, who has written an
absolutely groundbreaking book on Viking Age Iceland, and upon whose book I draw for
this lecture and other lectures about Iceland, and Bayoch, who maintains a website of his
archaeological excavations, has gone a very long way in showing how the sagas can be used
to illuminate social and economic conditions.
His excavations are state-of-the-art and have revealed an enormous amount of information
on diet, on the types of weapons that were used.
There's a minor debate running in the literature whether Viking-Edge weapons were really as
sharp as the sagas say.
You read these marvelous sagas.
The fight in Yau Saga between Gunnar and his brother against eight other men who have insulted
them is described in detail, and Gunnar fells four men immediately, cutting off legs and
lopping off arms, and Bayoch has been able to excavate skeletal remains in Iceland, in
the Mosfell Valley area, which are some of our few accurate skeletal remains we have
of the Icelandic Age, and as he likes to point out, one of those was someone who was
done in by an axe, and at least one person in Iceland in the 11th century had a very
sharp axe.
It was a single blow that knocked that skull open in half.
So it's in this new effort to bring the sagas in sync with the archaeological evidence that
is producing really exciting results in illuminating Iceland, and then the wider Viking Age.
What my opinion is, and the opinion of the newer scholars following in the wake of Bayoch,
is that these Icelandic sagas, they cannot be pressed as completely historical documents.
They were never intended that way.
But you're dealing with a society that had a very powerful oral tradition, that was very
conscious of its dissent from the original settlers, and also had in its mind key events
in their history that everyone knew, that is the creation of the all thing in 930.
The discovery of Iceland around 870, which can be verified by actually geological evidence,
the reform of the all thing in 965, the conversion in 1000, and that these family events are
fit into this framework fairly accurately.
Above all, they give us remarkable descriptions of daily life, of legal actions, divorce,
settlements over blood feud, that had to be consistent with existing customs, if the
story was to mean anything to an audience who were the direct descendants of these people
as well as still behaving along the same lines of these people a hundred years later.
And so with this proviso, the Icelandic sagas, the family sagas in tandem with the archaeology,
can be used as a legitimate source to tell us what Viking Age Iceland was all about.
Well, one of the first things I should discuss in the first part of this lecture is exactly
what these excavations in sagas tell us about, the conditions in Iceland that led to the
development of a frontier society.
And that was just the nature of the settlement itself.
I stressed that what happened is Icelanders moved in, or Norwegians moved in, and established
independent farmsteads.
Usually these were prominent people who built the main farm, and what they did is they acted
like lords, or yarls, the way they could not perhaps do back in Norway.
Usually these settlements were founded as a religious action, were told in a number
of the sagas that the initial family that settles in the area would throw two pillars
over the side of the ship and wait for those pillars to be washed ashore, and wherever
they landed, they would take the pillars and set up a farmstead in that vicinity.
And given the currents and the flow of these pillars, they usually were carried into an
ideal fjord where you had a sheltered harbor and pasture available.
Those pillars became the central focus of a hall, and were seen as sacred to Thor.
And in the great hall of a gothi of the chieftain, or the chieftain's wife in the case of Un
the Deep-Minded, she had the powers of a gothi, even though she herself was not one.
Usually the Icelandic farmers created for themselves a position of security and land
that put them in a very, very high class if you went back and looked at homeland Scandinavia,
such as in Norway.
Norwegian kings are really quite astonished at the prosperity of Icelandic farmers.
There are no peasants, many Icelanders maintain slaves or thralls, as they're called, and
they have dependence.
But the size and wealth of the farmers, the landed class in Iceland is really quite exceptional,
and probably not the norm in various parts of Scandinavia.
They however exploited a landscape that they came to ruin rather quickly.
By the year 1100, there's clearly serious ecological problems, and this is because Icelanders
moved in taking all this free land and carrying that great dramatic tradition that wealth
was cattle.
That the most noble occupation was raising cattle.
If you can't raise cattle, you raise sheep.
They all had horses, and the result was the extension of the pasture.
The dwarf trees, largely birch, which take decades to grow because of the harsh conditions,
were methodically cut down for building material, for charcoal, for forging iron, and for fuel.
Very quickly in the 10th century, it becomes clear that timber has to be imported from Norway.
The destruction of those forest zones led to a deterioration of the uplands, which then
reduced the grazing, which pushed people down to the coast.
By 1200, there is a serious economic and demographic problem resulting from the destruction of
those uplands, which are leading to massive erosion.
And that's one of the reasons why Icelandic society gets itself into trouble in the 13th
century, and eventually settles that by putting itself under the crown of Norway.
It's also a society that from the start required the cooperation of all members of the family,
and probably explains a great deal the social patterns that we see in the sagas.
Men were engaged in two major occupations.
That was in stock raising and in some type of hunting or fishing.
These were the main way in which food was provided.
This took men away long periods from their farmsteads.
The leader of the farmstead would go up to the high pastures.
They also, there's also a middle area, the so-called shielding, where they'd build a
little residence midway between the farmstead and the high pastures, where they would spend
a couple of months counting animals, shearing them, slaughtering them before they sent them
up to high pastures of summer, and then brought them down to the lower pastures in the winter.
There's this constant movement of animals, which took the men away from the farmsteads
for much of the time.
There's also fishing, especially for sea mammals and birds.
That's an extremely important occupation throughout the entire of the Viking age.
Major supplement to the food, and that meant, incidentally, the best way to bushwhack your
rival is when he's at one of these shieldings counting the sheep.
He's probably alone and not very well armed, so in a blood feud, that's where a lot of
battles end up being fought.
But this took the men away from the farmsteads for a long time, and as a result, the leading
lady in the Icelandic household really ran the operation.
Now this was probably true in Scandinavian society all along.
When you're living in those harsh northern climates, and where food is in short supply,
and women's major task is preparing the food and weaving, especially preparing linen woollen
garments.
This means that you do not have the luxury to seclude your women.
You do not have the luxury of, say, the Mediterranean world or the more wealthy near east of large
numbers of ornamental females.
Those women have to be able to produce, and they are expected to do certain types of jobs,
and they are going to be left alone running the household and managing the children for
a good part of the year.
And there are frequent incidents in Icelandic sagas, where the member of one family, a prominent
member of the family or a goatee, is writing to meet a relative or a friend of his to get
some sort of advice on a legal issue, usually.
Should I pursue a blood feud?
Should I make this marriage, whatever, it's just very common, Gunnar and Yal are doing
this all the time in Yal saga, and they come trotting into the household, and the lady
of the household, and Yal saga, this is always Bergthor is there, and she says, well my husband
is not here, but I can handle it, don't worry about it.
She handles the hiring of people, she handles the negotiations, initial negotiations for
instance on, well I'm here to handle this settlement on such and such, on the law dispute.
She as a woman does not actually have legal right to make a decision, but she certainly
can report everything to the husband, and in the sagas, most of the powerful leading
ladies are also more than willing to give their opinion on what the husband should do.
And the conditions that put an enormous stress on women managing those households, leads
to the legal position of women that we see in the first set of Icelandic laws, the so
called Grey Goose Laws, the Gragas, probably written around 1115 or there about, which
are record customary law, and very much conform to what we get incidentally in the sagas.
Women end up having enormous number of powers, for instance in administering property.
She can actually hold a chieftainship through delegates, through male members.
That is the power of being a chief, a gothie, or a gothie, you can, you can translate it
either as a D or a T-H from that runic letter.
That power could be exercised by a woman through male relatives with no problem in an Icelandic
law.
She could administer it and actually take the profits from it, which involve judicial settlements
of different types.
They had powers of divorce that are really quite remarkable.
In Laxdala Saga, one of my favorite sagas, the leading lady, Gudrun, a formidable woman,
carrying the same name of one of the heroines of the Volsan Saga, she marries four times.
She gets rid of one of her husbands, who is really quite a, you know, really rather
feckless figure, by manufacturing for him a shirt that's in the form of a woman's blouse,
so it's rather low cut.
He puts it on inadvertently not knowing that he's been duped, and she immediately announces
to her witnesses, you see my husband is cross-dressing, I'm divorced immediately, rides off to a
male relative and makes off with most of the property.
Well, this husband wasn't particularly bright anyway, but it gives you some idea of how
powerful leading ladies could be.
They are also in the Icelandic sagas, usually depicted as the leading characters egging
on blood feuds.
The blood feud in Yau Saga is between two ladies, Holgerd and Bergothora, and they're
pursuing the blood feud while the two husbands, who are best friends, are doing everything
in their power to settle it and try to get out of it, and Holgerd is really a piece of
work on that.
And on the other hand, you can go overboard, some of the scholars have said, well, this
shows a misogynist's attitude in the sagas.
No, there were such powerful women, because if you go through the sagas, you can find
just as many instances, and these aren't as prominent because they're not as vivid,
you don't remember them as well when you read the sagas, but you find just as many
instances, or almost as many instances, when wives and sisters and mothers counsel caution
to their husbands.
And the best one that comes to mind in Laksdalasag is a dispute between two half-brothers, Huskelton
Hutt, and they're ready to go at it, and it's really Joran, the wife of Huskel, who finally
brings him to his senses at a dinner table and said, do you really want to pursue this
against your brother, your half-brother?
She acts as the voice of reason and moderation.
And I think this depiction of women that comes through in Icelandic sagas and is confirmed
in the legal rights they have, and legal documents are always highly stylized, so it's difficult
to know what it means, do reflect a social reality, and that is in households, women
had a lot of important tasks to do.
And one could think for a moment what those tasks were.
In the preparation of food, you are living below the Arctic Circle.
They exploit later on certain types of seaweed as well as wild grasses to access substitute
for wheat.
They're involved in spinning and weaving all the time, and you're in a society that does
not have monetized markets, it doesn't have cities.
Wealth is usually accounted for in cloth, home-spun cloth measured by the local unit,
the L, and that is the measuring unit used in Icelandic law.
This is a society without coin money, it uses either silver bullion in very expensive operations
or cattle, but fundamentally, it's cloth, and cloth is manufactured by the women of
the household, and that is the money of the realm, in a sense, in Iceland.
They have to prepare food, and in Iceland, you waste nothing.
This includes taking all sorts of parts of animals, which most people would consider
inedible, boiling them down, stuffing them into salt, sausages, turning them into some
sort of edible food that can be used for that long stretch of the winter, where you're going
to slaughter animals and you're somehow going to try to calculate to make it to the spring.
That is part of the task of the lady of the household.
There is a number of difficulties in doing this in Iceland, for one, there's no rock
salt and you can't evaporate seawater very readily, it's too far north, and so there's
very little salting, you have to dry things in the wind, you have to boil it, the preparation
involved in running these households is enormous.
There's a limited amount of butter and cheese, and what they do is they take, there's a coagulated
or fermented type of sour milk, which is really taking a membrane from a pig and introducing
it there to ferment it, it tastes awful, but it allows you to eat this dairy product through
the winter, it's the same thing as consumed when you're on long sea voyages.
It is because of the success in managing this landscape and exploiting the resources that
the population rises and probably peaks at about 70,000 people in the year 1000.
And to give you a sense of what that means for Iceland, that is probably about as populous
as the island is.
There are declines and recoveries thereafter, you're hit by certain volcanic eruptions that
are very destructive in the 12th century.
There's a major impact of the black death, there's that great volcanic eruption in the
18th century, the population does not get up to the level of the Viking age again until
the end of the 19th century.
And so by 1000, some would see the time of the conversion to Christianity in many ways
that represents the pinnacle of the success of the early settlement of Iceland.
As I mentioned, they've always been economically dependent on Norway, that increasingly ships
are Norwegian ships, sagas are filled with references of Icelanders who take passage
on Norwegian ships go to Scandinavia.
And they're developed a tradition in the 10th, 11th, 12th, 13th centuries of Icelanders
going overseas.
Some of them go overseas to become poets and saga writers at the great courts or attach
themselves to King, so King Olaf of Norway, St. Olaf, who really is the national royal
saint of Norway.
One of his great advantages is that he had first rate Icelandic poets with him recording
his deeds, whereas his rival King Canute didn't, so King Canute never got the same PR as St.
Olaf.
Some of them take service as Vikings or as mercenaries.
We know of Icelanders who make it all the way over to Constantinople.
They're serving in the distant east.
And as the Danish author Saxo Grammaticus says on one occasion, the Icelanders turn their
poverty into a genius, into an advantage.
That is their great storytellers, and we'll get into that in the next lecture.
And because of that, they use that ability in an otherwise rather poor and remote island
to gain wealth and fame and reputation by going overseas and serving as poets and saga
writers.
The Icelanders, therefore, were a tough scan on the avian race who were able to adjust
to a harsh landscape, and certainly for 250 years to really succeed brilliantly in conditions
that would tax almost anyone.
The society that comes out of this Icelandic landscape is really remarkable.
And this is where the analogy to the American West is both deceptive and useful.
Given the patterns of Icelandic settlement, there is no national government.
In any sense, there is no government that either can make laws or enforce laws.
Everything is essentially private.
There are figures, I've mentioned, who are known as chieftains.
These are a goatee or gothe, gothar or godar is the way it would be rendered in the plural.
And these are not hereditary figures.
They are not chieftains in any kind of anthropological model.
The term chieftain is really an unfortunate translation.
A gothe was a leading man in a district who, by his reputation, his knowledge of the law,
his generosity to his family and his neighbors, was recognized as a figure to whom you could
go and who would settle disputes, would mediate issues, particularly blood feuds.
This is still very much a Viking society.
Men and especially women take offense very easily when their honor has been insulted.
This could lead to fighting.
That is, one member of a family killing another, and then you have these blood feuds running
through the generations.
This is often the main theme of an Icelandic family saga.
How did these families and all of their extended relations come into a disastrous blood feud?
A gothe is someone who is able to resolve these issues.
Someone who can keep a certain balance in society and whose rulings will be respected.
Furthermore, the gothe has a knowledge of customary law.
He has a very good memory.
He attends the quarter things.
That is, the things held in your district, your quarter, and would go to the all thing.
The position of gothe could actually be shared by several men at the same time.
That is, several members would have it.
If you don't do the job, you can lose your dependence and your so-called thing men.
That is, your neighbors who come and seek your assistance.
A poor gothe, a man who's not able to perform the job, will lose the position.
It is not hereditary.
You can transfer allegiances, and yes, there's a tendency to go with hereditary connection.
But that's an important point to make.
And so, a leading figure in Iceland, a gothe or a chieftain, is constantly on the alert
to make sure that custom and law is followed appropriately and that order is imposed in
the society.
And the whole nexus of the drama of Icelandic sagas is usually a man in a position who is
torn by family ties and kinship to pursue a blood feud or a prosecution, and his wider
obligations to his dependence and to the society as a whole to mediate and prevent a blood
feud.
In the Lux Dala saga, perhaps one of the most romantic and intriguing of all sagas, this
is the position of Olaf the Peacock, a figure that I've mentioned in several contexts.
This son, Kjartan, is involved in a very dangerous love triangle and is killed by his first cousin
and foster brother.
That is, these two cousins had been reared together as virtual brothers.
They'd gone together.
That cousin is egged on by the wife to kill Kjartan.
The news comes to Olaf the Peacock about it, and Olaf's obligation would be to order
a hit on Boli to avenge the death of that son, who is clearly his favorite son and his
long stories about his nobility, and yet he doesn't do it.
And his wife is urging him, eventually his wife does urge on the killing of that cousin
Boli, but Olaf's attitude is expressed with, look, to wage a blood feud on Boli would not
bring Kjartan back and it would be the equivalent of almost killing another son.
I'm tied to him by foster.
It would start a blood feud, and he goes for a settlement.
That is a compensation.
That is the paying out of money, the recognition that a wrong has been done, and he tries to
strike the balance the middle way.
And this is the essence of family soggers, of putting people in this dilemma, and it
tells us a great deal of how this privatized justice worked.
That is, it was a self-regulating society in which it's a face-to-face society, you're
under constant scrutiny, honor is important, and one of the qualities prized above all
others in Icelandic society was the ability to maintain honor and yet work out compromises
and mediation under the most difficult of circumstances.
In some instances, it's even argued that the threat of blood feud was often used more as
a negotiating device rather than an actual threat to the force of arms, and that it was
really a rather ritualistic appeal.
And there are instances of it.
Now analogies are made to the American West of this, in this regard, that you had a sort
of privatized justice in the American West.
People make analogies to Tombstone and all of this, and yes, there is that sense.
You're dealing with societies, face-to-face societies, sort of privatized justice.
But in the United States, there was always the assumption behind this that there was
a government, there were taxes, and this was just a temporary phase.
Eventually, more normal legal procedures would come in.
In Iceland, this type of society existed through the entire of the Viking Age and remarkably
existed to a large degree unchanged after the Icelanders passed under Norwegian rule.
And that occurred in a series of votes taken in the individual things between 1262 and
1264, in which the Icelanders accepted as their lord the King of Norway.
It started with King Hakken IV and ended with his son King Magnus.
Now often, it's thought that this was essentially the Icelanders voting themselves out of existence
because the Norwegian King had an economic lock.
That is, the Icelanders literally couldn't exist if the Norwegian King interrupted trade.
But the situation is far more subtle and really is far more consistent with this Icelandic
ability to mediate and compromise out of difficult situations.
They did that exactly again in the 1260s.
And that is, the deteriorating ecological conditions, starting in the 12th and beginning
in the 13th century to become very, very marked, led to the emergence of some very powerful
men in Iceland who had never existed before.
Men who could consolidate hereditary power in a way that a traditional goatee or goatee
could not.
These included men such as Snorri Sturlson, the famous author of whom I've spoken on
a number of occasions, the Sturling family.
They in effect carved out what Icelanders would call a rikki, a mini-kingdom.
And by the 1260s, there were about five leading families who had become so prominent in Iceland
as fewer got richer, in effect, in the change economic conditions, and more got poorer.
People were losing their land as ecological conditions were deteriorating and they were
being pushed out of the pastures.
That there was a real danger of a civil war among these powerful strongmen who were beginning
to maintain retainers, were acting as if they were dynasts who were fighting for control
over the Christian institutions since 1000, Iceland's been Christian, so they're trying
to use the two bishoprics as well as the other positions as essentially organs of state.
They're trying to manipulate the all thing and this essentially posed a threat of a major
civil war or series of civil war and most Icelanders, just this was unacceptable.
They had a tradition of regulating blood feud, a tradition of mediating, a tradition of compromise
and in effect they invited the Norwegian king to come in as their overlord and shut these
families down.
And what happened was, again, a second compromise and this is to the credit of the two Norwegian
kings, King Hacken and King Magnus, who are among some of the great kings of Norway in
the 13th century.
They understood what was going on and although Norwegian royal control was imposed, you have
the arrival of figures who would be the equivalent of an English sheriff, royal officials and
there was a new codification of laws, King Magnus made sure that most of those laws were
customary Icelandic law and that most of the royal officials operating in Norway were
essentially Icelanders co-opted into the royal service so that the traditional rules, the
traditional mediation, the traditional society long continued under the Norwegian kings and
the changes of that society would come much later when Norway had passed under Danish
control in the Union of Kalmar in 1397 and when the Danish kings in effect get Norway
well and therefore Iceland, their interest in Iceland declines and that's when the traditional
legal systems really fall out of the way.
So even in voting themselves out of existence in a way, that's this republic, the Icelanders
again showed their pragmatism, their sense of self-government and really worthy descendants
of those settlers who had carved out this remarkable frontier society just below the
Arctic Circle.
