In this lecture, I plan to conclude our discussion on the Viking impact in Easter
In this lecture, I plan to conclude our discussion on the Viking impact in Eastern Europe and
we'll conclude this lecture with the creation of Slavic-speaking Orthodox Russia.
And what happens in the course of this lecture is the Scandinavians who arrived starting in the ninth century
have slowly become assimilated to their Slavic subjects.
And by the act of conversion of Prince Vladimir to Orthodox Christianity in 988 or 989,
he propels this change into the creation of a new civilization.
And resulting civilization will be Slavic in its language, it will be Orthodox in its faith,
and will be very much Byzantine in its political and legal institutions,
that is the East Roman state, resident in Constantinople.
There will be a memory of the Norse or the Viking heritage, and especially the Princess of Kiev,
the two we will discuss a great deal in this particular lecture, of Vladimir,
or as he would be known by his Norse name, Valdemere, and not as immediate successor,
but as the most important successor to him, Yaroslav, and those two men essentially rule over the first half of the 11th century.
They will have a sentimental connection, and they will continue to host visiting or exiled Viking sea kings,
or princes, or warriors, but they would have redefined themselves as Christian Orthodox princes.
And by the year 1100, Kiev and Novgorod, to use the Slavic as opposed to the Scandinavian name for the northern town,
will become Russian cities.
And henceforth, the direction of this civilization is going to be quite different.
So how did this important change occur, and this change is on the same order of importance of, say,
the transformation of Vikings in France into Christian Normans?
Well, a lot of it has to do with the aims and personality of Prince Vladimir of Kiev,
who came to the throne in 980, and had to fight a series of civil wars to reimpose his authority.
He was the son of Sviatislav, the king who, or prince, prefer to use the term prince,
who was the prince of Kiev, who had invaded Bulgaria and taken on the Byzantine Empire,
and had been ambushed in 972 by the Pecheniks on the Lower Nyamper.
And the Sviatislav's head turned out to be the drinking skull of the Pecheniks, as I mentioned,
and the disaster of his army resulted in wars of succession.
Now, since the end of the 9th century, beginning of the 10th century,
what was to become Russia, the primary force zone of Russia,
was bristling with different fortified market towns,
and hence the Scandinavian name for the area as Garda rikki,
that is land of fortified towns or market towns.
Sometimes it was also known as Sweden the Great, as opposed to the Swedish homeland.
Well, as a result of the prosperity that developed because of the trade with Constantinople,
any prince in one of these towns who had a retinue of warriors
could assert himself as an independent ruler.
And once that prince of Kiev was slain, Sviatislav, in 972,
there were candidates not only for the throne in Kiev,
but all these various towns could break away and establish their own autonomous states.
And so Vladimir spent a good deal of the first ten years of his reign
bringing these areas back under control.
And he was very conscious of his need for legitimacy and for institutions to make that rule effective.
The other important aspect about Vladimir is he also drew some important lessons from his ancestors,
particularly from his dad, Sviatislav.
Sviatislav had attempted to invade the Balkans and either create a province there
or capture Constantinople. His motives are rather unclear.
What it did reveal were two aspects of this early state in Kiev.
One is it didn't have the institutions to sustain the type of warfare and conquests in the Balkans
that, say, the Byzantine emperor had.
There was no literacy. There was no bureaucracy.
There were no types of institutions you could associate with any kind of hierarchical structure,
the Christian church or monarchical.
And Vladimir appreciated this.
And he also appreciated the fact that a number of his ancestors were impressed by the great Orthodox civilization of Constantinople.
And he was the prince who concluded that it is much better for the prince of Kiev to rule as an ally of Constantinople
rather than to act as a restless Viking sea king to capture Constantinople,
that is to launch these naval attacks or conquer areas in the Balkans.
And that decision, with one exception, Yaroslav actually launches an attack later on on Constantinople in 1042,
but that's rather questionable what his motives were.
That perception by Vladimir becomes an important cornerstone of later diplomacy between Kiev and Constantinople.
They become related Orthodox civilizations, much more an alliance rather than a competition.
And there's good reason for this.
For one, Vladimir realized that as his state became increasingly organized
and as more and more ruse converted to Orthodox Christianity,
as there were more and more advantages to being part of that Orthodox Commonwealth
as scholars of the Byzantine world like to describe Eastern Europe,
they found themselves becoming more and more estranged from the Turkmen peoples of Eastern Europe.
This was already evident in the reign of Svetislav,
who launched an impressive campaign against the Khazars of the lower Volga and smashed the Khazar Cognate.
He essentially removed it as a political factor in the diplomacy of Eastern Europe.
And that victory actually was probably one of several reasons that led to the breakdown of the Volga trade route up to Sweden.
The Khazars had been knocked out as an important set of middlemen.
And the Byzantines had largely applauded this.
The Khazars had converted to Judaism sometime back in the 860s.
They weren't such useful allies and the relations had cooled.
So Vladimir could see that the Turkmen increasingly are going to become rivals
rather than trading partners as Kiev moved into alignment with Orthodox Constantinople.
Finally, Vladimir was an extremely adroit diplomat
and he exploited a situation that developed in the Byzantine Empire
that allowed him to convert to Christianity under the most favorable of terms.
And here we have to depend on the report of the Russian primary chronicle,
which tells us part of the story,
but we also have information from the various Byzantine historians who report this very important event.
And either in late 988 or early 989, there was a formal conversion.
Vladimir was actually baptized in the city of Sherazon,
which is in the Crimea today, which was a Greek colony in the Crimea
and affiliated with the Byzantine Empire.
And he received an imperial marriage.
He marries the sister of the then reigning emperor of Constantinople,
Basel II, a Bulgar octopus, the Bulgar slayer.
One of my favorite Byzantine emperors who really was a ferocious emperor
and probably only stood about 5152,
was barrel-chested ferocious warrior,
and all Scandinavians absolutely appreciated him as a paymaster and leader.
The reason for this is twofold.
According to the Russian primary chronicle,
before this political opportunity emerged,
Vladimir was seriously considering a conversion to Christianity.
And we're told a delightful story,
whether it's true or not, is not so important
as some of the fundamental truths behind this tale
of what caused northern people to convert.
Vladimir consulted with religious leaders from the major religions
that would have been available to him in Eastern Europe.
According to the Russian primary chronicle,
and once again you have to remember this is written by an Orthodox monk,
so it's, you know, the whole story is sort of slanted in that direction.
He consulted with religious teachers from the Bulgars,
that is the Turkomans of the Middle Volga,
long trading partners of the Rusyn in Russia.
And they told him about Islam,
and circumcision wasn't too thrilling to Vladimir.
Furthermore, he was not particularly intrigued by the fact
that they'd have to give up drinking alcoholic beverages.
And as the Russian primary chronicle puts it,
Vladimir says, no, this is not possible.
Vodka is the life of the Russians,
the joy of the Russians we can't do without it.
And I've made mention of this before,
that in Eastern Europe, fundamentally,
the conversion to Christianity or Islam
ran along the forest step zone,
or as I like to sometimes call it, the vodka hashish zone.
If you were a step nomad in a Turkmen of some sort
and your holy men smoked hashish
to climb the mystical ladder up to the other world,
well, Islam looks pretty good.
You could be a hoja in the Islamic tradition.
That's not a problem.
On the other hand, if you lived in the forest zones
and you had to get through the bleak Russian winters,
there was no way you were going to give up
your alcoholic beverages, especially vodka,
and other types of brews.
It's the only thing that gets you through to the spring.
So the Muslims are rejected.
The Latin missionaries, that is, from Western Europe,
are rejected.
There is supposedly a Jewish mission that also failed.
And the primary reason for that was,
Vladimir said, well, you people don't have a homeland.
You don't have a kingdom,
which to him would be very important.
If your God is so important, why don't you have a kingdom?
And that captures very much the notion of what
most of these northern rulers would see in a religion.
Is your God a God a victory? Is he powerful?
And he would look at the Jews.
It doesn't matter how prosperous these Jewish merchants are.
They don't have a kingdom.
He was convinced by the Byzantine missionary.
And again, the Chronicle is extremely telling.
There is a reference to the wonders of heaven.
But the real power of this Byzantine missionary,
whose unname, was the pictures he brought.
Apparently, these are either tapestries or icons.
And these pictures show the tortures of hell,
the punishment of the unfaithful.
And Vladimir and his nobles, his Scandinavian nobles,
they could really get into the plagues of Egypt
to be put upon your opponents.
They liked very much the righteous kings of Israel,
especially Josiah, Hezekiah, who cast down idols.
The power of the Lord of hosts, the conquest of Canaan.
These are the types of images that were presented,
apparently in some sort of visual form.
You have to remember that Orthodox Christianity at this point
has one of the most beautiful and articulated services
in the whole Christian world with its full icons,
with lots of wonderful images.
And this is what convinced Vladimir.
This is a powerful god.
We're going to go with the Orthodox version of the Christian god,
who in many ways was essentially a version
of the Old Testament divinity, the Lord of hosts.
And yet the report bears a lot of truth to this.
Vladimir was inclined to go that direction,
and there had been a lot of Christian missionaries in contact.
Many Scandinavians in Constantinople
had received what is often known as the Primo Signato.
That is the first sign that had sort of a provisional baptism.
They could at least attend services,
even though they weren't technically Christians.
Well, the political event that pushed Vladimir over
is reported largely in the Byzantine sources,
988, 989, the emperor Basel II faced
a very dangerous rebellion in Asia Minor.
Bardas' focus, the nephew of the previous emperor,
Nysephras' focus, had raised an enormous force,
carried Asia Minor, was threatening to cross over
and capture Constantinople.
And Basel was desperate for forces.
And he arranged a treaty with Vladimir
in which Vladimir gave him 6,000 Varyngians.
And these seemed to be Scandinavians,
not so much Bruce living in Kiev,
recent arrivals from Scandinavia,
who were the famed Viking warriors.
Vladimir kept a guard of these guys on hand.
That is recent arrivals from Scandinavia
who fought in the classic Viking shield wall.
And were told 6,000 of them arrived in Constantinople.
And in April of 989, Basel transported these forces
over to Asia Minor and bushwhacked the rebel army
at Abedas, scared the hell out of the Anatolian
and Armenian levies of Bardas' focus
and crushed the rebellion.
The result was the marriage.
The sister of Basel Anna was married to Vladimir,
so an imperial wedding was arranged.
Vladimir promised to convert to Christianity.
He was a little weak on setting aside his concubines.
He still had his concubines.
And there were certain traditional social behaviors
you have to expect, the all night feasting,
the drinking, the toasting.
But he was now a Christian ruler.
And he and his heirs would become increasingly Christian rulers.
Well, the conversion had powerful influence in several directions.
For Scandinavia, forward is beginning to become Russia
and for the Byzantine world.
So let's look at the impact on all three of those.
For the Byzantine Empire, this conversion,
probably in the spring of 989,
threw the door open to Byzantine recruiting officers
in Scandinavia.
Starting in the late 10th century
and running up to at least the year 1204,
when the Fourth Crusade,
or members of the Fourth Crusade,
Sack Constantinople,
every Byzantine emperor maintained
what is very often known as the Virginian Guard.
And these were Scandinavians,
sometimes later Anglo-Saxons after 1066,
who fought in the classic shield wall,
who came to be the elite guard of the imperial army.
And Basel kept presumably 6,000 of these guys on hand.
They fought everywhere in the Byzantine Empire,
and many important figures in Scandinavian history,
including Harold Hoddery, the future king of Norway,
fought in the Virginian Guard.
They fought under some of the veteran officers of Basel II,
such as George Monarchus,
and Harold made his career in Byzantine service,
learned all sorts of techniques.
The favorite one is what I call his Avery fire bombs.
He used to take cities in Sicily by attaching fires
and releasing pigeons that would then light up the town in Sicily.
And he was very, very good at stealth and craft,
which he learned in the Byzantine service.
And these Varyngians were reputed to be some of the best warriors
in the imperial army,
and their audacity is repeated in many literary sources.
One of the most charming features of it is there's a graffiti
on the great lion that stands in front of the arsenal St. Mark
in Venice today.
And actually, it's an Athenian monument of the 2nd century AD,
but there's a runic inscription on it put in by the Varyngian Guard.
It's too worn to read,
but it's typical of what these Varyngians do.
They scratch their names on little places like, you know,
Sten was here, and we, you know,
we clobbered the Greeks really well on this, whatever it was.
So the Byzantines got an enormous advantage out of this relationship,
and the Scandinavians did as well.
Numerous Scandinavians made their careers in Constantinople.
And going to Micley Guard, that is the great city,
is a feature that runs all through Icelandic sagas.
Many Icelanders end up serving in the Varyngian Guard,
or going as merchant princes.
Some of them settle in Constantinople.
There are reports of that.
And so many of the monarchs of Scandinavia
of the late 10th and 11th century
had that model of Constantinople in mind
when they were forging their own kingdoms.
Now, they went with Western Christianity,
and there's reasons for that.
It's closer in contact.
But the model for an effect of monarchy was Constantinople,
and the monarchy that was being set up in Kiev
by those Rus' princes,
that is, those Scandinavian princes,
who are coming to rule over the Slavic populations of the forest zone.
The most dramatic impact was not so much on Scandinavia
and the Byzantine world,
but on this emerging Russian state.
And I would say that somewhere between 1050 and 1100,
a Russian identity emerges.
And I use that term generally,
because today there's at least two,
three republics of the former Soviet Union
that could claim a dissent from this Russian state.
These would be the Ukraine, the Belarus,
and the great Russians,
which is now the Russian Republic.
And they're going to dispute exactly
what their relationship is today,
but they all culturally go back
to the achievements of Vladimir at Kiev
and also the emergence of what eventually becomes
the Republic of Novgorod in northern Russia.
Well, the conversion had some immediate and dramatic impact.
And the first and foremost was the conversion to Christianity
brought not only the institutions of Christianity,
but it also brought the Slavic language.
And that Slavic language was a literary language
created in the 9th century by Saint Cyril,
or to use more accurately his Greek name, Constantine,
the apostle to the Slavs.
And so when Vladimir and his nobles converted,
they had to use a written language
to communicate with the new god.
They had to have a way of praying to this god,
nor did not have a written form.
They had runes.
But there was this Slavic language,
which was used by the Slavic subjects
and allies of the Byzantine world.
So obviously this is what we use.
At this point in 989,
many Rus settled in Kiev, or Novgorod,
or the other Russian town would have known Slavic,
or their wives would have been Slavic speakers.
You would have had a number of bilinguals.
And so the transition is pretty easy for these people.
Once that decision was taken,
that opened up all of these Russian towns
to the literary culture of Constantine and Opel,
which was Greek and Slavic,
this literary Slavic language.
Well, that is going to result in a very, very important
linguistic and cultural change
in the identity of these people.
And by 1100, that change has been achieved.
Yaroslav, who's known very often as Yaroslav the Wise,
who ruled from 1019 to 1054.
He is one of the successors of Vladimir.
He issues the first coherent law code in Kiev,
and that's done in the Slavic language.
And what it is, is a Slavic translation of the imperial laws
that go all the way back to the Age of Justinian.
Furthermore, both Yaroslav and his predecessor, Vladimir,
come to sponsor Christian authors,
writing translations of biblical stories,
saints' lives.
The Russian primary chronicle, our major source.
And they cease to support the Scalds
who would be reciting the traditional poems in Norse.
And so that is an extremely important change
that occurs in the 11th century.
And the princes in Kiev have a sentimental sense
of being descended from Vikings,
and they long assert that.
They're very conscious of that,
in their marriage connections and in their diplomacy.
Vladimir or Valdemir, his Norse name,
is actually picked up as a name by the kings of Denmark
because of a marriage connection.
Valdemir is the great grandfather of Valdemir I of Denmark.
But it's a sentimental tie.
It's similar to the Norman memory of,
well, yes, we came from Vikings,
but we are Christians and we are warriors of Christ,
and we rule as Christian princes.
So it becomes an increasingly sentimental
and not really a major feature
in defining this new civilization.
In Novgorod, it's even more dramatic.
By the early 12th century,
it breaks away from Kiev,
establishes itself as an independent merchant republic.
That is, it's princes elected by a community,
essentially a council of merchants.
And Novgorod comes to see the Swedes,
especially, as rivals for the fur trade.
And there is no love lost
between the Novgorod and the Swedes
running through the 12th and 13th century.
They have become opponents and rivals.
And so the irony is those Swedish settlers
who had moved in and developed those northern Russian towns
as part of their fur trade network,
starting in the 8th and then running into the 10th century,
evolve into northern Russians,
Novgorod's, who see the Swedes as not kinsmen at all,
but as rivals, as members of Latin Christianity.
And so the lines become very sharp in northern Russia.
There are other important changes
driving the transformation of the Varyngians
into Slavic-speaking Orthodox Russians.
The simple fact that Vladimir had become an Orthodox prince
meant he had to have a capital.
He had to have the appropriate buildings.
Those are cathedrals and churches.
And that meant he could import Byzantine masons
to build freestanding masonry architecture.
And the first thing you get built in Kiev
is a church to marry Theotokos, marry the mother of God.
Immediately a church to Hagia Sophia
that is sacred wisdom is commenced in Novgorod.
And in the course of the 11th century,
every major town in Russia gets a stone church,
a freestanding masonry church as its main cathedral.
There are efforts to build palaces and usually city gates,
even though the fortifications are largely wooden
and earthen fortifications.
At least you have city gates,
so your towns look like Constantinople
when you approach them.
And this is an imitation of the great city to the south.
And they're able to get access to these Byzantine
or Byzantine-trained masons and craftsmen
to transform their fortified market towns
into what I would call incipient cities.
And by the time you reach the year 1200,
you have real cities in what is becoming Russia.
Novgorod, Kiev, these are cities running
between 50 and 80,000 strong.
There is nothing like this in Scandinavia.
And the majority of the people living in those cities
are clearly the Slavic subjects,
in some cases they might be Turkmen or Finns as well,
who have been attracted into the city
to sustain the activities associated with the Christian church,
the palace, and the trade that is still going on
with Constantinople.
This results in two important changes.
One is to sustain these cities,
Vladimir and his successors turn the Rus' from merchant princes
raiding Slavic tribes to get slaves to merchant princes
who see these Slavic peoples now as their subjects
and encourage them to extend the arable.
And between 1100 and 1300, the Russian peasants carve out
out of that formidable forest zone
the villages an agricultural basis to support these cities.
It is an important and significant transformation.
And what is even more impressive is that these Russian peasants
do not have the kind of tools that you have in Western Europe,
they do not have the three-field system,
and many of them are operating in northern climates
where you really have to depend on barley and oats rather than wheat.
But the clearing of the forest and the setting up of villages,
the turning of the society into a society of cities
based on peasant agriculture,
is one of the major social and economic changes going on in Russia
that turns Varyngians into Slavic Russians.
And it really is an achievement of those peasants
who are forced to pay tribute or taxes in the form of grain and produce.
There is still a lot of fishing, hunting and stock racing,
and the fur trade is still significant.
But this is a major change in the life of Russia.
That has a corresponding change in that the Slavs
are no longer potential victims for the slave trade.
They're now Christian subjects.
And the Russian princes no longer can sell them to the Turkmen.
And there was already a tension between those Turkmen tribes and the Rus.
Now with the emergence of Christian cities,
you do not sell your peasants, you want to keep your peasants as labor,
and it's wrong anyway to do so.
And the result is the Turkmen tribes start raiding the Russian villages
to find slaves.
If the Rus aren't going to sell them to us, we're going to go get them ourselves.
So the Petcheniks, later the Cumans, the Bulgars,
all of these people who had been some type of trading partner
when the Rus were still essentially Vikings, now become opponents.
And furthermore, many of these Turkmen tribes convert to Islam.
So there's now a religious tension.
And this breaks down along that same line I discussed earlier,
the Vatka line versus the Hashish line.
It's essentially the forest zone versus the steppes.
And so this becomes a major theme in Russian history ever after.
That is the Slavic peoples of the forest zone with their cities,
with their villages, their agricultural base,
trying to bring under control the Turkmen.
And if you look at the Turkmen, the steppe peoples,
this was a really menacing and threatening development.
For the first time in history, the peoples of the forest zone
had emerged as a major civilization in power,
compliments of the Byzantine institutions
and the driving organizational force of these Rus.
And that meant to the Turkmen, this civilization was dangerous
because eventually it would come to control the steppes.
It would turn those steppes into agricultural areas,
particularly in the Ukraine, where all of this steppe area
would be turned from pasture and range into villages and farming.
And this is, again, a major theme that will run through Russian history.
Finally, the Russian princes themselves, in combating the Turkmen,
transformed themselves ever more into Christian princes.
They changed their military system, or let's put it this way,
they updated it and they updated it with the same savvy pragmatism
you saw of the Normans in France.
They adopt cavalry, mounted warriors.
They maintain retinues, which are now known by the Slavic name Drutsina.
In some ways, they have the same ethos as the Viking warrior companies,
but these are now mounted warriors sporting armor armed with composite bows
skilled in raiding and stealth.
That is, they adopt many of the cavalry tactics of their Turkmen opponents.
You have now created a Russian cavalry in a Russian ruling class
that has to be supported by those agriculturists in those villages.
And by 1100, your military and political institutions are now quite different
from what you had back in 1000, or certainly that you had in 950,
when you were dealing essentially with a Viking culture
that had been transported to Eastern Europe.
Well, these changes result in the emergence of classic Russian civilization,
and as should be evident from this lecture,
while the Rus, the Vikings, are important in giving the political impetus
directing the trade and the contact with Constantinople,
they are not alone in the creation of this new Russian identity.
Byzantine civilization is of foremost importance.
And really, Vladimir very, very cleverly did what none of his contemporaries
could have done in Ireland, that is the Herberno-Northern island.
They didn't have Roman institutions in Russia,
but what Vladimir did was second best.
He brought it there in the form of conversion to Constantinople
and that close political alliance with Constantinople,
which brought in the organization, the hierarchy, the institutions,
the literate bureaucracy, taxation,
that allowed him to organize these Russian states.
The majority of the population are Slavic speaking,
and by 1100, that is going to be the language of the court,
the language of literature, and the shaping identity of this new society,
just as the Normans adopted French in Normandy.
Finally, they are going to be Orthodox Christians.
They are going to align with the Eastern European tradition,
and in many ways, the conversion of Vladimir
and the changes that follow creates Eastern Europe as we understand it today.
And it doesn't matter that by 1100, Vladimir's successors
did not establish a unitary state.
Russia was so huge and constantly expanding with the expansion of the arable
that the Prince of Kiev often ruled as sort of the leading figure,
sort of the chairman of a consortium of various ruse princes,
but they had built up the institutions for powerful regional states
that would eventually lead to the unification of the Russians under Moscow
and the creation of Russia of the European system.
