Lecture 33, Kings of the Swedes and Goths.
In this lecture I plan to look at the emergence of the kingdom of Sweden or to be more accurate
the realm of the Swedes and the Goths because Sweden is really a composite of these two
major people in central Sweden today.
And the reason we essentially devote only one lecture to Sweden is not because of the
lack of importance of Sweden but really the lack of evidence.
Sweden did not produce the same type of documentation as did Norway and Denmark.
And that does restrict our knowledge about developments, political developments especially
in Sweden during the Viking Age.
It also is a factor, another factor accounting for this is the unusual geographic and economic
circumstances in Sweden which inhibited the emergence of a effective territorial monarchy.
And that's a major issue we're going to look at in this lecture.
So I think that we really have three topics before us.
One is to look at the types of conditions in Sweden during the Viking Age which prevented
the emergence of a effective territorial monarchy in either the 10th or 11th centuries.
Quite in contrast to Norway and Denmark.
And then to account for this and see where Swedish political genius as it will, if you
wish to call it that, was expressed really more in Russia and in the eastern colonies
rather than in homeland.
And then finally to look at what type of monarchy did begin to emerge in the 11th century when
the first Christian kings of Sweden begin to organize a realm and start a process that
really is not completed until pretty late in the 13th century.
And in many ways we shall see that the Swedish kings of the 11th and 12th centuries are almost
in the position of someone like Hacken the Good was in Norway in the 10th century.
And that will underscore a great deal of the differences between Sweden and Norway and
Denmark.
Sweden had a very different experience in the Viking Age and consequently a very different
type of kingdom and society emerged.
Well what are some of the factors that were preventing the emergence of the type of monarchy
that we saw in Denmark and Norway?
You would think that in some way Sweden would be an ideal candidate for the emergence of
an effective monarchy.
Certainly in resources and population in the long run when Sweden was finally organized
especially in the 16th century under the Vasa Kings Sweden emerged as the unquestioned
power in Scandinavia.
But that was a destiny reserved for Sweden in the future.
That was not possible in the Viking Age for several reasons.
One was the land was broken up by the forests and it is important to stress that those forests
were a barrier far more than the sea.
And so the areas around Lake Maleron that is Fjelland Sweden the heartland of the Swedes
the Sfea.
That area was well linked by the communication of the lakes and its tributaries so that Uppsala
the great sanctuary to the gods a very early royal center was in close contact with the
market town such as Berga or Helgo and later starting in the late 10th century with Sektuna.
But that region was broken off from the other areas of modern Sweden to the north stretched
forest lands that ran into the Kiel mountain range which cut Sweden off from Norway and
those distant are Arctic areas were still homes to the laps.
Swedes ventured up there as fur trappers and as merchants who swapped goods with the laps
particularly iron and ceramic goods and came back with the furs that could then be exported
to European markets.
But it was very thinly settled there was no way of imposing any control over this area.
To the south of the heartland of the Swedes lay the lands of two different groups of people
the West Gautor and the East Gautor.
The East Gautor East Goths and to this day the king of Sweden calls himself the king
of the Swedes and the Goths that's what his official title is.
And that would today be the region of Östergottland and that's the region from Lake Vaterin to
the Baltic Sea which is south central Sweden today along the eastern Baltic shore of Sweden.
That area was an independent region.
The Gautor there very seldom acknowledged the king in Uppsala or later Sektuna.
And when the kingdom is finally united the Goths or the Gautar to use their Scandinavian
name always retain the right to ratify the election of a Swedish king and in several
instances we believe in the 12th century attempted to have elected a member of their own people
as king of that joint kingdom.
So from the start you had these two leading people who are going to come together and
form the kingdom of Sweden.
The rest of Sweden was divided up into numerous farmsteads, yarldoms and independent communities
separated by the forests.
In winter time the lakes would freeze over and the lakes and rivers could actually be
a means of communication if you had the proper slays and skis.
But it wasn't until the 15th and 16th century when this forest were cleared they were chopped
down when roads were put through that Sweden really began to be united.
And so that required the development of internal travel, inland travel that did not come in
the Viking age and so Sweden is very much a divided land.
It is also important to recall that what is today the west shore of Sweden, west Gautor
land or Vaster Götorland as it is called today, Jammnaut land to the north, that certain
western districts of Sweden were really part of the kingdom of Norway and that the far
south, the important arable areas, Blekinga, Halland and Skane were cut off by forests
and part of the traditional kingdom of Denmark.
So that geographically Sweden was a much smaller entity in the Viking age than it is today.
Second, besides this divided landscape, ironically the Viking age contributed a great deal of
prosperity to the Swedes and the Goths but it didn't result, the prosperity did not become
a means whereby kings could turn that to their fiscal advantage and build the kind of royal
institutions you see in Denmark and later in Norway and there's some important reasons
for that.
First, we have very little reports about any kind of king functioning in Sweden between
the time of Ottles, the legendary opponent of Rolf Krock in the 6th century A.D. and
the first king we have any real information on from the Viking age, Erik the Victorious,
who may have ruled somewhere around 980 to 995, that is essentially a contemporary of
Sweden, Forkbeard. Instead, most of our information comes from those Swedes, those
Rus' who tracked east and operated in Russia.
And I think an argument can be made that there were so many opportunities in exploiting and
developing the eastern lands, the regions that came to become Russia, that the political
genius and the organizational genius of the Swedes was applied overseas rather than in
the homeland. We do not have the same kinds of reports and again this could be simply
a function of the fact that we don't have the kinds of literary sources we have in Denmark
and Norway, but the overall impression is that those who went out of Viking, that is
those who went overseas, who took the road to Byzantium, who went to Kiev or Novgorod,
that not many of them returned as great sea kings with the military power, the money,
the expertise to establish an effective monarchy back in the homeland. Instead, many of them
preferred to stay overseas and settle as merchant princes, ruling over a fortified guard, or
stockade town, market town in Russia, or taking service in the Vringin Guard, or in some instances
signing up with King Canute or Sten Forkbeard to serve in Denmark. And this is borne out
also by the memorial stones in Sweden, another feature of the Viking Age, and that is while
a lot of prosperity was made, that prosperity perhaps was more evenly distributed among the
Vikings who went overseas and came home and didn't result in the concentration of economic
and political power that you saw in Denmark and Norway. Most of our runic stones, runestones,
memorials, grave markers, come from central Sweden, and many of them come from the later
Viking Age, somewhere from about, you know, the late 10th century into the mid to late
11th century. They're individual gravestones. Some of them are markers that indicate property
boundaries. They're set up by members of the family. There's been a great deal of study
of the social implications of what these stones represent. Many of them are actually Christian
and sentiment. Some of them are pagans. But the important fact that comes through when
one reads these stones and starts analyzing them statistically, and it's one of the few
bodies of evidence we can look at statistically, an important fact jumps out at you. We do
not have great royal inscriptions the way we have in Denmark. There are no great royal
stones like yelling, where the kings of Sweden are boasting of their accomplishments. Instead,
we have the memorial stones of individuals that could be characterized as merchant princes
and warriors. And what seems to have happened in the Viking Age is that the prophets resulted
in the emergence of a very substantial landed class and a very large merchant class and
a society that had a lot more people with property who, as far as we can tell in the
12th and 13th centuries, had some sort of loyalty eventually to the concept of Sweden,
but was a population that was not about to hand over power to a king. And they were going
to keep restrictions on the king. And this is what comes through, this is what we know
is the case of Sweden in the 14th century. That is the society that is revealed to us
once we have the documentation goes back into the late Viking Age. Sweden turned out to be a
land of a lot of independent farmers, substantial landowners, many merchants engaged in the
overseas shipping, and people who were proud of their independence and would hold their kings to
account far more than in Norway and Denmark. And I think that's a fair assumption to make,
which meant that if one was to be a king in Sweden, he had a far more daunting task in front
of him than he did in Denmark and Norway. And if this is true, if this surmises true based
on the evidence we have, it does explain the paucity of sources on the Swedish monarchy.
For one, Swedish kings just didn't have the money and means to maintain the kind of courts
which would attract Icelandic poets who would celebrate the deeds of great kings.
This only begins to occur in the late 10th century where Erik the Victorious is remembered,
but as we'll see in a moment, he really is a subordinate figure in comparison to his Danish
and Norwegian contemporaries. It's not that the Swedish kings were necessarily not as brave
as the Norwegians and Danes, it was just they weren't in the limelight. You also get the impression
from Icelandic sagas and Danish Latin accounts from the 12th and 13th centuries that the whole
region of the Baltic was sort of a common ground where any Scandinavian could go and raid.
And the southern shores of the Baltic were inhabited by either Slavic or Baltic peoples.
The eastern shores were occupied by other Baltes and Finno-Igurian peoples, the ancestors of
the modern Estonians, Latvians and Lithuanians. These areas posed no political threat to Sweden.
There was no incentive to organize an effective monarchy to counter a foreign threat, as you
had in Denmark, where there was the Holy Roman Emperor, the Carolingian emperors were putting
pressure on Denmark to develop. The Swedes were also conveniently cut off from the Danes and
Norwegians, so the Swedes were never really in the competition that you had between Denmark and
Norway. The Danish kings always resentful of the fact that the Norwegians had organized earlier,
that southern Norway is really part of their area, and so you have this long history of battles,
which only ends when Sven Estresen simply says forget it, I'm the king of Denmark and I'm not
going to worry about Norway anymore. So there wasn't the same pressure on the Swedish kings to
develop. So when we do begin to get information on the Swedish kings, starting in the late 10th
century, these kings rule far more provisionally. They have to adhere to a large number of traditions,
they must be accepted by the local things, and furthermore, if Norwegian kings found themselves
circumscribed in their actions by the magnates and the yarls of their homeland, my suspicion is the
Swedish kings were far more circumscribed in their actions by their subjects. As I said, there were
two principal people who could be the people to furnish someone for royal election, the Goths and
the Swedes. There were a number of families among both peoples who could present a plausible royal
candidate, and the monarchy in Sweden always remained elective. When one looks at later Swedish
history, what becomes the Royal Council, which is essentially a consortium of the noble families,
they control the election of the Swedish crown, and they will actually transfer the Swedish crown
from family to family, and we'll get into that into a later lecture. Well, as I mentioned, our
earliest king that we have any information on is Erik the Victorious, a very colorful figure,
who is remembered largely as a contemporary opponent to Sven Forkbeard, the king of Denmark,
and he ruled from the city of Sektuna, which is the planned settlement, a market town that was
established sometime around 975, 980, on a northern estuary of Lake Malloran when Berke had silted up,
and so we believe that he had some sort of control over the finances and the tolls of that area,
that there were a certain amount of revenues. He also must have ruled as king in Uppsala,
and Uppsala remained the great pagan sanctuary and the traditional capital of Sweden. In 1164,
it will be turned into the Archbishopric and the primate of Sweden, and to this day, in many ways,
Uppsala is still regarded as a sentimental cultural capital of Sweden, even though political power
in the mid-13th century had passed to Stockholm. We're told that Erik the Victorious, a battle
Sven Forkbeard, once Sven was compromised, but above all, Erik is really remembered as one of the
favorite of Odin, and the stories associated with Erik come right out of legend. I mean,
some of the accounts about Erik's exploits, which are recorded in this very, very strange
manuscript from Iceland called the Flati Yar Book, which is the Chronicle, the Yar Book, that is the
yearbook of the monastery of Flati in Iceland, records that he had the favor of Odin. He could
invoke Odin on battlefield, and what we have is a lot of good, heady, legendary stuff out of the
sixth century, and very little hard information or any kind of indication that Erik was establishing
the type of monarchy that we see emerging in Denmark and in Norway. His son was known as Olof
Skotkonug, which means Tithe King or Tax King, and he came to the throne around 995 and died in 1022,
and he very much ruled in the shadow of King Canute. There are, however, several important pieces
of information we have on Olof. Most of this coming from Snorri and Danish accounts, which have to
include Swedish history because Olof gets involved in the complicated dynastic struggles
during the reign of King Canute. One point is that he converts to Christianity, and that conversion
to Christianity carried the same implications that it did in Denmark and Norway, but it didn't
result in the same type of immediate territorial kingdom. There are several important caveats or
provisions about this conversion. First, he was baptized in the territory of the East Gotar,
that is, Ostergottland today, at the town of Husaby, near Skara, where the first bishopric was
set up. Sometime at the end of the 10th century, he was not baptized at his capital, Siktuna,
the market town. Furthermore, Siktuna acted apparently as the capital of this incipient
Swedish monarchy. It's where the coins were struck. We know that because the coins carry the name of
the myth. The moneyeers, that is, the men manufacturing the coins or making the dyes that
were used to strike the coins, are a combination of Danish and English names, and the whole arrangement
looks like, to some extent, the Swedish kingdom was organized under the pressure of the Danish King
Canute or an imitation of the Danish King Canute. The best guess is that the name, the nickname of
the king, was that he paid tribute to Canute. The organization of the first currency in Sweden
was really to pay the Danish King some kind of tribute, and it explains why Canute claimed
that he had a hegemony over Sweden. It also explains why the son of Olaf, Anyud Jakob, who's the second
Christian king of Sweden, teamed up with St. Olaf to attack Canute. That is, the Swedes were very,
very fearful of coming under the influence of the Danish monarchy, which was a far more effective
and consolidated monarchy. Those facts about the nature of that conversion bear out something
that we're told by Adam of Bremen, and this was another factor that inhibited the emergence of
a monarchy. Sweden remained pagan far longer than Norway and Denmark, and that, and again, it's hard
to argue cause and effect here. If you had more effective kings, maybe they would have been able
to impose Christianity more in the style of St. Olaf, but we have a remarkable report from Adam
of Bremen, who wrote the history of the Archbishoprics of Hamburg, Bremen, and he was at the court of
Svien Estresen in writing around 1070, and he gives us this report about the sanctuary of Uppsala,
and it's, I think, worthwhile reading a couple of excerpts from that account, and then expanding
on the implications of this for the Swedish monarchy. And this is what Adam tells us. That folk,
whereby he means the Swedes, has a very famous temple called Uppsala, situated not far from the
city of Siktuna and Bjorko, that's his name for Berka. In this temple, entirely decked out in gold,
the people worship the statues of the three gods, in such as wise that the mightiest of them, Thor,
occupied a throne in the middle of the chamber. Votan, which is his word for Odin, and Freiko,
that is Frey, have places on either side. The significance of these gods is as follows. Thor,
they say, presides over the air, which governs the thunder and the lightning, the winds and the
rains, fair weather and crops. The other, Votan, that is the furious, as I said, that's a good
description of Odin, carried on war and imparts to men's strength against his enemies. The third,
Freiko, who bestows peace and pleasure on mortals. For all their gods, there are appointed priests
to offer sacrifices for the people. No big change here. And you go, if a plague and famine threaten,
a libation is poured to the idol of Thor, if war to Votan, if marriages are to be celebrated
to Freiko, Frey. Frey. It is customary also to solemnize in Uppsala at nine-year intervals a
general feast of all the provinces of Sweden. Very, very telling point of a contemporary.
He sees Sweden as a collection of different kinglets and provinces, not really as a kingdom as you
have in Denmark. From the attendance at this festival, no one is exempted. Kings and people,
all in singly, send their gifts to Uppsala. And what is more distressing than any kind of punishment,
those who have already adopted Christianity, redeem themselves through these ceremonies.
And then he goes on in great detail about the ceremonies. Well, this is an account
written of a great sanctuary at Uppsala. Some scholars have tended to dismiss this account,
but there is now evidence, increasing archaeological evidence, mounting that there
were such great temples, and that temples and sanctuaries were probably far more common than
we initially assumed them to be. And here's a case where the Swedish Christians are required to
somehow participate in this great pagan festival. And we have had, at this point in 1070,
Christian kings for over a century. Now, that is a significant point to stress. No Danish or
Norwegian king was in this position in the 11th century, far from it. The last king who had to
adhere to any kind of sense of pagan traditions, Christian king, was hacking the good in Norway
in the early 10th century. The power of the old cults, the power of the great sanctuary at Uppsala,
and one must multiply that by the many different traditional cults that were scattered, scattered
across Sweden, inhibited the ability of these Christian kings around the Lake Malloran area
to impose their authority, to impose their control. They ruled very much as kings by permission.
They could get themselves elected in the things. They could rule as Christian monarchs in their
immediate capital at Siktuna. But their ability to impose a royal authority and an institutional
Christianity outside of that core was greatly circumscribed. And therefore, Sweden remains
pagan and it's still a debate among scholars how late it remains pagan, certainly into the early
12th century. That is beyond the date traditionally accepted for the end of the Viking Age. And that
is a factor that put a great deal of a roadblock in the way of any king aspiring to being a great
territorial monarch. You couldn't establish bishops. You couldn't put in the kind of literate
clergy who could provide the royal officials and bureaucracy to collect the taxes and to carry out
the types of changes you would see in Denmark and Norway. And so, in that case, Sweden lags behind.
With the death of Anid Yakup, the situation gets complicated because he's followed by a half-brother,
Emun the Old, who rules for about a decade. And then by the middle of the 11th century, by the
the 1060s, a series of civil wars breaks out in Sweden. And these are not particularly well
documented, but we do have the names of the kings. And there are a set of clashes that go on between
essentially two royal families. One of them are the descendants of a king of the early 12th century
no Svirker. And his family claims the right to be elected. The second is a Swedish-Gothic family
who are descendant from the canonized saint, that is Erik the Ninth of Sweden, who was murdered
in 1160 by actually the son, Magnus of Svirker, the king of the other family. And what these
wars indicate to us in the 11th and 12th century is a very, very different kingship than we see
emerging in both Denmark and Norway. Repeatedly, the things of both, that is the assemblies of both
the Swedes and the Goths, had the option to approve who should be king. And it's clear that they do
select kings from the rival families. And there's a whole political game in doing that. Second,
all of these kings, starting in the mid-11th century and thereafter,
rule with the consent of what becomes eventually institutionalized as the royal council,
which after 1250 or 1260 comes to sit in Stockholm. And this royal council
comes to include the leading nobles of the different districts of Sweden,
whereas Adam and Bremen would have called him in his day, the provinces, as well as the bishoprics,
the bishops, who are slowly established across the Swedish landscape in the 12th century.
And that royal council really ends up calling the shots. Usually, the royal council will agree on an
Earl. And here's a case where the term Earl, which is imported from the English usage,
it's better to use that English term than the traditional Norse Yarl, because that Earl wields
the type of power of a great Earl in late medieval England. Usually, the Earl and the council is able
to build together a faction of voters and supporters who can get his relative, or sometimes even
his son elected as king. And in fact, he rules through the king and directs policy. This becomes
very evident in the 13th century, where the great Earl's are really the ones organizing the so-called
Finnish crusades in the east. And so the kingship is always a means by which a powerful family
can build together a large coalition within the nobility, dominate the royal council, and rule
through that king and implement policy. And this becomes a fact of Swedish life down to the Union
of Kalmar and beyond. When in the 14th century, in 1397, Sweden, Norway, and Denmark are united
into one kingdom, the Danish king ruled in Sweden through that royal council. That royal council
pretty much restricted what the Danish king could do in the Union. The second important point is
that institutional Christianity is not really established throughout Sweden until about 1200.
It's only in 1164 that Uppsala becomes the primate, that is the archbishopric, of a Swedish
church, which is now separated from the authority of the German archbishops of Hamburg, Bremen.
And that's really quite late. Furthermore, there never really are sufficient number of parishes
in the 13th century to make sure that the word gets out. And many scholars then begin to wonder,
how deep was Christianity in the Swedish countryside even in the 13th century?
And so when Sweden does attain a certain political and economic stability at the end of the 13th
century, it really isn't due to the emergence of an effective hereditary monarchy. It really has a
lot more to do with this royal council that is beginning to take shape in Stockholm. It is the
royal council that elects King Valdemar, a king who establishes a new dynasty, the so-called
Falken dynasty, the Falkenar dynasty. And the royal council acts as the main political instrument
through which any kind of national policy is affected. So the kingship remains in Sweden,
always elective. It always depends very much on the will of the royal council, which now resides
in Stockholm. Stockholm by 1250 emerges as the political and economic center, largely because
the city has deep water ports. And those deep water ports are what are necessary for the type
of shipping conditions in the 13th and 14th century. And so quite in contrast to the Viking
experience in Denmark and Norway, great sea kings did not come home and create a territorial kingdom
in Sweden, far from it. The Viking age created quite a different society in Sweden. It was a
society that comprised many landowners of substantial rank. It was a society that had merchants
located in Gotland and Olin, the islands in the Baltic, which for a long time remained
independent operations and in the early 13th century became affiliated with the Hanseatic
League. Merchant princes and merchants in the areas around Lake Maleron, a society that remained
very pagan and traditional for a very long time, and a society that produced a large population
capable of erecting those memorial runestones. And so the wealth, the widening horizons, the great
advantages one in the Viking age produced a very rich society indeed, on the other hand,
that did not convert into royal power, into an effective monarchy. And the result is a society
in the 14th century in Sweden, which is economically far more diverse, with a population
with many more free holders, not the type of society that will evolve in Denmark and Norway,
and a society in which the subjects of the crown will hold that crown, that monarch,
very much to account. And that will produce a Sweden of the high Middle Ages quite different
from neighboring Denmark and Norway.
