In this lecture, I plan to look at the political and diplomatic and military developments in
Scandinavia in the period of 1100 to 1350, and this acts as a parallel to the, and a
matchup to the lecture that dealt with religious change, economic and social change in Scandinavia
during the same period.
Scandinavia was fundamentally transformed in this period of 250 years.
It's usually known as the High Middle Ages by most historians, and it's applied to Scandinavia
as well.
The landscape of Scandinavia increasingly is Christian, it is populated with steeples
of churches, church bells, rather than any kind of pagan sanctuaries.
Scandinavia is economically now part of a wider European community.
There are also these three kingdoms in various stages of developments, but definitively
Christian kingdoms that could have played a very important role in Northern Europe and
perhaps in wider European history.
And this is what the situation looked like in 1100, and by 1350, the situation looked
quite different.
By 1350, none of the Scandinavian kingdoms was really in a position to play anything
more than a local or regional role in the Baltic.
Power had shifted to the great principalities of the Holy Roman Empire and especially to
the Hanseatic League, and on the horizon, far to the east, where the kingdoms of Poland
and Russia destined to play far more prominent roles in European history than the Scandinavian
kingdoms.
And so what I wish to explore in this lecture is why did the kings, the descendants of those
sea kings who founded the kingdoms of Norway, Denmark, and Sweden in the Lake Viking Age,
failed to turn there the descendants of these Vikings into effective crusaders, crusaders
devoted to Christ and to the crown, who could conquer new lands in the Baltic, pioneer new
sources of revenue, areas to colonize, and turn Denmark or Norway or Sweden or even some
combination of the three kingdoms into a powerful Christian monarchy that could compete
on the same level as, say, the Kingdom of England, the Kingdom of France, the great
principalities of the Holy Roman Empire.
That's an important historical question to deal with, and again, it's a question that
is also closely linked to why the Viking Age passes, and Scandinavia ceases to play a major
role in European affairs in the later Middle Ages and will only re-emerge as a very important
factor in European history in the time of the Reformation and the wars of religion in
the 16th and 17th centuries.
Well, this requires us to look at the three monarchies, Denmark, Norway, and Sweden, but
it also requires us to look at certain political and fiscal conditions that were affecting
all three monarchies.
The Christian kings who followed the Viking Age, the kings who came after 1100, very much
wanted to turn themselves into, in fact, Crusader kings.
They wished to capitalize on the religious wars that were being waged in the Holy Land
to recover Jerusalem, and then later, within a generation, the concept of crusade was extended
to cover wars against any of the heathen, whether they be in Spain, the Baltic, Eastern
Europe.
By posing as crusaders, by posing as great Christian rulers, Scandinavian kings could
win legitimacy.
They could win the favor of the papacy.
Their lands were then put under the protection of Rome.
There were all sorts of legal advantages, both for Scandinavian monarchs and nobles
who went on crusade.
This is seen in the first crusading king of Scandinavia, a fellow named Sigurd, Jerusalem
Farer, or Jarsvar in Norse, a king of Norway from 1103 to 1130, and he was a descendant
of King Harold Haughtery, who was defeated in slain at the Battle of Stamford Bridge
back in 1066.
He undertook a personal crusade in 1107, 1108.
He equipped a fleet of 60 long ships, sailed to England, where he was received at the English
court by Henry I, sailed to Lisbon, assisted the Christians there in fighting the Muslims,
ended up in the Levant, and actually teamed up with King Baldwin I of Jerusalem to capture
the city of Sidon in Lebanon, and returned to Norway with a fragment of the True Cross.
He had visited the Jordan River, where he was baptized again.
He had been at Jerusalem, and really established a Christian legitimacy for Norwegian kings
thereafter.
That legitimacy of Sigurd was envied by the kings of Denmark and Sweden.
The Danish and Swedish kings in the 12th and 13th centuries, respectively, sought to gain
crusading advantages and legitimacy closer at home.
The Danish kings will wage wars along the southern and eastern shores of the Baltic
to convert the Slavic Wends, or the Baltic-speaking people such as Pomeranians, Prussians, or
the ancestors of the modern Latvians and Lithuanians today.
The Swedes will direct their efforts against the Finns, and eventually against Orthodox
Nufgerod in the 13th century.
All of these were efforts by Scandinavian kings to join the privileged circle of Christian
kings in Europe.
It also was accompanied by promoting European styles of fighting, and above all, knighthood
and chivalry, and all of the traditions now associated with knighthood that comes out
of the crusading traditions of the 12th and 13th century.
Scandinavian kings start putting on jowls.
There is a need for more heavy cavalry.
Denmark takes the lead in this.
The Danes convert to a menorial structure of agriculture, which can support what is called
in Danish a lens.
That is a thief.
Certain Danish warriors are in fiefd as knights, the way you would have in class if you're
many of the Danish knights are actually Germans who have been brought in by the Danish king
and given their fiefs.
To a lesser extent, this is also applied in Norway, and even far lesser in Sweden, and
that's because of the unusual quality of Sweden.
The Danish kings, foremost, but then followed quickly by the Swedish and Norwegian kings,
always had an appetite for revenues.
By becoming Christian kings, they had a far more expensive diplomacy.
They had international marriages.
They had to conduct crusades.
There was a whole style of diplomacy and court that one maintained.
The court at Raskilde is under the Christian kings of the 12th centuries, a very, very
different and far more expensive affair than the court of Rolf Krocke.
That meant they had to extend the royal jurisdiction over justice, the administration of justice,
the prophets of justice.
They had to collect tolls and rents on trade and on their estates.
Above all, they converted traditional obligations to the monarchy into cash payments.
The letting or lead egg, that is, the ship levy, was very often commuted, that is, turned
into cash payment in the course of the 12th and 13th century.
And that had another important development that changed Scandinavian society.
Increasingly, Scandinavia acquired very much the quality of most European states in the
later Middle Ages.
There was a warrior caste, a professional caste of knights, of nobles who did the real
fighting.
And increasingly, the rest of the population was engaged in agriculture or fishing or stock
raising and not expected to use arms.
Again, that is a European pattern that has now been brought into Scandinavia and is yet
another reason why you don't have that reservoir of train arm free men to go out on the Viking
style raids.
Now the king has a monopoly of violence.
He controls the armies, but above all, certain classes have that monopoly of violence, and
those are the men increasingly trained to fight as heavy cavalry as knights.
Also, shipping and banking falls into the hands of German burgers, that is, we would
call them bourgeoisie or middle class.
It's sort of a deceptive term.
Merchants are really just one step below the nobility.
Very often they acquire landed property.
But the members of the Hanseatic League take over the banking and the shipping in most
Danish and Norwegian towns.
They are prominent on the island of Gotland and Sweden, which is essentially a satellite
of the Hanseatic League.
They're far less important in Sweden because of the diversified economy and the nature
of Swedish social patterns.
The Danish kings cannot tax these people.
It is extremely difficult for the Danish kings to tax their German Hanseatic subjects.
The same is also true in Norway, where the Norwegian kings have to come to deals with the
Hanseatic League.
They control the ships, they control the shipping, and increasingly Scandinavian armies often
have to be shipped in German vessels.
And that puts another restriction on these Scandinavian monarchies.
And finally, these monarchies, all of them, to varying degrees, are struggling to make
themselves hereditary.
To force the nobility, the prelates, that is, the bishops, the clergy, and all of their
subjects to accept the principle that the monarchy is hereditary within one family and
that a single king should rule.
And without getting in too much of the details of later Scandinavian history, there are varying
degrees of success in this endeavor.
The kings of Norway, by the 13th century, by 1217, with the accession of King Hakken IV,
turn their monarchy into a hereditary Christian monarchy.
And the Norwegian throne is without doubt going to pass in the family the descendants
of Harald Hoddery, the descendants of essentially St. Olaf.
And that is a strict European-style monarchy, and in many ways Norway of the 13th century
resembles in its legal institutions and its royal institutions contemporary England under
Henry III.
Denmark is slightly different.
The Danish kings eventually assert that their family, the old yelling family, going back
to Gorm the Old, and these are the descendants of Sjen Estretsson, the nephew of King Knut.
Knut the Great, insist that they should be the only people qualified for election as
king, and there should only be really a single king.
There shouldn't be any of these joint kingships anymore.
And that pretty much sticks.
They however increasingly become restricted in the 13th century.
They have a royal council, which comes to be called the Danhoth, which is the, it means
the Danes house, the Danes, it's the royal council of prelates and nobles, the hereditary
lords of Denmark who advise the crown, and they insist that yes, they will elect a member
of that family, but each Danish king on his accession must promise to rule according to
customary laws and with consultation of the Danhoth or the royal council.
So the Danish monarchy is hereditary to some degree, but it is also restricted.
In Sweden, as I mentioned in another lecture, the Swedish kings never succeeded in making
their monarchy hereditary, and from the start, from 1250 on when we have good records, it
is the royal council in Stockholm that really dictates royal policy.
And the kings are always elective, elective monarchs, and the royal council will take
the initiative, particularly an important decision in the late 14th century to elect
not only someone outside the royal family, but in the case of, of Albrecht III of Mecklenburg,
someone who wasn't even a Swede, is connected by dynastic connections, but he was essentially
a German prince who was brought in to be king of Sweden.
So with all of these changes pressing on the different monarchies of Scandinavia, I would
like to switch over to the second part of this lecture and examine briefly the fortunes
of Denmark, Norway, and Sweden in the aftermath of the Viking Age and during that period
of the High Middle Ages, so that you have some sense of the type of Christian kingdoms
that had come out of the Viking Age.
Well initially Denmark showed the greatest promise.
In part, a lot of credit goes to Svien Estritsen.
He was the king who decided that the conquest of England was not worth the effort.
It was better to be a territorial Christian king of Denmark than attempting to revive the
empire of Canute.
He left five sons, all by different wives.
He was fondly remembered by bishops because he endowed a lot of land to the bishoprics,
but he never paid attention to Christian mores.
They're all officially wives.
Only one of his five sons was a half-brother, a son of a different mother, and the second
one of his sons to succeed, Canute IV, was eventually canonized somewhere around 1102-1103
because he was murdered by crews in Denmark who didn't want to carry out an invasion of
England.
Canute IV St. Canute, as he's usually known in the records, attempted to revive the project
of invading England, and that just didn't go anywhere, and he was actually dragged from
the sanctuary of a church and killed.
There's a lot of suspicion that his brother, Olaf, who at that point was in a royal dungeon
and was cited for execution, that his supporters had something to do with the mutiny.
This is in 1086, and Olaf was declared the next king.
He's the third son of Sven de Falo, and Olaf, a year after Olaf came to the throne, there
was a famine in Denmark, and he is affectionately remembered in the Danish tradition as Olaf
the Hungry or the Hunger, meaning that everyone was hungry because of the famine because it
was responsible for murdering or his supporters for murdering his brother Canute, who was
eventually canonized, a rather dubious royal saint to say the least.
Olaf in turn was followed by his brothers, Erik the Evergood and Niels, and they, collectively,
the five sons of Sven Estresen, really advanced the ecclesiastical institutions of Denmark.
They established the diocese, they carried out reforms of royal law, extended the competence
of royal courts, and very much promoted the changes that drove the economic, social and
religious changes of what I spoke.
Unfortunately, after the death of Niels in 1134, the Danish kingdom went through an incredibly
violent set of civil wars, which nearly wiped out the Danish monarchy.
It's led some scholars to really question how deep were Christian values when one of
my favorite Danish kings in the period, he's known as Erik the Unforgettable, who from 1131
to 1135 managed to wipe out eight of his own children, his nephews, his nieces, murdered
at least six bishops, and yet was reckoned by Saxo Grammaticus to rule with the favor
of divine clemency, and in the words of the historian Erik Christensen, he very much typifies
the types of kings of this age, and Christensen would say, such men worship success.
Christ would grant it, give shelter to the bloodstained soul after death, and in return,
he expected baptism, liberality to his priests, penance, and burial in hallowed ground, and
these Danish kings of the 12th century fit that description extremely accurately.
The situation changes with the accession of Waldemir I in 1157.
He and his two sons, who follow Knuth VI, Waldemir II, bring Denmark to the position
where Denmark looks as if she will turn herself into a great naval power that will dominate
the Baltic.
Mair and his first cousin, the bishop of Ruskeld, Absalon, carry out a very aggressive
set of wars along the southern shores of the Baltic.
They conquer the Wends.
They storm the pagan sanctuary on the modern island of Gruggen, which is strategically
placed at the Oder River.
They also extend their overlordship to the borderlands south of the Eider River, the
region of Holstein today, and they have in mind gaining control of both Hamburg and
Lubeck, and those goals are eventually realized by the second son of Waldemir, Waldemir II.
There's also efforts to campaign farther east along the, today these would be the shores
of Poland, the areas around Königsberg, or as it's now known, Kaliningrad, the shores
of Latvia and Lithuania.
Denmark still has a significant fleet.
This is before the emergence of the Hanseatic League, and when Waldemir I dies, he dies
probably seen as a king who rules a monarchy that in some ways might be comparable to
Norman England.
The population of Denmark is perhaps 700,000.
England and Wales is close to a million.
Denmark is expanding rapidly in the Baltic, becoming a naval power, colonizing new areas.
Again, the comparison to England is its expansion into Wales, eventually into Ireland and Scotland,
under the Norman Kings, the Plantagenic Kings.
And so Denmark is on the road to becoming a significant European monarchy.
And in part, that success depended on not just the personality of Waldemir I, but also
on the fact that the Danish kings cooperated closely with the great Hohenstaufen emperors
of the Holy Roman Empire, notably Frederick I, Frederick Barbarossa.
Well that possibility for Denmark to emerge as a, as the Christian crusader kingdom in
the Baltic, ends in the early 13th century.
There are several reasons for this.
The failure of Danish power to contemporaries was really probably quite unexpected and really
quite dramatic.
In the year 1227, the then reigning king, Waldemir II, at an important battle known as
Born Hoved, is defeated by his German vassals.
In 1227, the Danish kings ruled a substantial part of northern Germany, and this had been
allowed by the Hohenstaufen kings.
These would include towns such as Lubeck and Hamburg, the areas of Holstein, parts of what
are now Mecklenburg.
The Hohenstaufen's, whose base was really in southern Germany and were really far more
interested in Italy and Rome, used the Danish king as a counterweight, as a way of keeping
the northern German lords in line.
So they wouldn't get too obnoxious and frustrate Hohenstaufen ambitions in Italy and the Mediterranean.
And so the Waldemir I and his sons had exploited this alliance to extend Danish power in northern
Germany and to carry out significant crusading operations and colonization along the southern
shores and eastern shores of the Baltic.
Well in 1227 that comes to an end.
Waldemir II, who had had a rather unfortunate career with his German vassals, at one point
he and his son were actually seized by the count of Holstein when they were visiting
him for a hunting expedition, held for ransom, it was an outrageous sum, they paid it, that's
one reason why the Danish army ends up on the battlefield at Born Hoved in 1227 anyway.
But that defeat in which King Waldemir II was captured, he was forced to relinquish his
German conquest, to give up those towns.
He retained Rügen, that island at the mouth of the odor, and later campaigned his later
expeditions on the northern shores of Estonia, which was a really remote outpost of Danish
power that they were allowed to retain.
But otherwise the southern and eastern shores of the Baltic were going to become the area
colonized and exploited by Germans and Dutch.
Lubeck, the great city established in the mid-12th century, the first significant German
city founded on the Baltic shore, became the point of departure for German colonists, merchants
and crusaders who fanned out across the Baltic area and really conquered and converted these
areas and brought them into the Christian community.
And it is important to stress that while the modern maps show a shore for Poland, the Polish
kingdom is centered in Krakow.
The Polish kings have very little interest, very little contact on what's going on in
the shores of the Baltic.
That is a German area of activity.
And Russia is much too far east, or the Russian principalities and the Republic of Naufgerad,
that the eastern shores of the Baltic are largely not organized in any sort of states.
All of these areas are brought under German control and the towns are essentially German
towns.
And the Danish outpost in Estonia, the modern city of Tallinn, Rival, which is the basis
of Danish power, is essentially a German community.
The Danish king is actually using German settlers to settle his very conquest.
And so from the mid-13th century on, with that defeat of Waldemir II, the Danish kings
are increasingly behind the fiscal eight ball.
The situation gets worse and worse.
They take a second seat to the Hanseatic League and the German, particularly the Teutonic
order, the military monastic order, in the Baltic.
And the Danish crown, by the opening of the 14th century, is close to bankrupt.
It cannot meet its bills.
The currency is debased.
They lose control over the right to tax trade because the Hanseatic League has now the ships
and the military force to gain concessions from the Danish crown.
So they're exempt from it.
At one point in the early 14th century, the Danish monarch is actually abolished.
And they're close to 10 years.
And then all the Danish and German knights and lords realize, well, we really need a
king in order to entheap us and be a good idea.
And they bring the kingship back.
But it's remarkable that Denmark was just not incorporated into the Holy Roman Empire
as a principality similar to what happened to Bohemia.
Well, as the Danish monarchy declined dramatically in the 13th and early 14th century, the Norwegian
monarchy went to success.
There was a period of very difficult civil wars in the 12th century.
These are discussed in the latter portions of Snorri Struelsen's Hinscholling, a saga.
And he takes the story down to the 1170s, not quite to the end of those struggles.
In part, these were wars that followed the death of Sigurd Jerusalemfarer, where there
was a dynastic question of who should follow.
And up until, really until 1217, there was still an understanding within the royal Norwegian
house that all sons, legitimate and illegitimate, had some sort of claim to a realm.
And there are instances of kings sharing power or even dividing up the rule of Norway, the
traditional arrangement would be someone would get Vestlandat in the Oslo upland area,
someone would rule in Trondelag and Halagoland, the northern regions.
Well, from 1130 down to 1217, a series of violent civil wars broke out between rival
family, rival branches of the same family.
And these civil wars were really on an incredibly destructive level.
Each contender armed what is often known as a fluke, plural flukelar, where we get
fluke in English, it's essentially the same word.
These were armed retainers, very often men armed with the newest style European type weapons.
The plundering and the pillaging that went on was really quite horrendous if Snorri is
to believe.
Customary law was violated.
And what came out of about a generation and a half of Norwegian civil wars was a landed
class willing to accept a just king and eager to accept a hereditary monarch who would impose
the rule of law.
And with the exception of Hacken IV in 1217, the two groups, the Croisiers and the Birch
Legs as they like to call themselves from their banners, agreed to put their support
behind Hacken who represented both branches of the family in his descent.
And he not only imposed law, Hacken IV proved the very monarch that would make Norway work.
On the one hand, what Hacken got was the assurance of strict hereditary succession.
No more joint kingships, none of that nonsense, and the succession went to the family.
There was no other family, it was the Norwegian monarchy was no longer elective, unlike the
Danish monarchy where there was still an elective principle.
The second important thing that Hacken achieved was he linked royal power with local institutions.
An ancient tradition, but he brought in English style sheriffs.
He developed justices of the peace as we would call them in an English shire, very similar
to the arrangements you have in say, Plantagen in England.
They would administer justice according to traditional law in the different districts
of Norway, but they represented the crown.
And that was an important point.
Justice was customary, but linked and sanctified by the crown, a brilliant solution.
So what Hacken did was co-opt the local ruling elites to royal service.
He also developed church institutions, and the church was very much behind the notion
of hereditary monarchy because that would cause an end to the destruction, the plundering
of church properties that had been going on for the last 70 years, and they very much
promoted this image of a just king in the traditions of St. Augustine, and in return
they gave their full support, the coronation, the full Christian legal justifications behind
this hereditary monarchy, Hacken IV and his son and successor Magnus VI both proved to
be great friends of the church, they expanded ecclesiastical institutions, and really turned
the Norwegian church into a national church working in close tandem with the monarchy.
So that by the opening of the 14th century, where the Danish monarchy was in serious jeopardy
of disappearing, and essentially Denmark being divided between the Hanseatic League and various
nobles of both German and Danish ancestry who ruled as feudal lords, Norway emerged
as the most effective and central state on Scandinavia, and a kingdom that had a reputation
as a crusader kingdom and a powerful kingdom that commanded the respect of other European
monarchies.
Sweden, as I mentioned in the previous lecture, Sweden never developed a hereditary monarchy.
The royal council maintained the right to elect the king, to change the election of
kings, and above all directed policy.
And Swedish kings of the 13th century, and starting in the early 13th century with Erik
the 10th, attempted to gain some kind of respectability, legitimacy and profits by waging crusades
in Finland.
Now there were two reasons for doing this.
One was getting papal dispensations, all the advantages that the Danish kings had in the
12th century.
You would extend royal control, you would conquer Finland, you would bring Christianity
to the heathen.
But it was also hoped that these expeditions, which would drive deep into Finland and then
into Russia, would give the Swedes control over the Luka to fur trade.
And that fur trade had come increasingly to center on the old Scandinavian colony of
Nuffkarod, now the seat of a city, 80, 200,000 strong, a Russian principality that was very
very orthodox in its faith, and extremely jealous of the fur trade.
And so over the course of the 13th century, the Swedish kings launched a number of expeditions
to convert the Finns.
They do succeed in bringing southern Finland under their control, there is a certain amount
of colonization.
But they fail hopelessly in their efforts to push into the fur trade of Russia.
They just don't have the population and resources to take on the princes and the merchants of
Nuffkarod.
And in the end, Nuffkarod succeeds and by 1300, the Swedish kingdom is not going to generate
an effective monarchy by crusading and overseas conquest.
And so Sweden, by the opening of, by the early 14th century, is not quite in the fiscal disaster
that Denmark is, but that Swedish monarchy is never going to be a major power in the
late Middle Ages.
And so by 1350, the question on the eve of the Black Death is really, well, what will
happen next with these Scandinavian kingdoms, and we'll give a postscript on that in our
final lecture.
