Hey, so does anyone remember Jurassic Park?
Jurassic Park is a film about many things.
Dinosaurs obviously quite a big one, but then it's also about the risks of unchecked
science, the value of fatherhood, paying your software engineers a representative salary
that so destroy everything you know and love, and, most harrowing of all, mathematics.
Elegantly summarizing the last half-century on the topic with its iconic line, life, uh,
finds a way, Jurassic Park introduced a blockbuster audience to the subfield of mathematics known
as chaos theory.
You know, the butterfly effect, small changes leading to large changes, ergo, dinosaur-themed
butt-goat splat.
But did it strike anyone else as odd how certain Dr. Malcolm was in his predictions about something
that he himself argued was unpredictable?
How did he actually know it wouldn't have turned out fine?
Where were the calculations?
Could it be that he couldn't predict anything after all?
I knew he wasn't a real mathematician, mathematicians don't have sex appeal.
In truth, there are some things we can predict with considerable precision.
We know how well a plane will fly before it even takes off.
We know where the planets will be millions of years into the future.
And we know Paul the Lever, Cronk, must inevitably be followed by...
Wrong Lever!
Why do I even have that Lever?
Anyway, hey, so does anyone remember Foundation?
Foundation is a book series written by acclaimed science fiction author Isaac Asimov.
Depending on how long it takes me to make this video, it will be, is, or was also a TV
series, created for Apple's new, current, or long-defunct streaming service, Apple TV.
Many view Foundation as Asimov's magnum opus.
Indeed, it beat Lord of the Rings to the Hugo Award for Best Ever Series.
An award Asimov himself believed was created specifically for Lord of the Rings to win.
Which is all the more amazing when you realise the central premise of the book is a mathematical
theory.
This time, though, it's less life finds a way, and more life doesn't.
Asimov imagined a field of study called psycho-history, which would plug the current state of a galactic
society into a model and predict its future.
Foundation explores the consequences of psycho-history across hundreds of years, the tantalising
prospect of society itself being predictable.
But would psycho-history actually hold up in the real world?
How do we square it with chaos theory in all those butterflies?
As someone who knows a fair bit about maths, and, incidentally, someone with exceptionally
low sex appeal, checkmate Spielberg, today I am on a mission to find out.
I've assembled some of the latest research into predicting human behaviour with maths,
along with the frightening reality of it that may already be happening, to understand where
we're heading in the field of understanding where we're heading, as well as to learn
what it takes to write fiction about prediction in the first place.
So I predict you are going to sit right there for the next 50-ish minutes and join me as
we ask, Foundation, are we predictable?
This video contains major spoilers for the Foundation book series, as well as minor spoilers
for the media currently on screen.
Few other names, nay, few other words, are so laden with science fiction mystique.
It almost sounds like a name from another planet, that of the planet being the Soviet
Union.
Well, not quite, it was the Soviet Union's weird teenage phase when I hadn't quite
decided what it wanted to be yet, but whatever you call it, it was where Isaac Asimov was
born.
And if you thought the where was unclear, don't get me started on the when.
Nobody, neither Asimov nor his own parents, knew the exact date.
The best they could do was arrange, so, without any better way to decide, Asimov chose his
birthday himself.
He went for the latest date possible, which, 25 years later, meant he was drafted into
World War II because he was only just inside the required age bracket.
Asimov's parents emigrated to the United States when he was three.
They opened a sweet shop selling, among other things, pulp sci-fi magazines.
No prizes for guessing where young Isaac found his influences.
Hell bent on writing sci-fi, at age 18, Asimov started submitting stories to John W. Campbell's
astounding science fiction.
His first few were rejected, but Campbell insisted that Asimov should continue submitting
to hone his craft, even agreeing to regular meetings together with the hope that one day
he'd write something successful.
I wish the employers who rejected me would do that, but it's not the 1930s anymore.
Asimov's first published story appeared in 1939, but it was 1941's Nightfall that
made his name.
The story of a planet that has but one night every few millennia, where everyone goes mad
because they don't know about stars, propelled him to sci-fi stardom.
And from there, the guy went a bit nuts.
Few authors in any genre have been so prolific, so inventive, and so influential.
Take iRobot.
Asimov found the robot subgenre a tired shadow, endlessly rehashing stories of creations turning
on creator that did little Mary Shelley's Frankenstein hadn't done a hundred years earlier.
He left it an ethically expansive world of new questions and possibilities that shape
our treatment of real AI to this day.
But then the film version came along and sent us all backwards again, so…
Eh.
iRobot exemplifies the emphasis Asimov puts on big ideas.
It's a series of disconnected short stories that dissect a single topic from many angles,
poking and prodding his three laws of robotics to find the holes still present in a system
that does prevent robot uprisings.
The last question, possibly my favourite short story of all time, is similar.
Humanity returns to one question over and over in otherwise disparate vignettes throughout
the future, and is a pretty giant question to put it mildly.
But we aren't answering that one today.
Still a big one, but not that big.
Even my hubris has limits.
In 1941, Asimov was working at the Philadelphia Dockyard.
He hadn't had much time for writing.
He needed something new to show John Campbell in their upcoming meeting, something to blow
him away, but what?
Although he wasn't writing, he had been reading.
Specifically, reading Edward Gibbons' history of the decline and fall of the Roman Empire,
a six-volume epic charting the fall of Rome and the factors responsible.
This gave him an idea, and led to a meeting that must have gone something like,
Alright Isaac, we need a new idea for a killer sapphire story.
Nobody had properly attempted a galactic empire before, much less than a count of its destruction.
We have foundation to thank for the empire in Star Wars, for instance, at least that's
what Asimov believed.
And being a space opera to film more recently than the 1970s, the Foundation TV show takes
obvious influence from Star Wars in return, proving we're all living in a big cultural
oraborus.
But Asimov wanted to go further than simply transposing the fall of Rome into space.
Gibbons theories had struck a chord with his love of examining human progress at the grandest
scale, and he couldn't help but ask himself, what if the fall had been predicted?
If, according to Gibbons, there were such clear factors in hindsight, would it not be possible
for someone to notice them at the time?
Combining the idea with his love for all things technological, Asimov went beyond even that.
What if someone applied the scientific method to such an insight?
What if they were able to turn history into a robust predictive science?
He called it psychohistory, that branch of mathematics which deals with the reactions
of human conglomerates to fixed social and economic stimuli.
Psychohistory can't predict an individual's behaviour.
It studies dynamics in aggregate.
The more people involved, the more accurate it becomes.
Asimov likened it to physical systems like gases which we'll look at in more detail
later.
Discrete particles, humans, move in any which way they like, but the emergent flow of institutions
and incentive structures is highly predictable.
In universe, psychohistory is the invention of mathematician Harry Selden, who is very
much Asimov's self-insert.
He predicts the Galactic Empire will fall into chaos for 30,000 years, but creates a plan
to shorten that dark age to only 1,000 by establishing the Foundation, a new settlement
at the edge of the galaxy.
Initially, we're told the Foundation's task is to compile all knowledge into an encyclopedia
galactica, preserving it beyond the decline, but Selden's true plan was much more subtle.
He placed the Foundation in precisely the right spot to course correct the future evolution
of the galaxy, meeting a series of pivotal events known as Selden crises.
It would prevail against these crises not through the acts of great men or random chance, but
the inevitable march of social trends.
In 1942, Asimov published the first story set in the Foundation universe.
It and four others were later combined into the full-length novel Foundation in 1951.
Then came Foundation and Empire in 52 and Second Foundation in 53.
Asimov returned to the series much later, adding two sequels and two prequels in the
80s and 90s, thus completing the Foundation...septilogy?
I have the main trilogy in book form, and it might well be the most gorgeous-looking book
I own.
Oh, shiny.
Much like iRobot, the series challenges its premise from multiple angles across a long-disconnected
time span.
Here's a good example.
At one point in the second book, the Foundation has defeated every enemy except the remnants
of the Old Empire, still powerful enough to crush the Foundation's feeble military.
But they needn't worry.
The Empire is in a stalemate with itself.
In short, any general who conquers a Foundation would become a threat to the Emperor himself,
so the Emperor can't allow this to happen.
The Foundation therefore does nothing and...wins.
Asimov based this event on the real story of one Roman Emperor and his general, found
in decline and fall.
Writing a series like this must have been immensely challenging.
Its characters are fleeting and ineffectual, its focus sociological rather than psychological.
And that's not even touching on how one can create an entertaining story where everything
is preordained right from the beginning.
Sure, fiction is full of structure like character arcs, climaxes and resolutions and brick jokes.
What's a brick joke?
You know what, it's not important right now, we'll get to it later.
But canon structure built on mathematical prediction really work.
Well, I'll be diving into this in more detail in part 6, so pin that thought.
The effect of writing Foundation as such is that, well, it has some issues.
With a few notable exceptions, the characters have less dimension than a piece of string,
and the prose is brimming with more Technobabble than baby Apex Twin.
Admittedly, Asimov Technobabble is my kryptonite, so I'm good with it, but you shouldn't go
dashing out to read it if you have different sensibilities.
He's famous for his ideas, alright?
Those ideas did, however, make Foundation an enormous success.
Along with winning the Best ever series award, it cemented Asimov as THE great science fiction
writer.
Its impact is extensive.
Science fiction hasn't been the same since.
It shaped Dune, Star Wars, Hitchhiker, it was in the glovebox of Elon Musk's space
Tesla for crying out loud.
Further afield, Nobel Prize winner Paul Crouppen credits it with pushing him into economics.
The closest field to psycho-history you could find in the real world, but can we do better?
Let's get to the meat of this video and ask, is Asimov's psycho-history actually possible?
And for that, I'm afraid we need to use math.
Hot take.
Mathematics is in many things.
I hesitate to say everything because some smart ass in the comments is gonna ask, what
about the set of all things that aren't mathematics and cause some kind of paradox, but I digress.
Maybe I'm biased, but maths helps us understand so much and has opened so many doors for our
modern world that it might well be humankind's greatest ever invention.
Science is maths, engineering is maths, economics is maths, politics is maths, video games are
languages maths, if you squinted it, even music is maths, but you've all heard that one already.
We use maths in all its forms to understand the world, often with eerily good results.
For example, we began by describing real world shapes with real world geometry,
but with time, the maths dared us to imagine new geometries that didn't exist in our universe.
Then, out of nowhere, some guy called Albert used those imaginary geometries to build the
most accurate theory of physical motion we've ever known.
You might recognise him, and that's because his theory correctly predicted the weird position of
some stars during an eclipse and that shot him to stardom.
I didn't even plan that.
All in all, it's quite astonishing the power maths has to portray the real world.
Not that I know. I'm writing my master's dissertation on category theory.
Co-kill me now.
And with Einstein's eclipse example, we see maths is particularly well suited to the
field of prediction. Accurate observation and insightful theories mean we can forecast
planetary dynamics with stunning precision.
Take a look at Wikipedia's timeline of the far future, one of my favourite places on the
internet, and you'll see just how many astronomical events we're aware of billions of years in advance.
But before we can predict large things like planets and societies, we need to start small.
So, here's a familiar example.
Consider a cannon at ground level, pointing 45 degrees upwards,
which instantaneously accelerates a cannonball to 100 meters per second.
Factoring in air resistance, how far will the cannonball travel?
Thanks to the work of generations of mathematicians and physicists before us,
we don't even have to think.
We can simply plug these numbers into a big formula and know for certain where the ball will land.
Our prediction then aligns perfectly with reality.
Oh, there must have been a random gust of virtual wind or something.
Well, guess we won't be seeing that ball again.
No matter, let's try once more.
These same laws of physics are so effective, they tell us a building can withstand an
earthquake before a single brick has been laid.
Or how well a plane will fly without anything leaving the ground.
In more general terms, this is mathematical modelling.
Writing and solving equations to study real-world systems and predict their behaviour.
Psycho-history brings mathematical modelling to bear against humanity itself.
How would such a model work?
Asimov's main inspiration was the ideal gas law.
Gases are composed of trillions upon trillions of molecules,
all bashing into each other like a microscopic mosh pit.
Predicting each particle's behaviour is nigh on impossible,
but put enough together and the discontinuities are averaged out,
leaving only the overall movement of the gas in response to external pressures.
There's a video on YouTube where Professor Dan Crisan compares
psychohistory to heat transfer, a similar concept.
At the microscopic level, we have what's called a stochastic process.
Particles with more energy move faster and impart their energy to others through collisions,
but in a given region of this size, these collisions are effectively random.
Again though, zooming out reveals the emergent structure.
Heat flows from hot areas to cold.
At the macroscopic level then, there is a clear pattern in play.
Because there are so many particles, we can assume the system is continuous
and can write expressions known as differential equations to describe that pattern.
The solution to such an equation, if it exists but that's a story for another time,
then describes all those dynamics much more simply.
But there is important nuance here.
The equations assume continuity, that there is no smallest unit of the material,
when in fact we know there is.
Again, in practical terms, the particles are so small that our approximation is fine,
but this does highlight how modellers must be aware of the assumptions inherent in their descriptions.
We assumed that the outside of the material remains at a known temperature,
that the material is of uniform density,
that the laws of physics wouldn't change halfway through via sudden vacuum decay of the universe,
psycho history may not be a law of physics,
but that can't stop the power of mathematical models.
The Prime Minister has announced the most drastic limits to our lives that the UK has
ever seen in living memory.
The NHS will be unable to handle it.
A decision based on scientific projections
for how many thousands the virus might kill in the coming months.
Created scenarios will what might happen to the key metric of hospital admissions
with three different assumptions on how quickly...
Over the past two years, I've gone through several periods of near obsession
following models of the Covid-19 pandemic,
to the point that my mood on a given day
would depend on how that day's Covid statistics affected their predictions.
Unhealthy? Yeah, absolutely.
I think at the darkest points I needed their assurance
that there would be light at the end of the tunnel,
but they weren't always predicting light, were they?
My point is that population dynamics models,
in this case for a virus population,
held enormous sway over our lives recently.
Their might is evident.
Biological models make similar assumptions to physical ones.
Ignore individuals, zoom out to approximate continuity.
But because biological processes are arguably more complex
and less controllable than physical ones,
we need more assumptions.
This is why pandemic models disagree so often.
The maths never gives wrong answers.
We just feed it the wrong questions.
Outside of pandemics, we've used biological modelling
to understand predator-prey interactions
and humanity's effects on ecosystems,
such as figuring out sustainable fishing rates.
We're even simulating evolution itself.
Mathematical biology has exploded over the last half century.
More and more, we're finding biological systems are well suited to modelling,
suggesting psycho-history isn't as far removed from reality as it first seems.
I think if Asimov were writing Foundation Today,
he'd base psycho-history more on this than the physical sciences.
And as evidence, I present Jurassic Park.
A few of you may be surprised to learn that the film is based on a book.
Michael Crichton's Jurassic Park goes much harder into the biological maths,
and is so far the only instance I've ever seen
of a normal distribution being a major fictional plot point.
Plot point.
But Crichton took a much dimmer view of prediction than Asimov.
His mathematician self-insert is Dr. Ian Malcolm.
And we all know what he would think of psycho-history, don't we?
That is one big pile of shit.
In this land of many mysteries,
it's a strange fact that the largest legends seem to collect around the smallest creatures.
One of these is a mousy little rodent called the Lemming.
Here's an actual living legend.
For it's set of this tiny animal that it commits mass suicide
by rushing into the sea in droves.
In 1958, Disney put out a film called White Wilderness,
a documentary of life at the poles.
These days, it's infamous for one scene.
Contrary to the narrator's insistence,
the Lemmings were not voluntarily jumping from the cliff in a mass suicide attempt.
They were pushed.
The whole thing was fabricated.
White Wilderness didn't invent the legend of suicidal Lemmings,
that was part of existing folklore.
But it did bring it to the masses.
Nowadays, the word Lemming is synonymous with stupidity, death wishes,
and a pretty good video game for the 1990s that,
unfortunately still perpetuates the myth.
The myth arose due to extraordinary volatility in Lemming populations.
One year, a plague, the next near extinction, with no clear pattern.
With admittedly a few documented cases of Lemmings accidentally
driving each other off cliffs during migration,
mass suicide appeared the only explanation.
Though we're still not certain, today we have a much better guess.
Thanks, once again, to mathematics.
This is the Logistic Growth Map.
It's one possible model we can use for animal populations.
The population in year n is represented by xn,
so the equation tells us how to update the population for next year.
i.e. calculate xn plus 1, based on what it was last year.
The term R here represents the basic growth rate,
a measure of how quickly individuals reproduce.
Given an initial population and a growth rate,
we can hit the population with this map over and over again
to see how it develops year on year.
Notice it doesn't grow forever,
as the 1-xn term represents pressure from the environment
for the population to decline, such as a limit on food or space.
You'll notice that for some values of R,
the population eventually reaches a steady state.
After some initial wobbling, it reaches a stable level,
neither growing nor shrinking, as upward and downward pressures are balanced.
For others, it might settle into a repeating pattern,
up one year, down the next, oscillating between two values.
We can plot this behaviour on a graph.
The horizontal axis is the value of R,
the vertical axis is the steady state we eventually reach.
For R less than 1, all populations decline to extinction.
For R between 1 and 3, all populations approach some steady non-zero value.
Beyond 3, populations oscillate between two values.
Extending further, we get oscillations between 4 values and so on.
But beyond about 3.57, something rather silly happens.
The population never approaches a steady value
and instead jumps around unpredictably forever.
And Dr. Ian Malcolm is licking his lips because we've just discovered chaos theory.
Although Jurassic Park might give you the impression
that chaos theory is for the cool kids who aren't doing serious maths,
it is in fact a real field of study.
I know because I took an exam in it last year.
In 1961, Edward Lorenz was running calculations for weather forecasting
on these newfangled things called computers.
His forecast stored data to six decimal places.
Lorenz wanted to run the same calculations again,
but to save time, entered the data to only three decimal places.
He was astonished to find the outcomes differed wildly.
Sun became storms, storms became sun.
Small changes in initial conditions made the entire system unpredictable.
Lorenz published his findings in a paper that asked,
does the flap of a butterfly swing in Brazil set off a tornado in Texas,
enshrining the butterfly effect in the world's mind?
It's also a great example of mathematicians making discoveries by being lazy.
Chaotic systems like weather exhibit sensitive dependence on initial conditions.
Despite being fully deterministic, that is,
the future follows from the present by rigid laws, these systems appear random.
You can't predict them without perfect measurements,
which are effectively impossible to obtain.
The logistic map is one such system.
A growth rate beyond 3.57 produces chaos.
Your predictions add the mercy of how precisely you know
both the starting population and the reproduction rate,
off by even one individual and you might as well be rolling dice.
Here then, we find a potential solution to our lemming problem.
Lemmings, you see, reproduce very quickly.
The point is debated, but some estimates suggest their adjusted growth rate
exceeds the chaos threshold, though usually in other models,
I just used the logistic map as a simpler example.
According to Wikipedia, lemmings are some of the few vertebrates
which reproduce so quickly that their population fluctuations are chaotic.
Hmm, and there's even a source for this claim.
Fascinating.
Thanks, Peter Turchin.
Interesting name that.
If lemming populations follow a suitable model,
and if they do reproduce this quickly,
then it seems reasonable for chaos theory to hold the true explanation.
So if you take one thing from this video,
let it be that lemmings only exists because of insatiable libido.
Chaos theory may then be an insurmountable obstacle to psycho-history.
If we can't predict the weather beyond a few days,
what hope do we have to predict thousands of years of galactic society?
If a butterfly can cause a tornado,
why can't a single human change the course of history?
But don't go thinking we've outwitted Asimov here,
because Foundation asks the same question.
The second half of Foundation and Empire introduces one of my favourite villains
in all of literature.
A space warlord forging a new empire from the ruins of the old,
bringing countless star systems under his control
and sowing paralyzing fear in those still standing.
They call him The Mule, perhaps for his great strength.
Citizens of the Foundation guess his rise to power must be the latest Seldon crisis,
so they gather to listen to Seldon's hologram recording,
which will tell them why they're destined to win and that they can sit back and relax.
Everything goes a bit to pot when Seldon starts babbling about a non-existent civil war instead.
Whoops.
The Mule then conquers the entire Foundation.
Whoops.
We later learn the Mule's secret weapon is a genetic mutation,
giving him some form of mind control.
He can command others' emotions, manipulating them to build an empire for him.
We also learn he was an unassuming clown called Magnifico the whole time.
The protagonists only get to jump on him because one takes a genuine liking to him,
and the Mule lets his guard down because he can't bring himself to interfere
with the one piece of genuine affection anyone's ever felt for him
in his life of disgust and derision that drove him to conquer the entire galaxy
in a single-minded act of revenge for how it treated him.
Well done, Azimov.
You wrote a good character for once.
Even more so because the Mule is Foundation's avatar for chaos theory,
or at least the notion of it that existed in Azimov's time.
Seldon did not and could not predict a random change to one person's DNA.
That change nonetheless spiralled into a big old butterfly of an effect.
Some critics have noted there are other aspects of chaos inherent in psycho history,
such as technology.
If Seldon could predict the date and impact of a galaxy-altering invention,
he basically knew enough to invent it himself.
Look at steampower or the internet and their radical impacts on our lives, for instance.
Would someone living before the steam train have any hope of predicting modern social dynamics?
But all hope is not yet lost.
Because while chaos theory is a major hurdle, it's not always all it's cracked up to be.
Even though I can't tell you exactly what the weather will do two weeks from now,
I can reliably predict its average behaviour for quite a bit longer.
For those of us in the Northern Hemisphere, we'll see cold temperatures for the next few
months before a gradual period of warming into the summer.
Here in the UK, most of that period will be grey and miserable.
There will be storms here or there, which may or may not be caused by colourful flying insects,
but overall they will have little impact on most weather patterns.
It's a bit like rolling dice. Each roll is chaotic, deterministic,
but subject to incalculable tiny variations, yet enough together will always follow known statistics.
Even one of the poster children for chaos theory, the Lorenza Tractor, features order
among the chaos. It's a picture of airflow under convection inside a box. While the parts of the
air particles vary wildly, they still remain on the two main swells. In other words,
the specific trajectories can't be predicted, but the overall movement can.
Again, we're talking about averages in the aggregate. One atom is highly unlikely to
change the directions of trillions upon trillions. That's not to say it's impossible though,
but only for some systems, and it's hard to tell whether a given real world phenomenon is one of
them. But Harry Selden knew it was still a possibility. He accounted for it. Despite the
mules won in a quadrillion paradigm shift, Selden still had the last laugh. To see how we need to
move beyond atoms and lemmings. After all, they may be predictable, but we humans are so much more
advanced. Right? Why don't we play a fun game of rock, paper, scissors? I'll count us in,
we'll throw our hands on go, and you let me know who won in the comments. Ready? Three, two, one, go.
On the face of it, rock, paper, scissors is a random game. The choices are equally powerful,
and there's no inherent reason to choose one over another. Much like dice, with many trials,
the results should average out. One third of you should have lost to me, one third should have won,
and one third should have drawn. If that's the case though, why are there rock, paper, scissors
world champions? Yes, those exist. It's possible to consistently beat the odds because, in the hands
of humans, the game isn't random at all. Skilled players pick up on patterns and ticks and second
guessing to exploit the flaws in their opponent's thought processes. It even worked with this video.
If you know my patterns, you know I can't resist the temptation to make a terrible visual joke and
would never throw Dwayne Johnson. On a more general level, our brains exhibit cognitive biases that
make us more predictable than we'd like to believe, but I spoke about these at length in my diplomacy
video so I'll say no more here. What we're interested in today is how we can cash in on
these thought patterns with maths. And, perhaps unsurprisingly by now, there's a lot of scope
here. Take, as a morbid example, crime. Unless they're taking specific steps to avoid it,
criminals tend to commit crimes with a geographic pattern. When they commit multiple crimes,
the pattern strengthens and we can use this to narrow down investigations. As one example,
they may not act too close to home to avoid arousing suspicion, but don't want to put too
much effort into travelling and hence have an upper limit on distance too. Put these into a
formula and you generate a probability distribution that suggests the best places to find your suspects
given their crime locations. This technique is called geographic profiling. On the rise for
the last few decades, it's helped catch a fair number of serial criminals. Some have even used
it to retroactively predict the home of Jack the Ripper. As another example, consider the flow of a
crowd. Studies of ant swarms and fish shoals reveal that our movement isn't so different. We run on
autopilots and there are simple rules behind our movement, so we can save mental energy for more
important things like checking our phones. We can use these rules to design safer or more efficient
buildings. My favourite example is that placing an obstacle in the middle of a large hall can
actually improve traffic flow as it hacks like a roundabout. See America? It's completely natural.
All this points to at least some capacity to predict human behaviour even at the level of
individuals, which brings us to Asimov's next addition to the Foundation Universe, the second
Foundation. In the third book of the main trilogy, we discover Selden established two foundations,
one a blunt acts of technology and military might, the other a secretive puppet master scalpel.
The second foundation was to develop psycho history beyond Selden's groundwork,
making it more resilient to the whims of individuals and perhaps predicting actions
at a more granular scale. To do this, they explored the science of the human mind,
the ways it can be read and controlled. Unfortunately for this analysis, it does this
by having its members all be telepathic. Bit of a cheat code there. When the mule threatens
the Selden plan, the second foundation comes out of hiding to correct the aberration.
By predicting and shifting the actions of single humans, the second foundation suggests a much
finer version of psycho history and one that is self-correcting. But also telepathy, so yeah.
Despite the highlighted cases, we're still pretty far off forecasting the future of individuals.
Even if our brains exhibit patterns, our lives around them still appear for the most part
too chaotic. Countless events every day shape our future in ways we may never know.
We're forced then to retrace our steps back to psycho history proper, the prediction of
larger incentive structures. With the mathematical tools we've developed, are we any closer to
improving on Paul Krugman's substitutes of economics? Can we sidestep chaos theory to
truly build a model for humanity? Well, this would be a pretty disappointing video if I hadn't found
something, so ladies, gentlemen and others, please, put your hands together for the actual
real-world manifestation of psycho history. Clio Dynamics. Alright, alright, I'll get to that,
just let me explain what it is first. Guess I gotta cross Clio Dynamics off my controversial
topics for a YouTube video bingo card. Coined in 2003, Clio Dynamics is the term for the field
of study that mathematicalizes history. By collecting quantitative historical data,
its aim is to use statistical and modelling techniques to find the laws that dictate societal
progress. Much of the work on Clio Dynamics has been spearheaded by one man, Professor
of Ecology, Anthropology and Mathematics at the University of Connecticut, Peter Turchin. Hold on.
And there's even a source for this claim. Fascinating. Thanks, Peter Turchin.
I swear I found these two things independently. Turchin's background is in Beatles. He cut
his teeth studying their population dynamics, which of course we know all about now,
and the dynamics of other species, like lemmings. And he does indeed suggest lemmings may be one
of the few creatures exhibiting chaotic fluctuations. He moved on from ecology after
deciding he knew everything there was to know about Beatles, now setting himself the loftier
goal of studying humans. He believes that history, like biology, is ripe for being turned into
mathematics, and founded the journal Clio Dynamics to begin the task. Turchin's notoriety rose in
2010 when he announced that his work suggested a coming age of unrest in America. He became
even more famous in 2020 because his 2010 prediction said that would be the year when things would
get serious. Hmm. In Turchin's words, history as a subject is good at explaining the past.
Too good, in fact, and he cites one historian who had collated 210 competing theories for the
fall of Rome, making it incredibly difficult to choose between them. In my video Analyzing
a Darkling Plane, I compared that book's portrayal of societal demise to the Bronze Age
collapse, and we see a similar thing there. Theories ranging from spearmen emerging from the ocean,
to earthquakes, to an overly complex society falling in on itself in a process historian
Eric Klein calls systems collapse. This last one has a certain whiff of psycho history, if you ask me.
Clio Dynamics takes such hypotheses, translates them into mathematical models, and tests them
against databases spanning thousands of years. The hope is to identify the most plausible theories,
and with them, the mathematical laws of history, much like we have laws of physics and, increasingly,
laws of biology. Whether Clio Dynamics is really about predicting the future or only has use explaining
past trends depends on where you look. Turchin sometimes says yes, but sometimes says no,
citing some of the issues we've gone through already, while journalists representing his work
side emphatically with yes. And while it lets you write clickbait headlines like
the next decade could be even worse, can you really blame them? Because Clio Dynamics has
borne fruit. Despite countless differences between cultures that could have chaos-style effects,
there are, according to Turchin, consistent trends. Secular cycles are one such trend.
Apparent rhythms in boom and bust across time, driven by processes like elite overproduction.
Here, Clio Dynamics models suggest collapses are often preceded by a common social shift.
Namely, the funneling of more people into elite positions than there are elite positions available.
The theory goes that these shunned elites become the revolutionaries.
Even if you claim not to be in the business of prediction, forming such a model leads you down
that path. And yes, Turchin concludes that we're heading for the next crash as we speak.
But he can't predict the spark. Only the accumulation of fuel it can ignite.
Spoken like a true psycho-historian. As it happens, Foundation was a formative influence on Turchin.
He surely sometimes believes he is making Seldon's dream a reality. But it's no
surprise the man who considered chaotic lemmings has some criticisms of Asimov's predictive
machinery. He says that chaos theory makes mules of all of us, wrecking any hope for true precision.
He also takes issue with Seldon's insistence that his plan should remain a mystery.
Asimov spends most of Second Foundation arguing that knowing psycho-history's
prophecies ahead of time renders them useless. After coming out of hiding to defeat the mule,
the Second Foundation must convince the galaxy it has itself been crushed, lest the Seldon plan go
awry. In real life, this is called the uncertainty principle of the social sciences. Even with chaos
in the mix, forecasting the weather won't change the weather. Make a prediction in economics,
though, and you might bring about the crash you sought to prevent. Simplified to the point of
irritating economists, that's all the field is. Things having value because they're forecast to
have value. Game stop notwithstanding. But Turchin says clear dynamics can survive this,
because who cares about one odd professor's thoughts on the future?
The trouble is, quite a few people do. Right, you can bring back your pitchforks now.
Historians have not taken kindly to a mathematician coming along to tell them
they're all studying history wrong. And, weirdly, neither have the mathematicians.
Now, I'm not qualified to say either way, but I've seen enough claims that
Turchin's methodology is questionable to give them some weight. He's been accused of cherry
picking data to suit his conclusions, for instance, and prophesising historical trends to
shape policy recommendations has drawn some… unwelcome comparisons. Plus, you can't ignore
the survivorship bias. I can make a prediction that the world will end on the 9th of January
2031, and I'll join the long list of very wrong doomsday profits throughout history.
I hope. Turchin divined 2020, but we don't care about everyone who said 2019, do we?
But far and away the most common critique is that reducing history to numbers removes all
the nuance and context that's necessary to understand it at all. It's similar to the
criticism leveled against creators of so-called mega-histories, accounts of the big picture
which eschew the details in favour of high-level patterns. I need only mention guns,
germs, and steel to be marked anti-history for life. In general, historians believe that
society is simply too complex to predict. There are so many theories for the fall of Rome or
the Bronze Age collapse because there are so many things that can affect it. Sure,
we can plot a few of them on time series graphs, but none of them can ever come close to the full
picture. I'm reminded here of the notorious study on the decline of modern music from a few
years ago. It measured a few ill-chosen datasets without necessary context and called it a day.
I direct you towards YouTuber Tantacruel's evisceration of it for more detail.
But for any and all faults of Clear Dynamics as Turchin has created it,
I can't help but see the appeal of his counter-argument here.
Namely, that the complexity of society does not make maths a poor analysis tool.
Rather, it makes it the perfect analysis tool.
How did we predict the weather before maths? Cows and frogs mostly.
Empirical forecasts were mocked when they were invented, yet today we can't do without them,
even with chaos getting in the way. They do so much better than anything we had before.
By phrasing problems like this in mathematical terms, we have been able to make complex systems
palatable to our feeble and bias-ridden minds. But maybe it's all still too convoluted.
In the conclusion to his talk on the reality of psycho-history,
Dan Crissan states that he believes all the mathematical ingredients are there.
We just need the recipe. What then if our big brains are simply too dumb to make that recipe?
Is this all a lost cause regardless?
Well, we aren't the only big brains on this planet anymore, are we?
Actually, before we get to that, I'm going to interrupt with some stop-press. Sorry,
it wouldn't fit anywhere else. As I was putting this final video together,
the internet rediscovered a study which predicts the end of civilization in the 2040s.
That study was a 2020 reassessment of a prediction from the 70s,
which formed its conclusion with similar modelling approaches to cleodynamics.
I suppose I can take this opportunity to emphasise that there are indeed many studies
of this sort out there. Turchin's cleodynamics is just one of the more developed.
According to the recent assessment, we've matched some of the more grim
trajectories worryingly closely. Hence, you know, headlines claiming MIT predicts the end of the
world. I haven't had time to look into this properly, but I do have two points to make.
First, that these studies aren't immune to the problems of context and nuance that may hold
back cleodynamics. Second, in my initial research, I found a few solid refutations of similar
arguments also made in the 70s, such as forecasts of sudden population decline that decade due to
mass starvation. As it turned out, new technologies improved the globe's agricultural output and
stopped that happening, so technological chaos may in fact have saved us and could indeed save us again.
But that's all I have to say on that. Back to the video.
Consider Netflix.
On opening Netflix, other streaming services are available. I'm greeted with a selection of
films and TV shows that may be to my liking. It's in Netflix's interests that they're
to my liking. If they get it wrong and show me stuff I don't like, I'll conclude the service
has nothing of value and stop paying them. So Netflix needs to predict what films I will like.
Humans have easy shorthands for decisions like this. We can identify genre, personnel, tone,
and so on, and there's a strong chance that these will correlate with potential future favorites.
But if you strip that information away, can you still make good predictions?
This was the challenge Netflix posed in 2006. They ran a contest inviting people to improve
their film recommendation algorithm based on nothing but an enormous set of user film ratings,
over 2 million data points that each looked like this. Triples of user, film, and rating
identifiers together with the date. The hammer you need for such a nail of a problem is machine
learning. Using some complicated concepts I have no time to explain like higher dimensional graphs,
gradient descent, and a whole bunch of linear algebra, machine learning is about designing
computer algorithms that update their own inner workings. Feed them a massive amount of training
data along with some way of telling them how good a job they did analyzing that data,
and they will literally learn. With only a few years of work and petabytes of data,
they can identify features it takes humans milliseconds to recognize.
Ah, the concerning thing is that it's all a black box. The innards of the algorithm are known
only to that algorithm. We provide the ingredients and eat the meal, but nobody knows the recipe.
The most successful entries to Netflix's contest used machine learning or similar.
They could correctly predict people's movie tastes with no understanding of those movies
except other people's tastes. Like our usual top-down view, this bottom-up approach correctly
classified recognizable features like genres without any human input. This proved a breakthrough
in online content delivery. Nowadays, Netflix uses metrics like watch time, click rates,
and other numerical viewing patterns to recommend content. Everything run by machines to deal with
the enormous data load. But what's truly spooky and of use to us in this video is that these
algorithms can identify features we don't recognize. Groupings of films that have no
obvious connection yet have reliable predictive power. If I like one, I'll like the other.
Even if, as far as we can tell, they're wildly different.
The YouTube algorithm does something similar, which is why my analytics tell me I owe half
the success of my channel to this one completely unrelated video by Luke Correa.
On that note, don't forget to like, comment, and subscribe because the YouTube algorithm is
a fickle mistress. Machine learning has already transformed the internet and how we experience
it. It's certainly responsible for my YouTube success, the most important part,
so I feel confident in saying that. So, can we harness this AI powerhouse to predict more than
just videos? Can it predict everything? This is GDELT, the global database of events, language,
and tone. Founded in 2013, the GDELT project aims to collect and analyze vast amounts of
digital data pouring out from humanity. Its archives go back to 1979, but since 2013,
it's been collecting data every single day. Today, you can access the GDELT dataset on the
Google Cloud platform. The vision of its creator, Kalev Litaru, is forecasting the future based on
patterns and connections identified on a grand scale. He claims, for example, that his data
predicted the Arab Spring. After it had happened, but still, GDELT uses emerging techniques to
translate news articles, social media posts, and photos into quantitative measures of events and
our emotions about those events. It then hits all that with the big machine learning hammer to extract
unseen insights and, just maybe, predict the future. It's a faintly terrifying thought.
Everything we broadcast here on the internet will find its way to an enormous computer brain that
may or may not know what we're about to do before we do it. GDELT isn't the only attempt to
outsource societal prediction to the machines. There's Project Cassandra, run by a German team
aiming to predict the future using novels. There's Guard, the Alan Turing Institute's contribution
to military prediction in Britain. And in the US, there's the disturbingly named Global Information
Dominance Experiment spearheaded by the Pentagon. And these are just the ones we know about.
Really, with these projects and many others like them out there, we might as well be under AI
governance already. The machines took control and we didn't even notice.
This was not a development that escaped Isaac Asimov.
The final two books of the Foundation series, Foundation's Edge and Foundation in Earth,
take place hundreds of years after Second Foundation. In the latter, the characters make
a startling discovery about the origins of psycho-history. On the moon of an abandoned and
highly irradiated planet once called Earth, they find an ancient robot named Ar Daniel Olivore.
Olivore reveals he's been manipulating humanity for millennia and that it was he who put the idea
for psycho-history in Seldon's head in the first place. While it somewhat undermines the premise
of the entire Foundation series, this does show Asimov new robots would take well to societal
prediction. At the time he joined the Foundation series, Olivore was already a well-worn character.
He appeared in several Asimov stories and is representative of Asimov's attempts
in his later years to bring his works together into a single shared universe.
iRobot in particular therefore takes place in the same continuity as Foundation,
and the last story in that collection reveals similar thoughts on society-level AI
much earlier in Asimov's work. It tells of how supercomputers proved so adept at running the
world's economy that humans put them in charge, ushering in a new age of global utopia.
Unfortunately it's not the 1950s anymore. For good or bad, it looks like planet-level
prediction at the hands of AI is inevitable. And with enough data and computing power,
surely the sky's the limit. We could find hidden connections impossible to see without AI everywhere.
We could truly predict everything.
Well, video's over people. The question has been answered. We are indeed predictable.
Pack it up, we're done here.
In June last year, some guy called Denny tweeted about a machine learning algorithm he'd designed
for depixelating low-resolution faces. The program produced a fake but realistic human face that,
when downscaled, would recover the original image.
People on Twitter, ever the experimental bunch, had a bit of fun with it.
Here's the doom guy, for instance, now a real boy. Not half as cursed as the laughing emojis
true form, though. And of course, we all know who this is, right? I mean, even a child could tell you.
Who's that Pokemon?
Oh. Oh no.
Oh no. Yeah, the algorithm kind of changed Barack Obama's entire racial profile? Every time?
It isn't unique to Obama. Feed in anyone who isn't obviously white and you get… well,
you get a white person. The accuracy of machine learning depends on the quality of its training
data. In this case, the dataset likely had inherent bias. The algorithm had not seen enough
diverse faces to identify them. And if you think this problem is limited to funny missteps on
the internet, consider the case of Robert Julian Borchuk Williams. He was arrested for a crime
he didn't commit because a facial recognition algorithm couldn't tell the difference between
him and another black man. This is far from the only case of machine learning getting it wrong.
How about the turtle made out of pictures of guns that Google's AI thought was itself a gun?
Or the US military's tank detection AI that actually detected the weather? All the photos
of tanks that had been fed were taken on a sunny day and, because no one knew it's inner workings,
nobody noticed that it was picking up on the wrong thing. Even Netflix's algorithm famously
tripped up trying to classify Napoleon Dynamite. The film was so polarizing that its rating pattern
didn't look like that of any other film in the database. But aren't all these problems simply
a question of gathering more training data? Kind of, but there's a more fundamental problem at play.
The no-free lunch theorem is a mathematical result that, essentially, states that there is no
universal learning algorithm that can predict outcomes accurately in every scenario. No matter
its training data, it will always be possible to cook up something to foil the machine. That
something may be weird and pathological, but finding it out there in the real world is always
a possibility. We have mathematical proof of it. So even if you solved the bias and diversity issues
plaguing the AI industry, which is an enormous task in itself, you're out of luck in your hopes
to build an infallible automated prognosticator. Sure, you can build a good one, but we don't yet
know how good. Perhaps the utopia of AI running the world for us is, in fact, impossible.
So, after all that, after attacking every angle through a multitude of perspectives,
we are now ready to answer the question. Are we predictable?
Probably not.
Look, I'm not qualified to tell you what to think here, which begs the question of why
I'm making a video about this in the first place. But in my opinion, from all the evidence we've
looked at, I don't think psychohistory is possible. For all I've praised mathematics,
it doesn't exist in a vacuum. Models require assumptions, and we're often terrible at phrasing
them. Whether they're assumptions about continuity or datasets being representative,
they can cause problems. And when we're dealing with the grandest scale there is,
we have to make lots of assumptions. Chaos has the power to prey on them,
to render predictions about complex systems moot. It can't kill every model, but we don't yet know
where history itself lies on this spectrum. And while I like the philosophy of clear dynamics,
using maths to break through these complex systems, in its current form it can be
sketchy in places. And even its creator believes chaos will inevitably rip it apart.
With all we've looked at, we've made progress. But psychohistory as Asimov imagined it appears,
to me at least, forever too distant. You might have come to a different conclusion,
and that's fine. As I said, take everything I say with a big pinch of salt. I welcome
differing opinions in the comments. But since I don't want to end this video on that anti-climax,
I'm going to devote this last section to something different.
Because foundation isn't solely a mathematical theory. It's also, and hear me out on this,
a book. We may or may not be predictable. But what about our fiction? What can foundation
tell us about that? Fiction is full of structure. We like to think it's an unrestricted outpouring
of creative invention, but in reality it has plenty of rules, both explicit and implicit.
In the most extreme examples, you have things like La Dispassion,
where Georges Perrec goes the entire book without a single letter E. But outside of
novelties like this, we're still drawn to particular formats. Theories like The Hero's
Journey save the cat and even Dan Harmon's story circle, try to figure out what these are,
and have had tremendous influence on media. At the lower level, you can't even tell a joke
without invoking some sort of predictable structure. We know Paul the Leverkronk must be
followed by Wrong Lever, because it and similar jokes have conditioned us to expect it,
and that's often what makes it funny. I even rely on predictable formats for these video essays,
because they give easy shortcuts for clarity, rhythm and comedy. A good drinking game to play
with them would be to drink every time I use the rule of three, for instance, or a long,
stoic paragraph with a short, stupid quip at the end. Or this music.
I'm contractually obliged to use that in every video essay.
And although lol's so randomness can also work for humour,
it's not usually an effective way to write a whole story.
For example, if a story doesn't give a satisfying payoff at the very end, people don't tend to
like it. We can therefore predict that there will be a satisfying payoff, or at least an attempt at
one. Neither will audiences take kindly to coincidences, although these can work if handled
well. But if unpredictable and convenient events keep appearing, it feels cheap.
This is, however, reserved for fiction only, and as evidence I present Dave Gorman's Google
Wacadventure, the greatest exploration of coincidence ever put to film. And on that note,
Googling prediction in fiction shows you a load of children's activities meant to teach them
what to expect in a story. From a young age, we're all aware of how it should work.
But blindly sticking to such rules everywhere is one surefire way to make something horrendously
boring and of no artistic value to anyone ever. There are predictable aspects to fiction,
but to survive, it has to embrace unpredictability as well. It's a constant tug-of-war between
meeting expectations and, yes, subverting expectations. It's a bit like music. On one
extreme, you have repetitive monocodal corporate elevator music, and on the other you have Arnold
Schoenberg. Most people can't stand either. They arguably prefer a happy medium where the
flow feels natural, yet unexpected at the same time. One where each moment teeters on the edge
of our expectations, sometimes meeting them, sometimes not. You can't have a story go exactly
to a preordained plan, just as much as you can't keep throwing random fluff around. Most of the
time, storytelling lives in this limbo between narratives recycled and narratives invented,
and Foundation exemplifies this more than anything. Foundation is a story about history that recycles
history itself, but even today its structure seems odd. It's not a gripping yarn of human
drama and the arcs of individuals, separating it from most of the fiction we recognize,
and that does make it a difficult read for some people. No great heroes to root for or
villains to hate. No deep or emotional examinations of characters' psyches. Just the march of history.
The approach is certainly unconventional in fiction. How, then, can one possibly go about
adapting such a thing for television? Yes, the elephant can come out from hiding in the corner.
I've heard and read many opinions on the TV show, but to talk about it I decided I should at least
watch some of it myself. Yes, I subscribed to Apple TV just to make this video. Let's
hope my ad revenue can cover that. I don't envy the creators. Merging as a mob's giant but
rather sterile vision with the intimate personal drama expected of TV shows sounds painful.
Unfortunately for my money it all came out a bit… meh. I mean, space elevator. Big yes.
Less homogenous characters. Big yes. Straining to live up to its own mega historical aims
when so much of it hinges on the generally uninteresting private lives of a few characters.
Not so much. I wouldn't fault anyone for liking it, but I do agree with criticisms
that the essence of Foundation turned mildly mushy somewhere along the way.
Could this have been predicted? Was there any sign that we should have seen this coming?
If ever there were a company that was hoping to sort of better people's lives through technology,
through connectivity, it's Apple, and that's something very much that Asimov was hoping to do.
Truly a mystery of the universe. Nah, but really this was probably inevitable,
and Asimov's as much to blame as anyone. A century-hopping thought piece on the
maths of history is a hard story to tell in any medium. We're too wedded to predictable
structures of fiction for it to be easy. But we're also too wedded to the volatility of
fiction to accept a story that predicts its own cause. So how does Foundation avoid that?
This isn't a hollow question. John Campbell asked the same one after Asimov's first few
Foundation stories, fearing the premise was getting stale. He ordered Asimov to disrupt
the seldom plan, and Asimov gave him the mule. Asimov eventually grew to view Foundation as
another writing challenge, attacking the premise from all sides. Given a plan based on iron laws
of history, how could it still go wrong? What holes would go unnoticed? And this is really the
value of science fiction. It explores questions science can't yet answer, but one day might have
to. Fiction gives us incredible power to speculate and wonder, and Asimov more than most knew how
to wield it. Foundation stands as a towering achievement in appreciating both the maths of
history and, through the many who were inspired by the story it tells, the myth of history too.
If historians' responses to cleodynamics have taught me anything, it's that we're at our best
when we strive to understand them together. Mathematics is a tool more powerful than any other,
but if we don't appreciate the human context when applying it, it won't get us anywhere.
Personally, I'm content to believe that both our lives and our fiction remain unpredictable,
because that way, we never know what wonders lie in store for us in the future.
Ah, Jesus, why? Was that even funny? Well, this is what's become of my attempts at
comedy now? Jesus Christ, it's not funny, it just hurts. Every time I try to make something new
and original and I just revert to the same tired formulas over and over again.
Hmm, well, I am putting my foot down. This video will not be derailed like all the others,
you hear me? I will break the eternal and depressive mould. No more of this format.
No longer will we cower in fear of sudden, non-secretarial disaster.
I forgot about a cannonball.
Hey, so does anyone remember when you didn't know what this video was about?
Ah, those were the days. I said that someone had guessed the topic correctly in my 10,000
subscribers Q&A and turned it into something intensely meta, and I had a lot of fun with that.
Everyone at my Discord thought it would be Leviathan. I've never read Leviathan. Sorry.
But yeah, Discord, I have one. Joined for updates on and discussions about my videos,
along with many other things. See you there.
Thank you very much for watching, everybody. This video began as a love letter to Foundation
and seems to have ended as a love letter to maths, which sounds good to me.
Either way, that was a lot of work. You can find all my research sources in the description,
and I have to give particular credit to Marcus DeSotois, as I may have cribbed a disproportionate
amount of the maths in this video from his books and TV programs. Anyway, hope you enjoyed this
video and learned something from it. Stay tuned for whatever comes next. Maybe now you'll know
how to predict it. Goodbye.
Is an apple orchard in the imperial gardens that's older than the robot wars?
